                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            RACE AND ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITY IN THE UNITED STATES:
                    AN INTERGENERATIONAL PERSPECTIVE

                                          Raj Chetty
                                       Nathaniel Hendren
                                        Maggie R. Jones
                                        Sonya R. Porter

                                      Working Paper 24441
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24441


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                          March 2018, Revised December 2019




The views expressed are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the U.S. Census Bureau
or the National Bureau of Economic Research. The statistical summaries reported in this paper
have been cleared by the Census Bureau's Disclosure Review Board release authorization number
CBDRB-FY18-195. We thank Rick Banks, Jennifer Eberhardt, David Ellwood, John Friedman,
Roland Fryer, David Grusky, Anthony Jack, Lawrence Katz, Adam Looney, Alex Mas, Amy
O'Hara, Amanda Pallais, John Powell, Sean Reardon, Jesse Shapiro, Emmanuel Saez, Robert
Sampson, Isaac Sorkin, Florencia Torche, William Julius Wilson, numerous seminar participants,
and anonymous referees for helpful comments and discussions. We are indebted to Michael
Droste, Benjamin Goldman, Jamie Gracie, Alexandre Jenni, Martin Koenen, Sarah Merchant,
Emanuel Schertz, James Stratton, Joseph Winkelmann, and our other Opportunity Insights pre-
doctoral fellows for their outstanding contributions to this work. This research was funded by the
Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, the Kellogg
Foundation, and Harvard University.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Raj Chetty, Nathaniel Hendren, Maggie R. Jones, and Sonya R. Porter. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Race and Economic Opportunity in the United States: An Intergenerational Perspective
Raj Chetty, Nathaniel Hendren, Maggie R. Jones, and Sonya R. Porter
NBER Working Paper No. 24441
March 2018, Revised December 2019
JEL No. H0,J0

                                         ABSTRACT

We study the sources of racial disparities in income using anonymized longitudinal data covering
nearly the entire U.S. population from 1989-2015. We document three results. First, black
Americans and American Indians have much lower rates of upward mobility and higher rates of
downward mobility than whites, leading to persistent disparities across generations. Conditional
on parent income, the black-white income gap is driven by differences in wages and employment
rates between black and white men; there are no such differences between black and white
women. Hispanic Americans have rates of intergenerational mobility more similar to whites than
blacks, leading the Hispanic-white income gap to shrink across generations. Second, differences
in parental marital status, education, and wealth explain little of the black-white income gap
conditional on parent income. Third, the black-white gap persists even among boys who grow up
in the same neighborhood. Controlling for parental income, black boys have lower incomes in
adulthood than white boys in 99% of Census tracts. The few areas with small black-white gaps
tend to be low-poverty neighborhoods with low levels of racial bias among whites and high rates
of father presence among blacks. Black males who move to such neighborhoods earlier in
childhood have significantly better outcomes. However, fewer than 5% of black children grow up
in such areas. Our findings suggest that reducing the black-white income gap will require efforts
whose impacts cross neighborhood and class lines and increase upward mobility specifically for
black men.

Raj Chetty                                      Maggie R. Jones
Department of Economics                         Bureau of the Census
Harvard University                              4600 Silver Hill Rd.
Littauer 321                                    Washington, DC 20233
Cambridge, MA 02138                             margaret.r.jones@census.gov
and NBER
chetty@fas.harvard.edu                          Sonya R. Porter
                                                Bureau of the Census
Nathaniel Hendren                               4600 Silver Hill Rd.
Harvard University                              Washington, DC 20233
Department of Economics                         sonya.rastogi.porter@census.gov
Littauer Center Room 235
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
nhendren@gmail.com
I        Introduction

Differences in economic outcomes by race have persisted for centuries in the United States and
continue up to the present day (Myrdal 1944; Duncan 1968; Margo 2016). For example, in 2016, the
median household income of black Americans was $39,500, compared with $65,000 for non-Hispanic
white Americans (U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census 2017). The sources of
these disparities have been heavily studied and debated, with proposed explanations ranging from
residential segregation (e.g., Wilson 1987; Massey and Denton 1993) and discrimination (e.g., Pager
2003; Eberhardt, Goff, Purdie and Davies 2004; Bertrand and Mullainathan 2004) to differences in
family structure (e.g., McAdoo 2002; Autor et al. 2019).1
        Most empirical research on racial disparities has tested competing theories using cross-sectional
data on a single generation of individuals (Altonji and Blank 1999).2 In this paper, we analyze
the sources of racial disparities from an intergenerational perspective, focusing on the dynamics of
income across generations.3 In canonical intergenerational models of inequality (e.g., Becker and
Tomes 1979), racial differences in income distributions in the long run are determined by differences
by race in children’s incomes conditional on parental income, which we term intergenerational gaps.
For example, if black and white children have the same income distributions conditional on parental
income – i.e., if there is no black-white intergenerational gap – income disparities between the two
groups would vanish in the long run regardless of their initial magnitude.4 From this perspective,
the critical question to understand black-white income differences in the long run is: do black
children have lower incomes than white children conditional on parental income, and if so, how can
    1
     See Online Appendix Table I for a more detailed categorization of alternative explanations and selected references.
    2
     There are three primary exceptions to this characterization of the prior literature, each of which addresses the lack
of historical data linking parents to children in different ways: (1) studies that focus on intermediate outcomes such
as test scores using data from schools, which contain information on parental income and other characteristics (e.g.,
Jencks and Phillips 1998; Magnuson and Duncan 2006; Fryer and Levitt 2006); (2) studies that use ethnographic
methods (e.g., Carter 2005; Lareau 2011); and (3) work using longitudinal survey data (Blau and Duncan 1967;
Corcoran, Gordon, Laren and Solon 1992; Hertz 2005, Bhattacharya and Mazumder 2011; Mazumder 2014; Davis
and Mazumder 2018). Our study contributes to this literature by (1) directly examining long-term outcomes such as
earnings rather than intermediate outcomes; (2) presenting quantitative evidence that complements qualitative case
studies; and (3) presenting evidence from population-level data that reveals several results that cannot be detected
in survey data, such as neighborhood-level variation.
   3
     We focus on five racial and ethnic groups – non-Hispanic whites, non-Hispanic blacks, non-Hispanic Asians,
non-Hispanic American Indians and Alaskan Natives, and Hispanics – who together comprise 98.4% of individuals
with non-missing race information for the children we study. As has been noted in prior work, there is considerable
heterogeneity in outcomes within these five groups, and our conclusions should not be interpreted as applying uni-
formly to all subgroups within each of these populations. For simplicity, we use “race” to refer to race and ethnicity;
“American Indians” to refer to American Indians and Alaskan Natives; and “whites” to refer to non-Hispanic whites,
“blacks” to refer to non-Hispanic blacks, etc.
   4
     In richer models in which children’s outcomes depend upon other factors beyond their parents’ incomes, income
disparities may not vanish, but the intergenerational gap remains a key determinant of the dynamic of income
disparities. We discuss these issues further in Section II below.


                                                            1
we reduce these intergenerational gaps?
   We study this question using longitudinal data that covers virtually the entire American pop-
ulation from 1989-2015. Building on work by Akee, Jones and Porter (2017), we use de-identified
data from the 2000 and 2010 decennial Censuses linked to data from federal income tax returns
and the 2005-2015 American Community Surveys (ACS) to obtain information on income, race,
parental characteristics, and other variables. We focus on children in the 1978-1983 birth cohorts
who were born in the U.S. or authorized immigrants who came to the U.S. in childhood. Our
primary analysis sample consists of 20 million children, approximately 94% of the total number of
children in the birth cohorts we study.
   We divide our empirical analysis into four parts. In the first part, we characterize intergener-
ational gaps by race. We measure children’s incomes as their mean household income in 2014-15,
when they are in their mid-thirties. We measure their parents’ income as mean household income
between 1994 and 2000, when their children are between the ages of 11 and 22. Following Chetty,
Hendren, Kline and Saez (2014), we measure intergenerational mobility using a rank specification.
We rank children based on their incomes relative to all other children in the same birth cohort.
Similarly, we rank parents of these children based on their incomes relative to all other parents
with children in the same birth cohort.
   We find that intergenerational mobility and the persistence of disparities vary significantly across
racial groups. White and Hispanic children have fairly similar rates of intergenerational mobility.
For example, white children born to parents at the 25th percentile of the income distribution reach
the 45th percentile on average, while Hispanic children born to parents at the 25th percentile reach
the 43rd percentile on average. Because of these modest intergenerational gaps, the income gap
between Hispanic and white Americans is shrinking across generations. If mobility rates were to
remain constant across generations, a model analogous to Becker and Tomes (1979) predicts that
the income disparity between Hispanic and white Americans would shrink from 22 percentiles for
the parents in our sample to 10 percentiles for their children (who are currently in their mid-30s)
and ultimately to 6 percentiles in steady state.
   Asian children with parents at the 25th percentile reach the 56th percentile on average, well
above white Americans, echoing the widespread perception of Asians as a “model minority” (e.g.,
Wong, Lai, Nagasawa and Lin 1998). However, the exceptional outcomes of low-income Asian
children are largely driven by first-generation immigrants. Restricting the sample to Asians whose
mothers were born in the U.S., we find intergenerational gaps between Asians and whites of approx-


                                                   2
imately 2 percentiles on average across the parental income distribution. The changing patterns
of intergenerational mobility for Asians make it more difficult to predict the trajectory of their
incomes, but Asians appear likely to converge to income levels comparable to white Americans in
the long run.
   In contrast to Hispanics and Asians, there are large intergenerational gaps between black and
American Indian children relative to white children. Both blacks and American Indians have rank-
rank mobility curves that are shifted down relative to whites across the entire parental income
distribution by approximately 13 percentiles. This remains true even among children born to
parents in the top 1 percent, implying that children born into high-income black families have
substantially higher rates of downward mobility than whites across generations, consistent with
Bhattacharya and Mazumder (2011). Indeed, a black child born to parents in the top quintile is
roughly as likely to fall to the bottom family income quintile as he or she is to remain in the top
quintile; in contrast, white children are nearly five times as likely to remain in the top quintile as
they are to fall to the bottom quintile.
   The large intergenerational gaps for blacks and American Indians relative to whites lead to
disparities in earnings for these groups that persist across generations. If mobility rates do not
change, our estimates imply a steady-state gap in family income ranks between whites and American
Indians of 18 percentiles, and a white-black gap of 19 percentiles. These values are very similar
to the empirically observed gaps for children in our sample, suggesting that blacks and American
Indians are currently close to the steady-state income distributions that would prevail if differences
in mobility rates remained constant across generations. This result shows that reducing racial
disparities will require reducing intergenerational gaps – i.e., disparities in children’s outcomes
conditional on parental income – for blacks and American Indians. Transient programs that do
not affect intergenerational mobility, such as temporary cash transfers, are insufficient to reduce
disparities because income distributions will eventually revert back to their steady-states.
   In light of this finding, the rest of the paper focuses on understanding the factors that drive
intergenerational gaps in income, particularly between blacks and whites. One mechanical explana-
tion for black-white intergenerational gaps in household income is that blacks marry at much lower
rates than whites (Raley, Sweeney and Wondra 2015), leading to lower levels of household income
simply because they tend to have one rather than two earners in their families. In the second part
of the paper, we evaluate the role of marriage by measuring children’s incomes at the individual
rather than the household level. We find significantly smaller black-white intergenerational gaps


                                                  3
in individual income, of approximately 5 percentiles instead of the 13 percentile gap in household
income.
   The reduction in the intergenerational gap when focusing on children’s individual incomes,
however, masks important heterogeneity by gender. The intergenerational gap in individual income
is 10 percentiles for black men across the parental income distribution. In contrast, black women
earn about 1 percentile more than white women conditional on parent income. Moreover, there is
little or no gap in wage rates or hours of work between black and white women, weighing against
the hypothesis that black women have comparable incomes to white women solely because they
work longer hours to compensate for lower levels of spousal income. Black men, by contrast, have
substantially lower employment rates and wage rates than white men, even conditional on parental
income. We find analogous gender differences in other outcomes as well: black-white gaps in high
school dropout rates, college attendance rates, occupation, and incarceration are all substantially
larger for men than for women. Black women have higher college attendance rates than white men,
conditional on parental income. For men, the gap in incarceration is particularly striking: 21% of
black men born to the lowest-income families are incarcerated on a given day, as compared with
6% of white men.
   Why do rates of intergenerational mobility differ so sharply for black vs. white men? In the
third part of the paper, we study whether differences in other family characteristics (e.g., family
structure or wealth) explain these gaps. Controlling for parental marital status reduces black-white
intergenerational gaps for men only slightly, from 10 percentiles to 9.3 percentiles. Controlling
for differences in parental education also does not affect the black-white intergenerational gap
significantly. The black-white intergenerational gap remains substantial even after controlling for
differences in parental wealth, both when controlling directly for wealth proxies such as home value
observed in our ACS data as well as when adjusting for differences in total wealth using data from
the Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF). Our findings are also inconsistent with the hypothesis
discussed in some prior work (e.g., Rushton and Jensen 2005) that racial disparities may be due to
differences in cognitive ability, as there is no biological reason that racial differences in cognitive
ability would vary by gender.
   In the last part of the paper, we examine environmental factors outside the family that may
drive black-white intergenerational gaps (e.g., labor market conditions or the quality of schools)
by studying variation across commuting zones (CZs) and neighborhoods (Census tracts or blocks)
within CZs, as in prior sociological work (e.g., Sampson, Raudenbush and Earls 1997; Sharkey


                                                  4
2013). CZs that have higher rates of upward mobility for whites (e.g., the Great Plains) tend to
have higher rates of upward mobility for blacks as well, with the notable exception of the Southeast,
where whites have especially low rates of upward mobility but blacks do not. However, there are
substantial black-white gaps in nearly every commuting zone.
   We continue to find large intergenerational gaps even between black and white men who grow
up in the same Census tract (containing 4,256 people on average) or block (containing 50 people
on average). Among children with parents at the 25th percentile, black boys have lower incomes
in adulthood than white boys in 99% of Census tracts. The mean intergenerational gap in indi-
vidual income ranks between black and white boys with parents at the 25th percentile remains
at 7.7 percentiles with tract fixed effects and 7.0 percentiles with block fixed effects. Hence, the
intergenerational gap would fall by at most 30% if black and white boys were to grow up in the
same neighborhoods.
   The fact that neighborhood differences explain relatively little of the black-white intergener-
ational gap does not mean that neighborhoods do not matter for children’s outcomes. We find
substantial variation across tracts within CZs in both black and white boys’ outcomes. Both black
and white boys have significantly higher incomes if they grow up in “good” neighborhoods – e.g.,
those with low poverty rates, high test scores, or a large fraction of college graduates. However,
black-white gaps are larger on average for boys who grow up in such neighborhoods because the
correlation between growing up in a good (e.g., low-poverty) area and income is greater for white
boys than black boys.
   Among low-poverty neighborhoods (those with poverty rates below 10%), two factors are
strongly associated with better outcomes for black men and smaller black-white intergenerational
gaps. First, black men who grow up in tracts with less racial bias among whites – measured using
tests for implicit bias or indices of explicit racial animus based on Google searches – earn more
and are less likely to be incarcerated. Second, the fraction of fathers present in low-income black
households in the neighborhood is associated with better outcomes among black boys, but is uncor-
related with the outcomes of black girls and white boys. Black father presence at the neighborhood
level strongly predicts black boys’ outcomes irrespective of whether their own father is present or
not, echoing the findings of Sampson (1987). Of course, these correlations do not necessarily re-
flect causal effects because black father presence and racial discrimination are both associated with
many unobservables, but they provide some guidance for the types of neighborhood-level factors
that may warrant further study.


                                                 5
     Finally, using the methodology of Chetty and Hendren (2018a), we show that black boys who
move to better areas (as measured by the outcomes of other black residents) earlier in their child-
hood have higher incomes and lower rates of incarceration in adulthood. These childhood exposure
effects are race-specific: black movers’ outcomes are predicted by the outcomes of other black resi-
dents, but not white residents. These findings show that environmental conditions during childhood
have causal effects on racial disparities.
     We conclude that neighborhoods with low poverty rates, high rates of father presence among
blacks, and low levels of racial bias among whites have better outcomes for black boys and smaller
racial gaps. Examples of such areas include Silver Spring in Maryland and parts of Queens in New
York, where black boys growing up in low-income (25th percentile) families rise above the national
median on average in adulthood. But very few black families live in such places. Less than 5% of
black children currently grow up in a Census tract with a poverty rate below 10% and more than
half of black fathers present. In contrast, 63% of white children live in areas with poverty rates
below 10% and more than half of white fathers present. Importantly, these differences in childhood
environment arise not just from neighborhood-level factors, such as poverty rates or school quality,
but also factors that affect racial groups differentially within neighborhoods, such as racial bias and
race-specific rates of father presence. Our findings therefore suggest that reducing the black-white
income gap will require policies whose impacts cross neighborhood and class lines and increase
intergenerational mobility specifically for black men.
     The paper is organized as follows. Section II presents a model of intergenerational mobility and
racial disparities that we use to organize our empirical analysis. Section III describes the data.
In Section IV, we characterize intergenerational mobility by race. Section V examines the role of
differences in marriage rates and heterogeneity by gender in black-white gaps. Section VI analyzes
how family-level factors affect intergenerational gaps, while Section VII examines variation across
neighborhoods. Section VIII concludes. Supplementary results and methodological details are
provided in an online appendix. Statistics on children’s outcomes by race, parental income, and
other characteristics at the commuting zone and Census tract level can be downloaded from the
Census Bureau or Opportunity Insights and visualized using the Opportunity Atlas.


II     Conceptual Framework

We structure our empirical analysis using a statistical model of income inequality and intergenera-
tional mobility in the tradition of Galton (1886) and Becker and Tomes (1979). We use the model

                                                  6
to identify empirically estimable parameters that control the evolution of racial disparities.
       Consider a discrete-time setting in which t indexes generations. For simplicity, assume that each
family, indexed by i, consists of a single individual in each generation t. Let yi,t denote the income
percentile rank of individual i relative to all other individuals in the same generation t, and let r(i)
denote the race of family i.5 We show in our empirical analysis that the conditional expectation of
children’s mean ranks given their parents’ ranks is approximately linear for all races. We therefore
model individual i’s income as a race-specific linear function of his or her parents’ income:

                                            yi,t = αr + βr yi,t−1 + εi,t ,                                         (1)

where εi,t denotes an idiosyncratic shock that is independent across generations and has expectation
E[εi,t ] = 0. In Chetty, Hendren, Kline, and Saez’s (2014) terminology, αr ∈ [0, 1] measures absolute
rank mobility for children of the lowest-income parents: the mean rank of a child of race r whose
parents have income rank yi,t−1 = 0. The parameter βr ∈ [0, 1] measures the rate of relative
mobility: the association between the mean percentile rank of children and their parents’ income
ranks for race r. We assume that αr and βr do not vary across generations. Chetty et al. (2014)
present evidence in support of this assumption pooling races for recent cohorts, and we present
further evidence supporting this assumption by race in Online Appendix Table X.
       Under the linear specification in (1), one does not need to track the evolution of the full income
distribution to characterize the evolution of mean outcomes by race. The mean rank of individuals
of race r in generation t is simply ȳr,t = αr + βr ȳr,t−1 . Iterating over generations, we can write the
mean rank in generation t + s, ȳr,t+s , as a function of the mean rank in generation t, ȳr,t :
                                                          1 − βrs
                                           ȳr,t+s = αr           + βrs ȳr,t .                                    (2)
                                                          1 − βr
As s → ∞, βrs → 0 if βr < 1. Hence, the mean rank of individuals of race r converges in the long
run to a steady-state in which
                                                                        αr
                                          ȳr,t = ȳr,t−1 = ȳrSS =          .                                     (3)
                                                                      1 − βr
       We now turn to the implications of (2) and (3) for the evolution of racial disparities. Let
∆ȳt = ȳr1 ,t − ȳr2 ,t denote the unconditional mean income rank gap between two races r1 and r2 in
generation t. For expositional convenience, we consider a series of cases of increasing generality.
   5
     By focusing on percentile ranks, we capture changes in the relative position of racial groups in the income
distribution. As discussed in Bayer and Charles (2018) and Manduca (2018), trends in the absolute dollar magnitude
of racial disparities depend upon both changes in ranks and the marginal distribution of income in each generation.
We focus on ranks to separate the forces that affect racial disparities from forces that affect the income distribution
more generally, such as skill-biased technical change. The rank-based estimates of mobility we report here can be
translated into dollar gaps using the methods in Chetty et al. (2017).


                                                            7
   Constant Relative and Absolute Mobility. We begin with the case in which absolute and relative
rates of intergenerational mobility do not vary by race: αr = α and βr = β for all r. In this case,
the racial gap in mean ranks in steady state is ∆ȳ SS = 0, as all races converge to the same mean
rank, irrespective of their initial conditions ȳr,0 . The gap in generation t + s is ∆ȳt+s = β s ∆ȳt .
As noted by Becker and Tomes (1979), the rate of convergence in incomes across racial groups is
determined by the rate of relative mobility β. Chetty, Hendren, Kline and Saez (2014) estimate that
β ' 0.35 pooling all races in the U.S. This level of relative mobility implies that racial disparities
would fall to 35% of their current level after one generation and just 12% of their current level
after two generations, as illustrated in Figure Ia. In the absence of differences in intergenerational
mobility by race, racial disparities in income would dissipate relatively rapidly across generations
given observed levels of mobility and vanish entirely in steady-state. Hence, an intergenerational
model with constant relative and absolute mobility is clearly inconsistent with the persistence of
income disparities by race throughout America’s history (Myrdal 1944; Duncan 1968; Margo 2016).
   Constant Relative Mobility. Next, consider the case where absolute mobility varies by race, but
relative mobility does not: βr = β. Let ∆α = αw − αb denote the racial difference in absolute
mobility, i.e. the expected gap in children’s ranks conditional on parental income, which we term
the intergenerational gap. In this case, the racial gap in steady-state is

                                                        ∆α
                                            ∆ȳ SS =       .
                                                       1−β

The steady-state disparity is directly proportional to the size of the intergenerational gap ∆α,
as shown in Figure Ib. Reducing racial disparities in the long run therefore requires reducing
intergenerational gaps. Reducing the current gap ∆ȳ0 without changing ∆α will not affect racial
disparities in the long run.
   The gap in generation t + s is

                                 ∆ȳt+s = (1 − β s )∆ȳ SS + β s ∆ȳt .                              (4)

The gap in generation t is given by a weighted average of the steady-state gap and the current gap,
with the weight determined by the rate of relative mobility β. As discussed above, if β = 0.35 as
observed empirically, convergence to the steady-state is relatively rapid and hence what matters
most even after one or two generations is primarily the intergenerational gap ∆α.
   The difference between the racial gap in the current generation and the steady state, ∆ȳt −∆ȳ SS ,
measures the extent to which current disparities are driven purely by intergenerational gaps (∆α)


                                                   8
versus historical factors (∆ȳ0 ). If ∆ȳt −∆ȳ SS is small, we can infer (under our assumption that rates
of intergenerational mobility are stable) that most of the current disparity is due to intergenerational
gaps rather than transitory factors.
   General Case. We now return to the general case in which both αr and βr vary across races.
Here, steady-state disparities and rates of convergence are determined by the race-specific rates of
relative and absolute mobility. As noted above, prior work has established that the average level of
β pooling all races is approximately 0.35 in the U.S., but there is less evidence on how βr varies by
race (Mazumder 2014). Estimating βr by race is important because groups that have low relative
mobility (high βr ) could remain stuck at lower income levels for many generations even in the
absence of steady-state gaps. For example, suppose whites and blacks have the same steady-state
mean rank and that whites are currently in steady-state, but blacks are not. In this case, the gap
in period t + s is ∆ȳt+s = βbs ∆ȳt , where βb denotes relative mobility for blacks. If βb = 0.75, it
would take 8 generations for the black-white disparity ∆ȳ0 to fall to 10% of its current level.
   To summarize, race-specific rates of relative and absolute mobility (αr , βr ) control the persis-
tence of racial disparities and can provide guidance on the types of interventions that may be most
effective in reducing disparities. If relative mobility is high for all races (low βr ), reducing racial
disparities requires policies that reduce racial gaps in children’s outcomes conditional on parental
income (∆α), perhaps through changes in schooling or childhood environment. Transitory inter-
ventions, such as temporary cash transfers targeted by race, will have limited long-run effects unless
they change the process of intergenerational mobility itself. In contrast, if racial disparities emerge
from low rates of relative mobility (high βr ) combined with large gaps due to historical or transient
factors (high ∆ȳt ), then temporary interventions or policies that increase relative mobility would
have more persistent effects.
   Changes in Mobility Over Time. Our model’s steady-state predictions assume that intergen-
erational mobility for each race is constant over time. In practice, mobility rates may change
across generations. For example, Borjas (1992) proposes a model in which intergenerational gaps
by race emerge from differences in “ethnic capital” (measured e.g., by the previous generation’s
mean income or education), which itself evolves across generations. From the perspective of a single
generation, our model with heterogeneous, fixed intercepts αr can be interpreted as a reduced-form
of the Borjas model in which we do not microfound the underlying determinants of αr . Our steady-
state predictions should thus be interpreted not as predictions of the actual dynamics that we
expect to occur, but rather as what would happen in a (potentially counterfactual) world in which


                                                    9
the differences in mobility we document below remain fixed over time. These predictions provide
a useful benchmark because they tell us how mobility rates must change to achieve convergence,
whether via exogenous changes in policy, endogenous changes in ethnic capital, or changes in other
determinants of mobility.
   More generally, richer models of intergenerational income dynamics would permit children’s
outcomes to depend not just upon parents’ incomes but also grandparents’ incomes (Long and
Ferrie 2018) and allow for features such as assortative mating, endogenous fertility, and endogenous
human capital investment (e.g., Becker, Kominers, Murphy and Spenkuch 2018). Although steady-
state outcomes and convergence rates depend upon many additional factors in such models, rates
of intergenerational income mobility (αr , βr ) continue to play a central role and thus remain of
interest.
   Motivated by this framework, we focus on two sets of questions in our empirical analysis. First,
how do rates of intergenerational mobility vary across racial groups? Second, what factors lead to
differences in intergenerational mobility by race and produce gaps that persist across generations?


III     Data

We combine two sources of data housed at the Census Bureau in our primary analysis: data from
the Census 2000 and 2010 short forms and data drawn from federal income tax returns in 1989,
1994, 1995, and 1998-2015. For certain supplemental analyses, we also use data from the Census
2000 long form and the 2005-2015 American Community Surveys (ACS). The Census short forms
are designed to cover the entire population; the Census 2000 long form is a stratified random
sample covering approximately one-sixth of households; and the ACS is a stratified random sample
covering approximately 2.5% of households in each year (U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau
of the Census 2000; U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census 2003; U.S. Department
of Commerce, Bureau of the Census 2014).
   These datasets are linked by a unique person identifier called a Protected Identification Key
(PIK) that is assigned by Census Bureau staff using information such as Social Security Numbers
(SSNs), names, addresses, and dates of birth. The Census Bureau uses the Numident, a dataset
covering all SSN holders, and other administrative data to assign PIKs. All analysis in this paper
is conducted using a linked dataset that contains PIKs but is stripped of personally identifiable
information.
   The record linkage algorithm used to assign individuals PIKs is described in Wagner and Layne

                                                10
(2014). Using datasets that have both SSNs and other identifiers, Layne, Wagner and Rothhaas
(2014) show that the error rate in assigning PIKs when one does not have SSNs (as in Census
surveys) is typically below 1% for government datasets. In the 2010 Census, 90.3% of individuals
are successfully assigned a PIK (Wagner and Layne 2014, Table 2). Bond, Brown, Luque and
Hara (2014) show that PIK rates vary slightly across population subgroups in the 2010 ACS, but
exceed 85% in virtually all subgroups. We present statistics on the fraction of our target population
covered by our linked dataset below.
       In the rest of this section, we describe how we construct our analysis sample, define the variables
we use, and present summary statistics. Further details are in Online Appendices A-C.

III.A       Sample Definition

Our target sample frame consists of all children in the 1978-83 birth cohorts who were (1) born in
the U.S. or are authorized immigrants who came to the U.S. in childhood and (2) whose parents
were also U.S. citizens or authorized immigrants.6 We construct this sample frame in practice
by identifying all children who were claimed as a child dependent on a 1040 tax form at some
point between 1994-2015 by an adult who appears in the 2016 Numident file and was between
the ages of 15-50 at the time of the child’s birth.7 We then restrict the sample to children who
were born between 1978-83, based on their record in the 2016 Numident. Note that this sample
definition excludes children who are unauthorized immigrants or who are claimed as dependents
by unauthorized immigrants because unauthorized immigrants do not have SSNs and therefore do
not appear in the Numident file.
       We define a child’s “parent” as the person who first claims the child as a dependent (between
1994-2015). This person must be supporting the child to claim him or her as a dependent, but may
not necessarily be the child’s biological parent.8 If the child is first claimed by a single filer, the
child is defined as having a single parent. For simplicity, we assign each child a parent (or parents)
permanently using this algorithm, regardless of any subsequent changes in parents’ marital status
or dependent claiming.
   6
     We limit our analysis to individuals who are authorized immigrants because coverage rates of tax data for
unauthorized immigrants are difficult to determine.
   7
     Dependent claiming information is not available in tax returns from 1989. We impose the 15-50 age restriction
to limit links to grandparents or other guardians who might claim a child as a dependent.
   8
     An alternative method of identifying parents is to use information on relationships to household members in the
2000 Census short form. We find that the tax- and Census-data based measures of parents are well aligned: for
instance, among the children claimed as dependents by parents on a 1040 tax form in 2000, 93% live with the same
parents in the 2000 Census. We use the tax data to identify parents because many of the children in the oldest
cohorts in our sample have left their parents’ houses by the 2000 Census.


                                                        11
    If parents never file a tax return, we do not link them to their child. Although some low-income
individuals do not file tax returns in a given year, almost all parents file a tax return at some point
between 1994 and 2015 to obtain a tax refund on their withheld taxes and the Earned Income Tax
Credit (Cilke 1998). As a result, virtually all of the children in the 1978-83 birth cohorts are linked
to parents (Online Appendix Table II). We limit our analysis to children born during or after 1978
because many children begin to leave the household starting at age 17 (Chetty, Hendren, Kline and
Saez 2014, Appendix Table I) and the first year in which we have dependent claiming information
is 1994.
    In Online Appendix B, we assess the representativeness of our analysis sample by comparing
sample counts and descriptive statistics to corresponding measures from the ACS. Our analysis
sample covers approximately 94% of our target sample frame and has income distributions and de-
mographic characteristics very similar to the ACS (Online Appendix Tables III and IV), confirming
that it provides an accurate representation of our target population.

III.B      Variable Definitions

In this subsection, we briefly define the variables we use in our primary analysis; details are provided
in Online Appendix C. We measure all monetary variables in 2015 dollars, adjusting for inflation
using the consumer price index (CPI-U).
    Variable Definitions for Parents.
    Income. Our primary measure of parent income is total pre-tax income at the household level,
which we label parent family or household income.9 In years where a parent files a tax return, we
define household income as Adjusted Gross Income; for non-filers, household income is coded as
zero. We define our baseline parental income measure as the mean of parents’ household income
over five years: 1994, 1995, and 1998-2000, as tax records are unavailable in 1996 and 1997.
    Marital Status. We identify parents’ marital status based on their tax filing status in the year
the child is first claimed as a dependent by parents. We say that a child has a “father present” if
one of the tax filers who claims the child as a dependent in that year is male.
    Educational Attainment. We obtain information on the highest level of education parents have
completed from the American Community Survey and the 2000 Census long form. We define
“parental education” as the mother’s education if available; if not, we use the father’s education.
    Wealth. We proxy for parents’ wealth (again, prioritizing the mother’s data) using information
   9
     We use the term “household” income for simplicity, but we do not include incomes from cohabitating partners
or other household members aside from the primary tax filer’s spouse.


                                                      12
on home ownership, monthly mortgage payments, home value, and the number of vehicles from the
2000 Census long form and the ACS. We supplement these proxies using data from the Survey of
Consumer Finances (SCF) to control for total wealth. Further details on the use of the SCF are
provided in Online Appendix F.
   Location. In each year, parents are assigned the address from which they filed their 1040 tax
return. For non-filers, we use address information from information returns such as W-2s.
   U.S. Native Status. Children are defined as having a “native-born” mother if their mother was
surveyed in the 2000 Census long form or the ACS and reported being born in the United States
in either survey.
   Variable Definitions for Children.
   Income. We define children’s annual household income in the same way as parents’ income,
except that we use data from W-2 forms to impute income for non-filers (W-2 data are available
only since 2005 and hence cannot be used to measure parents’ incomes in our sample). We measure
children’s individual and household incomes as their mean annual incomes in 2014 and 2015, when
children are between the ages of 31 and 37.
   Marriage. A child’s marital status is measured based on whether he or she files a tax return
jointly in 2015.
   Race. We assign race and ethnicity to children using the information they report on the 2010
Census short form, 2000 Census short form or the ACS.
   Employment. We use two measures of employment, one based on the tax data and one based on
the ACS. In the tax data, children are defined as working if they have non-zero individual income
in either 2014 or 2015. In the ACS, children are defined as working if they report positive weeks
worked in the past year. This and all other employment-related ACS measures described below are
defined only among children who receive the ACS at age 30 or later.
   Hours Worked. Annual hours worked are measured in the ACS as the product of hours worked
per week and weeks worked per year.
   Hourly Wage. Hourly wages are measured in the ACS by dividing reported annual wage and
salary income by annual hours worked. The hourly wage is coded as missing for those with zero
hours worked.
   Occupation. We obtain information on children’s occupations from the ACS for children who
have positive hours worked.
   Educational Attainment. We measure children’s educational attainment based on the highest


                                               13
level of education they report having completed in the ACS or the 2000 Census long form (priori-
tizing the ACS, since it is more recent).
   Incarceration. Using data from the 2010 Census short form, we define an individual as incar-
cerated on the day of the Census (April 1, 2010) based on whether he or she lives in any of the
following types of group quarters: federal detention center, federal prison, state prison, local jail,
residential correctional facility, military jail, or juvenile correctional facility.
   Location. Children’s locations are measured based on the address from which they file tax
returns in 2015 or the most recent year in which an address is available. For non-filers, we obtain
address information from W-2 forms and other information returns.

III.C    Summary Statistics

Table I and Online Appendix Tables V-IX report summary statistics for children and parents,
by race and gender. There are 21.3 million children in our analysis sample, of whom 94% have
non-missing information on race (Online Appendix Table II). Of those with non-missing race in-
formation, 67% are white, 14% are black, 13% are Hispanic, 3% are Asian, and 0.8% are American
Indian. The median household income among children in 2014-15 (between the ages of 31-37)
is $53,730 for whites, $20,650 for blacks, $35,180 for Hispanics, $63,720 for Asians, and $22,260
for American Indians. Among parents, median household income is $70,640 for whites, $29,200
for blacks, $33,060 for Hispanics, $53,010 for Asians, and $34,850 for American Indians. These
differences in household income are partly driven by differences in marriage rates: 79.3% of white
children grow up in two-parent households, compared with 32.2% of black children. Other variables
vary across the groups in a similar manner. Notably, 10.3% of black men in our sample of children
were incarcerated on April 1, 2010 (between ages 27-32), a far higher rate than for any of the other
subgroups.
   In Online Appendix B and Online Appendix Table IV, we show that income distributions
measured in the tax records closely match those in the Current Population Survey and the ACS.
For example, the median income in 2015 of children who appear in both our analysis sample and
the 2015 ACS is $33,370 based on the tax data, compared with $34,000 based on the ACS data.
Individuals recorded as having zero income in the tax records (because they do not file and have no
W-2s) have a median income of $5,000 in the ACS, showing that tax records do not miss substantial
amounts of income for non-filers.




                                                     14
IV        Intergenerational Mobility by Race

In this section, we characterize the evolution of racial disparities across generations using the
framework in Section II. We begin by estimating relative and absolute intergenerational mobility
(αr , βr ) for each racial group using the specification in (1). Following Chetty, Hendren, Kline and
Saez (2014), we measure parents’ and children’s incomes using percentile ranks. We rank children
based on their incomes relative to all other children in the same birth cohort. Similarly, we rank
parents based on their incomes relative to all other parents with children in the same birth cohort.
Pooling all races, we obtain an estimate of relative mobility of β = 0.35 in our analysis sample
(Online Appendix Figure I), very similar to the estimate of β = 0.34 reported by Chetty, Hendren,
Kline and Saez (2014, Figure IIa) based purely on tax records.10
       Blacks vs. Whites. Figure IIa plots the mean household income rank of children versus the
household income rank of their parents, for black and white children. For whites, we estimate a
slope (relative mobility) of βw = 0.32: a 10 percentile increase in parents’ rank is associated with
a 3.2 percentile increase in children’s rank on average. The intercept for whites is αw = 36.8;
i.e., white children born to the lowest-income parents reach the 36.8th percentile on average. The
relationship between children’s expected ranks and parents’ ranks is linear across almost the entire
parental income distribution, but is convex in the upper tail (top 5%). Children from very high-
income families have especially high incomes themselves; for instance, white children with parents
at the 100th income percentile have a mean rank of 74.0.
       Blacks have relative mobility comparable to whites (βb = 0.28), but have uniformly lower rates
of absolute mobility across the entire parental income distribution. For example, black children
with parents at the 25th percentile reach an income rank of 32.6 on average, 12.6 percentiles below
white children born to parents with comparable incomes. Racial disparities persist even at the
highest income levels: among children whose parents are in the top 1% (who have incomes of $1.1
million on average), the black-white gap remains at 12.4 percentiles.11 Hence, high levels of parental
income provide no insulation against racial disparities.
       The differences in mean ranks between black and white children arise from the fact that blacks
both have much lower rates of upward mobility than whites and much higher levels of downward
  10
     The estimate increases by 0.01 because we measure children’s incomes at slightly older ages in this paper (ages
31-37 vs. ages 29-32), reducing the amount of lifecycle bias.
  11
     One may be concerned that this gap is overstated because white parents have higher incomes on average within
the top 1% than black parents (since the top percentile is effectively unbounded above). However, the black-white
gap remains at 13.1 percentiles among children with parents in the 99th percentile, where that issue does not arise.



                                                        15
mobility (Hertz 2005; Bhattacharya and Mazumder 2011). For example, among children with
parents in the bottom quintile, 10.6% of white children rise up to the top quintile, but only 2.5%
of black children do (Table I; see the Online Data Tables for quintile transition matrices by race
and ethnicity). Among children with parents in the top quintile, 41.1% of white children remain
in the top quintile, compared with 18.0% of black children. Perhaps most strikingly, black children
starting from families in the top quintile have nearly the same chances of falling to the bottom
income quintile (16.7%) as they do of staying in the top quintile.12
    Under the assumption that rates of mobility remain constant across generations, we can predict
how the black-white disparity will evolve across generations using the model in Section II. Plugging
our estimates of αw and βw into (3), the predicted steady-state mean rank for whites under the
                         SS = 54.4, illustrated by the point where the intergenerational mobility line
model in Section II is ȳw
intersects the 45 degree line on Figure IIa. The steady-state mean rank for blacks is ȳbSS = 35.2.
Hence, the predicted (unconditional) black-white income gap in steady state given current levels of
intergenerational mobility is ∆ȳ SS =19.2 percentiles.
    Figure IIb plots the mean ranks of parents (circles) and children (diamonds) in our sample vs.
the predicted steady-state mean ranks, by race. Both blacks and whites’ mean incomes are close
to their steady-state values, shown by the arrows intersecting the 45 degree line. The mean rank of
black children in the 1978-83 birth cohorts is 34.8, while the mean rank of white children is 55.7.
Hence, the observed unconditional black-white gap in the current generation is 20.9 percentiles,
very similar to the predicted steady-state gap of 19.2 percentiles. Interpreted using the model in
Section II, this result implies that blacks and whites are in a steady-state in which the black-white
income gap is due almost entirely to differences in rates of intergenerational mobility rather than
transitory or historical factors.
    As noted in Section II, these steady-state predictions assume that mobility rates do not change
across generations. Whether this assumption will hold going forward is unclear; the key point is
that if the race-specific levels of absolute mobility αr do not change, there will be little progress
in reducing black-white disparities in the U.S. To reduce black-white disparities, we must reduce
intergenerational gaps (∆α) either through changes in policy or other factors (e.g., via changes in
ethnic capital as in Borjas (1992)). Although the historical persistence of racial disparities suggests
that reducing ∆α will be challenging, one encouraging result is that interventions that reduce ∆α
  12
     This result is not driven by measurement error in parental income: we average parent income over five years in
our baseline analysis and find that using longer averages does not affect the results significantly.




                                                        16
could lead to rapid reductions in racial disparities across generations because blacks have fairly high
rates of relative mobility (low βr ). For example, under the assumptions of the model in Section II,
if black children’s mean ranks were increased by 13 percentiles at all levels of parental income, the
unconditional black-white income gap would fall to just 2.7 percentiles within two generations.
    American Indians, Hispanics, and Asians. Figure IIIa shows intergenerational mobility series
for Hispanics, Asians, and American Indians in addition to the series for whites and blacks plotted
in Figure IIa. Rates of intergenerational mobility for American Indians are very similar to those for
blacks. As a result, the predicted steady-state mean rank for American Indians is 36.5, similar to
that for blacks. The mean rank of American Indian children is 36.7, showing that they too are very
close to their steady-state if rates of mobility do not change (Figure IIb). Hence, American Indians’
low income levels are also due primarily to their low rates of upward mobility across generations.
    Hispanics have rates of intergenerational mobility (among authorized immigrants and citizens)
similar to those of whites, especially at the bottom of the income distribution. As a result, their
predicted steady-state mean income (assuming constant mobility across generations) is 48.7, only
5.7 percentiles below the steady-state for whites. But Hispanics’ current income distributions are
closer to those of blacks and Americans Indians than whites (Online Appendix Figure II). Hispanic
parents and children in our sample have a mean rank of 36.2 and 45.7 percentiles, respectively.
Hence, unlike blacks and American Indians, Hispanics are on an upward trajectory across genera-
tions and may close most of the gap between their incomes and those of whites, as shown in Figure
IIb. Their low levels of income at present thus appear to to be primarily due to transitory factors.
    Asians have much higher rates of relative mobility than all other groups, with β = 0.18. Asian
children have have high levels of income across the parental income distribution; even Asian children
born to the lowest-income parents reach the 51st percentile of the national income distribution on
average. These patterns have led to a perception that Asians are a “model minority” whose success
may serve as a model for other racial groups. One concern with this inference is that 81.8% of Asian
parents in our sample are first-generation immigrants, who might have high levels of latent skill
but low levels of observed income in the U.S., leading to unusually high rates of observed upward
mobility for their children. We evaluate this hypothesis in Figures IIIb and IIIc by focusing on
children whose mothers were born in the U.S. vs. outside the U.S.13 Asian children whose mothers
were born in the U.S. have outcomes very similar to white children (Figure IIIb), while those whose
 13
    These figures are based on the subsample of children whose mothers appear in the 2000 Census long form or the
ACS because we only observe where the mother was born in those datasets.




                                                       17
mothers were born outside the U.S. have much better outcomes than white children (Figure IIIc).
Hence, the exceptional outcomes of Asian children are unique to the children of first-generation
immigrants rather than a persistent feature of Asians who are U.S. natives. For this reason, Asian
children of U.S. natives have a predicted steady state income level that is similar to whites, as
shown in Figure IIb.
    Asians are not exceptional in having higher rates of absolute and relative mobility among
immigrants than natives. The same qualitative pattern holds among Hispanics, Blacks, and whites
as well, as shown in Online Appendix Figure III, although the gap between natives and immigrants
is significantly smaller for Hispanics than the other groups.14 This may be because first-generation
immigrants have low levels of earnings when they come to the U.S. despite having high levels of
latent skills that they transmit to their children or because immigrants choose to live in areas within
the U.S. that foster greater upward mobility for their children (Abramitzky, Boustan, Jacome and
Pérez 2019).
    In sum, an intergenerational perspective suggests that the racial disparities that are most likely
to persist are for blacks and American Indians, who appear to be in a steady-state with lower levels
of income. Understanding the persistence of disparities for these groups requires an understanding
of why black and American Indian children have lower incomes than white children conditional on
parent income. In the rest of the paper, we test a range of potential explanations for intergen-
erational gaps among black children. We focus specifically on the black-white gap because many
of our tests require examining small subgroups, and sample sizes for blacks are much larger than
those for American Indians.15


V      Marriage Rates and Gender Heterogeneity

We begin our analysis of the sources of black-white intergenerational gaps by considering a simple
mechanical explanation: racial differences in marriage rates. It is well known that blacks marry
at much lower rates than whites (e.g. Raley, Sweeney and Wondra 2015). Differences in marriage
rates could potentially explain the black-white gap in household income simply because we count
two incomes for most white children but only one for most black children. In this section, we study
the effects of differences in marriage rates by focusing on measures of individuals’ own outcomes
  14
     Because of this, the predicted steady-state for Hispanic natives is 47.3 percentiles, only 1.4 percentiles below the
value for all Hispanics. In the interest of parsimony, we present statistics simply by race and ethnicity here, pooling
immigrants from different countries; in the Online Data Tables, we report analogous statistics for second-generation
immigrants by their parents’ country of birth.
  15
     For completeness, we present parallel analyses for other racial groups in the Online Appendix.


                                                           18
and show that the results vary sharply by gender.
   We first document the large intergenerational gaps in marriage rates between black and white
children in our sample. Figure IVa plots marriage rates for black and white children in 2015 (be-
tween ages 32-37) by parental income percentile. Black children have substantially lower marriage
rates across the parental income distribution, with a gap of 32 percentage points (pp) for children
with parents at the 25th percentile and 34 pp at the 75th percentile. White children at the bottom
of the income distribution are as likely to be married as black children at the 97th percentile of the
parental income distribution.
   To evaluate the impacts of these differences in marriage rates, we focus on children’s individual
incomes (excluding spousal income). Figure IVb plots children’s mean individual income ranks vs.
their parents’ household income ranks, by race. The gap in individual income ranks is approximately
5 percentiles across the parental income distribution, substantially smaller than the approximately
13 percentile gap in household income in Figure IIa.
   However, the smaller gap in children’s individual incomes in Figure IVb masks substantial het-
erogeneity by gender. Figure V replicates Figure IVb separately for male and female children. This
figure reveals that the black-white intergenerational gap in individual incomes is driven almost
entirely by men. We find gaps for men of about 11 percentiles across the parental income distribu-
tion. In contrast, black women have 1 percentile higher individual income ranks than white women
conditional on parental income. The finding that black-white racial gaps in individual income are
substantially larger for men than women is consistent with prior literature showing that black-white
wage disparities are smaller for women than men in the cross-section (Darity, Guilkey and Winfrey
1996; Neal and Johnson 1996; Altonji and Blank 1999; Bayard, Ilellerstein, Neumark and Troske
1999; Blau 2012).
   Income Effects: Wage Rates and Hours of Work. One interpretation of the results in Figure
V is that black-white gaps in labor market opportunities are small for women, but large for men.
A competing explanation is that black women also have poorer labor market opportunities than
white women, but this is masked by an income effect on labor supply: black women may be working
harder to make up for having lower spousal income.
   One way to distinguish these explanations is to compare the hours of work and wage rates of
black and white women. In the simplest version of the income effect hypothesis, one would expect
that black women would have higher hours than white women but lower wage rates. We measure
annual hours of work and wages for children who appear in an ACS sample at or after age 30. We


                                                 19
define wage rates as self-reported annual earnings divided by annual hours. We then convert hourly
wages to percentile ranks by ranking individuals relative to others in the same birth cohort who
received the ACS survey in the same year. Hours of work are coded as zero for those who do not
work, while wages are coded as missing.
       Figure VI plots mean wage ranks, hours, and employment rates by parental income percentile
for women and men. Conditional on parental income, black and white women have very similar
wage rates, hours of work, and employment rates.16 These results suggest that the lack of an
intergenerational gap in income for females is not entirely due to an income effect. In contrast,
there are very large gaps in both wage rates and hours of work for men. Conditional on parental
income, black men have wages that are about 7 percentiles lower than white males, and work
roughly 9 fewer hours per week on average. The gaps in employment rates for men are particularly
stark, especially for children growing up in low-income families. Black men with parents at the
25th percentile are 18.9 pp less likely to work in a given year than white men, while black men with
parents at the 75th percentile are 11.4 pp less likely to work than white men. The employment
rates of black men with parents at the 75th percentile are comparable to those of white men with
parents at the 9th percentile.
       The black-white gap in wage rates may understate the true gap in potential wages if black
women with lower wage opportunities are less likely to be employed (Heckman, Lyons and Todd
2000). The similarity of employment rates for black and white women rules out selection bias in
which the decision to work is based purely on potential wage rates. However, as noted by Neal
(2004), black women who do not work might have low potential wage rates, while white women who
do not work have high potential wage rates but a high marginal cost of labor. Although there is
certainly scope for selection bias of this form, differences in potential wages for non-working women
are unlikely to overturn the conclusion that the intergenerational gap in labor market opportunities
is significantly smaller for women than men, for two reasons.
       First, even among women born to high-income parents – for whom employment rates are around
  16
     This is true not just for means: the entire distribution of black womens’ wage rates and hours of work is very
similar to the corresponding distributions for whites, conditional on parent income (not reported). We also find
that the occupational distributions of black and white women are similar conditional on parental income (Online
Appendix Figure IV), suggesting that black women are not substituting toward occupations with lower amenities to
obtain higher wages. We do find, however, that white women are less likely than black women to hold jobs that pay
traditional wage earnings (reported on form W-2) and are more likely to earn income of other forms (e.g., reported
on form 1099) conditional on parental income. Moreover, it remains possible that black women choose jobs that
offer fewer amenities in exchange for greater compensation within a given occupation. Hence, we cannot be certain
that there is no difference in labor market opportunities for black and white women conditional on parental income;
however, the data do strongly suggest that the black-white gap in opportunities is much larger for men than women.



                                                        20
90% – wages are very similar for blacks and whites. Second, we continue to find smaller intergen-
erational gaps for women and large intergenerational gaps for men for outcomes that are observed
for everyone, such as educational attainment. Among children with parents at the 25th percentile,
the black-white gap in high school completion rates is 3.5 pp for women vs. 8.3 pp for men (Figure
VIIa-b). The corresponding gaps in college attendance rates are 2.8 pp for women and 6.5 pp
for men (Figure VIIc-d).17 It is particularly noteworthy that high school completion and college
attendance rates are uniformly higher for black women than for white men across the parental
income distribution.
       The gender difference in racial disparities is perhaps most stark in incarceration (Steffensmeier,
Ulmer and Kramer 1998). Figure VIIe shows that 21% of black males born to parents in the lowest-
income (bottom 1%) families were incarcerated on April 1, 2010 (when they are between ages 27-32).
In contrast, 6.4% of white males born to parents with comparable income were incarcerated. As
parental income rises, the incarceration rates decline for both white and black males. But there are
substantial disparities even at the top of the parental income distribution. Among children with
parents in the top 1%, only 0.2% of white males were incarcerated, whereas 2.2% of black males
were incarcerated – the same rate as for white boys who grew up in families at the 34th percentile
of the parental income distribution. In contrast, incarceration rates are very low for both black
and white females across the parental income distribution (Figure VIIf). These findings reinforce
the view that the processes that generate racial disparities differ substantially by gender.
       Although there are large differences in incarceration rates between black and white men, in-
carceration itself is unlikely to mechanically explain the black-white gaps in income for men doc-
umented in Figure Va. That is, the black-white intergenerational gap would be sizable even if
we exclude individuals who are incarcerated at the point at which we measure their income (and
hence have near-zero income). One way to see this is that the income gap remains substantial even
among children in the highest-income families, for whom incarceration rates are small in absolute
terms: 2.2% of black men born to parents in the top 1% are incarcerated, yet their individual
earnings ranks are 10.2 percentiles below those of white men. Incarceration also cannot directly
explain the sharp disparities observed in outcomes at younger ages, such as high school dropout
rates. Moreover, incarcerated individuals have low levels of earnings even prior to incarceration
  17
    We also find larger gaps for men than women when examining the association between children’s education and
parents’ education (rather than income). See the Online Data Tables for intergenerational transition matrices of
education by race and gender.




                                                      21
(Looney and Turner 2017).18
    Implications for the Evolution of Income Disparities. We conclude based on the preceding
analysis that the black-white intergenerational gap in individual income is substantial for men, but
quite small for women. It is important to note, however, that this finding does not imply that
the unconditional black-white gap in women’s individual incomes will vanish with time. This is
because black women continue to have substantially lower levels of household income than white
women, both because they are less likely to be married and because black men earn less than white
men (Online Appendix Figure V). As a result, black girls grow up in lower-income households
than white girls in each generation, leading to a persistent racial disparity in individual income for
women even in the absence of an intergenerational gap in their individual incomes.
    Nevertheless, the key to closing income disparities for both black and white women is to close
intergenerational gaps in income between black and white men. We establish this result formally
in Online Appendix E by extending the model in Section II to allow men’s and women’s individual
income ranks to depend upon the individual income ranks of both men and women in the previous
generation. The model predicts that in the absence of intergenerational gaps for women, the
steady-state gap for both women and men is proportional to the intergenerational gap in individual
incomes for men. We therefore focus on understanding the determinants of intergenerational gaps
between black and white men in the rest of the paper.


VI      Family-Level Factors

In this section, we ask whether other factors that vary across black and white families beyond
parental income can explain intergenerational gaps in income between black and white men. We
consider four family-level factors that have received attention in the previous literature, summarized
in Online Appendix Table I: parental marital status, parental education, parental wealth, and
differences in ability.
    We study the role of parental characteristics by estimating regressions on the subsample of black
and white children of the form:

                          yi,c = a + bp yi,p + bw whitei + bwp whitei · yi,p + cXi + ei ,                        (5)
   18
      Our point here is simply that incarceration does not mechanically account for the black-white gap in earnings
outcomes by taking people out of the labor force. Of course, high rates of incarceration could influence intergenera-
tional gaps through broader channels, e.g. by changing ex-ante investment in human capital, by changing norms, or
by reducing the presence of black fathers in a community.




                                                         22
where yi,c is the child’s individual income rank, yi,p is the parent’s household income rank, whitei
is an indicator for the child being white, and Xi is a covariate such as parental education. In this
specification, the intergenerational gap in income between blacks and whites at a given parental
income rank p̄, controlling for the effect of Xi , is ∆p̄|X = bw + bwp p̄. Our goal is to assess how ∆p̄|X
changes as we control for various factors X.
       In Figure VIII, we show how ∆p̄|X changes as we control for various factors X. Panel A considers
the black-white gap for children growing up in low-income (p̄ = 25) families, while Panel B considers
the gap for those growing up in high-income (p̄ = 75) families. As a reference, the first two bars
in both panels report the unconditional difference in white and black children’s mean individual
income ranks, without controlling for parental income or any other covariate. This unconditional
gap is 17.6 percentiles for males and 4.8 percentiles for females. The second set of bars report
estimates of ∆p̄ when no controls Xi are included. These estimates correspond to the difference
between the black and white series in Figure IVb at the 25th and 75th percentiles (under a linear
approximation for both series).
       The rest of the bars in Figures VIIIa-b show how these intergenerational gaps change with
the introduction of additional controls, Xi . One prominent hypothesis is that black children have
poorer outcomes because they are more likely to grow up in single parent families (Lundberg 2017),
an effect that may be especially pronounced for boys (Autor et al. 2019). The third set of bars
in Figure VIIIa-b show that controlling for parental marital status in (5) has a small effect on the
intergenerational gap in income. At the 25th percentile, the intergenerational gap for men falls
from 10 to 9.3 percentiles; at the 75th percentile, it falls 11.7 to 11.4 percentiles.19
       Next, we include indicators for parents’ highest level of educational attainment in (5) (see
Online Appendix C for details on how educational attainment is defined). Controlling for parental
education in addition to marital status reduces the gap for men to 9.1 percentiles at p̄ = 25; at
p̄ = 75, the gap remains unchanged at 11.4 percentiles.
       Finally, we evaluate whether differences in parental wealth can explain the black-white gap in
intergenerational mobility. Black families have much lower levels of wealth than white families,
  19
    In Online Appendix Figures VIa-b, we relax the parametric assumption implicit in (5) that marital status has an
additive effect on children’s outcomes by replicating Figure Va separately for boys in single- and two-parent families.
The black-white intergenerational gaps remain similar to the estimates obtained from (5) in both of these groups.
Controlling for marital status has a larger effect when we do not control for parent income, reducing the unconditional
black-white gap from 17.6 to 13.3 percentiles (Online Appendix Figure VII), consistent with Autor et al. (2019). This
is because having two parents in the household is associated with a higher level of household income. We focus here
on how controls affect the intergenerational gap (i.e., the gap conditional on parental income) because that is the
parameter relevant for the dynamics of racial disparities across generations.



                                                          23
even conditional on income (Oliver and Shapiro 2006). Unfortunately, we do not observe household
wealth in our data; we only observe various proxies for wealth such as home ownership, monthly
mortgage payments, home value, and the number of vehicles. Controlling for these proxies reduces
the black-white intergenerational income gap modestly for males, from 9.1 to 8.4 percentiles at
p̄ = 25.20
    To estimate how much further the gap would narrow if we were to control for total wealth, we
use separate data from the Survey of Consumer Finances to assess how much of the black-white
gap in total wealth (conditional on parental income) is captured by the proxies that we observe in
the ACS. Our proxies account for about two-thirds of the black-white wealth gap: controlling for
the proxies reduces the estimated black-white wealth gap by 64%. In Online Appendix F, we show
that we can use this estimate to infer the black-white intergenerational income gap controlling for
total wealth under the assumption that children’s outcomes are independent of the ACS wealth
proxies conditional on total wealth (or, equivalently, that the components of wealth observed in the
ACS have the same effects on children’s outcomes as the unobserved components). Intuitively, we
simply inflate the reduction in the observed black-white intergenerational gap when we control for
the ACS wealth proxies by the portion of the wealth gap accounted for by those proxies to estimate
how much the black-white gap would fall if we were to control for total wealth.
    The adjustment for imperfect measurement of wealth in the ACS reduces the black-white income
gap given parents at the 25th percentile to 8.0 percentiles, a 0.4 percentile reduction relative to
the estimate that controls only for the ACS wealth proxies. Intuitively, this is because low-income
families hold the majority of their wealth in the illiquid assets that are captured in the ACS. The
correction for imperfect measurement of wealth has a slightly larger effect at the 75th percentile of
the national income distribution, reducing the estimated black-white gap from 11 to 10.2 percentiles.
We conclude based on this analysis that differences in wealth between black and white families are
unlikely to explain their starkly different rates of intergenerational mobility.
    Ability. The last family-level explanation we evaluate is the hypothesis that there are genetic
differences in cognitive ability by race. Since we do not have measures of innate ability in our
data, we cannot use the same approach as above to evaluate this hypothesis. However, two pieces
of evidence suggest that differences in ability are unlikely to explain the intergenerational gaps we
document. First, the prior literature suggests no ex-ante biological reason that racial differences in
  20
     Controlling non-parametrically for wealth, e.g. by conditioning on the subset of families who do not own houses,
also yields similar results (Online Appendix Figure VIc).




                                                         24
cognitive ability would vary by gender (Rushton and Jensen 2005). Hence, our finding that black-
white intergenerational gaps vary so sharply by gender casts doubt on ability as an explanation for
the gaps we observe.
    Second, most prior arguments for the ability hypothesis rest upon the large gaps observed
between black and white children on standardized tests (e.g., Hernstein and Murray 1994). However,
black-white test score gaps do not vary significantly by gender. Data from the National Assessment
of Educational Progress show that the black-white gap in test scores at age 9 for low-income (free-
or reduced-price lunch-eligible) children is 0.48 standard deviations (SD) for boys vs. 0.44 SD for
girls (Online Appendix Figure VIII). The fact that these test score gaps are not aligned with the
earnings gaps across gender casts further doubt upon the view that differences in cognitive ability,
as measured by test scores, explain black-white gaps in earnings outcomes.21
    In summary, the family-level factors most commonly discussed in prior work explain very little
of the differences in intergenerational mobility between black and white men.22


VII       Neighborhood-Level Factors

In this section, we use variation across neighborhoods as a lens to study how environmental factors
affect intergenerational mobility for black and white men. Since neighborhoods vary on many
dimensions that can affect individuals’ outcomes – from the quality of local schools to the availability
of jobs to the degree of racial bias – studying differences in outcomes across neighborhoods is a
fruitful way to learn about the effects of environmental factors (e.g., Wilson 1987; Cutler and
Glaeser 1997; Sampson, Morenoff and Gannon-Rowley 2002; Sharkey and Faber 2014).
    We organize our analysis into four sections. First, we characterize broad regional variation
in black-white intergenerational gaps across commuting zones, which are aggregations of counties
that are commonly used as a definition of local labor markets. Since blacks and whites often
live in different parts of a given CZ, we next examine variation in outcomes by race at much
finer geographies, by Census tract and block. Having characterized the observational variation in
outcomes across neighborhoods, in the third subsection, we study the outcomes of children whose
families move across areas to determine whether the neighborhood-level differences in black-white
gaps that we document are driven by causal effects of environment or sorting. Finally, we compare
  21
     An alternative explanation of the test score gaps is that blacks under-perform on standardized tests relative to
whites because of inherent biases in standardized tests or stereotype threat (Steele and Aronson 1995; Jencks and
Phillips 1998).
  22
     As with the black-white gap, we find that controlling for other family-level factors has little impact on intergen-
erational gaps between Hispanics, Asians, American Indians, and whites (Online Appendix Figure IX).


                                                          25
the types of neighborhoods in which black and white children grow up to evaluate the extent to
which changes in neighborhood environments could close the black-white gap.
       Throughout this section, we focus on characterizing how the neighborhoods in which children
grow up affect their outcomes, which may differ from the neighborhoods in which they live as adults.
We focus on childhood neighborhoods because of prior evidence that rates of intergenerational
mobility depend on where children grow up rather than where they live as adults (Chetty, Hendren
and Katz 2016; Chetty and Hendren 2018a).

VII.A        Variation Across Commuting Zones

We characterize black-white intergenerational gaps across CZs by assigning children to CZs based
on where they grow up. Chetty and Hendren (2018a) show that the CZ in which one grows up
has causal effects on earnings and other outcomes in adulthood until approximately age 23. We
therefore assign children to CZs in proportion to the amount of time they spend below age 23 in
each commuting zone over the years observed in our sample.23
       We characterize the mean income ranks of children of race r who grow up in CZ c conditional on
their parents’ income ranks using the linear specification in (1).24 We regress children’s individual
income ranks in the national income distribution on their parent’s household income ranks in the
national income distribution:
                                              yi,c = αrc + βrc yi,p + i ,                                         (6)

weighting by the number of years that child i is observed below age 23 in CZ c. This regression
yields estimates of absolute mobility for children with parents at p = 0 (αrc ) and relative mobility
βrc , for each CZ, c. We combine these estimates to report levels of absolute mobility at two parent
income levels: p = 25 (corresponding to the outcomes of children of below-median-income parents)
and p = 75 (above-median-income parents). We focus primarily on the estimates at p = 25 in the
main text because most black children presently grow up in relatively low-income families, but we
show that results are analogous at p = 75 in the Online Appendix.
  23
      These “exposure weighted” estimates could yield biased estimates of the mean outcomes of children who grow
up in a single CZ from birth because they combine the causal effects of multiple areas into a single area’s estimate.
Restricting the sample to children who never move across areas yields similar results at the CZ level, but yields much
less precise estimates when we zoom in to the Census tract level below because few children stay in a single tract for
their entire childhood. Fortunately, Chetty et al. (2018, Section III) show that the exposure weighted estimates are
likely to have a correlation above 0.95 with the mean outcomes one would observe if children did not move across
areas at all, even at the Census tract level, because children who move tend to move to similar areas. We therefore
interpret our estimates as good predictions of the outcomes of a child who grows up in a given area from birth.
   24
      Chetty, Hendren, Kline and Saez (2014) show that the relationship between children’s mean ranks and their
parents’ ranks is approximately linear in all CZs, and we have verified that this continues to be the case when further
disaggregating the data by race.


                                                          26
       Figure IX maps the mean individual rank of male children with parents at the 25th percentile
                                                 cr = αc + 0.25β c , for white and black men.25 The
of the national household income distribution, ȳ25    r        r

maps for both races are colored on a single scale: dark green colors represent areas with the highest
                                          cr ), yellow denotes colors with average levels of upward
levels of upward mobility (i.e., higher ȳ25
mobility, and dark red represent areas with the lowest levels of upward mobility.
       The maps reveal three lessons. First, both black and white children’s rates of upward mobility
vary substantially across areas. The difference between the 90th and 10th percentiles of the dis-
tribution of mean ranks across areas is about 10 percentile ranks for both white and black men,
which is the same as the average black-white income gap in the U.S. as a whole.
       Second, the areas in which white children have better outcomes tend to be places where black
children have better outcomes as well, although the patterns are not identical. The correlation
          cr for blacks and whites, weighting by total CZ population, is 0.5. The geographic
between ȳ25
patterns, especially for whites, largely mirror those documented in Chetty, Hendren, Kline and Saez
(2014), which pool across races. For both blacks and whites, rates of upward mobility are highest
for children who grow up in the Great Plains and the coasts and lowest in parts of the industrial
Midwest. For example, Boston has outcomes towards the top of the within-race distribution for both
white and black men, whereas Knoxville, TN has outcomes at the bottom of the distribution for
both groups. One notable exception to this pattern is the Southeast, where whites have especially
low rates of upward mobility relative to other areas but blacks do not. Among white men with
parents at the 25th percentile of the national income distribution, those who grew up in Atlanta
have a mean rank of 46.6, significantly lower than those who grew up in Chicago, who have a mean
rank of 52.6. In contrast, black men who grew up in Atlanta have a mean rank of 37.7, higher than
the mean rank of 36.8 of low-income black men who grew up in Chicago.
       Third, there are substantial differences in black and white boys’ outcomes within virtually all
CZs, for both children with parents at the 25th and 75th percentiles. Indeed, we find that the
distributions of outcomes for blacks and whites across CZs are almost non-overlapping. At the
90th percentile of the (unweighted) CZ-level distribution, black boys have a mean income rank of
45.1, which falls at the 16th percentile of the corresponding distribution for white boys. Black boys
do not have the same prospects for upward mobility as white boys in virtually any CZ.
  25
    In Online Appendix Figures X-XIII, we present analogous maps for females, children growing up in high-income
families (p = 75), childrenof Hispanic origin, and using household income ranks instead of individual income ranks.
The CZ-level estimates of ȳpcr r,c,p plotted in all of these maps are available in the Online Data Tables.




                                                        27
VII.B       Variation Across Census Tracts

Next, we zoom in to examine variation across neighborhoods within CZs by estimating intergen-
erational mobility at the Census tract level. To do so, we estimate the regression specification in
(6) for each Census tract separately by race and gender. Children’s outcomes vary substantially
                                                                                 cr across tracts
across tracts within CZs. The population-weighted interdecile (90-10) range of ȳ25
within CZs is 7.1 percentiles for black men and 8.4 percentiles for for white men, about as large as
the variation between CZs discussed above.26 The tract-level estimates can be visualized using the
Opportunity Atlas (Chetty et al. 2018), a searchable, interactive map that is analogous to Figure
IX, but at the tract rather than CZ level. This subsection summarizes the key properties of the
tract-level estimates, focusing in particular on the black-white gap in upward mobility.
    Black-White Gaps Persist Within Tracts. One of the most well-known explanations for the
black-white gap is residential segregation: blacks and whites may have different outcomes because
they tend to live in different neighborhoods (e.g., Massey and Denton 1993). To test this hypothesis,
we include Census tract fixed effects in equation (5), effectively comparing the outcomes of children
raised in the same neighborhood.27 Figure VIIIa shows that including tract fixed effects reduces
the black-white individual income gap among boys with parents at the 25th percentile (p = 25)
from 10.0 percentiles to 7.7 percentiles. Indeed, even when we compare children who grow up on
the same Census blocks (which contain 50 people on average) by adding block fixed effects, the
intergenerational gap for boys remains at 7 percentiles at p = 25 and 7.9 percentiles at p = 75. In
short, the vast majority of the black-white gap persists even among boys growing up in families
with comparable incomes in the same neighborhood; differences in neighborhood quality explain at
most 30% of the black-white intergenerational gap.28
    Online Appendix Figure XIVa illustrates why this is the case by presenting a histogram of the
   26                                                                      cr
      To adjust for variance due to sampling error in our estimates of ȳ25   when computing this interdecile range, we
                                        cr
first estimate the signal variance of ȳ25 as the raw variance of the tract-level estimates minus the noise variance. We
estimate the noise variance as the mean of the square of the standard errors obtained from the regression in (6). We
then use a Normal approximation to estimate the interdecile range by multiplying the signal SD by 2.56.
   27
      We use the first observed Census tract for individuals who move across tracts in childhood. Replicating the
analysis on children who remain in the same tract for several years or their entire childhood yields very similar
results.
   28
      The small reduction in the intergenerational gap does not mean that neighborhoods do not matter for children’s
outcomes. Since neighborhood choice itself is an endogenous variable, one cannot separate the contribution of
neighborhoods from parental income directly in observational data. Indeed, including Census block fixed effects
without controlling for parent income reduces the unconditional black-white gap for males from 17.6 to 9.8 percentiles,
similar to the effect of controlling for parental income. Intuitively, parent income itself might matter because it
allows parents to buy access to better neighborhoods for their children. As discussed above, we focus on how the gap
conditional on parental income changes when we control for neighborhood fixed effects because that is what matters
for the evolution of racial disparities in the long run.



                                                          28
intergenerational black-white gap in each tract for boys with parents at the 25th percentile of the
                        bw = ȳ cw − ȳ cb , weighting by the number of black men who grew up in each
income distribution, ∆ȳ25     25      25

tract. Consistent with Figure Xa, the mean gap within tracts is 7.5 percentiles. The raw standard
                bw is 6.6 percentiles. However, some of this variance is due to sampling variation
deviation of ∆ȳ25
resulting from small samples at the tract level. Subtracting the variance due to sampling error
from the total variance yields an estimated signal standard deviation of the latent black-white
intergenerational gap within tracts of 3.4 percentiles. This noise-corrected standard deviation
implies that among children with parents at the 25th percentile (p = 25), white boys have higher
incomes in adulthood than black boys in 98.7% of tracts.29
    These results imply that reducing residential segregation alone may be insufficient to close the
black-white gap, since substantial disparities persist within neighborhoods. Moreover, since low-
income children who live on the same block are likely to attend the same schools, simply enabling
black and white children to attend the same schools, without creating greater racial integration
within schools or making other changes that have differential effects by race, is also likely to be
insufficient to close the gap.
    Although black-white intergenerational gaps exist in virtually every neighborhood in the U.S.,
there is nevertheless substantial variation in the magnitude of these gaps across areas, as shown
in Appendix Figure XIVa. In the rest of this subsection, we use this variation across tracts to
understand the characteristics of places where black boys have better outcomes and where there
are smaller intergenerational gaps.
    Black-White Gaps Are Larger in “Good” Neighborhoods. We begin by analyzing the most
commonly used measures of neighborhood quality in prior work on neighborhoods (e.g., Sampson,
Morenoff and Gannon-Rowley 2002). We obtain data on a variety of proxies for neighborhood
quality – such as poverty rates, test scores, educational attainment of local residents, housing costs,
and family structure – at the tract level from the publicly available 2000 Census long form and
other sources. Details on sources and definitions of these variables are in Online Appendix D.
    Figure Xa plots the correlation between a selected subset of tract-level characteristics and the
mean individual income ranks of black boys (solid circles) and white boys (open circles) with
                                  cr ). All of these tract-level characteristics are defined so that the
parents at the 25th percentile (ȳ25
correlation between the characteristic and the outcome for white males is positive (e.g., we use the
  29
     At p = 75, white boys have higher incomes in adulthood than black boys in 98.1% of tracts (Online Appendix
Figure XIVb). In contrast, black girls have higher incomes than white girls in 84% of tracts conditional on having
parents at p = 25 and 69% of tracts at p = 75 (Online Appendix Figure XV).


                                                       29
share above the poverty line rather than the poverty rate).
   We find positive correlations between each of these proxies for neighborhood quality and the
outcomes for both white and black men. For example, black and white boys who grow up in
neighborhoods with lower poverty rates, higher test scores, higher median rents, and more two-
parent households tend to have higher incomes in adulthood. These findings reinforce prior work
showing that children who grow up in higher-income areas with more stable family structure and
higher test scores typically have better outcomes (e.g., Chetty, Hendren and Katz 2016; Chetty and
Hendren 2018b).
   The correlations in Figure Xa are generally larger for whites than for blacks. As a result, “good”
neighborhoods tend to have larger intergenerational gaps between blacks and whites. Figure Xb
illustrates this point by presenting a binned scatter plot of the relationship between the black-white
                                   bw = ȳ cw − ȳ cb ) and the fraction of residents in the tract who are
intergenerational gap for boys (∆ȳ25     25      25

above the poverty line. This plot is constructed by dividing the fraction above the poverty line into
20 equal-sized bins (weighting by the number of black men) and plotting the means of the x and
y variables within those bins. The mean intergenerational gap increases by 2.5 percentiles when
moving from the highest poverty neighborhoods to the lowest poverty neighborhoods. Intuitively,
both black and white boys have higher incomes in low-poverty areas, but the effect of growing up
in a low-poverty area is larger for whites than blacks. As a result, black-white intergenerational
gaps are larger in low-poverty neighborhoods than in high-poverty neighborhoods.
   Characteristics of Neighborhoods with Smaller Intergenerational Gaps. In light of these findings,
we next investigate whether there are certain neighborhoods where black boys do well and black-
white intergenerational gaps are smaller. The tracts where black men do well are dispersed across
the country rather than concentrated in one city or region. For example, black men have the highest
rates of upward mobility in Silver Spring in the Washington DC Metro Area as well as parts of
Queens in New York. In these areas, black men growing up in low-income (p = 25) families have
mean income ranks in adulthood above the 50th percentile. Black men have the poorest outcomes
in neighborhoods such as Englewood in the South Side of Chicago and parts of South Los Angeles,
where their mean income ranks in adulthood are around the 30th percentile.
   To characterize the features of areas that have good outcomes for black men, we first establish
that the neighborhoods in which low-income black boys have high rates of upward mobility – which
we define as a mean income rank in adulthood above the national median – are almost exclusively
low-poverty neighborhoods. Online Appendix Figure XVI establishes this result by presenting a


                                                   30
                                                         cb > 50 vs. the share of residents above the
binned scatter plot of the fraction of tracts in which ȳ25
poverty line. The subset of neighborhoods in which the average rank of low-income black boys is
above the 50th percentile almost all have poverty rates below 10% (demarcated by the dashed line
on the figure), which is approximately the median (population-weighted) poverty rate across tracts
in the U.S. We therefore zoom in on areas with a poverty rate below 10% to identify places where
low-income black boys do well in both absolute levels and relative to their white peers.
       In Figure XI, we correlate various tract-level characteristics with the black-white gap given
                      bw ) to identify the characteristics of areas with smaller intergenerational
parents at p = 25 (∆ȳ25
gaps. In addition to the more traditional proxies for neighborhood quality considered above, we
expand the set of tract-level characteristics we consider to include a set of race-specific measures –
such as poverty rates for black and white families – as well as other variables that have differential
effects by race, such as measures of racial bias. To isolate variables that are uniformly associated
with better outcomes for black boys, we focus on the subset of characteristics whose correlations
with black boys’ outcomes have the same sign at both the 25th and 75th percentile of the parental
income distribution. To simplify exposition, we define all the neighborhood characteristics so that
                                      cb (e.g., by examining the share above rather than below the
they are positively correlated with ȳ25
poverty line).30
       Mirroring the pattern documented above, most of the tract-level characteristics we examine are
associated with larger black-white intergenerational gaps. That is, neighborhood characteristics
associated with better outcomes for black boys are associated with larger intergenerational gaps
relative to whites. However, there are a small number of variables that are associated with smaller
gaps, which we now investigate in further detail.
       Father Presence. Among all the characteristics in Figure XI, the fraction of low-income black
fathers present is most predictive of smaller intergenerational gaps.31 We define father presence as
an indicator for whether the child is claimed by a male on a tax form in the year he is matched
to a parent. We regress this indicator for father presence on parental income rank for each tract
using equation (6), and define black father presence among low-income families as the prediction
for black children at p = 25.
  30
     Online Appendix Table XII provides the full set of variables and reports their correlations with the mean income
ranks of low-income white and black males in low-poverty neighborhoods. Online Appendix Tables XI and XIII
report analogous correlations for the full sample of tracts and for females, respectively.
  31
     This pattern holds even when we restrict the sample to children whose parents are born in the U.S. or after
controlling for the share of black immigrants at the tract level, allaying the concern that a high rate of black father
presence may simply be acting as a proxy for a community with a large share of immigrant black families (who have
higher rates of upward mobility than natives).


                                                          31
       Figure XII characterizes the association between father presence and children’s outcomes across
tracts. In Panel A, we present a binned scatter plot of low-income black and white boys’ mean
                             cb and ȳ cw , vs. black father presence, among the subset of low-
income ranks in adulthood, ȳ25       25

poverty tracts. Consistent with the correlation in Figure XI, we find a strong positive association
between black father presence and black males’ incomes. In contrast, we find no association between
black father presence and white males’ outcomes. Because of this differential effect by race, the
black-white intergenerational gap is 6.1 percentiles in tracts with the highest levels of black father
presence, compared with 9.3 percentiles in the tracts with the lowest levels of father presence.
       Panel B shows that these differences are even more stark when we focus on the extensive margin
of employment: black boys’ employment rates (measured as having positive income in the tax data
in either 2014 or 2015) are significantly higher in tracts with higher levels of black father presence.
Among low-poverty tracts with the highest levels of black father presence, the black-white gap in
employment rates given parents at p = 25 is 4 pp, as compared with 9 pp in the nation as a whole.
Panel C shows that black boys who grow up in areas with high father presence are also less likely
to be incarcerated. Panel D replicates Panel B, comparing the employment rates of black boys and
girls. Black father presence predicts boys’ employment rates, but not girls’ employment rates.32
       We probe the robustness of these results in Table II. In Column 1, we regress the predicted
                                         cb ) on low-income black father presence, weighting by the
income ranks of black males at p = 25 (ȳ25
number of black boys who grow up in each tract. Children who grow up in a tract with 10 pp more
low-income black fathers present have incomes that are 0.5 percentiles higher on average, consistent
with Figure XIIa. Column 2 shows that the pattern is driven by the presence of low-income black
fathers, not white fathers; including both variables in the regression yields a coefficient of 0.045
(s.e. = 0.0068) on the presence of low-income black fathers and 0.0077 (s.e. = 0.0076) for white
fathers. Column 3 shows that the results are very similar when we include state fixed effects.
       Columns 4 and 5 show that the association between black boys’ outcomes and neighborhood-
level presence of black fathers remains strong when we condition on the child’s own parents’ marital
status, by restricting the sample either to children raised in a single parent family (Column 4)
or a two-parent family (Column 5). Hence, the association with father presence is driven by a
characteristic of the neighborhood in which the child grows up, not simply a direct effect of the
  32
    Symmetrically, the employment rates of low-income white men are predicted by the fraction of white fathers
present and the employment rates of women are likewise predicted by the fraction of mothers present. But rates of
father presence among whites and rates of mother presence (for both blacks and whites) are generally quite high,
making this a less important factor in explaining the variance of outcomes for those subgroups than for black men.




                                                       32
marital status of one’s own parents, consistent with Sampson (1987).
   Next, we investigate whether the association with father presence is driven by black fathers
in particular or the presence of black men in general. To distinguish father presence from black
male presence, we calculate two measures: the number of low-income black males in each tract in
2000 in the Decennial Census and the number of below-median-income black fathers in the tract
in 2000. We divide both of these counts by the number of black children in our analysis sample in
each tract to obtain a measure of black male presence and a comparable measure of black father
presence. Column 6 shows that we continue to find a strong positive association between black
father presence and black boys’ earnings outcomes when we use the count-based measure of black
father presence defined above from the 2000 Census. Column 7 shows that when we include both
black father presence and black male presence in the regression, black father presence remains just
as predictive as in Column 6, whereas black male presence is not significantly related to black boys’
outcomes. Hence, what matters is the number of black men involved in raising children in a tract,
not the number of black men overall.
   Finally, we test the hypothesis that black boys’ outcomes are associated with black father
presence because they may both be affected by the same set of policies or shocks that persist over
time in an area (such as high rates of arrests or incarceration). To do so, we include fixed effects for
the tract in which the child lives as an adult (in 2015), thereby comparing children who grew up in
different areas but currently live in the same place. To maximize precision, we use the full sample
rather than the subset of low-poverty tracts for this analysis. The association between black father
presence and black boys’ earnings outcomes is strong whether or not we include adulthood tract
fixed effects (Columns 8 vs. 9). Hence, what matters is the fraction of low-income fathers in the
tract where the child grows up even holding fixed where they live as adults, ruling out the possibility
that the same factors that affect black father presence directly affect black boys’ outcomes.
   Together, these results show that black father presence is associated with children’s outcomes
in a highly race-by-gender specific manner. Although we cannot make strong causal claims based
on this correlational evidence, the specificity of this set of correlations rules out broad mechanisms
that would affect both genders and races (such as differences in the quality of schools). Instead, it
points to channels that affect black boys in particular, such as mentoring by black male role models
in the community or differences in the treatment of black boys in communities with high rates of
black father presence.
   Racial Bias. We now turn to another set of factors associated with both better outcomes for


                                                  33
black boys and a smaller black-white intergenerational gap in low-poverty tracts: lower levels of
racial bias among whites. Prior work has shown that exposure to racial bias during childhood
adversely affects black youth, especially black boys, in school (e.g. Simpson and Erickson 1983;
Chavous et al. 2008). Here, we investigate whether these effects are associated with adverse long-
term outcomes.
       We consider two measures of racial bias. The first is a measure of implicit racial bias from
implicit association tests (IAT), which measure the difference in a participant’s ability to match
positive and negative words with black vs. white faces (Greenwald, McGhee and Schwartz 1998).
We obtain mean IAT racial bias scores for white and black study participants at the county level
from the Race Implicit Association Database.33 The second measure we use is the Racial Animus
Index constructed by Stephens-Davidowitz (2014). This is a measure of explicit racial bias, based on
the frequency of Google searches for racial epithets at the media market level, which are aggregations
of counties. We standardize all the racial bias measures used below so that they have mean zero
and standard deviation 1 across areas (weighting by the number of black males in our sample),
with higher values representing greater racial bias against blacks.34
       Table III characterizes the association between measures of racial bias and upward mobility
across counties and media markets.35 We restrict the sample to counties or media markets with
poverty rates below 10% and weight the regressions by the number of black men in the relevant
geographic unit. We begin in Column 1 by regressing the mean individual income rank of black
                                      cb ) in each county on the (standardized) difference between
boys raised in low-income families (ȳ25
whites’ and blacks’ mean IAT scores. In counties with a 1 SD higher level of racial bias against
blacks among whites, black men grow up to have mean income ranks that are 0.8 percentiles lower.
This coefficient implies that the difference in black boys’ incomes between the least (bottom 5%)
and most (top 5%) racially biased counties exceeds 4 percentiles. In Column 2, we regress black
boys’ mean income ranks on whites’ and blacks’ IAT scores separately. As one might expect,
the negative correlation is driven entirely by variation in the degree of racial bias among whites.
  33
     Participation in the IAT (an online test that has been taken by millions of users) is entirely voluntary. As a
result, there may be selection biases induced by differences in who chooses to take the test across areas. Although we
cannot definitively rule out such biases, the rate of participation in the IAT is not significantly correlated with the
black-white intergenerational gap, providing some reassurance in using these measures as a rough proxy for average
racial attitudes in an area.
  34
     We did not include these racial bias measures in Figure XI because they are not available at the Census tract
level. Nevertheless, among all the variables we consider (at both the tract level and broader geographies) that are
not associated with larger black-white gaps, the racial bias measures have the strongest correlations with black boys’
income ranks at both p = 25 and p = 75 within low-poverty areas (Online Appendix Table XII).
  35
     Online Appendix Table XIV replicates the analysis in Table III using employment and incarceration among black
males as the dependent variables, showing similar patterns.


                                                          34
Column 3 shows that results remain similar when we include state fixed effects, showing that the
pattern is not just driven by differences across regions.
    Column 4 shows that, in contrast to the pattern for father presence, correlations with racial
bias are not gender-specific: black females also have lower incomes in places that are more racially
biased against blacks. Perhaps more surprisingly, Column 5 shows that low-income white males also
have lower incomes if they grow up in areas with greater racial bias against blacks. One potential
explanation for this association is that implicit racial bias is correlated with other forms of bias
that adversely affect low-income white men.36
    The patterns are very similar when we use the Racial Animus Index to proxy for racial bias.
Black boys who grow up in low-income (p = 25) families in media markets with greater racial
animus have lower incomes in adulthood (Column 6). As with the IAT results, these associations
are not gender- or race-specific: low-income black women and white men who grow up in areas
with more explicit racial animus have lower incomes (Columns 7 and 8).

VII.C      Causal Effects of Neighborhoods on Intergenerational Gaps

The neighborhood-level variation in black-white intergenerational gaps documented above could be
driven by two very different sources. One possibility is that neighborhoods have causal effects on
children’s outcomes: that is, moving a given child to a different neighborhood would change his
outcomes. Another possibility is that the geographic variation is due to unobserved differences in
the types of people living in each area. We assess the relative importance of these two explanations
by studying how the outcomes of children who move across areas vary with the age at which
they move. Chetty and Hendren (2018a) use this timing-of-move research design to establish that
neighborhoods have causal effects on children’s outcomes pooling all racial groups; here, we use the
same design to identify the causal effects of areas on racial disparities by showing that neighborhoods
have race-specific causal effects.
    Empirical Specification. We study the outcomes of children who move across CZs exactly once
during their childhood in our primary analysis sample, which we extend to cover the 1978-1985
cohorts in order to measure moves at earlier ages (see Online Appendix G for details). We focus on
CZ-level variation (rather than finer geographies) because the larger sample sizes at the CZ level
allow us to generate precise estimates of the outcomes of people who grow up in each area, which
is essential for identifying race-specific causal effects.
  36
     An alternative explanation is reverse causality: whites may be more biased in areas with lower earnings outcomes.
A third possibility is that racial bias is correlated with other latent factors that drive these correlations.


                                                         35
       Let i index children, pi denote their parental income ranks, and ri denote their racial groups.
In the sample of one-time movers, let mi denote the age at which child i moves from origin CZ o
                           r denote the exposure-weighted outcome of y
to destination CZ d. Let ȳpls                                         i,c for children of race r in

birth cohort s who grew up in location l with parental household income rank p, estimated using
the specification in (6).37 Let ∆rodps = ȳpds
                                           r − ȳ r
                                                 pos denote the predicted difference in income ranks

in the destination versus origin CZ for children in cohort s.
       We regress the income rank of children who move (yi,c ) on the measures of origin and destination
quality interacted with age-at-move fixed effects:


                             1985
                             X                                       28
                                                                     X
                  yi,c =              I(si = s)(φ1s + φ2s ȳpos
                                                            r
                                                                )+                    1
                                                                           I(mi = m)(ζm    2
                                                                                        + ζm yi,p )
                            s=1978                                   m=6
                              X28
                            +         bm I(mi = m)∆rodps + εi ,                                             (7)
                                m=6

where φ1s is a cohort-specific intercept, φ2s ȳpos is a cohort-specific control for the average exposure-
                                 1 is an age-at-move fixed effect, and ζ 2 p is an interaction of the
weighted outcome in the origin, ζm                                      m i

age-at-move fixed effects with parental income rank. The key parameters of interest are the bm
coefficients, which capture how children’s outcomes vary with the age at which they move to an
area with higher or lower predicted earnings.
       Identification Assumption. We can interpret differences in the coefficients bm , e.g. bm − bm+1 ,
as the causal effect of exposure to a better area (i.e., an area with higher observed incomes) under
the assumption that the potential outcomes of children who move to better vs. worse areas do
not vary with the age at which they move. Chetty and Hendren (2018a) present a series of tests
supporting this orthogonality condition: controlling for unobserved heterogeneity across families
using sibling comparisons in models with family fixed effects, implementing a set of placebo tests
exploiting heterogeneity in predicted causal effects across subgroups, and validating the results
using experimental designs, e.g. from the Moving to Opportunity Experiment (Chetty, Hendren
and Katz 2016). Furthermore, Chetty and Hendren (2018a) provide evidence that estimates of
place effects among movers are externally valid to the broader population because they find similar
results among those who self-select to move as compared to families displaced by idiosyncratic
events such as hurricanes. Building on these results, we take the validity of the research design as
given here and use it to explore racial heterogeneity in the causal effects of neighborhoods.
  37
   We do not include one-time movers when constructing these exposure-weighted outcomes to ensure that a child’s
own outcome does not enter our definition of neighborhood quality; see Online Appendix G for details.


                                                          36
       Results. Panels A and B of Figure XIII plot the coefficients {bm } in (7) using individual
income ranks at age 30 for black and white males, respectively. The bm coefficients decline until
approximately age 23, after which the coefficients are flat. Under the identification assumption
described above, this result implies that neighborhoods have causal effects on children’s outcomes
in proportion to childhood exposure prior to age 23. We estimate that every year of childhood
a black boy grows up in a place where black boys grow up to have 1 percentile higher incomes
increases his own income by 0.027 percentiles. The corresponding estimate for white males is 0.026
per year of exposure.38 Extrapolating over 20 years of childhood exposure, this estimate implies
that children who move at birth to an area where we observe 1 percentile higher incomes for children
of their race would pick up about 50% of that effect themselves through a causal effect of place.
       Panels C and D of Figure XIII replicate Panels A and B using incarceration as the dependent
                                                     r and ∆r
variable and race-specific incarceration rates for ȳpls    odps in (7). Black boys are 0.033 pp

more likely to be incarcerated for every year of childhood exposure to a place with 1 pp higher
incarceration rates for black males. We find a slightly smaller exposure effect of 0.025 for white
males.
       In Online Appendix Table XV, we present a series of regression estimates that consider alterna-
tive specifications and outcomes to assess the robustness of the results in Figure XIII. We find that
the estimated exposure effects are very similar to those in our baseline specifications (see Online
Appendix G for details). In addition, we show that places have causal effects not just on the level
of outcomes but also on the gap in outcomes across races. In particular, moving one year later
in childhood to an area where black boys have 1 percentile higher incomes in adulthood reduces
a black boy’s income rank by -0.029 (s.e. = 0.004). In contrast, the corresponding coefficient on
the change in predicted income ranks for white men is -0.003 (s.e. = 0.004), controlling for the
predicted income rank of black men. Hence, moving to an area with better outcomes for white boys
has essentially no impact on a black boy’s outcomes conditional on the outcomes of black boys who
grow up in that area. The converse is true for white men. These results show that moving to an
area with a larger observed black-white intergenerational gap at an earlier age in childhood results
in larger intergenerational gaps in adulthood.
       We conclude that much of the observational variation in black-white intergenerational gaps
  38
     These estimates are slightly smaller than those reported in Chetty and Hendren (2018a) when pooling racial
groups because they were only able to analyze moves after age 9, whereas here we include moves at earlier ages. As
is evident from Figure XIII, the bm coefficients decline more rapidly in adolescence than at earlier ages, which is why
expanding the age window to earlier ages leads to a smaller average exposure effect estimate.




                                                          37
documented above reflects the causal effects of childhood environment rather than selection.39 In
establishing the importance of environmental factors, this finding rejects the hypothesis that racial
gaps are driven entirely by differences in immutable traits such as innate ability. The finding that
neighborhood effects on racial gaps are proportional to childhood exposure is consistent with prior
evidence documenting the emergence of racial gaps in achievement in childhood (Fryer and Levitt
2004) and the importance of pre-labor-market measures in explaining racial gaps in labor market
outcomes (Neal and Johnson 1996; Altonji and Blank 1999; Fryer 2010). It is also consistent
with evidence from the Moving to Opportunity experiment showing that moving to a low-poverty
neighborhood as a young child significantly increases income for both blacks and whites, whereas
moving as an adult does not (Chetty, Hendren and Katz 2016).

VII.D       Summary: Environment Matters, but Good Environments are Rare

The analysis in this section has shown that childhood environment has significant causal effects
on black-white intergenerational gaps. Black boys do especially well in low-poverty neighborhoods
with a large fraction of fathers at home in black families and low levels of racial bias among whites.
However, very few black boys grow up in such areas. 4.2% of black children currently grow up in
Census tracts with a poverty rate below 10 percent and more than half of black fathers present
(Figure XIV).40 In contrast, 62.5% of white children grow up in low-poverty areas with more than
half of white fathers present. These disparities in the environments in which black and white
children are raised help explain why we observe significant black-white gaps in intergenerational
mobility in virtually all areas of the U.S.


VIII        Conclusion

Differences in intergenerational mobility are a central driver of racial disparities in the U.S. Black
and American Indian children have substantially lower rates of upward mobility and higher rates
of downward mobility than white children. The gap in incomes between blacks and American
Indians relative to whites is thus likely to persist indefinitely without changes in their rates of
  39
     This is true not just on average but also in the tails of the distribution: moves earlier in childhood to the very
best neighborhoods for black men (e.g., the top 10% of neighborhoods in terms of upward mobility) produce gains
commensurate to what one would predict based on the average exposure effect estimates discussed above. This finding
suggests that the exceptional outcomes observed in certain areas such as Silver Spring are not driven by selection but
rather by the unique causal effects of such environments on black youth.
  40
     Examples of such neighborhoods are given in Online Appendix Table XVI. We do not cut on racial bias in this
analysis because of the lack of data on racial bias at the tract level; doing so would only further reduce the number
of “good” neighborhoods for black children.



                                                          38
intergenerational mobility. In contrast, Hispanics have relatively high rates of absolute upward
mobility and are moving up significantly in the income distribution across generations, despite
having incomes similar to blacks today.
   The black-white gap – the largest gap among those we study – is driven entirely by sharp
differences in the outcomes of black and white men who grow up in families with comparable
incomes. Although closing this gap may appear to be a daunting challenge given its persistence,
there are some encouraging signs that the problem can be solved. First, black children have rates
of relative mobility comparable to whites: they are not stuck at the same income levels as their
parents. Closing the gap in opportunities between black and white children at a given parental
income level could therefore eliminate much of the black-white income gap within two generations.
Second, the black-white intergenerational gap is significantly smaller for boys who grow up in certain
neighborhoods – those with low poverty rates, low levels of racial bias among whites, and high rates
of father presence among low-income blacks. Black boys who move to such areas at younger ages
have significantly better outcomes, demonstrating that racial disparities can be narrowed through
changes in environment.
   The challenge is to replicate the conditions that lead to these smaller disparities more broadly
across the country. Our findings suggest that many widely discussed proposals may be insufficient
to narrow the unconditional black-white income gap in the long run. Policies focused on improving
the economic outcomes of a single generation – such as cash transfer programs or minimum wage
increases – can narrow the gap at a given point in time, but are less likely to have persistent effects
unless they also affect intergenerational mobility. Policies that reduce residential segregation or
enable black and white children to attend the same schools without achieving racial integration
within neighborhoods and schools would also likely leave much of the gap in place, since the gap
persists even among low-income children raised on the same block.
   Instead, our results suggest that efforts that cut within neighborhoods and schools and improve
environments for specific racial subgroups, such as black boys, may be more effective in reducing
the black-white gap. Examples include mentoring programs for black boys, efforts to reduce racial
bias among whites, or efforts to facilitate social interaction across racial groups within a given
area (e.g., Devine, Forscher, Austin and Cox 2012; Heller et al. 2017). Our analysis does not offer
guidance on which interventions of this type are most effective, but calls for greater focus on and
evaluation of such efforts.




                                                  39
References
Abramitzky, R., L. P. Boustan, E. Jacome, and S. Pérez (2019). Intergenerational Mobility of
 Immigrants in the US Over Two Centuries. NBER Working Paper No. 26408 .

Akee, R., M. R. Jones, and S. R. Porter (2017). Race Matters: Income Shares, Income Inequality,
  and Income Mobility for All U.S. Races. NBER Working Paper No. 23733 .

Alexander, M. (2010). The New Jim Crow: Mass Incarceration in the Age of Colorblindness. New
  Press, New York.

Altonji, J. G. and R. Blank (1999). Race and Gender in the Labor Market. Handbook of Labor
  Economics 3 (48), 3143 – 3259.

Austen-Smith, D. and R. G. Fryer, Jr. (2005). An Economic Analysis of “Acting White”. The
 Quarterly Journal of Economics 120 (2), 551–583.

Autor, D., D. Figlio, K. Karbownik, J. Roth, and M. Wasserman (2019). Family Disadvantage
 and the Gender Gap in Behavioral and Educational Outcomes. American Economic Journal:
 Applied Economics 11 (3), 338–381.

Bayard, K., J. Ilellerstein, D. Neumark, and K. Troske (1999). Why are Racial and Ethnic Wage
  Gaps Larger for Men Than for Women? Exploring the Role of Segregation Using the New Worker-
  Establishment Characteristics Database. In The creation and analysis of employer-employee
  matched data, pp. 175–203. Emerald Group Publishing Limited.

Bayer, P. and K. K. Charles (2018). Divergent Paths: A New Perspective on Earnings Differ-
  ences Between Black and White Men Since 1940. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 133 (3),
  1459–1501.

Becker, G. S., S. D. Kominers, K. M. Murphy, and J. L. Spenkuch (2018). A Theory of Intergen-
  erational Mobility. Journal of Political Economy 126 (S1), S7–S25.

Becker, G. S. and N. Tomes (1979). An Equilibrium Theory of the Distribution of Income and
  Intergenerational Mobility. Journal of Political Economy 87 (6), 1153–89.

Bertrand, M. and S. Mullainathan (2004). Are Emily and Greg More Employable than Lakisha
  and Jamal? A Field Experiment on Labor Market Discrimination. The American Economic
  Review 94 (4), 991–1013.

Bhattacharya, D. and B. Mazumder (2011). A Nonparametric Analysis of Black–White Differences
  in Intergenerational Income Mobility in the United States. Quantitative Economics 2 (3), 335–
  379.

Blau, F. (2012). Gender, Inequality, and Wages. Oxford University Press.

Blau, P. M. and O. D. Duncan (1967). The American Occupational Structure. New York: John
  Wiley and Sons.

Bond, B., J. D. Brown, A. Luque, and A. O. Hara (2014). The Nature of the Bias When Studying
  Only Linkable Person Records: Evidence from the American Community Survey. Working Paper
  No. CARRA-WP-2014-08 .


                                              40
Borjas, G. J. (1992). Ethnic Capital and Intergenerational Mobility. The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 107 (1), 123–150.

Brummet, Q. (2014). Comparison of Survey, Federal, and Commercial Address Data Quality.
  Center for Administrative Records Research and Applications Working Paper No. 2014-06 .

Card, D. and A. B. Krueger (1992). Does School Quality Matter? Returns to Education and the
  Characteristics of Public Schools in the United States. Journal of Political Economy 100 (1),
  1–40.

Carter, P. L. (2005). Keepin’ It Real: School Success Beyond Black and White. New York: Oxford
  University Press.

Chavous, T. M., D. Rivas-Drake, C. Smalls, T. Griffin, and C. Cogburn (2008). Gender Matters,
 Too: The Influences of School Racial Discrimination and Racial Identity on Academic Engage-
 ment Outcomes among African American Adolescents. Developmental psychology 44 (3), 637.

Chetty, R., J. Friedman, N. Hendren, M. Jones, and S. Porter (2018). The Opportunity Atlas:
 Mapping the Childhood Roots of Social Mobility. NBER Working Paper No. 25147 .

Chetty, R., D. Grusky, M. Hell, N. Hendren, R. Manduca, and J. Narang (2017). The Fading
 American Dream: Trends in Absolute Income Mobility since 1940. Science 356 (6336), 398–406.

Chetty, R. and N. Hendren (2018a). The Impacts of Neighborhoods on Intergenerational Mobility
 I: Childhood Exposure Effects. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 133 (3), 1107–1162.

Chetty, R. and N. Hendren (2018b). The Impacts of Neighborhoods on Intergenerational Mobility
 II: County-Level Estimates. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 113 (3), 1163–1228.

Chetty, R., N. Hendren, and L. F. Katz (2016). The Effects of Exposure to Better Neighborhoods
 on Children: New Evidence from the Moving to Opportunity Experiment. American Economic
 Review 106 (4), 855–902.

Chetty, R., N. Hendren, P. Kline, and E. Saez (2014). Where is the Land of Opportunity? The
 Geography of Intergenerational Mobility in the United States. The Quarterly Journal of Eco-
 nomics 129 (4), 1553–1623.

Chetty, R., N. Hendren, P. Kline, E. Saez, and N. Turner (2014). Is the United States Still a
 Land of Opportunity? Recent Trends in Intergenerational Mobility. American Economic Review
 Papers and Proceedings (5), 141–147.

Cilke, J. (1998). A Profile of Non-Filers. U.S. Department of the Treasury, Office of Tax Analysis
  Working Paper No. 78 .

Conley, D. (2010). Being Black, Living in the Red: Race, Wealth, and Social Policy in America.
  Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.

Corcoran, M., R. Gordon, D. Laren, and G. Solon (1992). The Association between Men’s Economic
  Status and Their Family and Community Origins. The Journal of Human Resources 27 (4), 575.

Cutler, D. M. and E. L. Glaeser (1997). Are Ghettos Good or Bad? The Quarterly Journal of
 Economics 112 (3), 827–72.



                                               41
Darity, W. J., D. K. Guilkey, and W. Winfrey (1996). Explaining Differences in Economic Perfor-
 mance Among Racial and Ethnic Groups in the USA: the Data Examined. American Journal of
 Economics and Sociology 55 (4), 411–425.

Davis, J. and B. Mazumder (2018). Racial and Ethnic Differences in the Geography of Intergener-
  ational Mobility. Mimeo.

Devine, P. G., P. S. Forscher, A. J. Austin, and W. T. Cox (2012). Long-term Reduction in
  Implicit Race Bias: A Prejudice Habit-Breaking Intervention. Journal of Experimental Social
  Psychology 48 (6), 1267–1278.

Donohue, J. and J. Heckman (1991). Continuous versus Episodic Change: The Impact of Civil
 Rights Policy on the Economic Status of Blacks. Journal of Economic Literature 29, 1603–1643.

Duncan, O. D. (1968). Inheritance of Poverty or Inheritance of Race? In D. Moynihan (Ed.), On
 Understanding Poverty: Perspectives from the Social Sciences, pp. 85–110. Basic Books.

Eberhardt, J. L., P. A. Goff, V. J. Purdie, and P. G. Davies (2004). Seeing Black: Race, Crime,
  and Visual Processing. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 87 (6), 876–893.

Fordham, S. and J. U. Ogbu (1986). Black Students’ School Success: Coping with the “Burden of
  ‘Acting White’”. The Urban Review 18 (3), 176–206.

Fryer, R. (2010). Racial Inequality in the 21st Century: The Declining Significance of Discrimina-
  tion. Handbook of Labor Economics 4B (10), 855–971.

Fryer, R. (2011). It May Not Take a Village: Increasing Achievement Among the Poor. Social
  Inequality and Educational Disadvantage.

Fryer, R. and S. Levitt (2004). Understanding the Black-White Test Score Gap in the First Two
  Years of School. The Review of Economics and Statistics 86 (2), 447–464.

Fryer, Jr, R. G. and S. D. Levitt (2006). The Black-White Test Score Gap Through Third Grade.
  American Law and Economics Review 8 (2), 249–281.

Galton, F. (1886). Regression Towards Mediocrity in Hereditary Stature. The Journal of the
 Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland 15, 246–263.

Glover, D., A. Pallais, and W. Pariente (2017). Discrimination as a Self-Fulfilling Prophecy: Evi-
  dence from French Grocery Stores. Quarterly Journal of Economics 132 (3), 1219–1260.

Greenwald, A. G., D. E. McGhee, and J. L. Schwartz (1998). Measuring Individual Differences in
  Implicit Cognition: The Implicit Association Test. Journal of Personality and Social Psychol-
  ogy 74 (6), 1464.

Heckman, J. J. (1998). Detecting Discrimination. Journal of Economic Perspectives 12 (2), 101–116.

Heckman, J. J., T. M. Lyons, and P. E. Todd (2000). Understanding Black-White Wage Differen-
  tials, 1960-1990. The American Economic Review 90 (2), 344–349.

Heller, S. B., A. K. Shah, J. Guryan, J. Ludwig, S. Mullainathan, and H. A. Pollack (2017).
  Thinking, Fast and Slow? Some Field Experiments to Reduce Crime and Dropout in Chicago.
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics 132 (1), 1–54.


                                               42
Hernstein, R. and C. Murray (1994). The Bell Curve: Intelligence and Class Structure in American
  Life. New York: Free Press.

Hertz, T. (2005). Rags, Riches, and Race: The Intergenerational Economic Mobility of Black and
  White Families in the United States. In S. Bowles, H. Gintins, and M. Osborne Groves (Eds.),
  Unequal Chances: Family Background and Economic Success, pp. 165–191. Princeton University
  Press.

Jencks, C. E. and M. E. Phillips (1998). The Black-White Test Score Gap. Washington, DC:
  Brookings Institution Press.

Lareau, A. (2011). Unequal Childhoods: Class, Race, and Family Life (2 ed.). Berkeley, CA:
  University of California Press.

Layne, M., D. Wagner, and C. Rothhaas (2014). Estimating Record Linkage False Match Rate for
  the Person Identification Validation System. Center for Administrative Records Research and
  Applications Working Paper No 2 .

Long, J. and J. Ferrie (2018). Grandfathers Matter(ed): Occupational Mobility Across Three
  Generations in the US and Britain, 1850–1911. The Economic Journal 128 (612), F422–F445.

Looney, A. and N. Turner (2017). Work and Opportunity Before and After Incarceration. Technical
  report, Economic Studies at Brookings.

Lopez, G. and J. Radford (2017). Facts on U.S. Immigrants, 2015: Statistical portrait of the
  foreign-born population in the United States. Pew Research Center .

Lundberg, S. (2017). Father Absence and the Educational Gender Gap. IZA Discussion Paper No.
  10814 .

Magnuson, K. A. and G. J. Duncan (2006). The Role of Family Socioeconomic Resources in the
 Black–White Test Score Gap Among Young Children. Developmental Review 26 (4), 365 – 399.

Manduca, R. (2018). Income Inequality and the Persistence of Racial Economic Disparities. Soci-
 ological Science 5 (8), 182–205.

Margo, R. A. (2016). Obama, Katrina, and the Persistence of Racial Inequality. The Journal of
 Economic History 76 (2), 301–341.

Mas, A. and E. Moretti (2009). Racial Bias in the 2008 Presidential Election. American Economic
 Review 99 (2), 323–29.

Massey, D. S. and N. A. Denton (1993). American Apartheid: Segregation and the Making of the
 Underclass. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Mazumder, B. (2014). Black-White Differences in Intergenerational Economic Mobility in the
 United States. Economic Perspectives 38 (1).

McAdoo, H. P. (2002). African American Parenting. In Handbook of Parenting: Social Conditions
 and Applied Parenting, Chapter 3, pp. 47–58.

Mickelson, R. A. (1990). The attitude-achievement paradox among black adolescents. Sociology of
 Education 63 (1), 44–61.


                                              43
Myrdal, G. (1944). An American Dilemma; the Negro Problem and Modern Democracy (2 volumes).
 Harper & Bros.

Neal, D. (2004). The Measured Black-White Wage Gap among Women is Too Small. Journal of
  political Economy 112 (S1), S1–S28.

Neal, D. and W. Johnson (1996). The Role of Premarket Factors in Black-White Wage Differences.
  Journal of Political Economy 104 (5), 869–895.

Noguera, P. A. (2003). The trouble with black boys:: The role and influence of environmental and
 cultural factors on the academic performance of african american males. Urban Education 38 (4),
 431–459.

Oliver, M. L. and T. M. Shapiro (2006). Black Wealth, White Wealth: A New Perspective on Racial
  Inequality. Taylor & Francis.

Orr, A. J. (2003). Black-White Differences in Achievement: The Importance of Wealth. Sociology
  of Education 76 (4), 281–304.

Pager, D. (2003). The Mark of a Criminal Record. American Journal of Sociology 108 (5), 937–975.

Raley, K., M. Sweeney, and D. Wondra (2015). The Growing Racial and Ethnic Divide in U.S.
  Marriage Patterns. The Future of Children 25 (2), 89–109.

Rothstein, J. and N. Wozny (2013). Permanent Income and the Black-White Test Score Gap.
  Journal of Human Resources 48 (3), 510–544.

Rushton, J. and A. Jensen (2005). Thirty Years of Research on Race Differences in Cognitive
 Ability. Psychology, Public Policy, and Law 11 (2), 235.

Sampson, R. J. (1987). Urban Black Violence: The Effect of Male Joblessness and Family Disrup-
  tion. American Journal of Sociology 93 (2), 348–382.

Sampson, R. J., J. D. Morenoff, and T. Gannon-Rowley (2002). Assessing “Neighborhood Effects”:
  Social Processes and New Directions in Research. Annual Review of Sociology 28 (1), 443–478.

Sampson, R. J., S. W. Raudenbush, and F. Earls (1997). Neighborhoods and Violent Crime: A
  Multilevel Study of Collective Efficacy. Science 277 (5328), 918–924.

Sampson, R. J. and W. J. Wilson (1995). Toward a Theory of Race, Crime, and Urban Inequality.
  Race, Crime, and Justice: A Reader 1995.

Sharkey, P. (2013). Stuck in Place: Urban Neighborhoods and the End of Progress Toward Racial
  Equality. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

Sharkey, P. and J. W. Faber (2014). Where, When, Why, and For Whom Do Residential Contexts
  Matter? Moving Away from the Dichotomous Understanding of Neighborhood Effects. Annual
  Review of Sociology 40, 559–79.

Simpson, A. W. and M. T. Erickson (1983). Teachers’ Verbal and Nonverbal Communication Pat-
  terns as a Function of Teacher Race, Student Gender, and Student Race. American Educational
  Research Journal 20 (2), 183–198.



                                              44
Small, M. Harding, D. and M. Lamont (2010). Reconsidering Culture and Poverty. ANNALS of
  the American Academy of Political and Social Science 629 (1), 6–27.

Smith, J. P. and F. R. Welch (1989). Black economic progress after myrdal. Journal of Economic
  Literature 27 (2), 519–564.

Smith, S. S. (2005). “Don’t put my name on it”: Social Capital Activation and Job-Finding
  Assistance among the Black Urban Poor. American Journal of Sociology 111 (1), 1–57.

Steele, C. and J. Aronson (1995). Stereotype Threat and Intellectual Test Performance of African
  Americans. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 69 (5), 797–811.

Steffensmeier, D., J. Ulmer, and J. Kramer (1998). The Interaction of Race, Gender, and Age in
  Criminal Sentencing: The Punishment Cost of Being Young, Black, and Male. Criminology 36 (4),
  763–798.

Stephens-Davidowitz, S. (2014). The Cost of Racial Animus on a Black Candidate: Evidence using
  Google Search Data. Journal of Public Economics 118, 26–40.

Tatum, B. D. (2004). Family Life and School Experience: Factors in the Racial Identity Develop-
  ment of Black Youth in White Communities. Journal of Social Issues 60 (1), 117–135.

U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census (2000). United States Census 2000: Infor-
  mational Copy. https://www.census.gov/dmd/www/pdf/d-61b.pdf. Form D-61B.

U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census (2003). Chapter 5, Sample Design and
  Estimation; 2000 Census of Population and Housing: Public-use Microdata Samples Technical
  Documentation. Technical report, U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census.

U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census (2014). American Community Survey Design
  and Methodology (January 2014); Chapter 4: Sample Design and Selection. Technical report.

U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census (2017). Historic Income Tables: Households;
  Table H-5. Race and Hispanic Origin of Householder – Households by Median and Mean Income.

Wagner, D. and M. Layne (2014). The Person Identification Validation System (PVS): Applying
 the Center for Administrative Records Research and Applications’ (CARRA) Record Linkage
 Software. Center for Administrative Records Research and Applications Working Paper .

Wilson, W. J. (1987). The Truly Disadvantaged: The Inner City, the Underclass, and Public Policy.
 University of Chicago Press.

Wong, P., C. F. Lai, R. Nagasawa, and T. Lin (1998). Asian Americans as a Model Minority: Self-
 Perceptions and Perceptions by other Racial Groups. Sociological Perspectives 41 (1), 95–118.




                                               45
                                         ONLINE APPENDICES

A. Data Construction
    This appendix provides further details on the methods we use to construct our analysis sample
and assign individuals to Census blocks.
    Sample Construction. We begin with the set of children born between 1978 and 1983, based
on birth dates recorded in the Numident file (22.8 million children), which contains records on all
persons in the U.S. who have ever had a Social Security Number (SSN). For each child, we define the
parent(s) as the first person(s) who claim the child as a dependent on a 1040 tax form. If parents
are married but filing separately, we assign the child to both parents. To eliminate dependent
claiming by siblings or grandparents, in the case of a potential match to married parents or single
mothers, we require that the mother be 15-50 at the birth of the child. In the case of children
claimed by a single father, we require that he be between 15-50 at the birth of the child.41 If no
such eligible match occurs in 1994, the first year of the data in which we have dependent claiming
information, we search subsequent years through 2015 until a valid match is found.
    Once we match a child to parents, we hold this definition of parents fixed regardless of subsequent
dependent claims or changes in marital status. For example, a child matched to married parents
in 1996 who divorce in 1997 will always be matched to the two original parents. Conversely, a
child matched to a single parent in 1996 who marries in 1997 will be considered matched to a
single parent, though spouse income will be included in our definition of parent income because we
measure parent income at the family level in our baseline analysis.
    We exclude children whose mean real or nominal parent income is zero or negative (1.0% of
children) because parents who file tax returns (as is required to link them to a child) reporting
negative or zero income typically have large capital losses, which are a proxy for having significant
wealth. We construct a strongly balanced sample of children by assigning incomes of zero to children
who do not appear in the tax data (e.g., because they have died). We then assign children and
parents income percentile ranks on the sample of children linked to parents with positive income,
using the income definitions described in Section II.B. Finally, we restrict the sample to individuals
who have non-missing race information to obtain our final analysis sample. Note that this ordering
of operations implies that we rank children and parents relative to all individuals in the sample,
not just those with non-missing race information.
    Assignment of Children to Census Tracts. Addresses in the tax records are geocoded and
assigned to standard Census geographic units (e.g. block, tract, and county) by Census staff in the
Census Master Address File (MAF). The geocoding process involves cleaning address information
so that it can be merged on to the MAF and assigned a MAFID, which is then associated with the
geographic units that we use. Brummet (2014) describes this process in greater detail. Brummet
also reports statistics on the match rate for addresses; for example, 92% of addresses in the 2009
American Housing Survey were successfully matched to the MAF.
    We assign children to Census tracts (or other geographies) where they grew up based on the
address from which their parents filed 1040 tax forms and claimed them as dependents. In particu-
lar, we identify all the Census tracts from which their parents filed tax returns (between 1989-2015)
  41
    Children can be claimed as a dependent only if they are aged less than 19 at the end of the year (less than 24 if
enrolled as a student) or are disabled. A dependent child is a biological child, step child, adopted child, foster child,
brother or sister, or a descendant of one of these (for example, a grandchild or nephew). Children must be claimed by
their custodial parent, i.e. the parent with whom they live for over half the year. Furthermore, the custodial parent
must provide more than 50% of the support to the child. Hence, working children who support themselves for more
than 50% cannot be claimed as dependents. See IRS Publication 501 for further details.



                                                           46
during or before the year in which their child turned 23. Beginning in 2003, we use address data
from information returns (e.g., W-2 forms) for non-filers. Since we search for address information
in multiple years, we are able to assign 99.5% of children in our baseline sample to at least one
non-missing tract during their childhood. We use an analogous process to assign children to ge-
ographies when they are adults in 2015, using their own 1040 form or, for non-filers, address data
from information returns (e.g., W-2 forms).

B. Comparison to Survey Datasets
    In this appendix, we assess the representativeness of our analysis sample by comparing sample
counts and descriptive statistics to corresponding measures from publicly available survey datasets.
We conduct three sets of analyses.
    First, we assess the coverage rate of our analysis sample by comparing the number of children
in our analysis sample to the number of individuals in the ACS who were born in the U.S. or
came to the U.S. before age 16. Online Appendix Table II shows that the total number of children
whom we link to parents is comparable to the expected number of children based on the ACS
(using the ACS sampling weights). On average over the 1978-83 birth cohorts, our sample count of
children linked to parents with positive income is 99.6% as large as that in the ACS.42 Information
on race and ethnicity is available for 94.1% of children; we lose 6% of the sample because their
records in the Census could not be assigned a PIK (i.e., linked to the Numident file) based on
the information provided. The coverage rates are above 94% for all racial and ethnic subgroups
except for Hispanics, for whom our sample count is 78.9% of that in the ACS. This is primarily
because our sample includes only authorized immigrants, whereas the ACS covers all immigrants.43
Lopez and Radford (2017) estimate that approximately 17.7% of immigrants in the United States
in 1990 were unauthorized, suggesting that our sample covers approximately 78.9/82.3= 95.9% of
Hispanics who are authorized immigrants or citizens, similar to rates of coverage for other groups.
    Next, in Online Appendix Table III, we examine whether the characteristics of individuals
in our analysis sample are representative of the corresponding population in the ACS. We start
from individuals in the 1978-83 birth cohorts who appear in the 2015 ACS and report their mean
individual income ranks and other characteristics (based on the ACS data) for three samples: all
individuals who appear in the ACS (Column 1), those who appear in both the ACS and our analysis
sample (Column 2), and those who appear in the ACS but not our analysis sample (Column 3).
Mean income ranks differ by 1 percentile or less between our analysis sample and the full ACS
sample for all groups except Hispanics, for whom there is a larger discrepancy because our sample
does not include unauthorized immigrants as noted above. Mean income ranks are slightly higher
for those in our analysis sample than in the complement, which is because individuals who have
particularly low incomes are less likely to appear in Census and tax data and hence are less likely
to be in our linked data. We find similar results for other variables such as marriage rates and
college attendance.
    Finally, we assess whether the income measures and other statistics we construct from the linked
Census-tax records are representative of corresponding measures in publicly available survey data.
  42
     These comparisons are not exact because there are small differences between our sample definitions and the ACS.
As discussed in Section III, our sample does not include unauthorized immigrants, whereas the ACS does, a factor
that reduces our counts relative to the ACS. In the other direction, (1) we retain individuals who have died by 2015
whereas the ACS does not; (2) we retain individuals who were ever in the U.S. but left by 2015, whereas the ACS
does not; and (3) some children may have immigrated to the U.S. after age 16 and still be claimed as dependents by
parents.
  43
     The ACS does not ask about immigration status, preventing us from comparing counts of authorized immigrants
directly.



                                                        47
In Online Appendix Table IV, we report summary statistics on income distributions (Panel A) and
demographics (Panel B) for five different samples. The first two columns use the (publicly available)
2012-2016 Current Population Survey (CPS) and 2012-2016 ACS, focusing on individuals in the
1978-83 birth cohorts who were born in the U.S. or came to the U.S. before age 16. Column 3
uses data from the 2015 ACS who appear in our analysis sample, and measures their incomes and
other characteristics in the ACS data. As shown in Online Appendix Table III, the individuals in
the linked analysis sample have slightly higher incomes than those in the ACS in general, with a
median income of $33,860 vs. $32,810 in the publicly available ACS and $33,000 in the CPS.
    Column 4 uses the same sample as Column 3, but reports income data from the tax records.
Income distributions measured in the tax records are very well aligned with the ACS. For example,
median income is $33,340 when measured in the tax data and $33,860 in the ACS data holding
the sample of individuals fixed. Column 5 assesses the extent to which estimates of income in tax
records are biased due to non-filing. It shows statistics on income and other characteristics using
ACS data for individuals who appear in both the ACS and the analysis sample, but who have zero
income in the tax data in 2015 (i.e., those who have no 1040 or W-2 forms in 2015). The median
income of these individuals is $5,000 in the ACS, showing that individuals we assign zero income
based on tax records typically have very low incomes in survey data as well. Hence, the tax records
do not miss substantial amounts of income for non-filers.
    In sum, comparisons to nationally representative surveys show that our analysis sample provides
an accurate representation of our target population in terms of overall coverage rates and sample
characteristics and that the tax records provide valid measures of income.

C. Construction of Individual-Level Variables
    In this appendix, we present comprehensive definitions of the variables we use in our primary
analysis, expanding upon the brief definitions given in Section 3.2.
    Variable Definitions for Parents.
    Income. In years where a parent files a tax return, we define household income as Adjusted
Gross Income (as reported on the 1040 tax return) plus tax-exempt interest income and the non-
taxable portion of Social Security and Disability benefits. In years where a parent does not file a
tax return, household income is coded as zero.44 Following Chetty, Hendren, Kline and Saez (2014),
we define our baseline parental income measure as the mean of parents’ household income over five
years: 1994, 1995, and 1998-2000, as tax records are unavailable in 1996 and 1997.45 We exclude
children whose mean parent income is zero or negative (1.0% of children) because parents who file
tax returns (as is required to link them to a child) reporting negative or zero income typically have
large capital losses, which are a proxy for having significant wealth.
    Marital Status. We identify parents’ marital status based on their tax filing status in the year
the child is first claimed as a dependent by parents. We say that a child has a “father present” if
  44
     Prior work (e.g., Chetty, Hendren, Kline and Saez 2014) has used information from W-2 forms to measure income
for non-filers. We cannot follow that approach here since income data from W-2 forms are unavailable at the Census
Bureau before 2005. However, this has little impact on results; Chetty, Hendren, Kline and Saez (2014) show that
in 2000, the median W-2 income among parents who were non-filers was $29, and only 2.9% of parents do not file in
a given year. Information from W-2s is more important when measuring the incomes of children in early adulthood,
for whom we do have W-2 data at the Census Bureau.
  45
     Formally, we define mean household income as the mother’s individual income plus the father’s individual income
in each year of 1994-95 and 1998-2000 divided by 10 (or divided by 5 if we only identify a single parent). For parents
who do not change marital status, this is simply mean household income over the 5 year period. For parents who
are married initially and then divorce, this measure tracks the mean household incomes of the two divorced parents
over time. For parents who are single initially and then get married, this measure tracks individual income prior to
marriage and total household income (including the new spouse’s income) after marriage.


                                                         48
one of the tax filers who claims the child as a dependent in that year is male.
    Educational Attainment. We obtain information on the highest level of education parents have
completed from the American Community Survey and the 2000 Census long form, prioritizing
information from the ACS (which is more recent) if both sources are available. We define “parental
education” as the mother’s education if available; if not, we use the father’s education. We define
seven categories of parental education: no school, less than a high school degree, high school degree,
college with no degree, associate’s degree, bachelor’s degree, and post-graduate degree. Education
(and all other variables obtained from the ACS or Census long form) are coded as missing for
individuals who do not appear in the ACS or Census long form samples.
    Location. In each year, parents are assigned an address based on the address from which they
filed their 1040 tax return. For non-filers, we use address information from information returns
such as W-2s, which are available beginning in 2003.46 Addresses are coded as missing in years
when a parent does not file or does not have an information return. For children whose parents
were married when they were first claimed as dependents, we prioritize the mother’s location if
marital status changes. Addresses are mapped to geographies such as Census tract or Census block
using a geocoding algorithm developed by the Census Bureau (see Online Appendix A for details).
    U.S. Native Status. Children are defined as having a “native-born” mother if their mother was
surveyed in the 2000 Census long form or the ACS and reported being born in the United States
in either survey.
    Variable Definitions for Children.
    Income. We define children’s annual household income in the same way as parents’ income
except in our treatment of non-filers. Since W-2 data are available for the years in which we
measure children’s incomes, we define income for a child who does not file a tax return as wage
earnings reported on form W-2. We define children’s individual incomes as their own W-2 wage
earnings plus self-employment and other non-wage income, which we define as Adjusted Gross
Income minus total wages reported on form 1040 divided by the number of tax filers (thereby
splitting non-wage income equally for joint filers). In years in which children have no tax return
and no information returns, both individual and household income are coded as zero.
    Marriage. A child’s marital status is measured based on whether he or she files a tax return
jointly in 2015.
    Gender and Age. Gender and age are obtained from the Numident file.
    Employment. We use two measures of employment, one based on the tax data and one based on
the ACS. In the tax data, children are defined as working if they have non-zero individual income
in either 2014 or 2015. In the ACS, children are defined as working if they report positive weeks
worked in the past year. This and all other employment-related ACS measures described below are
defined only among children who receive the ACS at age 30 or later.
    Hours Worked. Annual hours worked are measured in the ACS as the product of hours worked
per week and weeks worked per year. Individuals report weeks worked in bins; we use the midpoint
of the bin to assign each individual a single value (e.g., those who choose “27 to 39 weeks” are
assigned a value of 33). We convert the annual measures to average weekly hours worked by
dividing annual hours worked by 51 (the midpoint of the top bin of weeks worked). Those not
working in any week are coded as having zero hours of work.
    Hourly Wage. Hourly wages are measured in the ACS by dividing reported annual wage and
salary income by annual hours worked. The hourly wage is coded as missing for those with zero
hours worked.
 46
      Address information from W-2s starts in 2003, but income amounts are not available until 2005.




                                                         49
    Occupation. We obtain information on children’s occupations from the ACS for children who
have positive hours worked.
    Incarceration. Using data from the 2010 Census short form, we define an individual as incar-
cerated on the day of the Census (April 1, 2010) based on whether he or she lives in any of the
following types of group quarters: federal detention center, federal prison, state prison, local jail,
residential correctional facility, military jail, or juvenile correctional facility.
    Location. Children’s locations are measured based on the address from which they file tax
returns in 2015. For non-filers, we obtain address information from W-2 forms and other information
returns. If no address information is available in 2015, we use the most recent year in which an
address is available.

D. Construction of Tract-Level Covariates
    This appendix provides definitions and sources for the covariates used in Section VII.B. Our
source data are primarily at the Census tract level; all data obtained at other geographies were
aggregated to the tract level (with the exception of measures of racial bias, which are only available
at broader geographical levels). We use 2010 Census tract definitions throughout. For variables
defined using 2000 tract boundaries, we use the 2010 Census Tract Relationship Files from the US
Census Bureau to crosswalk 2000 tracts to 2010 tracts, weighting the 2000 tract-level covariates by
the fraction of the 2010 tract population that lives within the 2000 tract boundaries.
    We organize the covariates using the categories used in Online Appendix Table XI.
    Economy. We calculate the share of individuals below the poverty line for all individuals and
by race in each tract using tables NP087B and NP159B of the National Historical Geographic
Information System (NHGIS) database (2000 Census long form SF3a). To estimate the mean
household income for each tract, we use data on the distribution of households in 16 income bins
from table NP052A of the NHGIS database (2000 Census long form SF3a). We assume that the
mean household income in each bin equals the middle of the bin and impute a mean value of
$300,000 for the highest income bin ($200,000 or more). We then calculate the mean household
income for each tract using the distribution of households over income bins in the tract. We obtain
employment rates by race and sex in each tract using table NP150E of the NHGIS database (2000
Census long form SF3a). We define the share working in manufacturing as the number of workers
employed in the manufacturing industry over the total number of workers (in the sample of people
who are 16 years and older). These data are from table NP049C of the NHGIS database (2000
Census long form SF3a).
    Schools. Data for 3rd and 8th grade test scores are downloaded from the Stanford Education
Data Archive (table MeanA V1.1) and measured at the district level. We create a crosswalk from
districts to tracts by weighting by the proportion of land area that a given school district covers in
a tract.
    Health. The share without health insurance is constructed using tract-level data from table
B27001 of the American Community Survey (2008-2012) using the NHGIS database by subtracting
the number of people ages 18-64 with health insurance from the total tract-level population and
then dividing this number by the total tract-level population.
    Family Structure. We define the share of single parents in each tract as the number of households
with female heads (and no husband present) or male heads (and no wife present) with own children
under 18 years old present divided by the total number of households with own children present.
The data come from tables NP018E and NP018G of the NHGIS database (2000 Census short form
SF1a). We calculate the share married and share divorced in each tract using the number of people
who are married or divorced (in the sample of people who are 15 years and older) using data from


                                                 50
the NHGIS database in table NPCT007C (2000 Census long form SF3a). We estimate the share
of children born to low-income parents growing up in a household with father present by race in
each tract using our own Census microdata analysis sample. We first regress an indicator variable
for whether a child was matched to a father (see Online Appendix A) on a child’s parent income
percentile for each tract and race using our analysis sample (children in the 1978-83 birth cohorts).
We then use the predicted value at the 25th percentile of the parent income distribution as the
estimate for each tract and race group to measure father presence at the 25th percentile. We
estimate the share of children born to low-income parents growing up in a household with a mother
present by race and tract analogously.
    Demographics. The demographic variables are constructed from tract-level Census data using
the NHGIS database. The share of black residents is defined as the share of non-Hispanic black
residents who listed “Black” as their only race or as one of multiple races in the 2010 Census (long
form SF1, table H73). The share of the population younger than 18 is defined as the number of
persons under 18 in the 2000 Census divided by the total tract-level population (long form SF1a,
table NP012B). The share foreign born is defined as the number of foreign born residents in the 2000
Census divided by the sum of native and foreign born residents (long form SF3a, table NP021A).
    Education. The education variables are constructed from tract-level 2000 Census data using
the NHGIS database (long form SF3, table NP037C). The share that have less than a high school
education is calculated by dividing the number of people over 25 who did not graduate from high
school by the total number of people over 25 in a tract. The share of college educated is calculated
by dividing the number of people over 25 who have a bachelor’s degree, master’s degree, professional
school degree, or doctorate degree over the total number of people over 25 in a tract.
    Housing. The housing variables are constructed from tract-level Census and ACS data using
the NHGIS database. Population density is calculated by dividing the total tract-level population
in the 2000 Census by the land area of 2010 Census tract boundaries measured in square kilometers
(long form SF1a, table NP001A). The share who own homes is calculated by dividing the number of
housing units owned in the 2000 Census by the total number of housing units in a tract (long form
SF1a, tables H1 and H4). The median two-bedroom rent variable is constructed from tract-level
ACS data (2011-2015) and is defined as the median gross rent for renter-occupied housing units with
two bedrooms that pay cash rent (table AD79). The black median home value variable is defined
as the median value of owner-occupied housing units for black homeowners in the 2000 Census;
white median home value is defined analogously for whites (long form SF3a, tables NHCT042A
and NHCT042C).
    Racial Bias. We construct racial bias measures using three data sources. Implicit Association
Test (IAT) scores were obtained from the Race Implicit Association Database, available at Journal
of Open Psychology. The IAT score is a measure of racial bias that is constructed by measuring the
difference in a participant’s ability to match positive and negative words with black vs. white faces,
where higher IAT scores represent more implicit bias toward black faces (Greenwald, McGhee and
Schwartz 1998). We calculate mean IAT racial bias scores for white and black study participants
at the county level, pooling data from 2003-2016.
    The Racial Animus Index is obtained from Stephens-Davidowitz (2014). It is a measure of the
frequency of racially charged Google searches at the media market level, which are aggregations of
counties.
    The interracial marriage attitude data are constructed by Mas and Moretti (2009) using publicly
available data from the General Social Survey. They measure the fraction of white voters who
support anti-interracial-marriage laws by state.

E. Evolution of Racial Disparities with Gender Heterogeneity

                                                 51
   This appendix extends the model developed in Section II to show how racial disparities evolve
when racial gaps in intergenerational mobility differ by gender.
   For simplicity, we ignore marital choices and assume that each family i consists of a man and
a woman in each generation. We model the individual income of a person of gender g ∈ {m, f } in
family i in generation t as
                                g                           f
                               yi,t = αrg + βm yi,t−1
                                                m
                                                      + βf yi,t−1 + εigt
        g
where yi,t−1 denotes the individual income of a parent of gender g, and εigt denotes an idiosyncratic
shock that is independent across generations and genders and has expectation E[εigt ] = 0. Note
that we assume that relative mobility (βm , βf ) does not vary across races in this specification,
consistent with our empirical findings.
                                                               g      g
    In steady-state, the mean rank of each gender satisfies ȳi,t = ȳi,t−1 . The steady state mean
income rank for individuals of gender g and race r is given by:

                                              (1 − β−g )αrg + β−g αr−g
                                     ȳrg =                              ,
                                                   1 − βrm − βrf

where −g denotes the other gender, i.e., −g = m if g = f .
                f
    If ∆αf = αw   − αbf = 0, as we find empirically, then the black-white gap for women in the steady
state is directly proportional to the black-white intergenerational gap for men, ∆αm :
                                                     βm
                                       ∆ȳ f =               ∆αm .
                                                 1 − βm − βf

We caution that the abstraction from marital choices in this model is not innocuous. In practice,
closing intergenerational gaps in income for fathers may require both closing the gap in men’s
incomes and closing the gap in marital rates, if fathers’ incomes matter more if they are part of the
household raising the child. We cannot investigate this issue empirically because we cannot link
children to their fathers if the father is not present in their household (i.e., does not claim them as
a dependent). We therefore focus on understanding intergenerational gaps in income.

F. Correction for Imperfect Measurement of Wealth
    This appendix describes how we adjust for the bias that arises from the fact that we only have
partial measures of wealth in the ACS data by using information on total wealth from the Survey
of Consumer Finances (SCF).
    Estimand. We wish to estimate the following regression equation, analogous to the specification
in (5):

           yi,c = a + bp (yi,p − p̄) + bw whitei + bwp whitei (yi,p − p̄) + cXi + dwealthi + ei ,   (8)
where p̄ is the percentile of the income distribution at which we are estimating the black-white
intergenerational gap (e.g., p̄ = 25) and wealthi is a parent’s rank in the national wealth distribution
for parents. The parameter of interest is bw , which represents the black-white intergenerational gap
conditional on family-level characteristics and wealth for children with parents at percentile p̄ of
the income distribution.
    Missing Data Problem. In the linked ACS-Census-tax records dataset (which we refer to as the
ACS dataset below for simplicity) that we use for our primary analysis, we observe race, children’s
outcomes, and proxies for wealth, but not total wealth itself. In the SCF data, we observe race,
proxies for wealth, and total wealth, but not children’s outcomes. Our goal is to combine these two


                                                      52
datasets – each of which are representative samples of the U.S. population by design – to overcome
these missing data problems.
   Feasible Estimator. We begin by estimating the following two regressions of children’s income
ranks in adulthood on race, parental income, and controls in the ACS data:

               yi,c = ã + b̃p (yi,p − p̄) + b̃w whitei + b̃wp whitei (yi,p − p̄) + c̃Xi + e˜i , and        (9)


              yi,c = â + b̂p (yi,p − p̄) + b̂w whitei + b̂wp whitei (yi,p − p̄) + ĉXi + ĝZi + êi ,     (10)
where Zi is a vector of wealth proxies for parental wealth (e.g., home value, vehicle value, etc.).
The parameter b̃w in equation (9) estimates the black-white gap without controlling for wealth.
Equation (10) controls for wealth proxies, but omits the portion of wealth that is not captured by
the proxy variables. To adjust for omitted variable bias in b̂w that arises from controlling for wealth
imperfectly using the SCF data, we make the following assumption.

Assumption 1 (Exclusion Restriction) Conditional on total wealth, children’s outcomes are
independent of the wealth proxies:

                                     yi,c ⊥
                                          ⊥ Zi     yi,p , whitei , Xi , wealthi

    Intuitively, this exclusion restriction requires that the wealth proxies affect a child’s income rank
only when we do not condition on wealth itself. Equivalently, the exclusion restriction requires that
the observed component of wealth captured by the proxies has the same effect on children’s outcomes
as the unobserved component. For example, an additional dollar of home equity wealth (which is
observed in the ACS) must have the same effect on children’s outcomes as an additional dollar of
financial wealth (which is unobserved). Under this assumption, we can use the link between home
equity wealth and children’s outcomes that we can estimate in the ACS data to determine how
controlling for total wealth would affect the black-white gap, based on the relationship between
total wealth and home equity wealth estimated in the SCF.
    Formally, we estimate the following two regressions of total wealth on race, income, and controls
in the SCF data:

          wealthi = µ̃ + λ̃y (yi,p − p̄) + λ̃w whitei + λ̃wy whitei (yi,p − p̄) + λ̃X Xi + υ̃i , and       (11)


         wealthi = µ̂ + λ̂y (yi,p − p̄) + λ̂w whitei + λ̂wy whitei (yi,p − p̄) + λ̂X Xi + λ̂Z Zi + υ̂i .   (12)
The parameter λ̃w in equation (11) represents the black-white wealth gap conditioning on parent
income and other baseline covariates. The analogous parameter λ̂w in equation (12) represents the
black-white wealth gap after we additionally control for the wealth proxies Zi observed in the ACS.
If the wealth proxies perfectly capture total wealth, then λ̂w = 0; if they capture none of the gap
in wealth, then λ̂w = λ̃w .
    We now show how we can identify the estimand bw based on estimates of {b̃w , b̂w , λ̃w , λ̂w }. Let
x̃ denote the value of a variable x after residualizing with respect to yi,p , whitei · yi,p , Xi , and a




                                                        53
constant term. Then we can write the OLS regression coefficient for b̃w in (9) as:

                                      ˜ i + dwealth
                              Cov[bw white        ˜ i + ei , white
                                                               ˜ i]
                      b̃w =
                                                  ˜ i]
                                           V ar[white
                                      ˜ i + d(µ̃ + λ˜w white
                              Cov[bw white               ˜ i + υ̃i ) + ei , white
                                                                              ˜ i]
                         =
                                                        ˜ i]
                                               V ar[white
                         = bw + dλ̃w .                                                             (13)

Analogously,

                                             b̂w = bw + dλ̂w .                                     (14)
Equations (13) and (14) form a system of two equations with two unknowns (bw and d). Solving the
system yields the following expression for the degree of bias in our estimate of the intergenerational
gap b̂w when controlling for wealth proxies in the ACS relative to the target parameter bw one
would obtain when controlling for total wealth:

                                                         b̃w − b̂w
                                       b̃w − bw =                      .                           (15)
                                                    (λ̃w − λ̂w )/λ̃w

The denominator of this expression, λ̃wλ̃−λ̂w , measures the share of the black-white wealth gap
                                            w
explained by the ACS proxies, i.e. the extent to which our ACS measures capture the total black-
white wealth gap. Equation (15) shows that the degree of bias in our estimate of bw can be estimated
simply by inflating the observed effect of the wealth proxies on the intergenerational gap (b̃w − b̂w )
in the ACS by this share.
    Empirical Implementation. We implement this estimator using data from the 2001 SCF, the
closest year available to 2000, when our wealth proxies are observed in the Census long form and
the ACS. We restrict the SCF sample to black and white families with children and use sampling
weights to obtain estimates for a representative sample of the American population. We topcode
the number of vehicles at five in the SCF data to match the top-coding in the ACS data.
    Appendix Table XVII shows our estimates of {b̃w , b̂w , λ̃w , λ̂w } and the resulting estimate of bw
for boys growing up in families at the 25th and 75th percentiles of the national income distribution.
The first column considers families at the 25th percentile of the national income distribution.
Controlling for the wealth proxies reduces the intergenerational income gap estimated in the ACS
from b̃w = 9.1 (Row 1) to b̂w = 8.4 percentiles (Row 2). In the SCF data, the raw black-white
wealth gap is λ̃w = 9.2 ranks (Row 3). This gap shrinks to λ̂w = 3.3 ranks when we control for
the wealth proxies observed in the ACS (Row 4). Hence, the wealth proxies observed in the ACS
capture about two-thirds of the difference in mean wealth between blacks and whites.
    Putting together these four estimates, we calculate the effect of controlling fully for wealth using
equation (15). We divide the observed change in the black-white income gap when accounting for
the wealth proxies (9.1 − 8.4 = 0.7) in the ACS by the share of the wealth gap explained by the
proxies ( 9.2−3.3
            9.2   ≈ 0.64) to arrive at our final wealth-controlled estimate of the black-white gap of
             0.7
bw = 9.1 − 0.64   = 8.0 (Row 5).
    The adjustment for imperfect measurement of wealth in the ACS reduces the black-white gap
at the 25th percentile by only 0.4 percentiles – from 8.4 to 8.0 ranks – because the wealth proxies
available in the ACS explain the majority of the racial wealth gap for parents at the 25th percentile
of the national income distribution. Intuitively, low-income families hold the vast majority of
their wealth in the illiquid assets that are captured in the ACS. The correction for imperfect

                                                    54
measurement of wealth has a slightly larger effect at the 75th percentile of the national income
distribution (Column 2), reducing the estimated black-white gap from b̂w = 11.0 to bw = 10.2
percentiles.

G. Causal Effects of Neighborhoods
    In this appendix, we provide further details on the sample construction, variable definitions,
and empirical specifications used in Section VII.C to estimate childhood exposure effects. We then
assess the robustness of the findings shown in Figure XIII by discussing the additional regression
estimates shown in Online Appendix Table XV.
    Sample Construction and Variable Definitions. Our core sample and data construction are the
same as that described in Section III, but we expand the sample in two directions that increase
our ability to observe moves at younger ages. First, we extend our analysis sample to include the
1978-1985 cohorts.47 Second, we study income ranks measured at age 30, in addition to ranks of
pooled incomes over ages 31-37 in our analysis above. Chetty, Hendren, Kline and Saez (2014)
show that although children’s incomes from different backgrounds continue to diverge in levels, the
relationship between children’s income ranks (relative to their cohort peers) and parental income
stabilizes after age 30.
    Using the location of each child’s parents in each year in our sample, we form a sample of
one-time movers, defined as children whose parents move across CZs exactly once when they are
age 28 or below.48 We define the year of the move as the tax year in which the parents report living
in a different CZ relative to the previous year. In cases where we do not observe sequential years of
location information (e.g. we do not have tax records for 1990-93 and 1996-97), we assign the year
of move as the midpoint between the two nearest years in which different addresses are reported
(e.g. if we see a new location in 1994 relative to 1989, we assign the year of move as 1992.5). In
cases where this leads to a non-integer year of move, we randomly select the nearest year for the
move (1992 or 1993 in the case above). We then define the child’s age at the time of the move as
the year of the move minus the child’s cohort.
    Following Chetty and Hendren (2018a), we make three additional sample restrictions. First,
we restrict to moves between destinations and origins that have at least 25 observations used
to calculate ȳpos and ȳpds and exclude a small number of observations where either ȳpos or ȳpds
falls outside [0, 1]. As shown in Online Appendix A of Chetty and Hendren (2018a), imposing such
sample restrictions limits the degree of attenuation bias from sampling error in the ȳpcs estimates.49
Second, we require that we are able to observe the parents for at least two years after the move in
order to enter the sample (i.e. we only consider moves through 2013, since location is observed until
2015). Third, we require that families move at least 100 miles. This distance restriction ensures
that the children’s environments are actually changing and helps rule out cases where families move
very short distances that happen to cross CZ boundaries.
    We use the sample of children whose parents are not one-time movers, i.e. those observed in
exactly one or 3+ CZs, to estimate children’s predicted outcomes ȳpcs . In the one-time movers
sample, we have roughly 150,000 black male children and 884,000 white male children for whom
we observe income at age 30.
    Empirical Specification for Figure XIII. Using the sample of one-time movers, we consider
  47
     We also include the 1986 cohort in our analysis of incarceration.
  48
     When constructing the sample, we observe location up to age 30. But, as discussed below, we follow Chetty and
Hendren (2018a) and require that we observe the parents in the destination for at least two years. Therefore, the
oldest age of move for the parents is 28.
  49
     Chetty and Hendren (2018a) use population restrictions of 250,000 in the 2000 Census. We instead use count
restrictions on ȳpcs because many of our specifications focus on small subsamples, such as black males.


                                                       55
the outcomes of child i with parental income rank pi who moved at age mi from origin CZ, o,
to destination CZ, d. We estimate childhood exposure effects on a given outcome yi using a
specification analogous to that developed in Chetty and Hendren (2018a), estimated separately
for a given subgroup (e.g., black males or white females). Let ȳpcs denote the exposure-weighted
outcome of yi for children who grew up in CZ c with parental income rank p = pi , estimated using
equation (6). Let ∆odps = ȳpds − ȳpos denote the difference in the income rank of exposure-weighted
residents in the destination versus origin for children in cohort s with parental income rank p. We
run a regression of the form described in the text:

                             1985
                             X                                                    28
                                                                                  X
                 yi,c =               I(si = s)(φ1s + φ2s ȳpos ) +                                1
                                                                                        I(mi = m)(ζm    2
                                                                                                     + ζm yi,p )
                            s=1978                                                m=6
                              X28
                            +         bm I(mi = m)∆odps + ε1i ,                                                    (16)
                                m=6

where φ1s is a cohort-specific intercept and φ2s ȳpos is a control for the average exposure-weighted
outcome in the origin in which the coefficient is allowed to vary by cohort. These terms control
for selection effects in the origin CZ that children are coming from. Next, ζm   1 is an intercept and
 2y
ζm  i,p is an interaction with parental income rank that vary with the child’s age at the time of the
move, m. These terms control for heterogeneous disruption or selection effects that may occur with
moves at different ages and vary with parental income. Finally, the key coefficients of interest, bm ,
provide estimates of childhood exposure effects and are plotted in Figure XIII. The exposure effect
at age m, given by bm − bm+1 , can be interpreted as the causal effect of moving at age m instead of
m + 1 to a CZ in which children have 1-unit higher outcomes under our identification assumption.50
    Empirical Specifications for Online Appendix Table XV. In Columns 1-6 of Online Appendix
Table XV, we estimate parametric models that use linear splines over the age ranges above and
below
P28 23 to estimate average exposure effects. These specifications replace the non-parametric
   m=6 bm I(mi = m)∆odps term with a linear spline and have the form:


                  1985
                  X                                                               28
                                                                                  X
                                                                      ∼r
       yi,c =             I(si =   s)(φ1s   +   φ2s ȳpcs   +   φ3s ȳpcs )   +                    1
                                                                                        I(mi = m)(ζm    2
                                                                                                     + ζm yi,p )
                 s=1978                                                           m=6
                 +1 {mi ≤ 23} (δ≤23 + mγ≤23 ) ∆odps + 1 {mi > 23} (δ>23 + mγ>23 ) ∆odps + 2i , (17)

The under-23 own-race coefficient reported in Online Appendix Table XV is γ≤23 , while the over-23
own-race placebo is γ>23 in this specification.
    To test whether the race-specific differences in observed outcomes across areas reflect the causal
effect of childhood exposure, we add the outcomes of the other race to the regression in equation
  50
    Equation (16) is identical to the baseline specification in equation (6) of Chetty and Hendren (2018), with the
                                                                       P1985      d
exception that we do not include a cohort-varying intercept term,        s=1978 κs ∆odps . We make this modification
because below we use the specification here in much smaller subsamples (e.g., black males). With few observations in
some cohorts, including these terms introduces additional noise in the estimates. Chetty and Hendren (2018) verify
that the exclusion of these interactions does not meaningfully affect their results.




                                                                    56
(17) in Columns 7-12 of Online Appendix Table XV:
                 1985
                 X                                                              28
                                                                                X
                                                                    ∼r
      yi,c =            I(si =   s)(φ1s   +   φ2s ȳpcs   +   φ3s ȳpcs )   +                    1
                                                                                      I(mi = m)(ζm    2
                                                                                                   + ζm yi,p )
               s=1978                                                           m=6
               +1 {mi ≤ 23} (δ≤23 + mγ≤23 ) ∆odps + 1 {mi > 23} (δ>23 + mγ>23 ) ∆odps ,
                              ∼r      ∼r
                                           ∼r                    ∼r      ∼r
               +1 {mi ≤ 23} δ≤23  + mγ≤23   ∆odps + 1 {mi > 23} (δ>23 + mγ>23 ) ∆∼r
                                                                                 odps + ε3i , (18)

         ∼r and ∆∼r are the outcomes of white (black) children when running a regression on the
where ȳpcs        odps
sample of black (white) children. Here, γ≤23  ∼r is the under-23 other-race placebo reported in Online
                              ∼r
Appendix Table XV, while γ>23 is the over-23 other-race placebo.
    Results. Online Appendix Table XV presents estimates of average annual exposure effects by
replacing the age-at-move fixed effects {bm } with a linear parametrization of age at move, separately
for childhood (m ≤ 23) and adulthood (m > 23). Columns 1-4 show that this specification
yields estimates of annual childhood exposure effects – the impact of moving to a CZ with 1 unit
better outcomes one year earlier in childhood – similar to those reported in Figure XIII for income
and incarceration. For example, the estimate in Column 1 implies that moving one year later in
childhood to an area where black boys have 1 percentile higher incomes in adulthood (∆bodps = 1)
reduces a black boy’s income rank by -0.027. That is, an additional year of exposure to an area
with 1 percentile better outcomes increases a child’s own income rank by 0.027. Columns 5 and 6
report analogous estimates of annual exposure effects for marriage rates. Every year of exposure
to a CZ in which black males are 1 pp more likely to be married at age 30 increases a black boy’s
likelihood of being married at age 30 by 0.023 pp. We find a nearly identical effect of 0.023 pp for
white males.
    These results show that places have causal effects on the levels of children’s outcomes in adult-
hood; but do they have causal effects on the gap in outcomes across races? That is, if a black
and white boy both spend an additional year of childhood in a place where we observe a larger
black-white gap, do we find differential effects on their outcomes? We estimate causal effects on
racial gaps in Columns 7-12 of Online Appendix Table XV using an expanded specification that
predicts the outcomes of black movers using not only the mean outcomes of black boys (ȳpls       b ) but
                                       w
also the outcomes of white boys (ȳpls ) who grow up in the origin and destination CZs (and vice
versa for white movers).
    In Column 7, we regress the income ranks of black movers on predicted outcomes for black and
white men. Moving one year later in childhood to an area where black boys have 1 percentile higher
incomes in adulthood reduces a black boy’s income rank by -0.029 (s.e. = 0.004), similar to the
baseline estimate in Column 1. In contrast, the corresponding coefficient on the change in predicted
income ranks for white men (∆w   odps ) is -0.003 (s.e. = 0.004). Hence, moving to an area with better
outcomes for white boys has essentially no impact on a black boy’s outcomes conditional on the
outcomes of black boys who grow up in that area.
    Column 8 shows that the converse is true for white men. Here, we estimate an age-at-move slope
of -0.023 (s.e. = 0.002) on the predicted income ranks of white males (∆w     odps ), but a coefficient of
                                                                              b
only -0.004 (s.e. = 0.001) on the predicted income ranks of black males (∆odps ). Together, Columns
7 and 8 show that moving to an area with a larger observed black-white gap at an earlier age in
childhood results in larger intergenerational gaps in adulthood. Columns 9-12 show analogous
patterns for incarceration and marriage.




                                                                   57
                                                      Table I
                   Summary Statistics on Income Disparities and Intergenerational Mobility by Race
                                              White         Black         Asian        Hispanic        American Indian
                                                (1)          (2)           (3)             (4)               (5)

A. Children's Individual Income in Adulthood
Median Income ($)                               33,620       19,550        43,690         27,140            16,610
Mean Percentile Rank                             53.3         42.0          60.3           48.1              39.6
P(Child in Q1 | Parent in Q1)                   28.1%        28.7%         17.5%          23.2%             37.8%
P(Child in Q5 | Parent in Q1)                   11.1%         6.3%         26.8%          10.8%              5.3%
P(Child in Q1 | Parent in Q5)                   11.7%        13.8%         11.3%          13.3%             18.2%
P(Child in Q5 | Parent in Q5)                   36.9%        26.2%         49.9%          31.4%             24.1%

B. Children's Household Income in Adulthood
Median Income ($)                               53,730       20,650        63,720         35,180            22,260
Mean Percentile Rank                             55.7         34.8          60.7           45.6              36.7
P(Child in Q1 | Parent in Q1)                   29.0%        37.3%         16.7%          24.8%             45.5%
P(Child in Q5 | Parent in Q1)                   10.6%         2.5%         25.5%           7.1%              3.3%
P(Child in Q1 | Parent in Q5)                    8.7%        16.7%          9.9%          12.0%             18.8%
P(Child in Q5 | Parent in Q5)                   41.1%        18.0%         48.9%          30.6%             23.0%

C. Parents' Incomes
Median Parent Household Income ($)              70,640       29,200        53,010         33,060            34,850
Mean Parent Household Income Rank                57.9         32.7          49.2           36.2              36.8

Steady-State Household Income Rank               54.4         35.2           62.9           48.7             36.5
Number of children (1000's)                     13,490       2,750           685           2,615             165

Notes : This table presents summary statistics on income and intergenerational mobility by race/ethnicity; see Online
Appendix Table V for analogous statistics broken down by gender. All racial groups except Hispanics exclude
individuals of Hispanic ethnicity. Panels A and B present descriptive statistics on children's individual and household
incomes in adulthood, respectively, while Panel C presents summary statistics on parents' household incomes. All
statistics are based on the primary analysis sample (children in the 1978-83 birth cohorts). Child income is the mean of
2014-2015 individual or household income (when the child is between 31-37 years old), while parent income is mean
household income from 1994-1995 and 1998-2000. Children are assigned percentile ranks relative to all other
children in their birth cohort, while parents are ranked relative to all parents with children in the same birth cohort.
Q1 and Q5 refer to the first and fifth quintiles of the relevant income distribution. All monetary values are measured
in 2015 dollars. The steady-state household income rank is a prediction based on the model in Section II given
observed rates of intergenerational mobility. All values in this and all subsequent tables and figures have been
rounded to four significant digits as part of the disclosure avoidance protocol. Counts are rounded in the following
manner: numbers between 10,000 and 99,999 are rounded to the nearest 500; between 100,000 and 9,999,999 to
the nearest 1,000; and above 10,000,000 to the nearest 10,000. Sources for this and all subsequent tables and
figures: authors' calculations based on Census 2000 and 2010, tax returns, and American Community Surveys 2005-
2015. All statistics cleared under Census DRB release authorization CBDRB-FY18-195.
                                                                             Table II
                     Association Between Black Father Presence and Black Men's Upward Mobility Across Census Tracts: OLS Regression Estimates

                                                         Dependent Variable: Mean Individual Income Rank for Black Men Raised in Low-Income (p = 25) Families

                                                              Black vs.                 Children with
                                                                                                      Children with   Black Fathers                               Adulthood
                                                Baseline     White Father    State FE      Fathers                                    Gender Ratio   All Tracts
                                                                                                      Two Parents       per Child                                  Tract FE
                                                              Presence                     Absent


                                                   (1)            (2)          (3)           (4)           (5)             (6)            (7)           (8)          (9)

Low-Income Black Father Presence                 0.0492         0.0450       0.0501        0.0279        0.0461                                       0.0806       0.1052
                                                (0.0062)       (0.0068)     (0.0066)      (0.0108)      (0.0128)                                     (0.0036)     (0.0079)
Low-Income White Father Presence                                0.0077
                                                               (0.0076)
Low-Income Black Father Presence in 2000                                                                                 0.0382          0.0387
                                                                                                                        (0.0043)        (0.0043)
Low-Income Black Male Filers Per Child                                                                                                  -0.0011
                                                                                                                                        (0.0011)
Low Poverty Tracts                                 X              X             X            X             X               X                X
State FE's                                                                      X
Current Tract FE's                                                                                                                                                    X

Number of Tracts                                 10,582         10,444       10,582        5,159         5,280          10,177          10,177        28,850
Number of Individual Obs.                                                                                                                                         193,000
Notes : This table presents coefficients from OLS regressions run at the Census tract level, with standard errors reported in parentheses. The dependent variable in all
columns is upward mobility for black males who grow up in a given Census tract. To construct upward mobility in a given tract c, we regress children’s individual income
ranks on parent income rank, weighting by the number of years that each child is observed below age 23 in tract c. We then define upward mobility as the predicted
value from this regression at the 25th percentile of the parental income distribution. The key independent variable in Columns 1-5 is low-income black father presence.
We define father presence as an indicator for whether a child is claimed by a male on a tax form in the year he is matched to a parent. We regress this indicator for
father presence on parental income rank for each tract using equation (6), and define black father presence among low-income families as the prediction for black
children at p=25. In Column 1, we regress upward mobility for black men on the fraction of low-income black fathers present, weighting by the number of black boys
who grow up in each tract and restricting the sample to tracts with a poverty rate below 10% in the 2000 Census. The coefficient of 0.0492 implies that black boys who
grow up in a tract with 10 pp more low-income black fathers present have 0.5 percentile higher income ranks on average. Column 2 replicates Column 1, including a
control for low-income white father presence, which is defined analogously to black father presence. Column 3 adds state fixed effects to the baseline specification in
Column 1. In Column 4, we replicate Column 1, but measure upward mobility only among black boys raised in families without a father present; Column 5 conversely
measures upward mobility only among black boys raised in two-parent families. Column 6 replicates Column 1, replacing the independent variable with the number of
below-median-income black fathers in the Census tract in 2000 divided by the number of children in our analysis sample, an alternative measure of father presence.
Column 7 replicates Column 6, adding the total number of low-income black males (not just fathers) per child as an additional regressor. Column 8 replicates the
baseline specification in Column 1, but includes all available tracts instead of just low-poverty census tracts. Finally, Column 9 is analogous to Column 8, but includes
fixed effects for the tract in which children reside as adults (in 2015). In order to include these fixed effects, we estimate this specification at the individual level
(unweighted). We restrict the sample to children who grew up in families with parents between the 20th and 30th percentiles of the parental income distribution and
use their individual income rank as the dependent variable. All statistics cleared under Census DRB release authorization CBDRB-FY18-195.
                                                                 Table III
             Association Between Racial Bias and Upward Mobility Across Counties and Media Markets: OLS Regression Estimates

                                          Dep. Var.: Mean Individual Income Rank for Black Men Raised in Low-Income (p = 25) Families

                                                                                 Black                                       Black
                Sample:              Black Male Black Male Black Male                        White Male Black Male                       White Male
                                                                                Female                                      Female

                                         (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)            (5)           (6)            (7)            (8)

Difference in IAT                     -0.0081                    -0.0060         -0.0082        -0.0097
                                      (0.0024)                   (0.0019)       (0.0029)       (0.0025)
IAT Score for Whites                                -0.0080
                                                    (0.0023)
IAT Score for Blacks                                 0.0047
                                                    (0.0023)
Racial Animus Index                                                                                          -0.0263         -0.0191        -0.0203
                                                                                                             (0.0056)       (0.0080)       (0.0042)

State FE's                                                           X

                                                                                                             Media          Media          Media
Unit of Analysis                      Counties      Counties     Counties      Counties       Counties
                                                                                                             Markets        Markets        Markets
Number of Counties/Media
                                         340          340           340           325            340            28             27             28
Markets
Notes : This table presents coefficients from OLS regressions with standard errors reported in parentheses. Columns 1-5 examine the association
between measures of implicit racial bias and children's income ranks in adulthood across counties. The implicit racial bias measures are based on
mean scores on implicit association tests (IAT) for white and black study participants by county, obtained from the Race Implicit Association Database.
All racial bias measures used in this table are standardized so that they have mean zero and standard deviation 1 across areas (weighting by the
number of black males in our sample), with higher values representing greater racial bias against blacks. The dependent variable in Columns 1-3 is the
predicted income rank for black men who grew up in low-income (25th percentile) families in a given county, constructed by taking a population-
weighted average of the tract-level estimates of upward mobility described in the notes to Table II. Column 1 regresses this measure on the
standardized difference in IAT scores for white vs. black respondents (whites' IAT minus blacks' IAT). Column 2 includes separate regressors for black
and white respondents' IAT scores. Column 3 adds state fixed effects to the specification in Column 1. Column 4 replaces the dependent variable with
the predicted individual income rank for black females with parents at the 25th percentile instead of black males. Column 5 replaces the dependent
variable with the predicted individual income rank for white males at the 25th percentile. Columns 6-8 present estimates from regressions using a
standardized version of the Racial Animus measure constructed by Stephens-Davidowitz (2014) at the media market level as the independent variable.
These columns use the same dependent variables as Columns 3-5 aggregated to the media market level. We limit the sample to counties or media
markets with poverty rates below 10% in the 2000 Census in all specifications and weight the regressions by the number of black men in the relevant
geographic unit. All statistics cleared under Census DRB release authorization CBDRB-FY18-195.
                                                         Online Appendix Table I
                                                       Theories of Racial Disparities

               Explanation                                                       Selected References

A. Family-Level Factors
  Parental Income                          Magnuson & Duncan 2006; Rothstein & Wozny 2013
  Parental Human Capital & Wealth          Oliver & Shapiro 1995; Orr 2003; Conley 2010
  Family Structure and Stability           McAdoo 2002; Burchinal et al. 2011
  Ability at Birth                         Hernstein & Murray 1994 and Rushton & Jensen 2005 vs. Fryer & Levitt 2006

B. Structural Features of Environment
                                           Wilson 1987; Massey & Denton 1993; Sampson & Wilson 1995; Sampson, Morenoff & Gannon-
  Segregation, Neighborhoods
                                           Rowley 2002; Smith 2005; Small, Harding & Lamont 2010
  School Quality                           Smith & Welch 1989; Card & Krueger 1992; Jencks & Phillips 1998; Dobbie & Fryer 2011
                                           Donohue & Heckman 1991; Heckman 1998; Atonji & Blank 1999; Pager 2003; Bertrand &
  Discrimination in the Labor Market
                                           Mullainathan 2004; Fryer 2010
  Discrimination in Criminal Justice       Steffensmeier, Ulmer & Kramer 1998; Eberhardt et al. 2004; Alexander 2010
  Social Alienation, Stereotype Threat     Steele & Aaronson 1995; Tatum 2004; Glover, Pallais & Pariente 2017

C. Cultural Factors and Social Norms
  Identity and Oppositional Norms          Fordham & Ogbu 1986; Noguera 2003; Carter 2005; Austen-Smith & Fryer 2005
  Aspirations or Role Models               Mickelson 1990; Small, Harding, & Lamont 2010

Notes: In this table, we organize theories of racial disparities into three broad categories and provide selected references to prior work
discussing each of these theories.
                                                                 Online Appendix Table II
                                                 Sample Sizes and Coverage Rates by Birth Cohort and Race

A. Coverage Rates by Child's Birth Cohort
                                                    2015 ACS: Born in U.S. Percent Matched to                          And at Least And Appear in ACS at
                                                    or Arrived Before Age Parents with Positive     And with Non-     one Childhood Some Point between
                                                         16 (1,000s)            Income               missing Race         Tract         2005-2015
Cohort                                                        (1)                  (2)                    (3)              (4)              (5)
1978                                                        3,334                  94.5%                88.6%              88.1%               12.3%
1979                                                        3,594                  92.9%                88.3%              87.8%               12.1%
1980                                                        3,715                  95.1%                90.9%              90.4%               12.2%
1981                                                        3,580                  105.7%               97.1%              96.6%               12.8%
1982                                                        3,660                  104.1%               98.5%              98.0%               12.7%
1983                                                        3,678                  104.9%               97.9%              97.4%               12.5%
Average: Cohorts 78-83                                     21,561                   99.6%               93.6%              93.1%               12.4%

B. Coverage Rates by Race and Ethnicity
                                                            White                   Black                Asian           Hispanic         American Indian
                                                             (6)                     (7)                  (8)               (9)                (10)

Count in 2015 ACS                                        13,890,000               2,927,000            678,000           3,341,000            151,000
Share of 2015 ACS Total in Analysis Sample                 97.1%                    94.0%              101.0%              78.3%              109.3%

Notes: This table describes the coverage rates of our sample relative to the target population. Panel A presents statistics on coverage rates by birth cohort.
All observation counts shown are rounded as described in the notes to Table I. Column 1 presents estimates of the size of the target population (in 1,000's),
based on the number of people who were born in the U.S. or who moved to the U.S. before age 16 in the 2015 American Community Survey. We use the
ACS person weights to estimate total counts from the ACS sample. Column 2 shows the number of children in the tax data who are linked to parents with
positive income, measured as a percentage relative to the totals in Column 1. Column 3 reports the number of children in our linked sample for whom we
have information on race, again as a percentage of the counts in Column 1. In Column 4, we further require that children are assigned to at least one census
tract prior to age 23. In Column 5, we report the fraction of the resulting children whom we ever observe in the ACS. Panel B shows the coverage rate of
each racial and ethnic group in our analysis sample (children matched to parents with positive income and non-missing race) relative to the counts of these
groups in the 2015 ACS, pooling the 1978-83 birth cohorts. See Appendix B for further details. All statistics cleared under Census DRB release authorization
CBDRB-FY18-195.
                                             Online Appendix Table III
                                Characteristics of Matched vs. Unmatched Children

                                                            2015 ACS (1978-                       In 2015 ACS but
                                                                               In 2015 ACS and
                                                            83 cohorts, born                      does not appear
                                                                                 appears in our
                                                             in US or came                         in our analysis
                                                                                analysis sample
                                                               before 16)                              sample

                                                                   (1)                (2)                (3)
A. Individual Income Ranks in ACS Data by Race and Ethnicity
Pooled                                  Rank                     49.99              52.10               42.01
White                                   Rank                     53.02              54.19              46.27
                                        % of Sample              64.4%              69.4%              45.6%
Black                                   Rank                     41.36              43.09              36.60
                                        % of Sample              13.6%              12.6%              17.2%
Asian                                   Rank                     60.02              62.63               52.72
                                        % of Sample              3.1%               2.9%                3.9%
Hispanic                                Rank                     43.54              47.69              37.12
                                        % of Sample              15.5%              12.3%              30.3%
American Indian                         Rank                     37.29              37.46               36.97
                                        % of Sample              0.7%               0.6%                1.2%
"Other"                                 Rank                     49.67              51.61               43.44
                                        % of Sample              2.7%               2.6%                3.1%
B. Other Outcomes
Marriage Rate                                                    51.9%              54.1%              43.5%
College Attendance Rate                                          67.5%              71.2%              53.6%
Incarceration Rate                                                1.9%               1.1%               4.7%

Notes : This table compares the characteristics of children who appear in our linked analysis sample vs. those who
do not appear in the sample using data from the 2015 ACS. Panel A presents mean individual income ranks and
sample shares by race. Panel B presents statistics on other outcomes measured in the ACS, pooling across races. In
Column 1 we present statistics using the 2015 ACS, restricting to those who were born in the years 1978-1983,
were born in the US, or moved to the U.S. before age 16. We estimate the total counts and individual income ranks
using the ACS person weights in this column. The income ranks are calculated using ACS income and are computed
by ranking children within their birth cohort. In Column 2, we restrict the sample in 1 to children in our analysis
sample i.e. those whom we can match to parents with positive income and for whom we have race information. In
Column 3 we present statistics on those who appear in Column 1 but not in Column 2, i.e. children excluded from
our analysis sample but part of the target sample. In all columns, all statistics are estimated using the 2015 ACS
(not the tax data), so that differences between the columns are driven purely by sample selection. See Section III.B
for definitions of the variables in this table. All statistics cleared under Census DRB release authorization CBDRB-
FY18-195.
                                                  Online Appendix Table IV
                       Comparison of Tax Data Income Measures and Characteristics to CPS and ACS Data
                                                                                      Analysis Sample in 2015 ACS
                                                                                                        Subsample with 0
                                          Publicly        Publicly                                        Income in Tax
                                        Available CPS   Available ACS    Characteristics Incomes in Tax Records: Chars. in
                                         2012-2016       2012-2016          in ACS          Records           ACS
                                             (1)              (2)             (3)             (4)              (5)

A. Income Statistics
% Zero Income                                    8.1%            10.4%        9.5%             10.1%             37.5%
% Negative Income                                0.1%             0.1%        0.1%              2.1%              0.1%
Mean                                           42,550           43,760       42,890            44,990            12,240
Standard Deviation                             56,180           52,630       51,200           117,700            27,500
p10                                               160                0        300                 0                 0
p25                                            14,000           12,170       13,400            11,150               0
p50                                            33,000           32,810       34,000            33,370             5,000
p75                                            55,200           57,700       57,010            58,440            13,970
p90                                            85,250           91,140       89,000            92,330            34,000
p99                                           200,580          255,000      210,000           250,400           100,000

B. Demographic Characteristics
% Married                                       55.6%            55.6%       54.0%               -               28.0%
% Female                                        50.8%            49.9%       50.3%               -               48.2%
% Live in South                                 37.8%            38.1%       37.8%               -               44.5%
% White                                         66.2%            64.9%       67.3%               -               58.2%
% Black                                         13.0%            13.5%       12.7%               -               19.3%
% Asian                                          3.9%             3.6%        3.5%               -                2.2%
% Hispanic                                      14.4%            15.1%       13.2%               -               15.9%
% American Indian                                0.8%             0.8%        0.6%               -                1.2%
% Attend College                                67.4%            61.0%       70.2%               -               41.9%

Notes : This table presents summary statistics on income distributions (Panel A) and demographics (Panel B) for five different
samples. The first two columns use the (publicly available) 2012-2016 Current Population Survey (CPS) and 2012-2016 ACS,
focusing on individuals in the 1978-83 birth cohorts who were born in the U.S. or came to the U.S. before age 16. Column 3
uses data from the 2015 ACS who appear in our analysis sample, and measures their incomes and other characteristics in the
ACS data. Column 4 uses the same sample as Column 3, but uses income data from the tax records. Note that the
demographic characteristics of the sample in Column 4 are identical to those in Column 3 by construction since demographic
information is not obtained from the tax records. Column 5 shows statistics on income and other characteristics using ACS
data for individuals who appear in both the ACS and the analysis sample, but who have zero income in the tax data in 2015
(i.e., those who have no 1040 or W-2 forms in 2015). All statistics cleared under Census DRB release authorization CBDRB-
FY18-195.
                                                                      Online Appendix Table V
                                      Summary Statistics on Income Disparities and Intergenerational Mobility by Race and Gender
                                               White                      Black                      Asian                     Hispanic           American Indian
                                         Male        Female         Male        Female         Male       Female         Male        Female       Male      Female
                                          (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)          (6)           (7)          (8)        (9)       (10)

A. Children's Individual Income in Adulthood
Median Income ($)                         40,710      26,580        18,220      20,400        45,550      41,730        32,250      22,930       19,030      14,870
Mean Percentile Rank                       58.4        47.9          40.8        43.1          61.5        59.0          51.7        44.5         42.0        37.3
P(Child in Q1 | Parent in Q1)             26.0%       30.3%         37.5%       20.5%         17.0%       18.0%         23.5%       22.8%        39.0%       36.6%
P(Child in Q5 | Parent in Q1)             14.8%        7.2%          7.4%        5.2%         28.0%       25.6%         14.8%        6.7%         7.4%        3.3%
P(Child in Q1 | Parent in Q5)              8.7%       14.9%         16.4%       11.0%         10.8%       11.9%         11.6%       15.1%        16.2%       20.3%
P(Child in Q5 | Parent in Q5)             45.2%       28.2%         27.0%       25.4%         52.8%       46.9%         37.5%       25.4%        28.7%       19.1%

B. Children's Household Income in Adulthood
Median Income ($)                         51,960      55,740        17,730      22,690        56,580      71,880        35,280      35,080       20,890      23,450
Mean Percentile Rank                       54.5        56.8          32.6        36.8          57.5        63.9          44.6        46.7         35.7        37.8
P(Child in Q1 | Parent in Q1)             31.3%       26.7%         48.5%       26.8%         19.9%       13.2%         29.1%       20.4%        49.3%       41.7%
P(Child in Q5 | Parent in Q1)              9.7%       11.5%          2.5%        2.6%         21.2%       30.1%          6.6%        7.6%         3.1%        3.5%
P(Child in Q1 | Parent in Q5)             10.0%        7.3%         21.5%       11.8%         11.9%        8.0%         14.0%       10.0%        20.9%       16.6%
P(Child in Q5 | Parent in Q5)             39.3%       43.0%         17.4%       18.6%         45.6%       52.2%         28.8%       32.4%        21.5%       24.6%

Number of children (1000's)               6,891       6,599         1,348       1,402          350         335          1,312       1,303          84          82

Notes : This table replicates Table I, but presents statistics separately by gender. See notes to Table I for details. All statistics cleared under Census DRB release
authorization CBDRB-FY18-195.
                                                        Online Appendix Table VI
                                             Summary Statistics on Children's Outcomes by Race
Race                                   Pooled            White             Black             Asian           Hispanic       American Indian
                                         (1)              (2)               (3)               (4)               (5)               (6)
Household Income
Median ($)                             42,030           53,730            20,650           63,720            35,180              22,260
Mean ($)                               63,530           74,740            31,160           100,900           48,600              35,510
Mean Percentile Rank                    50.00            55.65             34.76            60.65             45.65               36.73

Individual Income
Median ($)                             29,210           33,620            19,550            43,690           27,140              16,610
Mean ($)                               40,700           45,340            27,450            63,620           34,590              25,780
Mean Percentile Rank                    50.00            53.28             42.01             60.31            48.10               39.65

Employment
Employed in Tax Data                   85.3%             88.9%             80.7%            90.6%             84.9%              76.8%
Employed in ACS                        84.7%             86.5%             74.9%            88.2%             81.5%              72.8%
Hours of Work per Week                 31.82             32.96             25.99            34.12             29.72              24.38

Wage Rate
Median ($/hour)                         18.11            18.79             14.67             23.94            16.19               13.76
Mean ($/hour)                           22.42            22.97             18.12             30.08            20.09               17.27
Mean Rank                               50.00            51.32             40.98             61.17            45.48               38.83

Other Outcomes
Marriage Rate                          45.0%             54.7%             16.3%            50.0%             37.4%              30.9%
HS Dropout Rate                        13.9%             11.4%             22.2%             8.6%             23.2%              23.2%
College Attendance Rate                63.6%             67.2%             50.1%            79.0%             50.5%              44.7%
Incarceration Rate                      1.5%              0.9%              5.1%             0.3%              1.5%               2.9%

Sample Size                         21,310,000        13,490,000        2,750,000          685,000          2,615,000           165,000
Sample Size for ACS Outcomes         4,169,000         2,986,000         456,000           131,000           464,000            40,000

Notes : This table presents summary statistics on children's incomes in adulthood and other outcomes by race using our primary analysis
sample (children in the 1978-1983 birth cohorts). Column 1 shows statistics for all children we link to parents with positive income, including
those with missing race information; this is the sample on which children are assigned income ranks. Columns 2-6 present statistics for
children with non-missing race information, based on their race and ethnicity. See Section III.B for variable definitions and data sources. We
report sample sizes both for variables measured in the full sample and those measured using 2005-2015 ACS data. All statistics cleared under
Census DRB release authorization CBDRB-FY18-195.
                                                          Online Appendix Table VII
                          Summary Statistics on Children's Outcomes by Race for those with Mothers Born in the US
Race                                        Pooled          White            Black           Asian          Hispanic      American Indian
                                              (1)            (2)              (3)             (4)              (5)              (6)
Household Income
Median ($)                                  48,070          56,390          21,670          57,540          36,740            23,350
Mean ($)                                    68,240          76,020          32,030          84,980          53,520            36,240
Mean Percentile Rank                         52.99           56.91           35.45           58.11           46.91             37.45

Individual Income
Median ($)                                  31,670          34,710          20,540          38,760          27,450            17,520
Mean ($)                                    42,570          45,790          28,140          52,460          37,170            26,170
Mean Percentile Rank                         51.81           54.10           42.77           57.40           48.49             40.30

Employment
Employed in Tax Data                         87.9%          90.0%            81.7%           90.5%           85.7%             78.0%
Employed in ACS                              83.8%          85.5%            73.9%           85.0%           79.0%             71.7%
Hours of Work per Week                       30.93          32.00            24.74           31.39           27.84             23.33

Wage Rate
Median ($/hour)                              17.18           17.67           13.95           19.63           15.42             13.56
Mean ($/hour)                                21.05           21.56           17.37           24.78           19.16             16.86
Mean Rank                                    47.68           48.87           39.31           53.62           43.54             38.01

Other Outcomes
Marriage Rate                                50.3%           57.0%           17.2%           48.4%           39.3%             32.2%
HS Dropout Rate                              15.8%           14.2%           23.7%           14.5%           22.0%             24.0%
College Attendance Rate                      61.4%           64.2%           48.2%           68.9%           50.9%             42.9%
Incarceration Rate                            1.2%            0.7%            4.6%            0.4%            1.5%              2.6%

Sample Size                                4,783,000      3,716,000        499,000          28,500         270,000            47,000
Sample Size for ACS Outcomes               1,699,000      1,364,000        177,000          10,500          97,500            19,500

Notes : This table presents statistics that are analogous to those in Online Appendix Table VI, but restricting the sample to children whose
mothers were born in the United States. We measure mother's place of birth in the ACS or 2000 Long Form. The sample sizes are smaller
than those in Online Appendix Table VI because we limit the sample to children whose mothers appear in the ACS or Long Form and also
were born in the United States. See notes to Online Appendix Table VI for further details. All statistics cleared under Census DRB release
authorization CBDRB-FY18-195.
                                                                                           Online Appendix Table VIII
                                                                         Summary Statistics on Children's Outcomes by Race and Gender
                                                        Pooled                         White                      Black                      Asian                  Hispanic             American Indian
                                                Male             Female          Male        Female        Male        Female         Male       Female        Male         Female       Male      Female
                                                 (1)               (2)            (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)           (7)         (8)          (9)          (10)        (11)       (12)
Household Income
Median ($)                                     40,960            43,200         51,960       55,740       17,730       22,690       56,580       71,880       35,280        35,080      20,890     23,450
Mean ($)                                       60,490            66,700         71,610       78,000       29,270       32,980       89,990      112,300       46,310        50,900      34,140     36,920
Mean Percentile Rank                            48.67             51.39          54.54        56.80        32.60        36.83        57.50        63.94        44.64         46.66       35.69      37.82

Individual Income
Median ($)                                     34,910            24,170         40,710       26,580       18,220       20,400       45,550       41,730       32,250        22,930      19,030     14,870
Mean ($)                                       46,970            34,170         53,700       36,610       27,650       27,260       68,230       58,820       39,410        29,750      29,140     22,300
Mean Percentile Rank                            53.66             46.18          58.43        47.90        40.85        43.12        61.52        59.04        51.66         44.52       41.98      37.25

Employment
Employed in Tax Data                           83.7%             87.0%           88.4%       89.3%        74.1%         87.0%        89.2%           92.0%     83.2%         86.6%       74.7%      79.0%
Employed in ACS                                88.5%             80.9%           91.5%       81.5%        70.0%         79.4%        90.5%           85.8%     85.5%         77.7%       75.7%      69.9%
Hours of Work per Week                         35.71             28.02           37.66       28.29        24.87         27.01        36.31           31.92     33.05         26.56       26.25      22.51

Wage Rate
Median ($/hour)                                 19.18            17.18           19.63        17.67        14.72        14.46        23.53           24.38     16.84         15.69       14.46      13.12
Mean ($/hour)                                   23.48            21.29           24.13        21.68        18.32        17.96        30.12           30.04     20.79         19.36       18.00      16.48
Mean Rank                                       52.10            47.76           53.63        48.75        41.35        40.69        60.63           61.74     46.97         43.93       40.65      36.88

Other Outcomes
Marriage Rate                                  42.5%             47.7%           51.5%       58.1%        16.8%         15.8%        45.4%           54.7%     35.1%         39.7%       29.0%      32.9%
HS Dropout Rate                                16.4%             11.5%           13.4%       9.3%         27.2%         17.6%        10.0%           7.2%      26.7%         19.8%       26.2%      20.2%
College Attendance Rate                        57.8%             69.3%           61.6%       72.8%        41.5%         57.9%        75.7%           82.5%     44.5%         56.3%       38.1%      51.5%
Incarceration Rate                              2.7%              0.3%            1.6%       0.2%         10.3%          0.6%        0.5%            0.0%       2.9%          0.2%       5.1%       0.8%

Sample Size                                  10,870,000      10,430,000        6,891,000    6,599,000    1,348,000     1,402,000    350,000       335,000    1,312,000     1,303,000     84,000     81,500
Sample Size for ACS Outcomes                 2,075,000       2,095,000        1,495,000    1,490,000     218,000       238,000      66,000       64,500      230,000       234,000      20,000     20,000
Notes : This table replicates Online Appendix Table VI, but presents statistics separately for each gender within each race. See notes to Online Appendix Table VI for details. All statistics cleared under
Census DRB release authorization CBDRB-FY18-195.
                                                           Online Appendix Table IX
                                      Summary Statistics on Parents' Incomes and Characteristics by Race
                                                    Pooled          White          Black          Asian         Hispanic      American Indian
                                                       (1)            (2)           (3)             (4)            (5)              (6)
Household Income
25th percentile ($)                                 27,010         39,830         16,070         23,650          17,920           17,940
Median ($)                                          55,810         70,640         29,200         53,010          33,060           34,850
75th percentile ($)                                 94,260         107,900        52,890         99,660          60,260           62,890
99th percentile ($)                                 466,300        566,500        168,900        533,500         213,300          190,500
Mean ($)                                            79,550         96,680         40,590         82,670          47,240           46,990
Mean Percentile Rank                                 50.00          57.86          32.72          49.20           36.17            36.76

Family Structure
Two Parent                                          68.34%          79.35%         32.16%         80.44%         57.03%           57.94%
Father Present                                      78.86%          86.09%         49.54%         88.41%         73.82%           70.17%
Mother Present                                      89.48%          93.26%         82.62%         92.02%         83.21%           87.76%

Education
Mom HS Dropout                                      12.32%          7.38%          17.07%         21.90%         37.44%           18.22%
Dad HS Dropout                                      13.65%          8.90%          20.18%         17.09%         41.38%           20.94%
Mom Attended College                                55.75%          59.35%         50.66%         59.15%         36.04%           49.29%
Dad Attended College                                56.92%          60.55%         46.73%         66.38%         35.75%           43.59%

Wealth
Home Ownership Rate                                 75.58%          81.59%         56.79%         70.62%         62.41%           67.66%
Median Monthly Mortgage Payment ($)                  502             570              0            827            289                0
Mean Monthly Mortgage Payment ($)                    704             742            490            1067           633              319
Median Number of Cars                                  2               2              2              2              2                2
Mean Number of Cars                                  2.30            2.44           1.73           2.39           2.14             2.01

Place of Birth
Foreign Born Mother                                 12.26%          4.41%          8.37%          81.76%         49.07%            3.80%
Foreign Born Father                                 12.85%          4.29%          10.82%         79.96%         54.08%            4.22%

Tract-Level Characteristics
Mean Parent Income Rank                              51.62           56.70          38.96          53.39          41.46            44.39
Single Parent Share (2000)                          30.20%          23.06%         53.84%         29.23%         38.85%           32.17%
Own-Race Single Parent Share (2000)                 30.12%          19.09%         66.70%         18.71%         41.05%           38.97%
Share White (2000)                                  66.84%          81.87%         32.78%         50.78%         37.21%           55.90%

Sample Size                                        21,310,000     13,490,000     2,750,000       685,000        2,615,000         165,000
Sample Size for ACS/Census Long Form Vars.         5,451,000      3,887,000       544,000        157,000         530,000          49,000

Notes : This table presents summary statistics on income and other characteristics of the parents of the children in our primary analysis
sample (1978-83 birth cohorts). All statistics are estimated using a sample with one observation per child (rather than parent). Column 1
shows statistics on all parents, including those with missing race information; this is the sample on which parents are assigned income ranks.
Columns 2-6 present statistics for parents of children with non-missing race information, based on their race and ethnicity. Statistics on
mother's and father's education and place of birth are reported only for the subset of children for whom the mother or father is present. Tract-
level characteristics are calculated based on the first non-missing parental tract. Poverty rate and share white are calculated using publicly
available Census 2000 data at the tract level. All other tract-level characteristics are calculated in the Census microdata. We report sample
sizes both for variables measured in the full sample and those measured using the 2005-2015 ACS or Census 2000 Long Form data. See
Section III.B and Online Appendices C-D for variable definitions and data sources. All statistics cleared under Census DRB release authorization
CBDRB-FY18-195.
                                           Online Appendix Table X
                                  Relative Mobility by Race and Birth Cohort
 Child Birth        White               Black             Asian            Hispanic          American Indian
  Cohort             (1)                 (2)                (3)               (4)                  (5)
    1978            0.322               0.254              0.198              0.249               0.289
    1979            0.326               0.256              0.193              0.250               0.280
    1980            0.327               0.255              0.189              0.247               0.291
    1981            0.328               0.259              0.187              0.244               0.307
    1982            0.328               0.254              0.180              0.240               0.303
    1983            0.329               0.252              0.174              0.240               0.316

Notes : This table presents estimates of relative mobility (β r) by race, separately for each birth cohort of
children in our primary analysis sample. We estimate these slopes using OLS regressions of children's
household income ranks on their parents' household income ranks, separately by cohort-race cell, and report
the coefficient on parent rank in each regression. All statistics cleared under Census DRB release authorization
CBDRB-FY18-195.
                                                                       Online Appendix Table XI
                  Correlations between Predicted Individual Income Ranks of Black vs. White Males and Neighborhood Characteristics, by Parent Income
                                                     Parents at 25th Percentile of National Distribution        Parents at 75th Percentile of National Distribution
                                                    White Male           Black Male         White - Black       White Male           Black Male        White - Black

A. Observable Measures of Neighborhood Quality
Economy
Share in Poverty (2000)                                  -0.446              -0.375              -0.138                 -0.313              -0.252               0.048
                                                        (0.004)             (0.006)             (0.006)                (0.004)             (0.006)             (0.006)
Mean Household Income (2000)                              0.522               0.391               0.216                  0.425               0.266               0.001
                                                        (0.004)             (0.006)             (0.006)                (0.004)             (0.006)             (0.006)
Employment Rate                                           0.145               0.219               0.029                  0.119               0.122              -0.053
                                                        (0.005)             (0.007)             (0.007)                (0.005)             (0.007)             (0.007)
Share Working in Manufacturing (2010)                    -0.170              -0.083              -0.115                 -0.076              -0.055              -0.017
                                                        (0.004)             (0.006)             (0.006)                (0.004)             (0.006)             (0.006)
Family Structure
Share Single Parents (2000)                              -0.502              -0.400              -0.145                 -0.436              -0.270               0.057
                                                        (0.004)             (0.006)             (0.006)                (0.004)             (0.006)             (0.006)
Share Married (2000)                                      0.304               0.368               0.044                  0.242               0.251              -0.088
                                                        (0.004)             (0.006)             (0.006)                (0.004)             (0.006)             (0.006)
School
3rd Grade Math Score (2013)                               0.259               0.193              -0.009                  0.299               0.178              -0.063
                                                        (0.004)             (0.006)             (0.006)                (0.004)             (0.006)             (0.006)
8th Grade Math Score (2013)                               0.346               0.184               0.082                  0.340               0.171              -0.026
                                                        (0.004)             (0.006)             (0.007)                (0.004)             (0.006)             (0.007)
HS Suspension Rate (2013)                                -0.227              -0.078              -0.133                 -0.170              -0.071              -0.001
                                                        (0.004)             (0.006)             (0.007)                (0.004)             (0.006)             (0.007)
Average ELA Score (2013)                                  0.290               0.213               0.014                  0.327               0.178              -0.049
                                                        (0.004)             (0.006)             (0.006)                (0.004)             (0.006)             (0.006)
Educational Attainment
Share Less Than HS Educated (2000)                       -0.506              -0.332              -0.195                 -0.347              -0.249              0.017
                                                        (0.004)             (0.006)             (0.006)                (0.004)             (0.006)             (0.006)
Share College Educated (2000)                             0.482               0.315               0.238                  0.371               0.251              0.012
                                                        (0.004)             (0.006)             (0.006)                (0.004)             (0.006)             (0.006)
Housing
Share who Own Home (2010)                                0.301               0.271               0.049                  0.285               0.212               -0.064
                                                        (0.004)             (0.006)             (0.006)                (0.004)             (0.006)             (0.006)
Median 2 Bedroom Rent (2015)                             0.353               0.246               0.198                  0.236               0.114                0.039
                                                        (0.004)             (0.006)             (0.007)                (0.004)             (0.007)             (0.007)
Healthcare Access
Share Adults Insured (2008-2012)                         0.407               0.188               0.133                  0.439               0.216               -0.016
                                                        (0.004)             (0.006)             (0.006)                (0.004)             (0.006)             (0.006)
B. Race-Specific Measures
Economy
Share Black in Poverty (2000)                            -0.199              -0.321              -0.032                 -0.106              -0.175              0.033
                                                        (0.005)             (0.006)             (0.006)                (0.005)             (0.006)             (0.006)
Share White in Poverty (2000)                            -0.428              -0.202              -0.138                 -0.304              -0.167              0.029
                                                        (0.004)             (0.006)             (0.006)                (0.004)             (0.006)             (0.006)
Family Structure
Black Father Presence (p25)                               0.032               0.193              -0.096                  0.018               0.121              -0.078
                                                        (0.005)             (0.006)             (0.006)                (0.005)             (0.006)             (0.006)
White Father Presence (p25)                               0.119               0.133              -0.064                  0.152               0.084              -0.030
                                                        (0.004)             (0.006)             (0.006)                (0.004)             (0.006)             (0.006)
Black Mother Presence (p25)                              -0.017              -0.031              -0.023                 -0.035              -0.003              -0.022
                                                        (0.005)             (0.006)             (0.006)                (0.005)             (0.006)             (0.006)
White Mother Presence (p25)                               0.132               0.081               0.067                  0.084               0.063              -0.024
                                                        (0.004)             (0.006)             (0.006)                (0.004)             (0.006)             (0.006)
Housing
Median Home Value Black (2000)                           0.362               0.266               0.184                  0.269               0.145               0.027
                                                        (0.004)             (0.006)             (0.006)                (0.005)             (0.006)             (0.007)
Median Home Value White (2000)                           0.413               0.203               0.213                  0.313               0.139               0.038
                                                        (0.004)             (0.006)             (0.006)                (0.004)             (0.006)             (0.006)
Racial Bias
IAT Score for Black                                       0.074               0.062               0.120                  0.078              -0.060               0.101
                                                        (0.021)             (0.027)             (0.027)                (0.021)             (0.027)             (0.027)
IAT Score for White                                      -0.105              -0.038              -0.164                 -0.004               0.079              -0.149
                                                        (0.018)             (0.027)             (0.026)                (0.018)             (0.027)             (0.026)
IAT Score White - Black                                  -0.100              -0.073              -0.193                 -0.075               0.094              -0.169
                                                        (0.021)             (0.027)             (0.026)                (0.021)             (0.027)             (0.026)
Interracial Marriage Attitudes                           -0.612              -0.050              -0.673                 -0.396               0.271              -0.643
                                                        (0.121)             (0.154)             (0.114)                (0.140)             (0.149)             (0.118)
Racial Animus Index                                      -0.352              -0.229              -0.105                 -0.114              -0.102               -0.01
                                                        (0.067)             (0.074)             (0.075)                (0.072)             (0.075)             (0.076)
Healthcare Access
Share Adults Insured Black (2008-2012)                   0.123               0.143               0.060                  0.109               0.135               -0.018
                                                        (0.004)             (0.006)             (0.006)                (0.004)             (0.006)             (0.006)
Share Adults Insured White (2008-2012)                   0.442               0.131               0.179                  0.456               0.129                0.014
                                                        (0.004)             (0.006)             (0.006)                (0.004)             (0.006)             (0.006)
C. Demographic Characteristics
Population Density (2000)                                 0.073               0.079               0.097                  0.049              -0.064               0.074
                                                        (0.004)             (0.006)             (0.006)                (0.004)             (0.006)             (0.006)
Share Black (2010)                                       -0.265              -0.121              -0.216                 -0.222              -0.120               0.016
                                                        (0.004)             (0.006)             (0.006)                (0.004)             (0.006)             (0.006)
Share of Population Younger than 18 (2000)               -0.002              -0.171              -0.091                  0.043              -0.111              -0.021
                                                        (0.004)             (0.006)             (0.006)                (0.004)             (0.006)             (0.006)
Share Foreign Born (2000)                                 0.134               0.182               0.134                  0.057              -0.016               0.064
                                                        (0.004)             (0.006)             (0.006)                (0.004)             (0.006)             (0.006)
Share Divorced (2000)                                    -0.450              -0.236              -0.089                 -0.464              -0.174               0.014
                                                        (0.004)             (0.006)             (0.006)                (0.004)             (0.006)             (0.006)
Notes : This table presents correlations between various neighborhood characteristics and the predicted income ranks of black and white men as well as the black-white
gap, conditional on having parents at either the 25th or 75th percentiles of the national income distribution. To construct predicted income ranks for a given race-gender
group in tract c , we first regress children’s individual income ranks on a constant and parent income rank, weighting by the number of years that each child is observed
below age 23 in tract c . We then calculate the predicted values from this regression at the 25th and 75th percentiles of the parental income distribution. Neighborhood
characteristics are obtained from the 2000 Census and other sources; see Online Appendix D for definitions and details. All correlations are estimated at the Census tract
level aside from the racial bias measures, which are estimated at the county (IAT), media market (Racial Animus), or state (Interracial Marriage Attitudes) level.
Correlations for black (white) males are estimated on the set of tracts with more than 20 black (white) men in the estimation sample; we restrict to tracts with at least 20
black and white men when estimating correlations with the black-white gap. All correlations are weighted by the precision of the predicted income rank estimates. Tract-
level correlations are adjusted for attenuation bias due to sampling error in the upward mobility estimates by inflating the raw correlations by the square root of the
reliability of the predicted income rank estimates. For non-tract level covariates (racial bias), we present raw correlations. Standard errors are listed below each
correlation in parentheses. All statistics cleared under Census DRB release authorization CBDRB-FY18-195.
                                                                       Online Appendix Table XII
              Correlations between Predicted Individual Income Ranks of Black vs. White Males and Neighborhood Characteristics, Among Low-Poverty Areas
                                                    Parents at 25th Percentile of National Distribution         Parents at 75th Percentile of National Distribution
Covariate                                          White Male           Black Male         White - Black       White Male           Black Male         White - Black

A. Observable Measures of Neighborhood Quality
Economy
Share in Poverty (2000)                                 -0.362               -0.216               -0.072                 -0.324               -0.177              0.019
                                                       (0.005)              (0.010)              (0.010)                (0.005)              (0.010)             (0.010)
Mean Household Income (2000)                            0.461                0.237                0.170                  0.435                0.196               0.039
                                                       (0.005)              (0.010)              (0.010)                (0.005)              (0.010)             (0.010)
Employment Rate                                         0.026                0.008                -0.002                 0.091                0.014               -0.022
                                                       (0.006)              (0.012)              (0.012)                (0.006)              (0.012)             (0.012)
Share Working in Manufacturing (2010)                   -0.148               -0.172               -0.009                 -0.066               -0.080              0.005
                                                       (0.005)              (0.010)              (0.010)                (0.005)              (0.010)             (0.010)
Family Structure
Share Single Parents (2000)                             -0.407               -0.156               -0.045                 -0.439               -0.173              0.034
                                                       (0.005)              (0.010)              (0.010)                (0.005)              (0.010)             (0.010)
Share Married (2000)                                    0.123                0.090                -0.063                 0.169                0.145               -0.084
                                                       (0.005)              (0.010)              (0.010)                (0.005)              (0.010)             (0.010)
School
3rd Grade Math Score (2013)                             0.219                0.087                -0.008                 0.309                0.144               -0.049
                                                       (0.005)              (0.010)              (0.010)                (0.005)              (0.010)             (0.010)
8th Grade Math Score (2013)                             0.300                0.104                0.072                  0.352                0.141               -0.008
                                                       (0.005)              (0.010)              (0.010)                (0.005)              (0.010)             (0.010)
HS Suspension Rate (2013)                               -0.188               -0.047               -0.099                 -0.154               -0.082              0.016
                                                       (0.006)              (0.010)              (0.010)                (0.006)              (0.010)             (0.010)
Average ELA Score (2013)                                0.246                0.120                0.010                  0.344                0.145               -0.036
                                                       (0.005)              (0.010)              (0.010)                (0.005)              (0.010)             (0.010)
Educational Attainment
Share Less Than HS Educated (2000)                      -0.427               -0.173               -0.132                 -0.312               -0.146              -0.008
                                                       (0.005)              (0.010)              (0.010)                (0.005)              (0.010)             (0.010)
Share College Educated (2000)                           0.434                0.183                0.181                  0.373                0.176                0.04
                                                       (0.005)              (0.010)              (0.010)                (0.005)              (0.010)             (0.010)
Housing
Share who Own Home (2010)                               0.166                0.039                0.025                  0.239                0.094               -0.028
                                                       (0.005)              (0.010)              (0.010)                (0.005)              (0.010)             (0.010)
Median 2 Bedroom Rent (2015)                            0.341                0.284                0.111                  0.253                0.102               0.046
                                                       (0.006)              (0.011)              (0.011)                (0.006)              (0.011)             (0.011)
Healthcare Access
Share Adults Insured (2008-2012)                        0.368                0.104                0.110                  0.465                0.178               -0.013
                                                       (0.005)              (0.010)              (0.010)                (0.005)              (0.010)             (0.010)
B. Race-Specific
Economy
Share White in Poverty (2000)                           -0.314               -0.056               -0.117                 -0.264               -0.074              -0.022
                                                       (0.005)              (0.010)              (0.010)                (0.005)              (0.010)             (0.010)
Share Black in Poverty (2000)                           -0.075               -0.161               0.037                  -0.051               -0.056              0.011
                                                       (0.006)              (0.010)              (0.010)                (0.006)              (0.010)             (0.010)
Family Structure
Black Father Presence (p25)                             -0.015               0.103                -0.134                 -0.009               0.094               -0.087
                                                       (0.008)              (0.010)              (0.010)                (0.008)              (0.010)             (0.010)
White Father Presence (p25)                             0.116                0.036                -0.082                 0.151                0.041               -0.015
                                                       (0.005)              (0.010)              (0.010)                (0.005)              (0.010)             (0.010)
Black Mother Presence (p25)                             -0.027               -0.003               -0.061                 -0.040               -0.016              -0.019
                                                       (0.008)              (0.010)              (0.010)                (0.008)              (0.010)             (0.010)
White Mother Presence (p25)                             0.102                0.045                -0.001                 0.078                0.025               -0.021
                                                       (0.005)              (0.010)              (0.010)                (0.005)              (0.010)             (0.010)
Housing
Median Home Value Black (2000)                          0.323                0.175                0.133                  0.270                0.120               0.035
                                                       (0.006)              (0.010)              (0.010)                (0.006)              (0.010)             (0.010)
Median Home Value White (2000)                          0.379                0.140                0.165                  0.327                0.118               0.054
                                                       (0.005)              (0.010)              (0.010)                (0.005)              (0.010)             (0.010)
Racial Bias
IAT Score for Black                                     0.073                0.090                0.084                  0.094                0.022               0.101
                                                       (0.039)              (0.054)              (0.054)                (0.039)              (0.054)             (0.054)
IAT Score for White                                     -0.092               -0.172               0.063                  0.012                -0.134              0.071
                                                       (0.034)              (0.054)              (0.054)                (0.034)              (0.054)             (0.054)
IAT Score White - Black                                 -0.093               -0.181               -0.035                 -0.084               -0.100              -0.045
                                                       (0.039)              (0.053)              (0.054)                (0.039)              (0.054)             (0.054)
Interracial Marriage Attitudes                          -0.428               -0.329               0.214                  -0.298               -0.472              0.353
                                                       (0.251)              (0.273)              (0.282)                (0.265)              (0.254)             (0.270)
Racial Animus Index                                     -0.718               -0.679               0.209                  -0.469               -0.520              0.400
                                                       (0.132)              (0.144)              (0.192)                (0.167)              (0.167)             (0.180)
Healthcare Access
Share Adults Insured Black (2008-2012)                  0.088                0.125                0.013                  0.093                0.113               -0.027
                                                       (0.006)              (0.010)              (0.010)                (0.006)              (0.010)             (0.010)
Share Adults Insured White (2008-2012)                  0.410                0.116                0.130                  0.486                0.130               0.019
                                                       (0.005)              (0.010)              (0.010)                (0.005)              (0.010)             (0.010)
C. Demographic Characteristics
Population Density (2000)                               0.169                0.131                0.106                  0.095                -0.022              0.076
                                                       (0.005)              (0.010)              (0.010)                (0.005)              (0.010)             (0.010)
Share Black (2010)                                      -0.169               0.044                -0.151                 -0.211               -0.107              0.065
                                                       (0.005)              (0.010)              (0.010)                (0.005)              (0.010)             (0.010)
Share of Population Younger than 18 (2000)              0.105                0.073                -0.096                 0.073                0.023               -0.051
                                                       (0.005)              (0.010)              (0.010)                (0.005)              (0.010)             (0.010)
Share Foreign Born (2000)                               0.239                0.236                0.099                  0.141                0.032               0.067
                                                       (0.005)              (0.010)              (0.010)                (0.005)              (0.010)             (0.010)
Share Divorced (2000)                                   -0.392               -0.186               -0.027                 -0.473               -0.187              0.020
                                                       (0.005)              (0.010)              (0.010)                (0.005)              (0.010)             (0.010)
Notes : This table replicates Online Appendix Table XI, restricting the sample to places with fewer than 10% of residents below the federal poverty line in the 2000 Census.
For variables that are not constructed at the tract level (racial bias), we restrict to counties, states, or media markets with fewer than 10% of residents below the poverty
line by aggregating up tract level shares using population weights. See notes to Online Appendix Table XI for details on the construction of this table. All statistics cleared
under Census DRB release authorization CBDRB-FY18-195.
                                                                               Online Appendix Table XIII
                          Correlations between Predicted Individual Income Ranks of Black vs. White Females and Neighborhood Characteristics, by Parent Income
                                                            Parents at 25th Percentile of National Distribution             Parents at 75th Percentile of National Distribution
Covariate                                                 White Female        Black Female           White - Black        White Female           Black Female       White - Black

A. Observable Measures of Neighborhood Quality
Economy
Share in Poverty (2000)                                      -0.427               -0.377                -0.101                   -0.321                 -0.263                0.070
                                                             (0.004)              (0.006)               (0.006)                  (0.004)               (0.006)               (0.006)
Mean Household Income (2000)                                  0.581                0.474                 0.196                    0.493                 0.360                -0.051
                                                             (0.003)              (0.005)               (0.006)                  (0.004)               (0.006)               (0.006)
Employment Rate                                               0.060                0.130                 0.074                    0.041                 0.081                 0.007
                                                             (0.005)              (0.007)               (0.007)                  (0.005)               (0.007)               (0.007)
Share Working in Manufacturing (2010)                        -0.242               -0.270                -0.089                   -0.172                 -0.210                0.059
                                                             (0.004)              (0.006)               (0.006)                  (0.004)               (0.006)               (0.006)
Family Structure
Share Single Parents (2000)                                  -0.326               -0.207                 -0.116                   -0.286                -0.218                0.070
                                                             (0.004)              (0.006)               (0.006)                  (0.004)               (0.006)               (0.006)
Share Married (2000)                                          0.097                0.134                 -0.004                   0.063                 0.158                -0.095
                                                             (0.004)              (0.006)               (0.006)                  (0.004)               (0.006)               (0.006)
School
3rd Grade Math Score (2013)                                   0.236                0.141                 0.056                    0.294                 0.178                 -0.051
                                                             (0.004)              (0.006)               (0.006)                  (0.004)               (0.006)               (0.006)
8th Grade Math Score (2013)                                   0.324                0.170                 0.110                    0.333                 0.185                -0.053
                                                             (0.004)              (0.006)               (0.007)                  (0.004)               (0.006)               (0.007)
HS Suspension Rate (2013)                                    -0.189               -0.079                -0.129                   -0.132                -0.069                -0.009
                                                             (0.004)              (0.006)               (0.007)                  (0.004)               (0.006)               (0.007)
Average ELA Score (2013)                                      0.297                0.160                 0.083                    0.361                 0.189                -0.042
                                                             (0.004)              (0.006)               (0.006)                  (0.004)               (0.006)               (0.006)
Educational Attainment
Share Less Than HS Educated (2000)                           -0.510               -0.351                -0.155                   -0.382                -0.269                 0.053
                                                             (0.004)              (0.006)               (0.006)                  (0.004)               (0.006)               (0.006)
Share College Educated (2000)                                 0.608                0.369                 0.292                    0.527                 0.341                -0.004
                                                             (0.003)              (0.006)               (0.006)                  (0.003)               (0.006)               (0.006)
Housing
Share who Own Home (2010)                                     0.149                0.108                -0.016                    0.168                 0.164                 -0.060
                                                             (0.004)              (0.006)               (0.006)                  (0.004)               (0.006)               (0.006)
Median 2 Bedroom Rent (2015)                                  0.551                0.533                 0.206                    0.436                 0.302                 -0.006
                                                             (0.004)              (0.006)               (0.007)                  (0.004)               (0.006)               (0.007)
Healthcare Access
Share Adults Insured (2008-2012)                              0.388                0.238                 0.081                    0.475                 0.230                 0.008
                                                             (0.004)              (0.006)               (0.006)                  (0.004)               (0.006)               (0.006)
B. Race-Specific Measures
Economy
Share Black in Poverty (2000)                                -0.222               -0.449                 0.005                    -0.143                -0.274                0.102
                                                             (0.004)              (0.006)               (0.006)                  (0.005)               (0.006)               (0.006)
Share White in Poverty (2000)                                -0.422               -0.128                -0.118                   -0.352                -0.141                 0.027
                                                             (0.004)              (0.006)               (0.006)                  (0.004)               (0.006)               (0.006)
Family Structure
Black Father Presence (p25)                                  -0.121               -0.190                -0.037                   -0.072                 -0.023               -0.024
                                                             (0.005)              (0.006)               (0.006)                  (0.005)               (0.006)               (0.006)
White Father Presence (p25)                                  -0.129               -0.134                -0.105                   -0.110                 -0.007               -0.020
                                                             (0.004)              (0.006)               (0.006)                  (0.004)               (0.006)               (0.006)
Black Mother Presence (p25)                                   0.028                0.126                -0.064                   -0.015                 0.025                -0.058
                                                             (0.005)              (0.006)               (0.006)                  (0.005)               (0.006)               (0.006)
White Mother Presence (p25)                                   0.020               -0.010                 0.026                   -0.030                 0.003                -0.026
                                                             (0.004)              (0.006)               (0.006)                  (0.004)               (0.006)               (0.006)
Housing
Median Home Value Black (2000)                                0.456                0.481                 0.186                    0.350                 0.320                -0.031
                                                             (0.004)              (0.006)               (0.006)                  (0.004)               (0.006)               (0.007)
Median Home Value White (2000)                                0.540                0.345                 0.254                    0.433                 0.260                 0.026
                                                             (0.003)              (0.006)               (0.006)                  (0.004)               (0.006)               (0.006)
Racial Bias
IAT Score for Black                                           0.061                0.223                 0.174                    0.060                 0.101                 0.119
                                                             (0.021)              (0.026)               (0.026)                  (0.021)               (0.027)               (0.027)
IAT Score for White                                          -0.055               -0.283                 -0.161                   0.062                 -0.203               -0.054
                                                             (0.018)              (0.026)               (0.026)                  (0.018)               (0.026)               (0.027)
IAT Score White - Black                                      -0.074               -0.346                 -0.235                   -0.038                -0.202                -0.127
                                                             (0.021)              (0.025)               (0.026)                  (0.021)               (0.026)               (0.027)
Interracial Marriage Attitudes                               -0.604               -0.584                 -0.577                   -0.306                -0.366                -0.480
                                                             (0.122)              (0.125)               (0.126)                  (0.145)               (0.144)               (0.135)
Racial Animus Index                                          -0.206               -0.373                 -0.062                   0.075                 -0.367                0.181
                                                             (0.070)              (0.071)               (0.076)                  (0.072)               (0.071)               (0.075)
Healthcare Access
Share Adults Insured Black (2008-2012)                        0.126                0.241                 0.008                    0.133                 0.175                -0.031
                                                             (0.004)              (0.006)               (0.006)                  (0.004)               (0.006)               (0.006)
Share Adults Insured White (2008-2012)                        0.450                0.168                 0.162                    0.502                 0.161                 0.024
                                                             (0.004)              (0.006)               (0.006)                  (0.004)               (0.006)               (0.006)
C. Demographic Characteristics

Population Density (2000)                                     0.231                0.301                 0.158                    0.160                 0.070                 0.065
                                                             (0.004)              (0.006)               (0.006)                  (0.004)               (0.006)               (0.006)
Share Black (2010)                                           -0.185               -0.008                 -0.242                  -0.135                 -0.047               -0.039
                                                             (0.004)              (0.006)               (0.006)                  (0.004)               (0.006)               (0.006)
Share of Population Younger than 18 (2000)                   -0.189               -0.119                 -0.195                  -0.263                 -0.111               -0.120
                                                             (0.004)              (0.006)               (0.006)                  (0.004)               (0.006)               (0.006)
Share Foreign Born (2000)                                     0.337                0.383                 0.198                    0.215                 0.171                 0.013
                                                             (0.004)              (0.006)               (0.006)                  (0.004)               (0.006)               (0.006)
Share Divorced (2000)                                        -0.314               -0.187                 -0.087                  -0.326                 -0.213                0.020
                                                             (0.004)              (0.006)               (0.006)                  (0.004)               (0.006)               (0.006)
Notes : This table replicates Online Appendix Table XI for female children instead of male children. See notes to Online Appendix Table XI for details. All statistics cleared under Census
DRB release authorization CBDRB-FY18-195.
                                   Online Appendix Table XIV
   Association Between Racial Bias and Black Men's Employment and Incarceration Rates: OLS
                                     Regression Estimates

Dependent Variable:                   Employment        Incarceration      Employment       Incarceration

                                            (1)               (2)               (3)               (4)

Difference in IAT                        -0.0052            0.0039
                                         (0.0022)          (0.0032)
Racial Animus Index                                                          -0.0138            0.0278
                                                                             (0.0057)          (0.0092)

                                                                             Media             Media
Unit of Analysis                        Counties           Counties
                                                                             Markets           Markets
Number of Counties/Media
                                           340                312               28                26
Markets
Notes : This table replicates Table III, using employment and incarceration rates for black men with parents
at the 25th percentile as the dependent variable. Columns 1 and 2 replicate Column 1 of Table III, replacing
the dependent variable with predicted employment and incarceration rates given parents at the 25th
percentile instead of individual income ranks. Columns 3 and 4 use the same dependent variables
(aggregated to the media market level) as columns 1 and 2. See notes to Table III for further details. All
statistics cleared under Census DRB release authorization CBDRB-FY18-195.
                                                                                Online Appendix Table XV
                                                Quasi-Experimental Estimates of Childhood Exposure Effects for Black vs. White Men
                                             Exposure Effects Using Baseline Specification                                   Exposure Effects Using Other Race Placebos
            Outcome:             Individual Income at 30    Incarcerated in 2010     Married at Age 30          Individual Income at 30    Incarcerated in 2010    Married at Age 30

                                   Black        White        Black       White       Black      White            Black        White         Black       White       Black      White
            Sample:
                                   Males        Males        Males       Males       Males      Males            Males        Males         Males       Males       Males      Males
                                    (1)          (2)           (3)        (4)          (5)       (6)              (7)           (8)          (9)         (10)        (11)       (12)

Under-23 Own-Race Coeff.          -0.027       -0.027       -0.034      -0.027       -0.023    -0.022           -0.029        -0.023       -0.032      -0.031      -0.017      -0.021
(Annual Exposure Effect)          (0.004)      (0.002)      (0.004)     (0.003)      (0.004)   (0.001)          (0.004)       (0.002)      (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.002)

Placebos:
                                                                                                                 0.003        -0.004       -0.018       0.001       -0.015     -0.002
Under-23 Other-Race Placebo
                                                                                                                (0.004)       (0.001)      (0.014)     (0.001)     (0.003)     (0.002)

                                   0.008       -0.016       -0.030      -0.010        0.018     0.004            0.015        -0.025       -0.032       0.020       0.005      -0.005
Over-23 Own-Race Placebo
                                  (0.025)      (0.011)      (0.027)     (0.023)      (0.029)   (0.010)          (0.029)       (0.015)      (0.030)     (0.033)     (0.030)     (0.015)

                                                                                                                -0.013         0.005        0.012       0.004       0.034      -0.007
Over-23 Other-Race Placebo
                                                                                                                (0.028)       (0.010)      (0.099)     (0.007)     (0.023)     (0.011)

Num. of Obs.                     150,000       884,000      123,000     712,000     150,000    884,000          150,000      668,000       122,000     460,000     150,000    666,000

Notes : This table presents OLS regression estimates of annual childhood exposure effects for different outcome variables by analyzing individuals who move across CZs in
childhood. These effects are estimated using specifications analogous to equation (7), replacing the non-parametric indicators for age at move in the final term with a two-piece
linear spline above and below age 23; see Online Appendix G for the resulting estimating equation. Columns 1 and 2 use individual income ranks at age 30 as the dependent
variable. In these columns, the own-race coefficients can be interpreted as how children's outcomes change when they move one year later in childhood (before age 23) to a CZ
with a 1 percentile higher predicted individual income rank in adulthood for children of the same race, gender, and parental income level. Predicted income ranks are estimated
using the outcomes of children in the same race-gender subgroup and parental income level, excluding one-time movers. The own race coefficient is equivalent to the annual
childhood exposure effect with the opposite sign. The over-23 own-race placebo coefficients show how children's outcomes change when their parents move one year later to a CZ
with a 1 percentile higher predicted income rank after the child turns 23. The estimation sample in Columns 1 and 2 consists of male children born between 1978-1985 whose
parents move exactly once across CZs in our sample window. Column 1 considers black men; column 2 considers white men. Columns 3 and 4 replicate columns 1 and 2, changing
the dependent variable to an indicator for being incarcerated on April 1, 2010 and the key independent variables to predicted incarceration rates instead of predicted income ranks.
The estimation sample in these panels consists of male children born between 1978-1986. Columns 5 and 6 replicate columns 1 and 2, changing the dependent variable to an
indicator for being married at age 30 and the key independent variables to predicted marriage rates. Columns 7-12 replicate Columns 1-6, adding predicted outcomes for the other
race (whites or blacks) in addition to the own-race predictions in a parallel manner. These coefficients can be interpreted as how children's outcomes change when they move one
year later (either before or after age 23) to a CZ with 1 unit higher predicted outcomes for children of the other race, controlling for the predicted outcomes of children of their own
race. Observation counts are rounded as described in the notes to Table I. See Online Appendix G for further details on the estimation sample, variable definitions, and regression
specifications. All statistics cleared under Census DRB release authorization CBDRB-FY18-195.
                                                          Online Appendix Table XVI
                     Tracts With Highest, Average, and Lowest Rates of Upward Mobility for Black Men: Illustrative Examples

Tract FIPS code     CZ Name             Neighborhood Name                                 Predicted Rank of    Fraction of Fathers Poverty Rate in
                                                                                           Black Men with       Present in Tract       Tract
                                                                                           Parents at p=25
A. Highest Upward Mobility Places
36047083800        New York             East Flatbush, Kings County                              46.1                 51.3%              6.1%
36081064600        New York             Laurelton, Queens County                                 46.7                 53.9%              4.4%
36081054200        New York             Queens Village, Queens County                            55.4                 56.2%              8.1%
51510200102        Washington DC        Alexandria West, Alexandria City County                  45.0                 53.4%              7.3%
24031704000        Washington DC        Silver Spring, Montgomery County                         50.1                 63.2%              4.7%

B. Average Places
13121006500         Atlanta             Capitol View, Fulton County                              38.1                 33.9%              24.5%
37119001400         Charlotte           North Charlotte, Mecklenburg County                      39.1                 37.8%              22.2%
48201231600         Houston             East Little York/Homestead, Harris County                37.6                 34.9%              23.3%
48201331300         Houston             Sunnyside, Harris County                                 37.3                 36.7%              20.7%
42101029000         Philadelphia        Olney, Philadelphia County                               38.4                 36.9%              19.8%

C. Lowest Upward Mobility Places
17031680600       Chicago               Englewood, Cook County                                   32.3                 23.9%              48.4%
17031350400       Chicago               South Loop, Cook County                                  26.6                 19.8%              76.0%
39061026400       Cincinnati            West End, Hamilton County                                31.6                 20.5%              62.2%
26163512400       Detroit               Chandler Park, Wayne County                              30.5                 15.9%              41.3%
6037237101        Los Angeles           South Los Angeles, Los Angeles County                    32.5                 24.7%              42.1%
Notes: This table provides selected examples of the best, average, and worst Census tracts in terms of upward mobility and its key tract-level
correlates for black boys growing up in low-income (p=25) families using tract-level data reported in the Opportunity Atlas
(www.opportunityatlas.org). The highest upward mobility tracts listed in Panel A satisfy three criteria: (1) they are above the 90th percentile in
predicted individual income ranks for black boys with parents at p=25 (across all tracts with at least 50 black boys in the tract whose parents have
income below the national median, weighting by black population); (2) have a poverty rate below 10% in the 2000 Census; and (3) have more than
50% of black boys in families at p=25 who are raised with a father present (defined as in the notes to Table II). The poverty rate threshold
corresponds to approximately the 15th percentile of poverty rates across tracts with at least 50 black boys (weighting by black population); the
father presence threshold corresponds to around the 90th percentile of father presence for low-income black boys across the same set of tracts.
"Average" tracts in Panel B are between the 40th and 60th percentile in predicted income ranks, poverty rates, and father presence. The lowest
upward mobility tracts listed in Panel C are those with predicted income ranks below the 10th percentile, rates of father presence below the 10th
percentile, and poverty rates above the 85th percentile. There are many more tracts than the examples listed here that fall into each of these
three groups; a comprehensive list can be obtained from the tract-level Online Data Tables for the Opportunity Atlas at
www.opportunityinsights.org/data.
                                                          Online Appendix Table XVII
                        Correction for Imperfect Measurement of Wealth Using Data from the Survey of Consumer Finances
                                                                                       Men with Parents at 25th       Men with Parents at 75th
                                                                                             Percentile                     Percentile
                                                                                                 (1)                            (2)
A. Estimated Black-white gaps in income ranks and wealth
                                                  �𝑤𝑤 )
Black-white gap in child individual income rank ( 𝑏𝑏                                              9.1                            11.4
                                                  �𝑤𝑤 )
Black-white gap in child individual income rank ( 𝑏𝑏                                              8.4                            11.0
Black-white gap in household wealth, no wealth proxies ( 𝜆𝜆̃ 𝑤𝑤 )                                 9.2                            15.2
Black-white gap in household wealth, wealth controls ( 𝜆𝜆̂ 𝑤𝑤 )                                   3.3                            10.1

B. Black-white intergenerational income gap, controlling for total wealth
Black-white gap in child individual income rank ( 𝑏𝑏𝑤𝑤 )                                          8.0                            10.2

Notes: This table reports estimates of black-white intergenerational gaps for men controlling for total wealth rather than just the wealth proxies
observed in the ACS. To do so, we combine data from the SCF with the Census-tax-ACS data we use for our primary analysis, following the method
described in Online Appendix F. Panel A shows the black-white gap in household wealth (estimated using SCF data) and the black-white gap in
child individual income rank (estimated using Census and ACS data), the key inputs needed to compute the total-wealth-controlled estimates of
the intergenerational gap. The black-white gap is computed based on an OLS regression of an outcome variable (income or wealth rank) on the
indicator variable for being white, parental income, an interaction of the white indicator and parental income, and various additional controls. We
report the estimated black-white gap given a parental income rank of p =25 in Column 1 and p =75 in Column 2. The first row shows the black-
white gap in child individual income rank after controlling for parental education and marital status in addition to income. The second row
replicates the first, adding controls for the wealth proxies observed in the ACS-Census-tax records dataset: home ownership, monthly mortgage
payments, home value, and number of vehicles. The third row shows the black-white wealth gap, in ranks, among families with children in the SCF
data after controlling for education, marital status, income, and the interaction of an indicator variable for being white and income. The fourth
row replicates the third, adding controls for the proxies for wealth observed in the ACS-Census-tax records dataset. Panel B shows the wealth-
adjusted black-white gap that we obtain using these inputs by applying the formula in equation (15), which are the values plotted in the sixth set
of bars in Figure VIII.
             FIGURE I: Intergenerational Mobility and the Evolution of Racial Disparities
                                                                 A. Constant Relative and Absolute Mobility




                                 100
                                 80
                         Mean Child Rank                                   Steady State

                                    60

                                                   Gap in Gen. t+1 = 7.0
                                 51.8
                                 44.8
                          40




                                                                                 Gap in Gen. t
                                                                                   = 20.0
                                 20




                                                                                                                    Relative Mobility: β = 0.35
                                                       o                                                            Absolute Mobility: α = 32.5
                                                  45
                                 0




                                                                            35                   55
                                            0                   20               40                     60                 80                  100
                                                                                      Parent Rank

                                                 B. Constant Relative Mobility, Racial Differences in Absolute Mobility
                                   100
                                   80




                                                                                      Steady State
                                                                                       for Whites
                                                                                                                                    Whites
                                                                       Steady State
                          Mean Child Rank




                                                                        for Blacks
                                     60




                                                                                                                                    Blacks
                                                Intergen. Gap
                                                  ∆α = 10.0
                           40




                                                                                      Steady-State
                                                                                       Gap = 15.4
                                   20




                                                                                                         Relative Mobility: β b = β w = 0.35
                                                                                                         Absolute Mobility: α b = 27.5, α w = 37.5
                                                       o
                                                  45
                                   0




                                            0                   20               40   42.3       57.7   60                 80                  100
                                                                                      Parent Rank



Notes: These figures show how rates of intergenerational mobility determine the evolution of racial disparities under the
model in Section II. In Panel A, we assume that both black and white children have the same rates of relative and absolute
intergenerational mobility. The solid line plots children’s expected ranks conditional on their parents’ ranks. We assume this
line has a slope of 0.35, consistent with evidence from Chetty, Hendren, Kline, and Saez (2014). Since mean ranks are 50
(by definition) for both parents and children, this line must pass through (50, 50). The steady-state mean income rank for
both blacks and whites, depicted by the point where the solid line crosses the dashed 45 degree line, is therefore 50. The
figure illustrates convergence to this steady-state given mean ranks of 35 percentiles for black parents and 55 percentiles
for white parents in the initial generation, depicted by the vertical lines. In this case, white children have a mean rank of
51.8 percentiles and black children have a mean rank of 44.8 percentiles in the next generation, depicted by the horizontal
lines. The gap therefore falls from 20 percentiles to 7 percentiles in one generation. In Panel B, we assume that blacks and
whites have the same rates of relative mobility (β = 0.35), but absolute mobility is 10 percentiles lower for blacks than whites
(αw − αb = 10). Here, the steady-state for blacks is 42.3 percentiles, while the steady-state for whites is 57.7 percentiles; hence
the intergenerational gap of ∆α = 10 leads to a steady-state racial disparity of 15.4 percentiles.
        FIGURE II: Empirical Estimates of Intergenerational Mobility and Racial Disparities

                                                                                   A. Intergenerational Mobility and Steady States for Blacks vs. Whites




                                                     100 80
                           Mean Child Household Income Rank
                                                                                                                                                                     Diff. at p=100: 12.4


                                                60


                                                                                       Diff. at p=25: 12.6
                                      40




                                                                                                                                                           Diff. at p=75: 15.7
                            20




                                                                                                                         Steady-State
                                                                                                                          Gap = 19.2
                                                                                                                                             White (Int.: α w = 36.8; Slope: β w = 0.32)
                                                                                                                                             Black (Int.: α b = 25.4; Slope: β b = 0.28)
                                                     0




                                                                               0                 20               35.2
                                                                                                                    40        54.4 60                           80                   100
                                                                                                              Parent Household Income Rank



                                                                                   B. Current Mean Ranks vs. Predicted Ranks in Steady State, by Race
                             Empirically Observed Mean Household Income Rank




                                                                                                                                                   Asian (US Natives)
                                                                     60




                                                                                                                                                                          45 Degree Line
                                                                                                                                             White
                                           40          50




                                                                                                    American Indian                     Hispanic

                                                                                                 Black                                               Parents
                                                                                                                                                     Children (born 1978-83)
                             30




                                                                               30                            40                   50                                 60
                                                                                                                   Steady State Mean Rank

Notes: These figures show how empirical estimates of intergenerational mobility by race (Panel A) relate to the evolution
of racial disparities (Panel B) using the model in Section II. These figures use the primary analysis sample (children in the
1978-83 birth cohorts). Child income is the mean of 2014-2015 household income (when the child is between 31-37 years old),
while parent income is mean household income from 1994-1995 and 1998-2000. Children are assigned percentile ranks relative
to all other children in their birth cohort, while parents are ranked relative to all parents with children in the same birth
cohort. Panel A plots the mean household income rank of children by parent household income rank for black and white
children. The best-fit lines are estimated using an OLS regression on the binned series; the slopes (βr ) and intercepts (αr )
from these regressions are reported for each race. We also report white-black differences in mean child individual income rank
at the 25th, 75th, and 100th percentiles of the parent income distribution. Plugging the estimates of αr and βr into equation
                                                                    αb
(3) from our model, the steady-state mean rank for blacks is 1−β       b
                                                                         = 35.2 percentiles, while the steady-state for whites is
  αw
1−βw
       = 54.4 percentiles, resulting in a 19.2 percentile black-white gap in steady state. Panel B plots the empirically observed
mean parent and child household ranks by race against the predicted steady-state mean ranks for blacks, whites, and other
racial groups. Estimates for Asians are based on the subsample of children whose mothers were born in the United States,
as in Figure IIIb below. The circles show the unconditional mean income ranks for parents, while the diamonds show mean
ranks for children in our analysis sample.
                                                               FIGURE III: Intergenerational Mobility by Race
                                                        A. All Children                                                                                                                                                           B. Children with Mothers Born in the U.S.

                                          80                                                                                                                                                                             80
       Mean Child Household Income Rank




                                                                                                                                                                                      Mean Child Household Income Rank
                                          60                                                                                                                                                                             60




                                          40                                                                                                                                                                             40
                                                                                                                   Asian (Intercept: 51.43; Slope: 0.18)                                                                                                                       Asian (Intercept: 43.60; Slope: 0.23)
                                                                                                                   White (Intercept: 36.83; Slope: 0.32)                                                                                                                       White (Intercept: 37.50; Slope: 0.32)
                                                                                                                   Hispanic (Intercept: 36.14; Slope: 0.26)                                                                                                                    Hispanic (Intercept: 34.03; Slope: 0.28)
                                                                                                                   Black (Intercept: 25.43; Slope: 0.28)                                                                                                                       Black (Intercept: 25.31; Slope: 0.28)
                                                                                                                   American Indian (Intercept: 25.18; Slope: 0.31)                                                                                                             American Indian (Intercept: 25.43; Slope: 0.31)

                                          20                                                                                                                                                                             20
                                               0   20        40              60                                                     80                           100                                                          0                 20        40              60                    80                           100
                                                        Parent Household Income Rank                                                                                                                                                                 Parent Household Income Rank




                                                                                                                 C. Children with Mothers Born Outside the U.S.

                                                                                                        80
                                                                     Mean Child Household Income Rank




                                                                                                        60




                                                                                                        40

                                                                                                                                                                                                     Asian (Intercept: 53.70; Slope: 0.18)
                                                                                                                                                                                                     White (Intercept: 46.28; Slope: 0.21)
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Hispanic (Intercept: 39.51; Slope: 0.25)
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Black (Intercept: 36.15; Slope: 0.21)

                                                                                                        20
                                                                                                             0                    20                        40              60                                            80                 100
                                                                                                                                                       Parent Household Income Rank




Notes: Panel A replicates Figure IIa, including series for Hispanics, Asians, and American Indians. Panel B replicates Panel
A for children whose mothers were born in the United States. Panel C replicates Panel A for children whose mothers were
born outside the United States. Panels B and C are based on the subsample of children whose mothers appear in the 2000
Census long form or the 2005-2015 American Community Survey because information on parental birthplace is available only
for those individuals. Panel C excludes American Indians because of the small sample size of American Indian children with
mothers born outside the U.S. See notes to Figure II for further details.
               FIGURE IV: Black-White Gaps in Marriage Rates and Individual Income
                                                                                               A. Marriage Rates




                                                                         70
                        Percent of Children Married in 2015 (Ages 32-37)
                                                           50     60
                                                                                                                                   Diff. at p=75: 34.2
                                                    40



                                                                                         Diff. at p=25: 32.1
                             10      20     30




                                                                                                               White (Intercept: 39.25, Slope: 0.26)
                                                                                                               Black (Intercept: 8.03, Slope: 0.25)
                        0




                                                                              0   20             40            60                   80                   100
                                                                                          Parent Household Income Rank



                                                                                              B. Individual Income
                                                      80
                        Mean Child Individual Income Rank
                                                 60




                                                                                                                                Diff. at p=75: 5.6
                              40




                                                                                       Diff. at p=25: 4.2



                                                                                                               White (Intercept: 37.40, Slope: 0.27)
                                                                                                               Black (Intercept: 33.38, Slope: 0.26)
                                                      20




                                                                              0   20             40            60                   80                   100
                                                                                          Parent Household Income Rank




Notes: Panel A plots children’s marriage rates by parent income percentile for black and white children. A child’s marital
status is defined based on the marital status used when filing his or her 2015 tax return. Children in our sample are between
the ages of 32-37 at that point. Panel B plots the mean individual income rank of children vs. their parents’ household income
rank for black and white children. Individual income is defined as own W-2 wage earnings plus self-employment and other
non-wage income, which is Adjusted Gross Income minus total wages reported on form 1040 divided by the number of tax
filers (thereby splitting non-wage income equally for joint filers). We measure children’s individual incomes as their mean
annual incomes in 2014 and 2015. The intercepts, slopes, and best-fit lines are estimated using OLS regressions on the binned
series. We also report the white-black differences in outcomes at the 25th and 75th parent income percentiles. See notes to
Figure II for further details on sample and variable definitions.
                    FIGURE V: Black-White Gaps in Individual Income, by Gender
                                                                                   A. Males




                                          80
                       Mean Child Individual Income Rank
                                                60



                                                                                                                Diff. at p=75: 12.0
                             40




                                                                    Diff. at p=25: 9.7



                                                                                              White (Intercept: 41.36, Slope: 0.29)
                                                                                              Black (Intercept: 31.80, Slope: 0.27)
                                          20




                                                           0   20             40            60                     80                  100
                                                                       Parent Household Income Rank



                                                                                 B. Females
                                          80
                       Mean Child Individual Income Rank
                                                60




                                                                                                                 Diff. at p=75: -1.0
                             40




                                                                    Diff. at p=25: -1.4



                                                                                              White (Intercept: 33.30, Slope: 0.25)
                                                                                              Black (Intercept: 34.86, Slope: 0.25)
                                          20




                                                           0   20             40            60                     80                  100
                                                                       Parent Household Income Rank




Notes: These figures replicate Figure IVb separately for male (Panel A) and female children (Panel B). Individual income
ranks are computed within a child’s cohort pooling across race and gender. See notes to Figure IV for further details.
             FIGURE VI: Black-White Gaps in Wage Rates, Hours, and Employment, by Gender

                                                                    A. Wage Rank, Females                                                                                                              B. Wage Rank, Males
                                    80




                                                                                                                                                                      80
        Mean Child Wage Rank (Age >= 30)




                                                                                                                                          Mean Child Wage Rank (Age >= 30)
                              60




                                                                                                                                                                60
                                                                                                 Diff. at p=75: 1.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Diff. at p=75: 7.9
              40




                                                                                                                                                40
                                                                Diff. at p=25: 1.9
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Diff. at p=25: 6.4
                                                                                                                                 White                                                                                                                        White
                                                                                                                                 Black                                                                                                                        Black
                                    20




                                                                                                                                                                      20
                                                           0   20               40            60                  80                100                                                      0   20              40            60               80               100
                                                                         Parent Household Income Rank                                                                                                     Parent Household Income Rank


                                                                 C. Hours Worked, Females                                                                                                             D. Hours Worked, Males




                                                                                                                                                                      50
                                    50




                                                                                                                                          Weekly Hours Worked in ACS (Age >= 30)
        Weekly Hours Worked in ACS (Age >= 30)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Diff. at p=75: 8.1




                                                                                                                                                                         40
                                       40




                                                                                                           Diff. at p=75: -1.3




                                                                                                                                                                 30
                               30




                                                                 Diff. at p=25: -1.0
                                                                                                                                                       20
                     20




                                                                                                                                             10                                                   Diff. at p=25: 10.6
           10




                                                                                                                                 White                                                                                                                        White
                                                                                                                                 Black                                                                                                                        Black
                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                    0




                                                           0   20               40            60                  80                100                                                      0   20              40            60               80               100
                                                                         Parent Household Income Rank                                                                                                     Parent Household Income Rank


                                                               E. Employment Rates, Females                                                                                                      F. Employment Rates, Males
                                                     100




                                                                                                                                                                                       100
        Percent of Children Working in ACS (Age >= 30)




                                                                                                                                          Percent of Children Working in ACS (Age >= 30)
                                             90




                                                                                                                                                                               90




                                                                                                                                                                                                           Diff. at p=25: 18.9
                                   80




                                                                                                                                                                     80




                                                                                                          Diff. at p=75: -2.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Diff. at p=75: 11.4
                                                                           Diff. at p=25: -2.0
                          70




                                                                                                                                                            70
               60




                                                                                                                                                 60




                                                                                                                                 White                                                                                                                        White
                                                                                                                                 Black                                                                                                                        Black
                                    50




                                                                                                                                                                      50




                                                           0   20               40            60                  80                100                                                      0   20              40            60               80               100
                                                                         Parent Household Income Rank                                                                                                     Parent Household Income Rank


Notes: This figure shows the relationship between children’s employment outcomes and their parents’ household income, by
race and gender. All children’s outcomes in this figure are obtained from the American Community Survey and all panels
include only children observed in the 2005-15 ACS at age 30 or older. Panels A and B plot mean wage ranks vs. parental
household income percentile, by race and gender. Panels C and D replicate A and B using mean weekly hours of work as the
outcome, while Panels E and F use annual employment rates as the outcome. Wages are computed as self-reported annual
earnings divided by total hours of work; they are missing for those who do not work. We convert wages to percentile ranks
by ranking individuals relative to others in the same birth cohort who received the ACS survey in the same year. Hours of
work are defined as total annual hours of work divided by 51 and are coded as zero for those who do not work. Employment
is defined as having positive hours of work in the past 12 months. To protect confidentiality, bins in which there are fewer
than 10 children who are employed or not employed are suppressed in Panels E and F. In each figure, the best-fit lines are
estimated using OLS regressions on the binned series. We report white-black differences based on the best-fit lines at the 25th
and 75th parent income percentiles.
    FIGURE VII: Black-White Gaps in Educational Attainment and Incarceration, by Gender

                                                         100              A. High School Completion Rates, Females                                                                                                         B. High School Completion Rates, Males




                                                                                                                                                                                                          100
        Pct. of Children with High School Degree (Age >= 19)




                                                                                                                                                         Pct. of Children with High School Degree (Age >= 19)
                                                90




                                                                                                                                                                                                 90
                                                                                                                           Diff. at p=75: 1.5

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Diff. at p=75: 4.2
                                       80




                                                                                                                                                                                        80
                                                                                     Diff. at p=25: 3.5
                             70




                                                                                                                                                                              70
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Diff. at p=25: 8.3
                  60




                                                                                                                                                                   60
                                                                                                                                                White                                                                                                                                                        White
                                                                                                                                                Black                                                                                                                                                        Black
        50




                                                                                                                                                         50
                                                                      0         20               40            60                 80               100                                                                 0           20                   40            60                   80                   100
                                                                                          Parent Household Income Rank                                                                                                                           Parent Household Income Rank


                                                                            C. College Attendance Rates, Females                                                                                                             D. College Attendance Rates, Males
                                           100




                                                                                                                                                                                            100
        College Attendance Rate for Children (%)




                                                                                                                                                         College Attendance Rate for Children (%)
                                                                                                           Diff. at p=75: 3.6
                                       80




                                                                                                                                                                                        80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Diff. at p=75: 7.7
                          60




                                                                                                                                                                           60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Diff. at p=25: 6.5
                                                                                 Diff. at p=25: 2.8
              40




                                                                                                                                                               40




                                                                                                                                                White                                                                                                                                                        White
                                                                                                                                                Black                                                                                                                                                        Black
                                           20




                                                                                                                                                                                            20




                                                                      0         20               40            60                 80               100                                                                 0           20                   40            60                   80                   100
                                                                                          Parent Household Income Rank                                                                                                                           Parent Household Income Rank


                                                                                     E. Incarceration, Females                                                                                                                            F. Incarceration, Males
        Pct. of Children Incarcerated on April 1, 2010 (Ages 27-32)




                                                                                                                                                         Pct. of Children Incarcerated on April 1, 2010 (Ages 27-32)




                                                                                                                                                White                                                                                                                                                        White
                                                                                                                                                Black                                                                                                                                                        Black
                                                           20




                                                                                                                                                                                                            20
                                                15




                                                                                                                                                                                                 15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Diff. at p=25: -8.2
                                    10




                                                                                                                                                                                     10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Diff. at p=75: -3.2
                         5




                                                                                                                                                                          5
            0




                                                                                                                                                             0




                                                                      0         20               40            60                 80               100                                                                 0           20                   40            60                   80                   100
                                                                                          Parent Household Income Rank                                                                                                                           Parent Household Income Rank

Notes: Panels A-D show the relationship between children’s educational attainment and their parents’ household income, by
race and gender. Data on educational attainment is obtained from the American Community Survey. Panels A and B plot
the fraction of children who complete high school by parental income percentile, by race and gender. Panels C and D replicate
Panels A and B using college attendance as the outcome. Panels A-B include only children observed in the 2005-15 ACS at
age 19 or older, while Panels C-D include those observed at age 20 or older. High school completion is defined as having a
high school diploma or GED. College attendance is defined as having obtained “at least some college credit.” Panels E and
F plot incarceration rates vs. parent income percentile, by race and gender. Incarceration is defined as being incarcerated
on April 1, 2010 using data from the 2010 Census short form. The children in our sample are between the ages of 27-32 at
that point. The best-fit lines in Panels A-D are estimated using OLS regressions on the binned series. We report white-black
differences based on the best-fit lines (in Panels A-D) and based directly on the non-parametric estimates (in Panel F) at the
25th and 75th parent income percentiles. To protect confidentiality, bins in which there are fewer than 10 children who either
exhibit the outcome (e.g., college attendance) or do not exhibit the outcome are suppressed.
FIGURE VIII: Effects of Family- and Neighborhood-Level Factors on the Black-White Income Gap
                                                                                   A. Children with Parents at 25th Percentile



                                           20
          Mean Rank of White Minus Black



                                                17.6                                                                                                         Male
                                                                                                                                                             Female
                                           15

                                                             10.0
                                           10                                9.3                9.1
                                                                                                                8.4              8.0
                                                                                                                                               7.7
                                                                                                                                                            7.0
                                                       4.8
                                           5

                                                                    -2.0             -1.7              -1.9           -2.3              -2.5         -2.2         -2.7
                                           0


                                           -5
                                                 None        Par. Inc.       Par Inc.           Par Inc.        Par Inc.       Par Inc.        Par Inc.     Par Inc.
                                                                           +Mar. Status       +Mar. Status    +Mar. Status   +Mar. Status      +Tract       +Block
                                                                                                +Educ.          +Educ.         +Educ.
                                                                                                              +ACS Wealth    +Full Wealth
                                                                                                                Proxies        Control



                                                                                   B. Children with Parents at 75th Percentile



                                           20
          Mean Rank of White Minus Black




                                                17.6                                                                                                         Male
                                                                                                                                                             Female
                                           15
                                                             11.7            11.4               11.4           11.0              10.2
                                           10                                                                                                  8.9
                                                                                                                                                            7.9

                                                       4.8
                                           5

                                                                    -0.9             -0.7              -0.7           -1.2              -2.2         -1.7         -2.6
                                           0


                                           -5
                                                 None        Par. Inc.       Par Inc.           Par Inc.        Par Inc.       Par Inc.        Par Inc.     Par Inc.
                                                                           +Mar. Status       +Mar. Status    +Mar. Status   +Mar. Status      +Tract       +Block
                                                                                                +Educ.          +Educ.         +Educ.
                                                                                                              +ACS Wealth    +Full Wealth
                                                                                                                Proxies        Control




Notes: These figures show how the black-white gap in children’s individual income ranks changes as we control for family-
and neighborhood-level factors. The bars on the left in each pair report the black-white gap in individual income ranks for
boys, while the bars on the right report the same statistics for girls. The first set of bars shows the unconditional black-white
gap in mean individual income ranks. The second set of bars reports ∆p̄ , the intergenerational gap in mean income ranks
at percentile p̄ of the parental income distribution, estimated by regressing children’s income ranks on their parents’ ranks,
an indicator for being white, and the interaction of these two variables. Panel A reports estimates for p̄ = 25, while Panel B
reports estimates for p̄ = 75. The next three sets of bars report estimates of ∆p̄ as we include additional family-level controls in
the regression: parental marital status, education, and wealth proxies. Parental marital status is measured based on whether
the primary tax filer who first claims the child as a dependent is married. We control for parental education using indicator
variables for the highest level of education parents have completed using data from the ACS and the 2000 Census long form,
prioritizing information from the ACS if both sources are available. We define seven categories of parental education: no
school, less than high school, high school degree, college no degree, associate degree, bachelor degree and graduate degree.
We use the mother’s education if available; if not, we use the father’s education. We use indicators for home ownership and
the number of vehicles owned and linear controls for monthly mortgage payments and home value as wealth proxies. These
variables are also obtained from the 2000 Census long form and ACS, again prioritizing the mother’s data. The sixth set of
bars controls for total wealth (including the component not captured by the Census/ACS wealth proxies) by using information
from the SCF, following the method described in Online Appendix F. The seventh set of bars includes fixed effects for the
tract in which the child grew up (defined as the first non-missing tract of their parents). The eighth set of bars replicates the
seventh, replacing the Census tract fixed effects with Census block fixed effects. The estimates reported in the fourth, fifth
and sixth pairs of bars use the subsample for which the relevant controls are available from the 2000 Census and ACS, while
the other estimates use the full analysis sample.
           FIGURE IX: The Geography of Upward Mobility in the United States, by Race

                                      A. White Males with Parents at 25th Percentile




                                                                                                    Mean Individual
                                                                                                     Income Rank

                                                                                                        56.9 ($35k)
                                                                                                        54.6
                                                                                                        52.8
                                                                                                        50.9
                                                                                                        49.4
                                                                                                        48.1
                                      B. Black Males with Parents at 25th Percentile
                                                                                                        46.5
                                                                                                        45.1 ($25k)
                                                                                                        43.6
                                                                                                        41.6
                                                                                                        40.3
                                                                                                        39.2
                                                                                                        37.8
                                                                                                        36.5 ($17k)

                                                                                                        Insufficient
                                                                                                        Data




                                 These maps must be printed in color to be interpretable.

Notes: These figures present maps of upward mobility by commuting zone (CZ) for white male children (Panel A) and black
male children (Panel B). All figures are based on the same sample and income definitions as in Figure III. To construct upward
mobility for a given race-gender group in CZ c, we first regress children’s individual income ranks on a constant and parent
income rank, weighting by the number of years that each child is observed below age 23 in CZ c. We then define upward
mobility as the predicted value from this regression at the 25th percentile of the parental income distribution. The maps are
constructed by grouping the CZ-by-race observations into fifteen quantiles and coloring the areas so that green colors represent
higher levels of upward mobility, while red colors correspond to lower mobility. The two maps are on a single color scale to
permit comparisons across racial groups. Estimates for areas with fewer than 20 children in our analysis sample or fewer than
500 residents of the children’s racial group in the 2000 Census are omitted and are shaded with the cross-hatch pattern. The
dollar amounts shown in the legend represent the mean income (in 2015 dollars) corresponding to the relevant percentile for
children in the analysis sample in 2014-15, when they are between ages 31-37.
         FIGURE X: Correlations Between Upward Mobility and Tract-Level Characteristics

                      A. Correlations between Tract-Level Characteristics and Upward Mobility for Black vs. White Males




                              Economy
                                                                                   Share Above Poverty Line
                                                                                       Mean Household Income
                                                                                             Employment Rate




                                                               Schooling
                                                                                  Mean 3rd Grade Math Score
                                                                                  Mean 8th Grade Math Score

                                                    Attainment             Share HS Students Not Suspended
                           Healthcare Family Housing Educ.


                                                                                       Share High School Grad.
                                                                                           Share College Grad.


                                                                                            Median Rent (2BR)
                                                                                           Share Homeowners
                             Access Structure




                                                                                                Share Married
                                                                                             Share Two-Parent


                                                                                          Share Adults Insured

                                                                              White           Black              0           0.2                 0.4            0.6
                                                                                                                                   Correlation

                                                                            B. Black-White Intergenerational Gap for Men vs. Share Above Poverty Line
                                                                            8.5
                             White Minus Black Indiv. Income Rank

                                                             8
                                    Given Parents at p = 25
                              6.5        7         7.5




                                                                                                                                          Slope = 0.05 (0.01)
                                                                            6




                                                                                  50                  60           70             80             90               100
                                                                                                      Share Above Poverty Line in Tract in 2000 (%)


Notes: Panel A presents tract-level correlations between various characteristics and upward mobility for black men (hollow
circles) and white men (solid circles) with parents at the 25th percentile of the national income distribution. To construct
upward mobility for a given race-gender group in tract c, we first regress children’s individual income ranks on a constant
and parent income rank, weighting by the number of years that each child is observed below age 23 in tract c. We then
define upward mobility as the predicted value from this regression at the 25th percentile of the parental income distribution.
Tract-level characteristics are obtained from the 2000 Census and other sources; see Online Appendix D for definitions and
details. All characteristics are defined such that correlations with upward mobility are positive. Correlations for black (white)
males are estimated on the set of tracts with more than 20 black (white) men in the estimation sample and are weighted
by the precision of the upward mobility estimates. Correlations are adjusted for attenuation bias due to sampling error in
the upward mobility estimates by inflating the raw correlations by the square root of the reliability of the upward mobility
estimates. Panel B presents a binned scatter plot of the black-white gap in upward mobility (white minus black) for men with
parents at the 25th percentile vs. the share of residents in the tract in which they grew up who were above the poverty line in
the 2000 Census. To construct this figure, we first bin tracts into ventiles (20 groups) based on poverty rates, weighting each
tract by the number of black men in the analysis sample. We then plot the mean black-white gap vs. the mean share above
the poverty line within each bin. The sample for Panel B consists of all tracts with at least 20 white males and 20 black males
in our analysis sample.
  FIGURE XI: Correlations Between Black-White Gap for Men and Tract-Level Characteristics

                         Black Father Presence (p25)
                         White Father Presence (p25)
                                       Share Married
                     Share Black Above Poverty Line
                         Mean 3rd Grade Math Score
                                    Employment Rate
                         White Mother Presence (p25)
                          Share Black Insured (18-64)
                                  Share Homeowners
                                  Share Two Parents
                          Black Mother Absence (p25)
                            Share Above Poverty Line
                          Mean 8th Grade Math Score
                 Fraction Not Suspended from School
                                Share Insured (18-64)
                                  Median Rent (2BR)
                     Share White Above Poverty Line
                          Share White Insured (18-64)
                                  Share HS Graduate
                            Median Black Home Value
                           Median White Home Value
                             Mean Household Income
                                 Share College Grad.

                                                  -0.15 -0.1 -0.05       0    0.05    0.1   0.15
                                Correlation with White Minus Black Rank for Men with Parents at p=25



Notes: This figure shows correlations between selected tract-level characteristics and the black-white gap in upward mobility
(white minus black) for men with parents at p = 25, limiting the sample to Census tracts with poverty rates below 10%
in the 2000 Census. Upward mobility is estimated as described in the notes to Figure X. Tract-level characteristics are
obtained from the 2000 Census and other sources; see Online Appendix C for definitions and details. All characteristics
are defined such that their correlation with the level of incomes for black men is positive. We include only characteristics
whose correlations with black men’s incomes have the same sign at both the 25th and 75th percentile of the parental income
distribution (p = 25 and p = 75). Correlations are weighted by the precision of the estimated intergenerational gaps and are
adjusted for attenuation bias due to sampling error in the upward mobility estimates by inflating the raw correlations by the
square root of the reliability of the estimated intergenerational gaps. Negative correlations correspond to smaller magnitudes
of intergenerational gaps between blacks and whites.
                                                       FIGURE XII: Black-White Gaps vs. Father Presence by Census Tract
                                                                                                                                                       B. Employment Rates for Black vs. White Males
                                              A. Individual Income Ranks for Black vs. White Males




                                                                                                                                   90
                          54


                                                                                   White; Slope: -0.00 (0.006)
                                                                                   Black; Slope: 0.05 (0.006)
                                       52




                                                                                                                                                 88
       Mean Child Individual Income Rank




                                                                                                                   Percentage of Children Working
                                  50




                                                                                                                                         86
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Diff: 4.0
                          48




                                                                                                                                 84
                                                                                                   Diff: 6.1
                   46




                                                                                                                                                         Diff: 7.2

                                                   Diff: 9.3




                                                                                                                        82
           44




                                                                                                                 80
      42




                                                                                                                                                                                           White; Slope: 0.02 (0.006)
                                                                                                                                                                                           Black; Slope: 0.07 (0.007)




                                                                                                                                   78
                          40




                                 20                   40                   60                  80                                          20                   40                   60                  80
                 Percentage of Black Children in Low-Income (p25) Families whose Father is Present                         Percentage of Black Children in Low-Income (p25) Families whose Father is Present


                                                                                                                                                      D. Employment Rates for Black Males vs. Females
                                                C. Incarceration Rates for Black vs. White Males




                                                                                                                                      95
                             12




                                                                                   White; Slope: -0.01 (0.003)
                                                                                   Black; Slope: -0.06 (0.007)
        Percentage of Children Incarcerated




                                                                                                                   Percentage of Children Working
                                       10




                                                                                                                                             90
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Diff: 7.7
                              8




                                                                                                                                 85
                                                    Diff: 7.9
                                                                                                                                                           Diff: 13.0
                   6




                                                                                                 Diff: 5.2
                                                                                                                     80
          4




                                                                                                                                                                                 Black Male; Slope: 0.08 (0.007)
                                                                                                                                                                                 Black Female; Slope: -0.01 (0.005)
                                                                                                                                      75
                             2




                                20                   40                   60                  80                                           20                   40                   60                  80
                Percentage of Black Children in Low-Income (p25) Families whose Father is Present                          Percentage of Black Children in Low-Income (p25) Families whose Father is Present




Notes: These figures present binned scatter plots of various outcomes in adulthood vs. the percentage of black children raised
in low-income families whose fathers are present in their household, by Census tract. We define father presence as an indicator
for whether a child is claimed by a male on a tax form in the year he or she is matched to a parent. We regress this indicator for
father presence on parental income rank for each tract using equation (6), and define black father presence among low-income
families as the prediction for black children at p = 25. Each figure is constructed by dividing the x variable (father presence)
into 50 equal-sized bins and plotting the mean of the y and x variables in each bin, separately for various subgroups. In Panel
A, the y variable is upward mobility, the predicted individual income rank in adulthood conditional on having parents at the
25th percentile, estimated as described in the notes to Figure X. In Panels B and D, the y variable is an indicator for working,
where working is defined as having non-zero individual income in either 2014 or 2015. In Panel C, the y variable is an indicator
for being incarcerated on April 1, 2010. In all panels, we restrict the sample to tracts with a poverty rate below 10% in the
2000 Census. We also limit the sample to tracts with at least 20 observations for both white and black males in Panels A, B,
and C, and 20 observations for both black males and females in Panel D. We estimate best fit lines on the plotted points using
OLS and report the differences in the predicted values from these regressions in the 1st and 50th quantile. We also report the
slope coefficients and standard errors (in parentheses).
                                                                    FIGURE XIII: Childhood Exposure Effects on Income and Incarceration in Adulthood

                                                                            A. Income Rank at Age 30, Black Males                                                                                                   B. Income Rank at Age 30, White Males
                                                  0.8




                                                                                                                                                                                           0.8
   Coefficient on Predicted Rank in Destination CZ




                                                                                                                                            Coefficient on Predicted Rank in Destination CZ
                                     0.6




                                                                                                                                                                              0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Slope: -0.026
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (0.003)
                         0.4




                                                                                                                                                                  0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    δ: 0.242
                                                                         Slope: -0.027
                                                                                (0.004)
                                                                                                                            δ: 0.119
            0.2




                                                                                                                                                     0.2
                                        0




                                                                                                                                                                                 0
                                                                    5         10             15            20          25              30                                                                    5        10             15            20          25              30
                                                                                      Age of Child when Parents Move                                                                                                          Age of Child when Parents Move


                                                                         C. Incarceration Rates in 2010, Black Males                                                                                             D. Incarceration Rates in 2010, White Males




                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.8
                                                              0.8




                                                                                                                                            Coefficient on Predicted Incarceration Rate in Destination CZ
   Coefficient on Predicted Incarceration Rate in Destination CZ
                                                 0.6




                                                                                                                                                                                          0.6
                                    0.4




                                                                                                                                                                             0.4




                                                                         Slope: -0.033                                                                                                                           Slope: -0.025
                                                                                (0.004)                                                                                                                                 (0.004)
                        0.2




                                                                                                                                                                0.2




                                                                                                                            δ: 0.055                                                                                                                                δ: 0.094
            0




                                                                                                                                                    0




                                                                    5         10             15            20          25              30                                                                    5        10             15            20          25              30
                                                                                      Age of Child when Parents Move                                                                                                          Age of Child when Parents Move




Notes: These figures show estimates of childhood exposure effects on income and incarceration in adulthood. Panels A and
B plot estimates of the coefficients {bm } vs. the child’s age when his parents move (m) using the regression specification in
equation (7) with individual income rank at age 30 as the dependent variable. The coefficients bm can be interpreted as how
children’s outcomes change when they move at age m to a CZ with a 1 percentile higher predicted individual income rank in
adulthood for children of the same race, gender, and parental income level. Predicted income ranks are estimated using the
outcomes of children in the same race-gender subgroup and parental income level, excluding one-time movers. The estimation
sample in Panels A and B consists of male children born between 1978-1985 whose parents move exactly once across CZs in
our sample window. Panel A considers black men; Panel B considers white men. Panels C and D replicate A and B, changing
the dependent variable to an indicator for being incarcerated on April 1, 2010 and the key independent variables to predicted
incarceration rates instead of predicted income ranks. The estimation sample in these panels consists of male children born
between 1978-1986. The dashed vertical lines separate the data into two groups: age at move m ≤ 23 and m > 23. Best-fit
lines are estimated using unweighted OLS regressions of the {bm } coefficients on m separately for m ≤ 23 and m > 23. The
slopes of these regression lines are reported along with standard errors (in parentheses) on the left side of each panel for m ≤ 23
and on the right side for m > 23. The magnitudes of the slopes for m ≤ 23 represent estimates of annual childhood exposure
effects. The slopes reported differ slightly from Online Appendix Table XV because they are estimated from a regression on
the coefficients, bm , rather than a linear parametrization in the individual-level data.
     FIGURE XIV: Father Presence and Poverty Rates by Tract for Black vs. White Children
                                                                    Low      High                     Low      High




                                                             80
                                                                   Father   Father                   Father   Father
                                                                  Presence Presence                 Presence Presence


                  Share of Children in Neighborhood Type (%)
                    10    20     30    40    50   60    70




                                                                    66.3    9.8       19.7   4.2       1.0    34.1       2.4   62.5
                0




                                                                  High Poverty        Low Poverty    High Poverty       Low Poverty
                                                                           Black Children                    White Children



Notes: This figure plots the share of black and white children who grow up in four types of Census tracts: high poverty, low
father presence; high poverty, high father presence; low poverty, low father presence; and low poverty, high father presence.
We define Census tracts as “low poverty” if they have an overall poverty rate below 10% in the 2000 Census; we define tracts
as having “high father presence” if more than 50% of fathers are present in families among children of the same race.
         ONLINE APPENDIX FIGURE I: Intergenerational Mobility in the Full Population




                                         80
                      Mean Child Household Income Rank
                              40              60




                                                                                           Int.: a = 33.31; Slope: b = 0.35
                                         20




                                                         0   20          40           60              80                 100
                                                                  Parent Household Income Rank




Notes: This figure plots the mean household income rank of children vs. parent household income rank in our primary analysis
sample (1978-83 birth cohorts). This figure is constructed in exactly the same way as Figure IIa, except that here we pool
races and genders. The best-fit line and slope are estimated using an OLS regression on the plotted points. See notes to
Figure II for details on variable and sample definitions.
                                            ONLINE APPENDIX FIGURE II: Parental Income Distributions by Race


           Share of Parents at Given Household Income Percentile
                                                                                                 White             Black
                                                        .02
                                                                                                 Asian             Hispanic
                                                                                                 American Indian
             0         .005         .01      .015




                                                                   0   20          40            60          80          100
                                                                            Parent Household Income Rank



Notes: This figure plots the empirical distribution of parental income by race and ethnicity in our primary analysis sample.
Each curve shows the fraction of children whose parents fall in each of the 100 percentiles of the national parental income
distribution using our baseline definition of parental household income. This distribution is uniform (with a value of 0.01) by
construction when pooling all races. See notes to Figure II for details on variable and sample definitions.
     ONLINE APPENDIX FIGURE III: Intergenerational Mobility by Race for Children with
                       Immigrant vs. Non-Immigrant Mothers


                                                        A. White Children                                                                                                              B. Black Children

                                         80                                                                                                                              80
      Mean Child Household Income Rank




                                                                                                                                      Mean Child Household Income Rank
                                         60                                                                                                                              60




                                         40                                                                                                                              40



                                                                    Mothers Born in U.S. (Intercept: 37.50; Slope: 0.32)                                                                          Mothers Born in U.S. (Intercept: 25.31; Slope: 0.28)
                                                                    Mothers Born Outside U.S. (Intercept: 46.28; Slope: 0.21)                                                                     Mothers Born Outside U.S. (Intercept: 36.15; Slope: 0.21)

                                         20                                                                                                                              20
                                              0   20          40              60                        80                      100                                           0   20        40              60                        80                      100
                                                         Parent Household Income Rank                                                                                                  Parent Household Income Rank




                                                       C. Hispanic Children                                                                                                            D. Asian Children

                                         80                                                                                                                              80
      Mean Child Household Income Rank




                                         60                                                                                           Mean Child Household Income Rank   60




                                         40                                                                                                                              40



                                                                    Mothers Born in U.S. (Intercept: 34.03; Slope: 0.28)                                                                          Mothers Born in U.S. (Intercept: 43.60; Slope: 0.23)
                                                                    Mothers Born Outside U.S. (Intercept: 39.51; Slope: 0.25)                                                                     Mothers Born Outside U.S. (Intercept: 53.70; Slope: 0.18)

                                         20                                                                                                                              20
                                              0   20          40              60                        80                      100                                           0   20        40              60                        80                      100
                                                         Parent Household Income Rank                                                                                                  Parent Household Income Rank




Notes: This figure replicates the series shown in Panels B and C of Figure III, but showing estimates for children whose
mothers were born in the U.S. vs. outside the U.S. on the same scale for each race to facilitate comparison between the
outcomes of natives and immigrants. The figure excludes American Indians because of the small sample size of American
Indian children with mothers born outside the U.S. See notes to Figure III for details.
        ONLINE APPENDIX FIGURE IV: Occupational Distributions by Race and Gender

                                                            A. Parents in 3rd Income Decile


                                                       Male                                                         Female

                                     Business                                                 Business

                                        STEM                                                     STEM

                                Social Service                                           Social Service

                                   Healthcare                                               Healthcare

                                 Food/Service                                             Food/Service

                                Administrative                                           Administrative

                          Farming/Construction                                     Farming/Construction

                           Maintenance/Repair                                       Maintenance/Repair

                            Machine Operation                                        Machine Operation

                                Transportation                                           Transportation

                                                 0     10        20       30                              0     10        20         30
                                                      Pct. of Workforce                                        Pct. of Workforce

                                                 Mismatch Fraction = 19.5%                                Mismatch Fraction = 5.5%


                                                                     White                    Black



                                                            B. Parents in 8th Income Decile


                                                       Male                                                         Female

                                     Business                                                 Business

                                        STEM                                                     STEM

                                Social Service                                           Social Service

                                   Healthcare                                               Healthcare

                                 Food/Service                                             Food/Service

                                Administrative                                           Administrative

                          Farming/Construction                                     Farming/Construction

                           Maintenance/Repair                                       Maintenance/Repair

                            Machine Operation                                        Machine Operation

                                Transportation                                           Transportation

                                                 0     10        20       30                              0     10        20         30
                                                      Pct. of Workforce                                        Pct. of Workforce

                                                 Mismatch Fraction = 13.2%                                Mismatch Fraction = 5.4%


                                                                     White                    Black




Notes: This figure plots the empirical distribution of children’s occupations in adulthood conditional on parental income, by
race and gender. The sample consists of children in our primary analysis sample whom we observe in the ACS at age 30 or
older and who report working in the previous year in the ACS. Occupations are grouped using one-digit ACS occupation codes.
In Panel A, we focus on children with parents in the third decile of the household income distribution; in Panel B, we focus
on children with parents in the 8th decile. We use our baseline definition of parent household income ranks in this analysis.
For each parent income decile and race, we also report a measure of the mismatch between the two distributions, defined
as the minimum fraction of black workers who would have to be allocated a different occupation to match the occupational
distribution of white workers.




                                                                               4
ONLINE APPENDIX FIGURE V: Intergenerational Gaps in Household and Spousal Income, by
                                   Gender
                                                A. Household Income Rank, Females                                                                             B. Household Income Rank, Males
                          80




                                                                                                                                        80
     Mean Child Household Income Rank




                                                                                                                   Mean Child Household Income Rank
                                                                                    Diff. at p=75: 14.9
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Diff. at p=75: 16.6
                            60




                                                                                                                                          60
            40




                                                                                                                          40
                                                   Diff. at p=25: 11.7

                                                                                                          White                                                 Diff. at p=25: 13.6                                    White
                                                                                                          Black                                                                                                        Black
                          20




                                                                                                                                        20
                                            0     20              40            60            80             100                                          0   20               40            60            80             100
                                                           Parent Household Income Rank                                                                                 Parent Household Income Rank




                                                 C. Spouse Income Rank, Females                                                                                D Spouse Income Rank, Males
                          80




                                                                                                                                        80
     Mean Spouse's Individual Income Rank




                                                                                    Diff. at p=75: 21.6            Mean Spouse's Individual Income Rank
                               60




                                                                                                                                             60


                                                                                                                                                                                                 Diff. at p=75: 16.0
             40




                                                                                                                           40




                                                   Diff. at p=25: 17.1

                                                                                                          White                                                 Diff. at p=25: 14.0                                    White
                                                                                                          Black                                                                                                        Black
                          20




                                                                                                                                        20




                                            0     20              40            60            80             100                                          0   20               40            60            80             100
                                                           Parent Household Income Rank                                                                                 Parent Household Income Rank




Notes: This figure replicates Figure V using children’s household income ranks (Panels A and B) and spousal income ranks
(Panels C and D) instead of individual income ranks as the y variable. Spousal income is defined as household income minus
individual income; children who are not married are assigned spousal income of 0 and are included in the figures. See notes
to Figure V for further details.
ONLINE APPENDIX FIGURE VI: Black-White Intergenerational Gaps, Controlling for Parental
                          Marital Status and Wealth
                                              A. Male Children in Single-Parent Families                                                                                                                     B. Male Children in Two-Parent Families
                         80




                                                                                                                                                                                        80
                                     70




                                                                                                                                                                                                    70
     Mean Child Individual Income Rank




                                                                                                                                                                    Mean Child Individual Income Rank
                                                                                                                        Diff. at p=75: 12.0                                                                                                   Diff. at p=75: 11.5
                               60




                                                                                                                                                                                              60
                      50




                                                                                                                                                                                     50
            40




                                                                                                                                                                           40
                                                          Diff. at p=25: 9.7                                                                                                                                             Diff. at p=25: 7.9
     30




                                                                                                                                                                    30
                                                                                                                                                White                                                                                                                    White
                                                                                                                                                Black                                                                                                                    Black
                         20




                                                                                                                                                                                        20
                                          0       20            40            60                                                    80               100                                                 0        20          40            60                      80      100
                                                         Parent Household Income Rank                                                                                                                                  Parent Household Income Rank



                                                                                                                           C. Male Children, Parents Do Not Own Home
                                                                                                   80          70
                                                                               Mean Child Individual Income Rank




                                                                                                                                                                         Diff. at p=75: 11.9
                                                                                      40        50       60




                                                                                                                                               Diff. at p=25: 8.1
                                                                               30




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       White
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Black
                                                                                                   20




                                                                                                                    0                20              40            60                                        80           100
                                                                                                                                              Parent Household Income Rank




Notes: These figures replicate Figure Va for male children in single-parent families (Panel A), two-parent families (Panel B),
and among parents who do not own a home (Panel C). See notes to Figure V for further details and Section III for definitions
of parental marital status and home ownership.
     ONLINE APPENDIX FIGURE VII: Effects of Family-Level Factors on the Unconditional
                                Black-White Gap




                                 20
                                                  17.6                                                   Male
                                                                                                         Female
                                                                             15.2
                 Mean Rank of White Minus Black
                                            15
                                                               13.3                               13.1
                                   10




                                                         4.8
                          5




                                                                                    2.4
                                                                       1.8
                                                                                                           1.0
                  0              -5




                                                     None        Marital      Parent                Parent
                                                                 Status      Education            ACS Wealth
                                                                                                    Proxies




Notes: This figure shows how the black-white gap in children’s individual income ranks changes as we control for family-level
factors, as in Figure VIII, but without conditioning on parental income. Each bar plots an estimate from an OLS regression of
children’s individual income ranks on an indicator for being white and a single set of additional control variables. The first pair
of bars show the unconditional black-white gap in mean individual income ranks for male and female children, respectively.
The subsequent bars show how the coefficients on the race indicator change as controls are added. We use the same three
groups of controls as in Figure VIII, but include only one set of controls in each regression (and do not control for parental
income). See notes to Figure VIII for definitions of the control variables.
ONLINE APPENDIX FIGURE VIII: Black-White Gaps in Test Scores for Low-Income Students,
                                  by Gender
                                                                             A. Age 9




                                          .5
                        In SD From National Average
                          Math Test Score at Age 9

                                             0



                                                      -0.16                              -0.16
                             -.5




                                                                                                         -0.61
                                                                     -0.64
                                          -1




                                                              Boys                               Girls

                                                                              White      Black



                                                                             B. Age 17
                                          .5
                        In SD From National Average
                          Math Test Score at Age 17

                                              0




                                                      -0.16
                                                                                         -0.24
                             -.5




                                                                     -0.74
                                                                                                         -0.80
                                          -1




                                                              Boys                               Girls

                                                                              White      Black




Notes: These figures plot mean math test scores from the National Assessment of Educational Progress for blacks and whites
by gender in 2012. The sample consists of all children who are eligible for free or reduced price lunch programs. Panel A
presents data for children at age 9, while Panel B presents data for children at age 17. The scores are scaled as standard
deviations relative to the overall national mean (including children ineligible for free or reduced price lunches) among children
in the same cohort. The data used to construct this figure are publicly available and can be downloaded from the Nation’s
Report Card.
  ONLINE APPENDIX FIGURE IX: Effects of Family-Level Factors on Intergenerational Gaps
                                                                 A. Hispanic Children, Parents at 25th Percentile                                                                                      B. Hispanic Children, Parents at 75th Percentile

                                                10
     Mean Rank of White Minus Hispanic




                                                                                                                                                                                      10




                                                                                                                                           Mean Rank of White Minus Hispanic
                                                                                                                               Male
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Male
                                                          6.8                                                                  Female
                                                                                                                                                                                                6.8                                                               Female

                                                5
                                                                  3.4                                                                                                                 5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 3.8             3.7
                                                                                                                                                                                                        3.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 3.0            2.9


                                                                           -0.6    -3.0      -0.8   -2.9     -2.1   -4.6    -2.3    -4.5                                                                                0.6             0.6
                                                0                                                                                                                                                                                                      -0.5           -0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                      0



                                                -5
                                                                                                                                                                                      -5
                                                           None            Par. Inc.         Par Inc.        Par Inc.        Par Inc.
                                                                                           +Mar. Status    +Mar. Status    +Mar. Status                                                          None            Par. Inc.       Par Inc.        Par Inc.       Par Inc.
                                                                                                             +Educ.          +Educ.                                                                                            +Mar. Status    +Mar. Status   +Mar. Status
                                                                                                                           +ACS Wealth                                                                                                           +Educ.         +Educ.
                                                                                                                             Proxies                                                                                                                          +ACS Wealth
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Proxies




                                                         C. American Indian Children, Parents at 25th Percentile                                                                               D. American Indian Children, Parents at 75th Percentile
     Mean Rank of White Minus American Indian




                                                                                                                                           Mean Rank of White Minus American Indian
                                                20                                                                                                                                    20
                                                                                                                               Male                                                                                                                               Male
                                                         16.2                                                                                                                                  16.2
                                                                                                                               Female                                                                                                                             Female
                                                15                                                                                                                                    15

                                                                  10.5                                                                                                                                  10.5     10.5            10.4           10.7           10.3
                                                                           10.0              9.8             9.9             9.6
                                                10                                                                                                                                    10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        6.5             6.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       5.8            5.3
                                                                                   4.7              4.8             4.5             4.3
                                                5                                                                                                                                     5


                                                0                                                                                                                                     0


                                                -5                                                                                                                                    -5
                                                           None            Par. Inc.         Par Inc.        Par Inc.        Par Inc.                                                            None            Par. Inc.       Par Inc.        Par Inc.       Par Inc.
                                                                                           +Mar. Status    +Mar. Status    +Mar. Status                                                                                        +Mar. Status    +Mar. Status   +Mar. Status
                                                                                                             +Educ.          +Educ.                                                                                                              +Educ.         +Educ.
                                                                                                                           +ACS Wealth                                                                                                                        +ACS Wealth
                                                                                                                             Proxies                                                                                                                            Proxies




     E. Asian Children Born to Native Mothers, Parents at 25th Percentile                                                                     F. Asian Children Born to Native Mothers, Parents at 75th Percentile


                                                     2                                                                                                                                     2                                                                    1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.9
     Mean Rank of White Minus Asian




                                                                                                                                           Mean Rank of White Minus Asian




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.7             0.7
                                                     0                                                                                                                                     0
                                                           -0.9                                                                                                                                  -0.9
                                                 -2                                                                                                                                    -2
                                                                            -2.5             -2.5            -2.4            -2.5
                                                 -4                                                                                                                                    -4                                                              -3.9           -3.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -4.4            -4.4
                                                 -6                                                                                                                                    -6
                                                                   -6.2                                                                                                                                  -6.2
                                                                                                                    -6.9            -6.8
                                                                                    -7.3            -7.3
                                                 -8                                                                                                                                    -8

                                                -10                                                                            Male                                                   -10                                                                         Male
                                                                                                                               Female                                                                                                                             Female
                                                -12                                                                                                                                   -12
                                                                None        Par. Inc.        Par Inc.        Par Inc.        Par Inc.                                                                 None        Par. Inc.      Par Inc.        Par Inc.       Par Inc.
                                                                                           +Mar. Status    +Mar. Status    +Mar. Status                                                                                        +Mar. Status    +Mar. Status   +Mar. Status
                                                                                                             +Educ.          +Educ.                                                                                                              +Educ.         +Educ.
                                                                                                                           +ACS Wealth                                                                                                                        +ACS Wealth
                                                                                                                             Proxies                                                                                                                            Proxies



Notes: These figures replicate selected bars from Figure VIII for Hispanic children (Panels A-B), American Indian children
(Panels C-D), and Asian children whose mothers were born in the U.S. (Panels E-F). All panels show gaps for the labelled
group relative to whites. See notes to Figure VIII for further details.
   ONLINE APPENDIX FIGURE X: The Geography of Upward Mobility in Household Income

                                                   A. Full Population




                                                                                                 Mean Household
                                                                                                  Income Rank
                                                       B. Whites
                                                                                                     53.5 ($45k)
                                                                                                     50.4
                                                                                                     48.0
                                                                                                     46.3
                                                                                                     44.9
                                                                                                     43.6
                                                                                                     42.5
                                                                                                     41.5 ($32k)
                                                                                                     40.4
                                                                                                     38.7
                                                                                                     36.9
                                                                                                     34.8
                                                                                                     33.0
                                                                                                     31.5 ($21k)
                                                        C. Blacks
                                                                                                     Insufficient
                                                                                                     Data




                               These maps must be printed in color to be interpretable.

Notes: These figures replicate the results in Figure IX using household income instead of individual income when measuring
children’s incomes in adulthood and pooling men and women. Panel A pools all races; Panel B considers white children; and
Panel C considers black children. See notes to Figure IX for details.
   ONLINE APPENDIX FIGURE XI: The Geography of Upward Mobility for Black vs. White
                                   Women

                                    A. White Females with Parents at 25th Percentile




                                                                                                  Mean Individual
                                                                                                   Income Rank

                                                                                                     46.2 ($26k)
                                                                                                     44.0
                                                                                                     42.3
                                                                                                     41.3
                                                                                                     40.6
                                                                                                     39.9
                                    B. Black Females with Parents at 25th Percentile
                                                                                                     39.4
                                                                                                     38.9 ($20k)
                                                                                                     38.4
                                                                                                     37.9
                                                                                                     37.2
                                                                                                     36.5
                                                                                                     35.8
                                                                                                     34.5 ($16k)

                                                                                                      Insufficient
                                                                                                      Data




                                These maps must be printed in color to be interpretable.

Notes: These figures replicate the maps in Figure IX for female children instead of male children. See notes to Figure IX for
details.
ONLINE APPENDIX FIGURE XII: The Geography of Mobility for Children with Parents at the
                               75th Percentile

              A. White Males with Parents at 75th Percentile                 B. Black Males with Parents at 75th Percentile




             C. White Females with Parents at 75th Percentile               D. Black Females with Parents at 75th Percentile




Notes: These figures replicate Figure IX and Appendix Figure X for black and white children with parents at the 75th
percentile of the income distribution instead of the 25th percentile of the income distribution. For simplicity, each map is
presented on a separate color scale, dividing CZs into ten (unweighted) deciles, with lighter colors representing areas with
higher child incomes. See notes to Figure IX for further details on the construction of these maps.
 ONLINE APPENDIX FIGURE XIII: The Geography of Upward Mobility for Hispanic Children


            A. Hispanic Females with Parents at 25th Percentile              B. Hispanic Males with Parents at 25th Percentile




            C. Hispanic Females with Parents at 75th Percentile              D. Hispanic Males with Parents at 75th Percentile




Notes: These figures reproduce the maps in Figure IX and the preceding Appendix Figures for Hispanic children. Panels A
and B show the mean child individual income rank for Hispanic female and male children with parents at the 25th percentile,
respectively. Panels C and D show the same statistic for children with parents at the 75th percentile. For simplicity, each
map is presented on a separate color scale, dividing CZs into ten (unweighted) deciles, with lighter colors representing areas
with higher child incomes. See notes to Figure IX for further details on the construction of these maps.
  ONLINE APPENDIX FIGURE XIV: Distribution of Black-White Gaps Across Tracts for Men
                                                    A. Men with Parents at 25th Percentile




                            .08
                            .06
                        Density
                         .04.02




                                  Raw Fraction < 0: 11.8%
                                  Signal Fraction < 0: 1.3%
                                   Mean Gap: 7.5 pctiles
                            0




                                  -40              -20              0               20              40
                                          White Minus Black Rank Given Parents at 25th Percentile


                                                    B. Men with Parents at 75th Percentile
                            .08
                            .06
                        Density
                         .04.02




                                  Raw Fraction < 0: 15.2%
                                  Signal Fraction < 0: 1.9%
                                   Mean Gap: 9.2 pctiles
                            0




                                  -40              -20              0               20              40
                                          White Minus Black Rank Given Parents at 75th Percentile




Notes: This figure plots the distribution of the black-white gap in upward mobility for men, conditional on parental income.
Panel A plots the distribution of the black-white gap in upward mobility for men with parents at the 25th percentile. The
distribution is weighted by the number of black male children in the tract, excluding Census tracts with fewer than 50 black
or white male children. To construct upward mobility for a given race-gender group in tract c, we first regress children’s
individual income ranks on a constant and parent income rank, weighting by the number of years that each child is observed
below age 23 in tract c. We then define upward mobility as the predicted value from this regression at the 25th percentile
of the parental income distribution. The figure also reports the mean black-white gap as well as estimates of the fraction of
black males growing up in Census tracts where the predicted income rank for black males with parents at p̄ = 25 is higher
than that for white males. The raw estimate reports this fraction based on the empirical distribution itself (i.e., the plotted
histogram), while the “signal” estimate adjusts this fraction for noise in the underlying predictions as described in the text.
Panel B replicates Panel A for men with parents at the 75th percentile.
   ONLINE APPENDIX FIGURE XV: Distribution of Black-White Gap in Individual Income
                             Ranks for Women
                                                 A. Women with Parents at 25th Percentile




                           .08
                           .06
                       Density
                        .04.02




                                  Raw Fraction < 0: 72.5%
                                 Signal Fraction < 0: 83.6%
                                   Mean Gap: -3.0 pctiles
                           0




                                 -40              -20              0               20              40
                                         White Minus Black Rank Given Parents at 25th Percentile



                                                 B. Women with Parents at 75th Percentile
                           .08
                           .06
                       Density
                        .04.02




                                  Raw Fraction < 0: 60.8%
                                 Signal Fraction < 0: 69.0%
                                   Mean Gap: -2.1 pctiles
                           0




                                 -40              -20              0               20              40
                                         White Minus Black Rank Given Parents at 75th Percentile




Notes: This figure replicates Online Appendix Figure XIV for females with parents at the 25th (Panel A) and 75th (Panel B)
percentiles of the income distribution. See notes to Online Appendix Figure XIV for details.
  ONLINE APPENDIX FIGURE XVI: Fraction of Tracts with High Upward Mobility Rates for
                     Black Men vs. Share above Poverty Line



                Percent of Tracts where Black Men with Parents at p=25

                                                                   15
                       have Mean Rank above 50th Percentile                                                                   Poverty Rate Below 10%
                  0                5              10




                                                                         40           60                       80                      100
                                                                              Share Above Poverty Line in Tract in 2000 (%)




Notes: This figure presents a binned scatter plot of the fraction of Census tracts with high upward mobility rates for black men
vs. the share of residents above the poverty line. A “high upward mobility” tract is defined as one in which the predicted rank
of black males with parents at the 25th percentile of the national parental income distribution is above the 50th percentile of
the national child income distribution. Predicted ranks are estimated using equation (6); see notes to Figure X for details.
The sample for the figure consists of all tracts with at least 50 black men in the estimation sample. Tracts are grouped into
50 equal-sized bins, weighting by the number of black males in each tract.
