NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EFFECTIVENESS OF CONNECTED LEGISLATORS
Marco Battaglini
Valerio Leone Sciabolazza
Eleonora Patacchini
Working Paper 24442
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24442

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2018

For useful comments and discussions we thank Tiziano Arduini, Quoc-Anh Do, Sida Peng and
seminar participants at 2017 B-PECO Conference in Brussels and the 2017 Behavioral Public
Economics Workshop in Vienna. We thank Angela Cools for outstanding research assistance.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Marco Battaglini, Valerio Leone Sciabolazza, and Eleonora Patacchini. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Effectiveness of Connected Legislators
Marco Battaglini, Valerio Leone Sciabolazza, and Eleonora Patacchini
NBER Working Paper No. 24442
March 2018
JEL No. D72,D85
ABSTRACT
In this paper, we study the extent to which social connections influence the legislative
effectiveness of members of the U.S. Congress. We propose a new model of legislative
effectiveness that formalizes the role of social connections and generates simple testable
predictions. The model predicts that a legislator's equilibrium effectiveness is proportional to a
specific weighted Katz-Bonacich centrality in the network of social connections, where the
weights depend on the legislators' characteristics. We then propose a new empirical strategy to
test the theoretical predictions using the network of cosponsorship links in the 109th-113th
Congresses. The strategy addresses network endogeneity by implementing a two-step Heckman
correction based on an original instrument: the legislators' alumni connections. We find that, in
the absence of a correction, all measures of centrality in the cosponsorship network are
significant. When we control for network endogeneity, however, only the measure suggested by
the model remains significant, and the fit of the estimation is improved. We also study the
influence of legislators' characteristics on the size of network effects. In doing so, we provide
new insights into how social connectedness interacts with factors such as seniority, partisanship
and legislative leadership in determining legislators' effectiveness.
Marco Battaglini
Department of Economics
Uris Hall
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14850
and EIEF
and also NBER
battaglini@cornell.edu
Valerio Leone Sciabolazza
Bureau of Economic and Business Research (BEBR)
University of Florida
720 SW 2nd Ave #150, Gainesville, FL 32601
sciabolazza@ufl.edu

Eleonora Patacchini
Cornell University
Uris Hall
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14850
ep454@cornell.edu

1

Introduction

Understanding what makes legislators eﬀective, both in absolute and relative terms, is clearly a
question of practical and theoretical importance. From a normative perspective, understanding
eﬀectiveness may help governments design more eﬃcient political institutions. From a positive
perspective, it may help explain the determinants of politicians’ success and therefore their career
paths.

It is therefore not surprising that there is a large literature devoted to measuring and

explaining legislative success (see, among others, Volden and Wiseman [2014]). This literature
has investigated the extent to which idiosyncratic talent, skill sets, seniority, demographics (sex
and race, in particular), institutional and party positions play a role in the process of passing
legislation both at the state and federal level.
While most of this literature has focused solely on legislators’ individual characteristics, journalistic accounts and political commentators have traditionally privileged the importance of social
connections, portraying successful politicians as masterful “networkers.” As a result, recent work
in economics and political science has aimed to link social connectedness to legislative eﬀectiveness.

In a seminal contribution, Fowler [2006a] has shown that measures of legislative success

correlate positively with politicians’ connectedness in the network of cosponsorships. In Fowler’s
definition, politicians’ connectedness depends on the number of cosponsorships their bills receive
and a measure of the bills’ quality. This line of research has been continued by Cho and Fowler
[2009] and Kirkland [2011], who both use cosponsorships as their source of information on network
connections.

Craig [2015], in contrast, has constructed network connections using cosigners of

congressional “Dear Colleague” letters, and has shown that “team players” are better at gathering
support in the form of cosponsorships, but they do not have greater success in advancing their
legislative agendas.
A key issue with the current literature on social connectedness and legislative eﬀectiveness is
that it relies on measurements of social connection that are naturally endogenous. Legislators are
certainly strategic in choosing with whom to cosponsor and with whom to partner in sending “Dear
colleague” letters. This strategic self-selection may make it diﬃcult to interpret the correlation
between legislative eﬀectiveness and social connectedness, since omitted variables (such as social
skills) may drive both social connections and legislative success. A positive correlation between
centrality and eﬀectiveness found while ignoring these issues may be spurious; similarly, the lack

1

of a correlation may not rule out a causal relationship.
In this paper, we build on this early literature suggesting a role of social connections in determining legislative eﬀectiveness, but we explicitly deal with the problem of the endogeneity of social
networks and study the causal connections between them and legislative eﬀectiveness.

Specifi-

cally, we make two contributions. First we propose a simple model of legislative eﬀectiveness in
Congress that formalizes the role of social connections and generates simple testable predictions.
Second, we propose a new empirical strategy to test these predictions.

The strategy to deal

with network endogeneity consists of implementing a Heckman correction based on an original
instrument: the legislators’ alumni connections. The advantange in using this technique is that it
allows to control for the presence of individual-level unobserved factors. A politician’s ability is a
prominent example. More able politicians who are more eﬀective may be more likely to attract
cosponsors, and also may have attended the more prestigious schools.
In the model that we propose, legislative eﬀectiveness depends on three factors: the legislator’s
characteristics, the eﬀort directly exerted by the legislator, and the legislative eﬀectiveness of all
the legislators with whom the legislator has social connections. This last factor reflects the idea
that if legislator  has cultivated a social relationship with  (for example, by contributing to the
reelection campaign of legislator  through his own PAC or by playing golf with him/her), then 
may conscript  to his own cause. Therefore, existing social connections make  more productive.
Once equilibrium eﬀort levels are taken into account, we show that our model has a unique Nash
equilibrium in which the legislators’ eﬀectiveness levels are uniquely defined and are proportional
to a standard measure of centrality developed in the sociological literature: the weighted KatzBonacich centrality (see for example, Bonacich [1987] and Zenou [2015]). More importantly, the
model’s equilibrium conditions can be expressed in the form of a simple spatial autoregressive
system of equations that allows us to structurally estimate the model.
We then test the model predictions using data from five recent election cycles: the 109th
Congress (election cycle 2004) to the 113th Congress (election cycle 2012). We measure each congressman’s legislative performance using the Legislative Eﬀectiveness Scores (LESs) for members
of the U.S. House of Representatives, developed by Volden and Wiseman [2014]. This is a general
metric of individual legislative eﬀectiveness in the U.S. Congress, which identifies diﬀerences across
legislators in formulating meaningful bills and moving them through the legislative process from
introduction to the ultimate signing into law. As mentioned above, we deal with the endogeneity
2

of available measures of social connections in Congress by implementing a two-step procedure.
In the first step, alumni connections and other relevant legislators’ characteristics (gender, party,
seniority, etc.) are used to explain the map of cosponsorship linkages. In the second step, the
residuals of the first stage (that incorporates unobservable variables explaining the existence of
legislative networks in Congress), are included in the regression used to estimate our model. In
our alumni network, two congressmen are connected if they graduated from the same institution
within a given time window. The idea behind our approach is that shared educational experiences
have long-lasting eﬀects on the propensity for socialization later in life (see Cohen et al. [2008],
Fracassi and Tate [2012], Cohen and Malloy [2014], Do et al. [2016], Battaglini and Patacchini
[2017] among others).
Three main results emerge from our analysis. First, we find that, consistent with the theory,
congressmen’s Bonacich centralities have highly significant eﬀects on their Legislative Eﬀectiveness
Scores.

This result is robust to many natural controls suggested by the existing literature,

including seniority, measures of relative institutional power inside the House, electoral success,
and political ideology. Our estimate generalizes and, indeed, includes as a nested case, previous
empirical models that ignore social connections: it therefore allows us to formally show social
connections significantly improve the models’ fit. In their survey of the literature on legislative
eﬀectiveness, Volden and Wiseman [2009] list nine factors that have been identified as predictors
of legislators’ legislative eﬀectiveness: seniority, previous legislative experience, party influence,
legislative leadership, committee influence, ideology, race, gender and ethnicity considerations,
natural coalition partners and electoral connections. Our work provides a microfoundation and
evidence for a tenth factor: social connections.
Second, we show that ignoring network endogeneity is problematic. We show that without the
Heckman correction, traditional measures of centrality are apparently significant: betweenness,
closeness and eigenvector. Once we control for omitted variables with our Heckman correction,
however, none of these measures of centrality remains significant.

The measure of centrality

suggested by our model, on the contrary, remains significant when we correct for the Heckman
correction.

It also remains significant when we run a “horse race” in which all measures of

centrality are included, suggesting that our theoretically founded measure of social connectedness
is a robust predictor of eﬀectiveness.
Third, our analysis provides insight into the mechanisms through which variables previously
3

identified as important aﬀect legislative eﬀectiveness. We find that ethnic minorities appear to
benefit more than the average congressmen from social interactions, whereas congressmen with
higher seniority and committee chairs receive less benefits form interacting with others than other
members of the Congress.
Our work is related to two strands of literature. First, there is the traditional literature on legislative eﬀectiveness that focuses on the questions of how to measure eﬀectiveness, its determinants
and its eﬀects. This literature has highlighted factors such as seniority and leadership position
in Congress and the parties as unambiguous drivers of eﬀectiveness (see for example Frantzich
[1979], Anderson et al. [2003], Padro i Miguel and Snyder [2006], Cox and Terry [2008], Volden
and Wiseman [2009]). Other factors have been highlighted but proven more controversial, such as
electoral safety, ethnicity and gender (see for ex., Jeydel and Taylor [2003], Bratton [2005], Bratton
and Haynie [1999]). A variety of measures of legislative success have been adopted, ranging from
“batting averages” (i.e. the share of sponsored bills that are passed), to entrepreneurial measures
(i.e. the number of sponsored and cosponsored bills), to productivity measures that count how
a legislators help a bill move through stages in Congress, to direct surveys (for state congresses).
As mentioned, for our work we have chosen a measure proposed by Volden and Wiseman [2009]
that tracks the diﬀerent forms of success and weights success by the importance of the bill.1
Second, our work contributes to the literature on social networks in Congress.

As said,

a number of works have investigated the correlation of legislative success and measures of social
centrality using data from cosponsorships (Fowler [2006], Tam Cho and Fowler [2009] and Kirkland
[2011]) and “dear colleague” letters (Craig [2015]). This pioneering literature first highlighted the
importance of social links to legislative success, but has not investigated the problem arising with
the endogeneity of social networks and therefore has not studied the causal link between observed
measures of social connectedness and legislative success.
A recent literature has employed a variety of strategies to control for the endogeneity of social
networks in Congress and other legislative assemblies. Masket [2008] and Harmon et al. [2017]
use seat assignments to study voting behavior in the California state assembly and the E.U,
Parliament, respectively. Cohen and Malloy [2014] and Battaglini and Patacchini (2017) use the
alumni networks to study voting behavior in the U.S. Senate and PAC electoral contributions in
1 The index tracks the number of sponsored bills (entrepreneurship), and sponsored bills that complete all
subsequent steps in the legislative process (so productivity and “batting averages”).

4

the U.S. Congress, respectively.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents our model of legislative
behavior, the equilibrium predictions and the estimation strategy. In Section 3, we describe the
data. In Section 4, we discuss the empirical results and a number of robustness checks. Section
5 concludes.

2

Theory and empirical strategy

2.1

Setup

Consider a congress comprised of  legislators, where N = {1  } is the set of legislators. Each
legislator has a pet legislative project that he cares to implement. The goal of each legislator is
to maximize his legislative eﬀectiveness, measured by the probability of implementing the project.
We assume that legislator ’s legislative eﬀectiveness  is a function of legislator ’s characteristics,
his eﬀort and the legislative eﬀectiveness of all the legislators that  has befriended. For example,
legislator  may have spent time playing golf with , or (perhaps more substantively) contributed
to the reelection campaign of legislator  through his own PAC. This may allow  to conscript 
to his own cause.
Specifically, we assume:

qP
 =  + 
   · 

Equation (1) represents the “production function” for legislative eﬀectiveness.
 , is a fixed eﬀect idiosyncratic to .

(1)
The first term,

This term may include a variety of characteristics that

have been highlighted in the existing literature as important for eﬀectiveness: the legislator’s
seniority (Volden and Wiseman [2009], Padro i Miquel and Snyder (2006), for example), sex and
race (potentially in the presence of discrimination) and the legislator’s position in the committee
system and party hierarchy (Anderson et al. [2003], Cox and Terry [2008], for example).
second term, which is new in our model, captures the importance of social connections.

The
As in

Ballester, Calvo-Armengol and Zenou [2006], the social network is described by a  ×  matrix
 with the generic element  that measures the strength of the social influence of legislator
 on legislator .

In (1), we assume that there is a complementarity between ’s eﬀort  and

the eﬀectiveness of the legislators in ’s social circle, as measured by the weighted average of the
eﬀectiveness of the legislators with whom  has a social link. We normalize the social weights so

5

that  ∈ [0 1] for any   and

P

 

= 1 for any . This normalization simply means that

legislator  has a total budget of resources to “help” connected colleagues: it is presumable that a
legislator with many connections will have less time per connection. Assuming that eﬀectiveness
£ ¤
takes a value in 0  for some   0, it is easy to see that a suﬃcient condition for  ∈ (0 1)

is that  +   1, an assumption that we will maintain throughout the analysis, where  is the
upper bound on  .
A strategy for a legislator is described by a function  : T → [0 1], mapping ’s type  to
an eﬀort level.

When the floor opens for business, each legislator  chooses his own level of

eﬀort  simultaneously, taking as given the social network and his own expectations of the other
legislators’ eﬀectiveness. Given this, the levels of eﬀectiveness are endogenously determined by
(1).
In the following pages, we consider very complex networks with hundreds of nodes. It is
therefore useful to define a simple statistic that describes the position of an agent in the network
(which will prove important to interpret the theoretical predictions): the Bonacich Centrality
(Bonacich [1987], Ballester, Calvo-Armengol and Zenou [2006], Zenou [2015]). For a given network
b the vector of Bonacich centralities, if it exists, is defined as:
matrix ,
³
´ ³
´−1
b =  − 
b
b  
·1

(2)

where   1 is a positive parameter,  is the identity matrix and 1 is a column vector of ones. The
³
´
b and  is the th entry of b  
b . Bonacich
Bonacich centrality of legislator  with respect to 

b may fail to be invertible.
centralities may not exist because the matrix  −  

Invertibility is

b if  is suﬃciently small. For the reminder of the paper, a condition that
guaranteed for any 

guarantees that the relevant Bonacich centralities exist in our environment is the following:
Assumption 1. The matrix  −

2
2 

is invertible and positive.

It can be shown that Assumption 1 is not satisfied only if social spillovers measured by  are very
large (so as to induce reinforcement eﬀects that lead to unbounded levels of eﬀectiveness).2

This

is implausible and indeed it is not true in our empirical analysis. It is therefore very natural to
assume that social spillovers, though significant, are suﬃciently small to allow for Assumption 1.
2

See, for example, Theorem 1 in Ballester, Calvo-Armengol and Zenou [2006].

6

2.2

Equilibrium predictions

The optimal level of eﬀort  by a type  = 1   solves the problem:
³qP
o
n
´

2
max  + 
=1   ·  − ( ) 2 ,

(3)



Substituting the solution to this maximization in (1), we obtain that the equilibrium levels of
legislative eﬃciency for a type  = 1   are given by:
 =  +

2 P
=1   
2

(4)

These equations can be expressed in matrix form as:
∙
¸
2
−
 ·E=A
2

(5)

0

where E = ( 1 ( A)    ( A)) is the vector of legislative eﬀectiveness   ( A) solving (5),
0

and A = (1    ) is the vector of types’ characteristics.3

It is easy to show that given

Assumption 1,  are uniquely defined with:

2

£
¡
¢
¤−1
0
A;
( 1 ( A)    ( A)) =  − 2 2 · 

The vector [− 2 ·]−1 A coincides with the vector of weighted Bonacich centralities b(2 2  A) =
0

(1 (2 2  A)   (2 2  A)) with weights A = (1    ) , a well know concept in sociology and economics (see Ballester et al. [2006] for instance). We therefore have:
Proposition 1. There is a unique equilibrium in which legislator ’s legislative eﬀectiveness is
equal to  (2 2  A).
From a theoretical point of view, a key novelty in the analysis presented above is the fact that
legislators choose the optimal legislative eﬀort  taking as given their rational expectations of
the other legislators’ levels of eﬀectiveness. This approach is similar to the approach in general
equilibrium theory in economics where consumers choose their optimal consumption taking prices
as given. As in general equilibrium theory, where prices are endogenous since they need to clear
markets, here the levels of eﬀectiveness are endogenous since they must satisfy the externality
equation (1) given the optimal eﬀort levels.
3

£

¤

Note that if the matrix  − 2  ·  is invertible, then the equilibrium legislative eﬀectiveness levels at  = 2

£

¤−1

are uniquely defined and equal to the Bonancich centralities ( 2 ) =  − 2  · 
2 .

 of  with discount

£

¤

However, we should note that here  is endogenous, so to determine the invertibility of  − 2  · 
factor
and  we should first solve for  in the first stage of the game.

7

When there are no social spillovers (i.e.,  = 0), Proposition 1 tells us that legislative eﬀectiveness is determined exclusively by the individual characteristics of legislators:
( 1 ( A)    ( A))0 = A
In the presence of social spillovers among connected legislators (i.e.   0), however, the eﬀectiveness of any legislator depends on the characteristics of all other legislators, with each legislator
£
¡
¢
¤−1
weighted using their distance in the network (the weights given by the rows of  − 2 2 ·  ).
Since the standard model is nested as a special case of the more general model (with  = 0), we
will be able to test if social connections improve the fit of our estimates of E.

2.3

Empirical Model

Assume that we observe data from ̄ congresses  = {1  }, each comprised of  congressmen
and characterized by a network  = { }. Moreover, assume the vector of characteristics of
legislators in congress , A = (1    )0 , is a linear function of a vector of congressman ’s
characteristics in congress :
A =  +  β + ε 

(6)

where ε = (1    )0 is a vector of i.i.d. shocks, β = (1    )0 is a vector of coeﬃcients
and  is a constant term. Given (6), our prediction (5) for congress  can be represented as:
E =  + ∗ ·  E +  β + ε 

(7)

where, for simplicity we denote ∗ = 2 2. System (7) is a spatial autoregressive system that can
be easily estimated given  and X . When bringing this model to the data, however, we face a
key challenge: the social network  is likely endogenous and determined by variables that also
aﬀect E . If these characteristics are omitted in  or are unobservable, then we have a biased
estimation.
To address this concern, we implement a Heckman correction of (7) with a two stage estimation.
The idea is to estimate an extended version of our model in which we explicitly account for
a possible correlation between unobserved factors driving network formation and outcomes.4
4 Qu and Lee (2015) implement a similar control function approach for the estimation of a spatial autoregressive
model with an endogenous spatial matrix in a geographic context. Their strategy is to model proximity between
areas as a function of observed characteristics at a first stage and then add a function of the first stage residuals to
the outcome equation.

8

Identification in Heckman selection models is notoriously diﬃcult, especially in environments like
ours in which networking in Congress is driven by the goals of the politicians. To address this
problem, we rely on an original instrument: the network of the legislators’ alumni connections.
These connections oﬀer an original instrument which rests on plausible assumptions: the network
is exogenous to the political process, but still relevant even many years after the congressmen
attend school (a fact that is well known in general and that we will documented for our specific
case below).5
For the first step (i.e., the estimation of the network), we consider a standard dyadic model of
link formation, used previously in the literature (see, e.g., Fafchamps and Gubert [2007)], Mayer
and Puller [2008)], Lai and Reiter [2000], Apicella, Marlowe, Fowler and Christakis [2012] and
Attanasio, et al. [2012]). When used in our context, the link  between two congressmen 
and  in congress  is explained by distance between  and  in terms of characteristics according
to the model:
 = 0 + 1  +

X



+1 | −  | +  ,

(8)

where  for  = 1   are ’s characteristics and  denotes connections in the alumni
network. The link  is equal to the number of ’s bills cosponsored by  over the total number
of bills cosponsored by ; and the link  between two congressmen  and  in congress  is
equal to the number of educational institutions attended by both  and  whithin eight years from
each other over the total number of institutions attended by . For this definition, educational
institutions include high schools and other higher institutions attended for both undergraduate and
graduate degrees. We adopt an eight year time window to allow for post graduation interactions,
since most university make signicant eﬀorts to connect alumni graduating in nearby cohorts.6
As standard in the literature on dyadic link formation we assume:
5 Observe that the Heckman selection model would be identified even without exclusion restrictions. Identification, in this case, exploits non-linearities specific to the network structure of our model. The dyad-specific
repressors used in the first stage (the network formation stage) are expressed in absolute values of diﬀerences: these
diﬀerences in characteristics do not appear in the outcome equation.
6 For example, graduates in the classes of 2008-2017 at Yale College are enlisted as members of BOLD (“Bulldogs
of the Last Decade,”), a groups for which the university organizes special events (see http://boldalumni.yale.edu/).
Similar organizations can be found, for example, at the Harvard Law School (see the GOLD association for
“Graduate Of the Last Decade,” http://hls.harvard.edu/dept/alumni/giving-to-hls/harvard-law-school-annualfund/graduates-of-the-last-decade/) and Stanford where, for instance, the Stanford National Black Alumni Association organizes outreach events for young alumni (http://www.stanfordblackalumni.org/young-alumni-connectors/).
At the Princeton reunions, graduation years are organized as satellites around the classes that celebrate major reunions (5th, 10th, 15th, etc. reunions). Cornell University has a “Second Decade Program” for graduates 10 to 20
years past graduation (https://alumni.cornell.edu/connect/young-alumni/second-decade/).

9

Assumption 2. Assume that  = (1    )0 and  = (1    )0 are jointly normal
with (2 ) = 2 , (  ) =  for all  6= , (  ) = 2 ∀ = , and (  ) =
0 ∀ 6= .
Assumption 2 implies that the selection eﬀect (i.e. the correlation between unobservable characteristics determining link formation and unobservable characteristics driving the outcome as
measured by  ) is the same for all politicians.

Under Assumption 2, it can be shown that

expected value of the error term conditional on the link formation is ( |1      −1 ) =
P
 · 6=  , where  =  2 . It follows that our model can be written as:
E = [ − ∗  ]−1 · [ · 1 +  β+ξ r + ε ]

where  =

P

6=

(9)

0

 with ξ r = (   ) . The term ξ r now captures the selection bias.

An advantage of model (10) is that it allows to control for the presence of individual-level
unobserved factors. As said in the introduction, a politician’s intrinsic ability is a prominent
example. More able politicians who are more eﬀective may be more likely to attract cosponsors
and may also have attended a more prestigious school.

Another example may be unobserved

features of the educational institutions attended by . The term  includes all unobserved
characteristics of legislator  that contribute explaining his connections in (8).
0

0

For a sample of  agents at each congress , stack up the data by defining  = ( 1  · · ·   0̄ ) ,
0

 = (01  · · ·  0̄ )0 , and  = (0  · · ·  0 )0 as a -dimensional vectors,  = (10  · · ·  ̄0 ) as a  ×
̄
matrix, and  = diag{ }=1
as a  ×  matrix. For the entire sample, the model is:

−1

E = [ − ∗ ]

· [ · 1 + β+ξ + ε]

(10)

Given the social network , the covariates X and the correction ξ, we can estimate the parameters
of interest , , β, and  by Nonlinear Least squares (NLLS) using (10).7
Inference is complicated because the selectivity term ξ is a generated regressor from a previous
estimation and no closed form solution is available for the NLLS standard errors estimates in
a network context. We use bootstrapped standard errors with 500 replications. Because of the
inherent structural dependency of network data, the design of the resampling scheme needs special
h
i−1
consideration. The residuals in the vector  =  − b∗ 
ε in (10) are not i.i.d., and thus one
7 An OLS estimation of this system would not be consistent because of the simultaneity which is endemic in
spatial autoregressive models (see, e.g., Anselin [1988]).

10

cannot sample with replacement from this vector. We thus use the residual bootstrap procedure in
spatial econometrics (e.g., Anselin, 1990) where resampling is performed on the structural errors
ε since they are assumed to be i.i.d. (see model (7)).8

3

Data

We measure each congressman’s legislative performance using the Legislative Eﬀectiveness Scores
(LESs) for members of the U.S. House of Representatives, developed by Volden and Wiseman
[2009]. Each member of Congress’s score is based on how many bills each legislator introduces,
as well as how many of those bills receive action in committee, pass out of committee and receive
action of the floor of the House, pass the House, and ultimately become law. Data are available online by the Legislative Eﬀectiveness Project (http://www.thelawmakers.org). Volden et al. [2013]
have used it to explore the legislative eﬀectiveness of women for the 93th - 110th Congresses. A
similar index, Health ILESs, was proposed by Volden and Wiseman [2011] to examine which House
members has been most successful to advance health care bills for the 93th to 110th Congresses.
We use information from five recent election cycles: the 109th Congress (election cycle 2004) to
the 113th Congress (election cycle 2012).
Consistent with existing theories of congressional politics, Volden and Wiseman [2009] argue
that legislative eﬀectiveness is a function of innate abilities, a cultivated set of skills, and institutional positions. The Legislative Eﬀectiveness Project thus provides data on the observed
legislators’ characteristics that are theoretically important for lawmaking eﬀectiveness. Nine factors are identified. The first one is the number of years served as a member of the Congress
(seniority). As legislators spend more time in Congress, they are expected to become better, and
more eﬀective, at lawmaking. In our data, freshmen members of Congress have an average LES
of 0.73 while it is 83% higher (1.33) for members in their fifth term. This pattern captures the
idea that congressmen cultivate the set of skills needed to achieve eﬀectiveness during their time
in the Congress. The open question, however, is which skills they develop and in which ways. Our
paper contributes to this debate by indicating that learning mechanisms are an important part of
the story.
Consistent with the acquisition of skills over time, the second factor is previous legislative
£

8

In practice, having in hand the residual vector  the vector of structural errors are derived from  =

¤

b∗   They are thus resampled congress by congress.
 −
11

experience. Legislators who have previously served in the state legislatures may be more eﬀective
than legislators without similar experiences.
The subsequent three factors (party influence, committee influence, and legislative leadership)
capture the eﬀect of institutional positions on the legislative process. The bills that they endorse
are thus more likely to receive attention by their own (and other) parties and committees. By the
same reasoning, committee chairs and members of the most powerful committees (Appropriation,
Budget, Rules and Ways and Means) could also have greater legislative eﬀectiveness. Volden and
Wiseman [2009] find that the high level of eﬀort required by the members of these committees,
however, results in a number of endorsed bills which is lower that the average House member,
thus making the relationship with their LES scores negative. Party leadership is also an important
variable, with opposite eﬀects for leaders of the majority or minority party. Majority party leaders
are more likely to receive attention and have their bills pass the House. Minority Party leaders,
in contrast, find it more diﬃcult relative to other members of their party. Being Speaker of House
may also result in less eﬀectiveness, given then the LES score is based on how far legislators’ bills
advance in the legislative process and the Speaker of the House traditionally introduces few, if
any, bills.9
The sixth factor captures ideological considerations. The Legislative Eﬀectiveness Project data
is merged with the http://voteview.com project data. It provides data on legislators’ preferences
for extreme or moderate policies. These preferences are captured by the absolute value of the
first dimension of the dw-nominate score created by McCarty et al. [1997], which measures a
legislator’s distance to the center in terms of ideology. A number of legislative politics studies
suggest a negative correlation between this variable and legislative success, reflecting idea that
moderate policies obtain a larger consensus among the members of the House (see, e.g. Krehbiel
[1992], Wiseman and Wright [2008]).
The seventh factor captures the demographic characteristics of under-represented members in
Congress. The experiences of female and ethnic minority legislators in terms of eﬀective lawmaking
are diﬀerent from the average congressmen, though the existing literature has not reached a
consensus about the sign and the sources of these diﬀerences (Jeydel and Taylor [2003]; Volden
and Wiseman [2009]; Volden et al. [2013]).
9 See Volden and Wiseman [2009] for further discussion about why Speakers of the House may be diﬀerent from
other legislators in terms of LES score.

12

The eighth factor is the size of the congressional delegation, which counts the number of districts
in the state congressional delegation (and thus the number of congressmen in the House from
the same state). Legislators coming from larger congressional delegations may be more eﬀective
since they can find coalition partners among the members of their delegations. In contrast, the
presence of more legislators interested in the same issues (the interests of the state) may result
in a lower number of bills advanced in the legislative process for each legislator. The last factor
is built on the electoral competition. It is the margin of victory (i.e. the percentage of total
votes that separated the congressman from the second-place finisher in the previous election).
If voters value politicians’ legislative eﬀectiveness, then one would expect a positive relationship
between legislators’ levels of eﬀectiveness and their margins of victory. The existence and sign
of this relationship, however, is still a matter of debate. In fact, it is plausible to expect a
negative correlation if electorally vulnerable legislators expend more energy to foster their agenda
and increase support among voters. Alternatively, one may think that vulnerable legislators spend
their energy on campaigning, while legislators in safe districts commit more time to the lawmaking
process (see, e.g. Pedro I Miquel et al. [2006], Volden and Wiseman [2009]).
Our analysis considers all the legislator characteristics indicated in the Legislative Eﬀectiveness
Project. The control set  in model (10) includes the number of years spent in Congress,
margin of victory, dw-ideology, the size of the state congressional delegation, party, chairmanship,
majority and minority party leadership, whether the congressman is the Speaker of the House,
gender and race. Because the information on previous legislative experience is missing for a large
share of politicians, we add this control in a robustness check in Section 5.4 for the subsample
of congressmen for whom the variable is available. The information on committee membership is
also exploited in Section 5.4. While Volden and Wiseman (2009) use a dummy variable capturing
membership in the most powerful committee, we include a full set of committee fixed eﬀects as a
robustness check. Members of the same committee who work on the same topic are likely to be
connected in our network since they likely cosponsor the same bills and also likely to have similar
LES scores. The committee fixed eﬀects control for these common shocks.
We construct a legislative network using data on cosponsorship from the Library of Congress
data information system, THOMAS (http://thomas.loc.gov). We use information on the 109th113 Congresses. We collected all pieces of legislation proposed in these ten years and define two

13

Figure 1: Legislative eﬀectiveness and the cosponsorship network in the 113th Congress. Republicans are represented by circles, democrats by squares.
members of Congress as linked if they have cosponsored the same bill.10 Each network includes
roughly 433 Representatives (including midterm replacements). As a result, we obtain a sample
of 2,176 connected congressmen. Figure 1 illustrates the cosponsorship network of the 113th U.S.
Congress in a figure in which each node corresponds to a congressman and the size of the node is
proportional to the LES of the associated congressman.11
10 The same network definition has been used by Tam Cho and Fowler [2010] to investigate connections between
topological characteristics of these Congressional networks and the production of important pieces of legislation.
They use data for the 93th to the 108th Congresses. For the same Congresses, Fowler [2006a, 2006b] presents a
more detailed description of each legislator’s cosponsorship activities.
11 The layout of the network was generated by the algorithm lgl (large graph layout) implemented in the R
package “igraph” (see Csardi and Nepusz [2006]). To make the Figure clearer, we are plotting a link only for
 that are in the top 5% in terms of size. The two agglomerations in Figure 1 correspond to Democrats and
Republicans. Eﬀectiveness levels are larger for Republicans because they constitute the majority in this congress.

14

To find a measure of social connections that is extraneous to the political process, we extract information on the universities attended by the congressmen using the Biographical Directory of the United States Congress (available online at http://bioguide.Congress.gov/biosearch/
biosearch.asp) and construct a membership network based on educational experience.12 Specifically, we match politicians to their colleges and universities. A tie between two congressmen exists
if they graduated from the same institution within eight years of each other. By using alumni
connections, we are able to link about forty percent of congressmen. Table A1 in the Appendix
provides a detailed description of the variables used in this study, together with summary statistics
for our sample.

4

Estimation Results

We begin our empirical analysis by showing that the alumni networks are still relevant even
many years after the congressmen attended school. This exercise constitutes the first step of our
analysis. Table 1 collects the OLS estimation results of model (8), with an incresing set of control
variables. Table 1 shows that two politicians who attended the same educational institution are
more likely to cosponsor the same piece of legislation than two politicians who attended diﬀerent
universities or the same university at diﬀerent times, keeping constant similarities in terms of
observed characteristics. We consider similarities in terms of seniority, vote share, party, ideology,
chairmanship, party leadership, speaker, gender, race and Congress fixed eﬀects.13
Table 2, Column (1) reports the OLS estimates of the traditional model in which campaign
contributions are explained using only legislators’ characteristics (ignoring the fact that congressmen are connected). This is the specification used by Volden and Wiseman [2009]. Although we
use more recent data, most of the estimates remain in line with their findings. Table 2, Column
(2) presents the NLLS estimates of our model (equation (7)). The estimates reveal a positive and
statistically significant estimate of ∗ , which confirms the presence of externalities as predicted by
our theory. We formally test whether the model fit improves with the addition of network eﬀects
12 We use academic institutions attended for both undergraduate and graduate degrees. In dealing with multiple
campuses, we matched each satellite campus as a separate university (e.g., University of California at Los Angeles,
San Diego, and Berkeley are treated as separate universities). We match specialized school to the university. We
drop observations where a specialized school name could match multiple universities (e.g., School of Management).
13 Our findings are in line with Cohen and Malloy’s [2014] results showing that alumni networks help to explain
voting patterns of Senators from the 101st to the 110th Congress.

15

(relative to the traditional linear regression in which ∗ = 0) using a partial F-test.14 The F-test
rejects the hypothesis that the model with  6= 0 does not provide a significantly better fit than
the model with ∗ = 0 (  001). In Column (3), we show the estimation results when controlling for network endogeneity (model (9)). It appears that the estimate of the selection correction
term is statistically significant and negative. This is consistent with the presence of unobservable
characteristics that are positively correlated with, say, legislator ’s legislative eﬀectiveness, but
negatively with variables that aﬀect other legislators’ inclinations to cosponsor bills proposed by
 (or viceversa). For example,  may have very specialized knowledge, so s/he sponsor only few
bills, but very eﬀectively. The partial F-test comparing the fit of the model without correction
versus the fit of the model with correction shows that the fit of the model is further improved when
adding the correction. The important result here is that the estimate of our target parameter 
maintains its statistical significance and positive sign.
The coeﬃcients on most of the control variables are significant across models [Column (1)Column (3)]. However, the interpretation and magnitude of these eﬀects diﬀers. Indeed, if ∗  0
(in model (9)), then the marginal eﬀect of the -th covariate is not   but ( − ∗ )−1 ( ),
which is an  ×  matrix with its ( )-th element representing the eﬀect of a change in 
on  . The important diﬀerence is that the marginal eﬀects are heterogeneous across individuals,
since they depend on the individual’s position in the network. In Table 3, Panel (b) we show
the magnitudes of the diagonal elements of this matrix [that is, the marginal eﬀect of a change
in  for  , based on the estimates in Column (3) of Table 2] We report the mean, standard
deviation, minimum and maximum values. Panel (a) shows the OLS marginal eﬀects, which can
be compared to the mean values in Panel (b). In comparing the OLS estimates with the average
eﬀects of the model with network eﬀects, we can see that the OLS estimates overestimate the eﬀects
of all of the legislators’ characteristics. The OLS estimates are even higher than the maximum
estimate from the model with network eﬀects. For example, the OLS estimates suggest that being
a committee chair is associated with an increase of 1.97 LES score points. This is higher than
what is estimated in the network model with the strongest externalities (18% lower in magnitude).
Thus this evidence suggests that the eﬀects of the politicians’ characteristics are capturing network
14 Let  define the residual sum of squares of the unrestricted model [Column (4)] and  the number of
1
1
parameters. Let 2 the residual sum of squares of the restricted model [Column (5)], and 2 the number of
parameters. The partial F-test statistic  = [(1 − 2 )1 − 2 ] (1 ) − 1 will have an F distribution
with (1 − 2   − 1 ) degree of freedom.

16

eﬀects. Traditional estimates of the eﬀects of these characteristics on legislative eﬀectiveness which
ignore those externalities risk overstating their importance by omitting a relevant variable, social
connectedness.
Before turning to robustness checks and extensions, it is useful to compare the predictions of our
model with the predictions we would have obtained if we attempted to establish the importance of
network centrality using standard measures that are not backed by a theoretical analysis. There
are two issues to discuss. The first is the eﬀect of the traditional measures when endogeneity
issues are taken into account. The second is how our analysis would change if we included these
variables in our estimation.
Table 4 presents OLS estimates of the relationship between politicians’ legislative eﬀectiveness
and Betweenness, Closeness and Eigenvalue centralities.15 All control variables have the expected
signs, consistent with Table 2, and it appears that a high connectedness score in the network of
cosponsorship has a positive and significant impact in advancing agenda items [Columns (1), (3),
and (5)]. This is consistent with Fowler [2006a], who studied the relation between centrality
measures in the network of cosponsorship, and the number of amendments passed by each legislator in each Congress. However, when controlling for the unobserved factors related to agent’s
connectivity following our estimation strategy,16 centrality measures are no longer significantly
diﬀerent from zero [Columns (2), (4) and (6)]. More importantly, when those centrality measures
are included in a regression where network eﬀects are modeled as predicted by the theory [Column (8)], they lose statistical significance: only the measure of network externality supported by
Proposition 1, , seems to matter.

5

Discussions and extensions

In this section, we extend the basic model of Section 2 and the empirical analysis of Section 4 in
many dimensions to investigate the determinants of legislative success and explore the robustness
15 Degree centrality counts the total number of direct connections. Closeness centrality measures the length of
the average shortest path passing between a node and each other node. Betweenness is equal to the number of
shortest paths from all nodes to each other that passes through that node . Eigenvalue centrality of agent  is the
th component of the eigenvector associated to the highest eigenvalue of . See Jackson [2008] for an introduction
and detailed description of these measures.
16 For each centrality measure, in the first step, a politician’s centrality score in the cosponsorship network is
explained as a function of individual characteristics and the centrality measure in the alumni network. The residuals
of this regression are then used as a selection correction term in the second step regression when the LES score is
explained by the centrality score (and controls).

17

of the results.

In Section 5.1, we extend the model to allow for heterogeneous social spillovers

that may depend on the legislators’ characteristics. In Section 5.2, we explore the role of parties
as a factor enhancing or inhibiting productive social connections. In Section 5.3, we investigate
whether social connections matter more in early or late stages of the legislative process. In Section
5.4, we present a number of robustness checks of the baseline estimations.

5.1

Heterogeneity

In the previous analysis, we have assumed that the network externality is described by a single
parameter, , that is the same for all agents.

However, it is plausible to assume that network

externalities are heterogeneous. For example, the degree to which an agent is “useful” to others
may depend on whether or not the agent is a committee chair, has high seniority.

The ability

to “use” other legislators may also be heterogeneous. By extending the model to allow for these
eﬀects, we can study the determinants of these heterogeneous social externalities (which may be
an important component of power in Congress).
To study this question let us generalize (1) to allow ’s usefulness to depend on his characteristics:
 =  +

q P
   ( ·  ) · 

(11)


In (11) we allow for heterogeneity in social spillovers by splitting  in 2 variables, ( )=1 and
( )=1 . The variable  can be interpreted as measuring how legislator ’s eﬀectiveness is susceptible to the eﬀectiveness of his socially connected peers: a legislator with a higher  is able to
better “use ” all the other legislators whom he has befriended. The variable  , instead, describes
how legislator ’s eﬀectiveness is useful to his socially connected peers: a legislator  with a higher
 is more “useful” to all the legislators who have befriended him.
Following essentially the same steps as in Section 2.2, we can derive the analog of (4) for this
more general model, obtaining:
1 P
 =  +  =1  ·   
2

(12)

These equations can be expressed in matrix form as:

[ − Φ ·  · Λ] · E = A

(13)

√
where Λ is a diagonal matrix with th diagonal component equal to   2 and Φ is a diagonal
√
matrix with th diagonal element equal to   2.
18

To bring (13) to the data, we assume:



√
2(0 + 0 θ 1 )
√
=
2(0 + 0 γ 1 )
=

(14)

where  = (1     ) is a vector of characteristics of , 0 , θ1 = (1     ) and 0 , γ 1 =
( 1      ) are coeﬃcients. To interpret (14), imagine that the th component of θ1 and γ 1 is
seniority.

Then   0 (respectively,   0) means that the seniority of a legislator increases

(resp., reduces) the ability of the legislator “use ” the eﬀectiveness of his socially connected peers;
   0 (resp.,    0) means that seniority of a legislator increases (resp., reduces) the usefulness
of the eﬀectiveness a legislator to his socially connected peers.
Once we insert (14) in (13), the parameters of the model can be again jointly estimated using
NLLS as in the estimation of (9).
The estimation of (13), in which we include the legislators’ personal characteristics (the 
variables), are presented in Tables 5a and 5b. We find that ethnic minorities appear to benefit more
than the average congressmen from social interactions, whereas congressmen with higher seniority
and committee chairs receive less benefits form interacting with others than other members of the
Congress.

5.2

The influence of parties

An important political factor which deserves special attention is the role of parties in fostering or
hindering social connections among legislators. For example, is it more useful for a Republican to
befriend a fellow Republican or to befriend a Democrat? A natural conjecture is that intraparty
connections are more useful than interparty connections, especially in the polarized landscape
that has developed in Congress since the 1970s. However, having some support from the other
party may be essential to advance bills through the legislative process. Addressing this question
is paramount for understanding the role of social connections in Congress.
To allow for party eﬀects, let us reorder the legislators in congress  so that the first  are
Republicans and the second  =  −  are Democrats.
into four submatrices.

The matrix  can now be divided

The top left  ·  dimensional submatrix collects the interactions of

Republicans with fellow Republicans; the bottom right  ·  dimensional submatrix collects the
interactions of Democrats with fellow Democrats; the top right  ·  dimensional submatrix
19

shows the influence of Democrats on Republicans (i.e.  where  is Democrat and  Republican);
and finally the bottom left  ·  dimensional submatrix shows the influence of Republicans on
Democrats (i.e.  where  is Republican and  Democrat).
∗
∗∗
∗
We can now decompose  in two  ×  matrices ∗ and ∗∗
 with  =  +  , where 

is a matrix that has the same top left and bottom right components as  and it is zero otherwise
and ∗∗
 is a matrix that has the same bottom left and top right components as  and it is zero
otherwise. Given this, we can extend the basic model by assuming:
 =  +

q P
P ∗∗
∗
∗  
·  + ∗∗  
·  · 

(15)

In (15) we are distinguishing between the eﬀects of intraparty and interparty social connections,
allowing them to be diﬀerent: if the impact of ’s eﬀectiveness on a legislator of the same party is
greater (resp. smaller) than that of a legislator of a diﬀerent party, then we should see ∗  ∗∗
(resp., ∗  ∗∗ ). If we impose ∗ = ∗∗ , we are back at the baseline model (9).
Starting from (15), we can easily derive:
i
1 h ∗P ∗
∗∗ P ∗∗

  ·  + 
  ·  
2

(16)

∙
¸−1
1 ∗ ∗
∗∗ ∗∗
E =  − (  +   )
· [ · 1 +  β + ε ]
2

(17)

 =  +
that in matrix form becomes:

Given the social network  , from which we can easily construct ∗ and ∗∗
 , and the covariates
 , we can now estimate (17) as before by NLLS.
Table 6 shows the estimation results. The results appear to favor the hypothesis that being
able to find support from outside one’s own party is very useful, a result that appears in line with
many informal accounts of how Congress works in practice.17

It is interesting to note that the

increasing polarization of politics in the U.S. Congress since the 1970s was paired by a drastic
reduction in its aggregate productivity (see, for example, Mann and Orstein [2016] on this). The
results of Table 6 may contribute to an understanding of why the increase in polarization has led
to a reduction in aggregate productivity.
17 Formal accounts on the importance of bridging gaps between parties include the biographies of notable legislators such as Speaker of the House Tip O’Neill (see O’Neil [1988] and Matthews [2013]), Senator Ted Kennedy
(see Canellos [2009]), and Representative (and then Senator and President) Lyndon Johnson (see Caro [2003]).

20

5.3

Timing of interactions

In this section, we investigate whether network eﬀects are more important in the early or late
stages of the legislative process. We follow the classification presented by Volden and Wiseman
[2009] who categorize bills as follows: bills proposed in the House of Representatives (BILL); bills
that received any action in committee (AIC); and bills that received some action beyond the
committee stage, distinguishing here between those that have passed (PASS) in the House, those
that have not passed in the House (ABC), and those that have become law (LAW). The Legislative
Eﬀectiveness score (LES) that we used in the previous analysis is calculated by averaging the five
indicators (BILL, AIC, ABC, PASS, LAW) and then normalizing so that the average LES takes
a value of 1 in each congress. (The fraction of bills in each category is weighted by the category’s
importance.)18 We now perform the same analysis considering each class separately.
Table 7 collects the NLLS estimations of (9) when the LES score is decomposed in order to
isolate the congressmen’s eﬀectiveness at diﬀerent stages of the legislative process. In Columns (1)
and (2), the dependent variable measures the congressmen’s eﬀectiveness at the very early stages
of the legislative, i.e. when eﬀectiveness is calculated using only bills categorized as BILL. In
Columns (3) and (4), the dependent variable is eﬀectiveness computed using the bills in BILL and
the bills deemed as AIC, thus capturing eﬀectiveness at the next step in the legislative process.
Finally, in Columns (5) and (6), the dependent variable is eﬀectiveness of congressmen at the later
stages of the legislative process. In this case the dependent variable is calculated including all bills
that received any action beyond the committee stage on the floor of the House (ABC, PASS,
LAW). The three dependent variables (BILL, BILL+AIC, ABC+PASS+LAW) are normalized so
that their average take a value of 1 in each congress.
The results in Table 7 show that network eﬀects are positive and significant for all stages
of the legislative process. Interestingly, looking at the control variables one can see that the
characteristics making legislators eﬀective change along the stages of the legislative process. More
senior congressman, committee chairs, and minority leaders acquire a sizable premium importance
18 Volden and Wiseman [2009] categorize a bill’s relevance in three groups: i) commemorative (C), ii) substantive
and significant (SS), iii) substantive (S). A bill is deemed commemorative (C) when its subject is a provision for
a renaming, a commemoration, the private relief of an individual, and the like. A bill is deemed substantive and
significant (SS) if it had been the subject of an end-of-the-year write-up in the Congressional Quarterly Almanac.
Finally, all other bills, and any “commemorative” bills that were also the subject of a CQ Almanac write-up are
classified as substantive (S). Bills assigned to the substantive and significant category are counted 10 times more
than those in the commemorative category, and twice as much as those in the substantive category.

21

at a later stage of the legislative process. Legislators with more extreme ideologies are more active
in proposing bills, but their extremism does not help in advancing those bills through the legislative
process. Finally, we observe that females are more penalized in the early stages.

5.4

Other robustness checks

To control for unobserved factors that may aﬀect the parameter estimates in (9) and are not
captured by our Heckman correction, in Columns (1) and (2) of Table 8 we include in our model
(9) dummies for all the congressional committees (21 dummies). Committees are an important
institutional feature of the legislative process and have been shown to be an important determinant of social connections (see, for example, Caldeira and Patterson [1987], Caldeira et al. [1993]
and Arnold et al. [2000]).19

As shown in the table, the estimates barely change, confirming

the robustness of the results. Interestingly, the importance of unobserved factors remains statistically diﬀerent from zero, signaling that unobserved factors that simultaneously aﬀect politicians’
legislative activity and patterns of cosponsorships are not the same for all members of a given
committee.
We conclude this section by adding in the control set of the congressman’s previous legislative
experience. This is one of the nine factors indicated by Volden and Wiseman [2009] as drivers of
legislative eﬀectiveness. The Legislative Eﬀectiveness Project dataset, however, does not report
this information for about 20% of the politicians in our sample. Therefore we did not include it
in our previous analysis to preserve the sample size. In Columns (3) and (4) of Table 8 we report
the estimation results of model (9) when it is run on the subsample of congressmen for which this
information is available. Previous legislative eﬀectiveness is captured using a dummy taking value
one whether a legislator has previously served in the state legislature (and 0 otherwise) and its
interaction with the state’s level of professionalism (see, e.g. Squire [1992]). Table 8 shows that
our results hold true, and the point estimates are very close in magnitude to the ones in Table 2,
Columns (2) and (3). Columns (5) and (6) of Table 8 show the results with committee dummies.
Again, the estimates of the externality remain positive and statistically significant, indicating that
19 Caldeira et al. [1993] find that representatives who share committee assignments are more likely to identify
one another as a “friend” or “respected legislator,” and that the probability of social bonds increases with the
number of shared assignments. As noted by Caldeira et al. [1993], “the business of the legislature largely happens
in its committees and subcommittees, where legislators become familiar with and take a measure of colleagues in a
task-oriented environment. Legislators on the same committees or subcommittees share substantive interests and
common workloads, so they have good reasons for establishing a relationship” (p. 12).

22

our evidence of network eﬀects is not driven by common shocks at the level of the committee.

6

Conclusions

This paper presents a simple theory of legislative eﬀectiveness in which a legislator’s performance
depends not only on his own characteristics and eﬀort, but also on the legislative eﬀectiveness of
the legislators with whom he has social connections. Using data from five recent Congresses, we
structurally estimate this model and test for the importance of social connections in determining
legislative eﬀectiveness.
Consistent with the theory, we find that congressmen’s weighted Bonacich centralities have a
significant eﬀect on their levels of legislative eﬀectiveness. Moreover, we find that controlling for
the endogeneity of the network connections has important implications.

If we ignore network

endogeenity, then all measures of congressmen’s network centralities are significant predictors of
their levels of legislative eﬀectiveness, leading to spurious correlations. Most measures of centrality,
however, are not significant when we control for network endogeneity.

The centrality measure

suggested by our model remains significant not only when we control for endogeneity, but also
when we include committee fixed eﬀects and, importantly, when we include all other standard
measures of centrality as controls in a “horse race.”
With our framework, we can also study the sources of social influence by allowing for heterogeneous network eﬀects. We find that ethnic minorities appear to benefit more than the average
congressmen from social interactions, whereas congressmen with higher seniority and committee
chairs receive less benefits form interacting with others than other members of the Congress. When
we focus on the role of parties, we find that connections with those outside one’s own party are
more important than connections within one’s own party, supporting the hypothesis that more
eﬀective legislators are those able to find support from outside their own party. Finally, we find
that network eﬀects are significant in all stages of the legislative process, but they appear to
become more important in the later stages.

23

References
Anderson, W. D., J. M. Box-Steﬀensmeier and V. S. Chapman (2003), “The Keys to Legislative Success in the U.S. House of Representatives”, Legislative Studies Quarterly, 28(3):
357-386.
Anselin, L., 1988, Spatial Econometrics: Methods and Models, Springer.
Anselin, L., 1990, “Some robust approach to testing and estimation in spatial econometrics,”
Regional Science and Urban Economics, 20, 141-163.
Apicella, C. L., F. W. Marlowe, J. H. Fowler, and N. A. Christakis (2012), “Social networks
and cooperation in hunter-gatherers,” Nature, 481 (7382): 497-501.
Arnold, L., R. Deen, S. Patterson (2000), “Friendship and Votes: The impact of Interpersonal
Ties on Legislative Decision Making,” State and Local Government Review, 32(2): 142-147.
Attanasio, O., A. Barr, J. C. Cardenas, G. Genicot, and C. Meghir (2012), “Risk pooling,
risk preferences, and social networks,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 4
(2): 134-167.
Ballester, C., A. Calvó-Armengol, and Y. Zenou (2006), “Who’s who in networks. Wanted:
The key player,” Econometrica, 74(5): 1403-1417.
Battaglini, M., and E. Patacchini (2017), “Influencing Connected Legislators,” Journal of
Political Economy, forthcoming.
Bonacich, P. (1987), “Power and centrality: A family of measures,” American Journal of
Sociology, 92(5): 1170-1182.
Bratton, K. A. (2005), Critical mass theory revisited: The behavior and success of token
women in state legislatures, Politics & Gender, 1(1): 97-125.
Bratton, K. A., and K. L., Haynie (1999), Agenda setting and legislative success in state
legislatures: The eﬀects of gender and race, The Journal of Politics, 61(3): 658-679.
Caldeira, G. A., J. A. Clark, and S. C. Patterson (1987), “Political Friendship in the Legislature,” The Journal of Politics, 49(4): 953-975.
Caldeira, G. A., J. A. Clark, and S. C. Patterson (1993), “Political respect in the legislature,”
Legislative Studies Quarterly, 18(1): 3-28.
Canellos, P. (2009), Last Lion: The Fall and Rise of Ted Kennedy, Simon & Schuster.
Caro, R. (2003), Master Of The Senate: The Years of Lyndon Johnson, Vintage.
Cohen, L., A. Frazzini, and C. Malloy (2008), “The Small World of Investing: Board Connections and Mutual Fund Returns,” Journal of Political Economy, 116(5): 951-979.
Cohen, L., and C. Malloy (2014), “Friends in High Places,” American Economic Journal:
Economics Policy, 6(3): 63-91.
Cox, G. W., and W.C. Terry (2008), Legislative productivity in the 93d—105th Congresses,
Legislative Studies Quarterly, 33(4): 603-618.

24

Craig, A. W. (2015), “Lone Wolves and Team Players: Policy Collaboration Networks and
Legislative Eﬀectiveness in the House of Representatives,” mimeo.
Csardi, G., T. Nepusz (2006), “The igraph software package for complex network research,”
InterJournal, Complex Systems, 1695. http://igraph.org
Do, Q.-A., Y.-T. Lee, and B. D. Nguyen (2016), “Directors as Connectors: The Impact of
the External Networks of Directors on Firms,” mimeo.
Fafchamps, M., and F. Gubert (2007), “Risk sharing and network formation,” American
Economic Review, 97(2): 75-79.
Fafchamps, M., M. J. Leij and S. Goyal (2010), “Matching and network eﬀects,” Journal of
the European Economic Association, 8(1): 203-231.
Fowler, J. H. (2006a), “Connecting the Congress: A study of cosponsorship networks,”
Political Analysis, 14(4): 456-487.
Fowler, J. H. (2006b), “Legislative cosponsorship networks in the U.S. House and Senate,”
Social Networks, 28 (4): 454-465.
Fracassi, C., and G. Tate (2012), “External networking and Internal Firm Governance,”
Journal of Finance, 67(1): 153-194.
Frantzich, S. (1979), “Who makes our laws? The legislative eﬀectiveness of members of the
U.S. Congress,” Legislative Studies Quarterly, 4(3): 409-428.
Goldsmith-Pinkham, P., and G.W. Imbens (2013), “Social networks and the identification
of peer eﬀects,” Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 31(3): 253-264.
Graham, B. S. (2014), “An econometric model of link formation with degree heterogeneity,”
NBER Working Paper Series n. 20341.
Harmon, N., R. Fisman, and E. Kamenica (2017), “Peer Eﬀects in Legislative Voting,”
mimeo.
Jackson, M.O. (2008), Social and Economic Networks, Princeton University Press.
Jeydel, A., and A. J. Taylor (2003), “Are women legislators less eﬀective? Evidence from
the US House in the 103rd-105th Congress,” Political Research Quarterly, 56(1): 19-27.
Kirkland, J. H. (2011), “The relational determinants of legislative success: Strong and weak
ties between legislators,” Journal of Politics, 73(3): 887-898.
Krehbiel, K. (1992), Information and legislative organization, University of Michigan Press.
Lai, B., and D. Reiter (2000), “Democracy, political similarity, and international alliances,
1816-1992,” Journal of Conflict Resolution 44(2): 203-227.
Mann, T., and O. Orstein (2016), It’s Even Worse Than It Looks: How the American
Constitutional System Collided with the New Politics of Extremism, Basic Books.
Mayer, A., and Puller, S.L. (2008), “The old boy (and girl) network: social network formation
on university campuses,” Journal of Public Economics, 92(1): 329-347.

25

Masket, S. (2008), “Where You Sit Is Where You Stand: The Impact of Seating Proximity
on Legislative Cue-Taking”, Quarterly Journal of Political Science, 3: 301-11.
Matthews, C. (2013), Tip and the Gipper: When Politics Worked, Simon & Schuster.
McCarty, N. M., K. T. Poole, and H. Rosenthal (1997), Income redistribution and the realignment of American politics, AEI press.
Mele, A. (2017), “A Structural Model of Dense Network Formation,” Econometrica, 85(3):
825-850.
O’Neil, T. (1988), Man of the House: The Life and Political Memoirs of Speaker Tip O’Neill,
St. Martins Press.
Padro I Miquel, G, and J. M. Snyder (2006), Legislative eﬀectiveness and legislative careers,
Legislative Studies Quarterly, 31(3): 347-381.
Qu, X., and L. Lee (2015), “Estimating a spatial autoregressive model with an endogenous
spatial weight matrix.” Journal of Econometrics, 184(2): 209-232.
Richards-Shubik, S., and E. Tamer (2015), “Identification of preferences in network formation games,” Working paper n. CWP29/15, Centre for Microdata Methods and Practice,
Institute for Fiscal Studies.
Sheng, S. (2014), “A structural econometric analysis of network formation games,” UCLA
Mimeo.
Squire, P. (1992), “Legislative professionalization and membership diversity in state legislatures,” Legislative Studies Quarterly, 17(1): 69-79.
Tam Cho, W., and J. Fowler (2010), “Legislative success in a small world: Social network
analysis and the dynamics of Congressional legislation,” The Journal of Politics, 72(1): 124135.
Volden, C., and A. E. Wiseman (2009), “Legislative eﬀectiveness in Congress,” Mimeo, The
Ohio State University.
Volden, C., and A. E. Wiseman (2011), “Breaking Gridlock: The Determinants of Health
Policy Change in Congress,” Journal of health politics, policy and law, 36(2): 227-264.
Volden, C., and A. E. Wiseman (2014), “Legislative Eﬀectiveness in the United States
Congress: The Lawmakers,” Cambridge University Press.
Volden, C., A. E. Wiseman, and D. E. Wittmer (2013), When are women more eﬀective
lawmakers than men?,” American Journal of Political Science, 57(2): 326-341.
Wiseman, A. E., and J.R. Wright (2008), “The legislative median and partisan policy,”
Journal of Theoretical Politics, 20(1): 5-29.
Zenou, Y. (2015) “Networks in Economics,” In: J.D. Wright (Ed.), International Encyclopedia of the Social and Behavioral Sciences, 2nd Edition, Amsterdam: Elsevier Publisher,
572-581.

26

TABLE 1. NETWORK FORMATION
Dep. Var.: Link in Co-sponsorship network
(1)
(2)
(3)

Link in Alumni network

4.4519***
(0.2021)

3.8658***
(0.1941)
-0.1128***
(0.0103)
0.3834***
(0.011)
2.165***
(0.0098)
-0.0309***
(0.0011)
-0.4682***
(0.0209)
-1.5762***
(0.0264)
-0.0175***
(0.0003)
-0.6119***
(0.0165)

3.8561***
(0.194)0
-0.1048***
(0.0103)
0.3894***
(0.0111)
2.1663***
(0.0099)
-0.0303***
(0.0011)
-0.496***
(0.0209)
-1.5496***
(0.0264)
-0.0174***
(0.0003)
-0.6226***
(0.0165)
-0.5416***
(0.0213)
-0.1818***
(0.0216)
0.5620***
(0.0757)

Yes

Yes

Yes

Gender (1=Female)
No White (1=Yes)
Party (1 = Democrat)
Seniority
Vote Share
Distance to the Median
Size of Congr. Deleg.
Committee Chair (1 = Yes)
Majority Leader (1 = Yes)
Minority Leader (1 = Yes)
Speaker (1 = Yes)

Congress fixed effects

R2
0.0007
0.0791
0.0799
945,382
945,382
945,382
N. obs.
Notes. OLS estimated coefficients (multiplied by hundreds) are reported. An intercept
is included. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered by dyad. *, **, *** indicate
statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level.

TABLE 2. MAIN ESTIMATES
Dep. Var.: Legislative Effectiveness Score (LES)
(2)
(3)
0.8324***
0.4448***
(0.0233)
(0.0516)
-0.0310
0.0128
-0.0257
(0.0493)
(0.045)
(0.0830)
-0.1088
-0.1643**
-0.1588**
(0.0577)
(0.0511)
(0.0929)
-0.1166
-0.2762***
-0.179***
(0.0605)
(0.0497)
(0.105)
0.0229**
0.0251***
0.0177***
(0.0052)
(0.0047)
(0.0102)
-0.0018
0.2193**
0.0781
(0.0877)
(0.0806)
(0.1095)
-0.3204*
-0.4084**
-0.4228***
(0.1276)
(0.1132)
(0.1903)
-0.0034*
-0.0048***
-0.0048***
(0.0011)
(0.001)
(0.0020)
1.6107***
1.9669***
1.8693***
(0.1147)
(0.105)
(0.1545)
-0.0494
0.4083**
0.182
(0.125)
(0.1167)
(0.1566)
-0.2944
-0.3910***
-0.3972***
(0.1143)
(0.105)
(0.1799)
-1.2605
-0.3563
-0.8245
(0.8745)
(0.7732)
(0.9538)
-0.4133***
(0.0741)
(1)

Φ
Gender (1=Female)
No White (1=Yes)
Party (1 = Democrat)
Seniority
Vote Share
Distance to the Median
Size of Congr. Deleg.
Committee Chair (1 = Yes)
Majority Leader (1 = Yes)
Minority Leader (1 = Yes)
Speaker (1 = Yes)
Unobservables (ξ)

Intercept
Congress fixed effects
Partial F test (ϕ=0)
p-value

0.9976***
(0.0938)
Yes

0.6930***
(0.0786)
Yes

0.2531*
(0.149)
Yes

350.81***
[2.2e-16]

59.51***
[1.8e-14]

2,176
N. Obs
2,176
2,176
Notes. NLLS estimated coefficients are reported in columns (2)-(3). OLS estimated coefficients are reported
in column (1). Robust standard errors (in parentheses) are reported in columns (1) and (2). Standard errors
in column (3) are bootstrapped with 500 replications. A precise definition of control variables can be found
in Table A.1. *, **, *** indicate statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level.

TABLE 3. EFFECTS OF EXOGENOUS VARIABLES
No Network Effects
Panel (a)

With Network Effects
Panel (b)
Direct Effects
Indirect Effects
mean
max
min
mean
max
min

Gender (1=Female)
0.0128
-0.0314
-0.0310
-0.0335
-0.0004
0.0000
No White (1=Yes)
-0.1643
-0.1100
-0.1088
-0.1176
-0.0012
0.0000
-0.2762
Party (1 = Democrat)
-0.1179
-0.1166
-0.1260
-0.0013
0.0000
0.0251
Seniority
0.0231
0.0247
0.0229
0.0003
0.0086
0.2193
Vote Share
-0.0019
-0.0018
-0.0020
0.0000
0.0000
Distance to the Median
-0.4084
-0.3241
-0.3204
-0.3464
-0.0037
0.0000
Size of Congr. Deleg.
-0.0048
-0.0034
-0.0034
-0.0037
0.0000
0.0000
Committee Chair (1 = Yes)
1.9669
1.6292
1.7412
1.6107
0.0185
0.6060
Majority Leader (1 = Yes)
0.4083
-0.0499
-0.0494
-0.0534
-0.0006
0.0000
Minority Leader (1 = Yes)
-0.39100
-0.2978
-0.2944
-0.3183
-0.0034
0.0000
Speaker (1 = Yes)
-0.3563
-1.2750
-1.2605
-1.3627
-0.0145
0.0000
Notes. Panel (a) reports the OLS estimates in Table 2, column (1). Panel (b) reports NLLS estimates in Table 2, column (3).

-0.0117
-0.0409
-0.0439
0.0000
-0.0007
-0.1205
-0.0013
0.0000
-0.0186
-0.1108
-0.4743

TABLE 4. HORSE RACE
Dep. Var.: Legislative Effectiveness Score (LES)
(1)

(2)

0.0079***
(0.0007)

-0.2599
(0.1662)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

Centrality Measure:
Betweenness

-0.0395
(0.1917)
0.0011***
(0.0001)

Closeness

0.0085
(0.0086)

0.0041
(0.017)
0.1203***
(0.0073)

Eigenvector

-0.4122
(0.2500)

-0.4813
(0.3908)
0.7095***
(0.0817)

Φ
Gender (1=Female)

0.0197
(0.0481)

0.7488
(0.491)

0.0087
(0.0472)

-0.1919
(0.2315)

-0.0131
(0.0465)

0.2023*
(0.1101)

-0.0607
(1.1479)

No White (1=Yes)

-0.1491**
(0.0563)

-1.0094*
(0.5806)

-0.152**
(0.0553)

0.4184
(0.6835)

-0.1345**
(0.0544)

-0.5547**
(0.2032)

-0.0634
(2.0651)

Party (1 = Democrat)

-0.2342***
(0.0591)

-0.6011**
(0.2532)

-0.2407***
(0.058)

-0.26***
(0.0521)

-0.2218***
(0.0571)

-0.1815***
(0.0525)

-0.0385
(0.434)

Seniority

0.0227***
(0.0051)

0.1232*
(0.0683)

0.0212***
(0.005)

-0.0029
(0.029)

0.0208***
(0.0049)

0.0373***
(0.0096)

0.0076
(0.1516)

Vote Share

0.1759**
(0.0856)

1.6545*
(1.0001)

0.1395*
(0.0842)

-0.3838
(0.6263)

0.0726
(0.0832)

0.6508**
(0.2825)

0.0153
(2.5583)

Distance to the Median

-0.349**
(0.1246)

-0.8424**
(0.3548)

-0.3752**
(0.1223)

-0.5176**
(0.1935)

-0.3327**
(0.1204)

-0.2431**
(0.1088)

-0.2426
(0.6088)

Size of Congr. Deleg.

-0.0051***
(0.0011)

0.0257
(0.0209)

-0.0054***
(0.0011)

-0.0152
(0.0116)

-0.0054***
(0.0011)

0.0018
(0.0036)

-0.0075
(0.0507)

Committee Chair (1 = Yes)

1.9779***
(0.1118)

2.3234***
(0.2753)

1.9119***
(0.1099)

1.2324
(0.8192)

1.8769***
(0.1082)

2.4862***
(0.3251)

1.8036
(1.9863)

Majority Leader (1 = Yes)

0.3565**
(0.1219)

0.0258
(0.2493)

0.2373**
(0.1204)

-0.7899
(1.2353)

0.1712
(0.1187)

1.1042**
(0.4593)

0.3422
(2.5992)

Minority Leader (1 = Yes)

-0.4046***
(0.1114)

-0.8726**
(0.3223)

-0.4022***
(0.1095)

-0.3849***
(0.1096)

-0.3385**
(0.1078)

-0.6183***
(0.177)

-0.4875
(0.6070)

-0.1024
(0.8528)

-8.1598
(5.5727)

-0.1973
(0.8377)

0.963
(1.5138)

-0.1043
(0.8243)

-1.1973
(0.7647)

-0.2851
(10.8160)

Speaker (1 = Yes)
Unobservables (ξ)

0.0027
(0.0018)

Between

-0.0440
(0.1916)
-0.0074
(0.0086)

Closeness

-0.0042
(0.017)
0.5323**
(0.25)

Eigenvector

-0.2891***
(0.0858)

Φ

-4.4950
(26.7543)

Intercept
Congress fixed effect
N. Obs.

0.5152
(0.3856)

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2,176

2,176

2,176

2,176

2,176

2,176

2,176

Notes. OLS estimated coefficients and standard errors (in parentheses) are reported in columns (1)-(6). NLLS estimated coefficients are
reported in column (7). In columns (2), (4), (6), and (7) standard errors are bootstrapped with 500 replications. Estimates for betweeness,
closeness and eigenvector centralities are multiplied respectively by 100, 10,000 and 10,000. A precise definition of control variables can
be found in Table A.1. *, **, *** indicate statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level.

TABLE 5a. HETEROGENEOS EFFECTS

𝜃𝜃0
𝜃𝜃1
𝛾𝛾0

Gender (1=Female)

𝛾𝛾1

No White (1=Yes)
Party (1 = Democrat)
Seniority
Vote Share
Distance to the Median
Size of Congr. Deleg.
Committee Chair (1 = Yes)
Majority Leader (1 = Yes)
Minority Leader (1 = Yes)
Speaker (1 = Yes)
Unobservables (ξ)
Intercept
Congress fixed effects
N. Obs

Gender (1 = Female)
φ
η
(1)
(2)
0.8413***
(0.0572)
0.0345
(0.1014)
0.8409***
(0.1011)
0.0523
(0.4724)
-0.0006
-0.0289
(0.0929)
(0.0808)
-0.1101
-0.1096
(0.0931)
(0.0925)
-0.1138
-0.111
(0.1046)
(0.1058)
0.0230**
0.0230**
(0.0101)
(0.0093)
-0.0032
-3e-04
(0.1101)
(0.1204)
-0.3163*
-0.3175
(0.1901)
(0.2041)
-0.0034*
-0.0034*
(0.002)
(0.002)
1.6084***
1.6104***
(0.1547)
(0.1569)
-0.0435
-0.0493
(0.1569)
(0.1769)
-0.2896
-0.2942
(0.1820)
(0.1891)
-1.2844
-1.2558
(0.959)
(1.0026)
-0.4121***
-0.4134***
(0.0731)
(0.0759)
0.2426*
0.2454*
(0.147)
(0.1424)
Yes
Yes
2,176
2,176

Dep. Var.: Legislative Effectiveness Score (LES)
No White (1=Yes)
Party (1=Democrat)
φ
η
φ
η
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
0.8535***
0.8322***
(0.0599)
(0.071)
0.1584*
-0.0003
(0.0955)
(0.0896)
0.8432***
0.8121***
(0.094)
(0.0937)
0.0735
-0.0458
(0.3823)
(0.1198)
-0.0423
-0.0310
-0.0310
-0.0328
(0.0792)
(0.0825)
(0.0776)
(0.0885)
0.0302
-0.1031
-0.1088
-0.1064
(0.0994)
(0.0877)
(0.1034)
(0.0918)
-0.1169
-0.1071
-0.1169
-0.1447
(0.0975)
(0.1096)
(0.1076)
(0.1004)
0.0226**
0.0230**
0.0229**
0.0225**
(0.0094)
(0.0101)
(0.0094)
(0.0094)
-0.0095
0.0018
-0.0019
-0.0055
(0.1051)
(0.1198)
(0.1122)
(0.1051)
-0.3292*
-0.3147
-0.3205*
-0.3267*
(0.1908)
(0.2061)
(0.1942)
(0.1907)
-0.0034*
-0.0034
-0.0034*
-0.0034
(0.002)
(0.0021)
(0.002)
(0.0022)
1.6225***
1.61***
1.6106***
1.6102***
(0.1443)
(0.1517)
(0.1472)
(0.1512)
-0.0608
-0.0516
-0.0494
-0.0517
(0.1794)
(0.1758)
(0.1742)
(0.1746)
-0.3176
-0.2953
-0.2944
-0.2907*
(0.199)
(0.1895)
(0.1941)
(0.1763)
-1.0359
-1.2589
-1.2608
-1.264
(0.9756)
(1.0046)
(1.0214)
(0.9428)
-0.3895***
-0.4146***
-0.4133***
-0.4148***
(0.0754)
(0.0915)
(0.0783)
(0.082)
0.2362
0.2379
0.2533
0.2795*
(0.1469)
(0.1688)
(0.1565)
(0.1484)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
2,176
2,176
2,176
2,176

Seniority
φ
η
(7)
(8)
0.6172***
(0.1004)
-0.0339**
(0.0123)
0.7191**
(0.2944)
-0.0159
(0.0365)
-0.0352
-0.0326
(0.0821)
(0.0887)
-0.1063
-0.1062
(0.0991)
(0.0999)
-0.141
-0.1386
(0.1131)
(0.1025)
-0.0023
0.0216**
(0.0108)
(0.0098)
0.0148
-0.0033
(0.124)
(0.1201)
-0.3231
-0.327*
(0.2087)
(0.1864)
-0.0035*
-0.0036*
(0.0019)
(0.0021)
1.5222***
1.6105***
(0.1662)
(0.153)
-0.0525
-0.049
(0.1706)
(0.1802)
-0.2766
-0.2951
(0.1855)
(0.185)
-1.2837
-1.3571
(1.0739)
(0.9692)
-0.4252***
-0.411***
(0.0796)
(0.0854)
0.4118**
0.2832*
(0.166)
(0.1583)
Yes
Yes
2,176
2,176

Notes. NLLS estimated coefficients and bootstrapped standard errors with 500 replications (in parentheses) are reported. A precise
definition of control variables can be found in Table A.1. *, **, *** indicate statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level.
According to the theoretical equation (15), 𝜃𝜃0 and 𝜃𝜃1 indicate how susceptible legislator i’s effectiveness is, while 𝛾𝛾0 and 𝛾𝛾1 indicate the
influence of legislator i on other legislators’ effectiveness.

TABLE 5b. HETEROGENEOUS EFFECTS

φ
(1)

𝜃𝜃0

𝜃𝜃1

Vote Share

0.8672***
(0.0920)

0.8672***
(0.0920)

0.9017***
(0.0824)

0.0777
(0.1315)

0.0777
(0.1315)

0.0031
(0.0021)

𝛾𝛾0
𝛾𝛾1

η
(2)

Dep. Var.: Legislative Effectiveness Score (LES)
Distance to the Median
Size of Congr. Deleg.
φ
η
φ
η
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)

0.8509***
(0.2475)

0.8509***
(0.2475)

0.7237**
(0.2519)

0.0393
(0.4525)

0.0393
(0.4525)

-0.0052
(0.0107)

-0.0320
(0.0773)

-0.0309
(0.0855)

-0.0320
(0.0773)

-0.0309
(0.0855)

-0.0398
(0.0756)

-0.0336
(0.0845)

No White (1=Yes)

-0.1109
(0.0984)

-0.1081
(0.0959)

-0.1109
(0.0984)

-0.1081
(0.0959)

-0.1009
(0.0889)

-0.1089
(0.0956)

Party (1 = Democrat)

-0.1089
(0.0946)

-0.1127
(0.0944)

-0.1089
(0.0946)

-0.1127
(0.0944)

-0.1107
(0.1106)

-0.1283
(0.1096)

Seniority

0.0227**
(0.0096)

0.0229**
(0.0097)

0.0227**
(0.0096)

0.0229**
(0.0097)

0.0227**
(0.0093)

0.0225**
(0.0097)

Vote Share

0.0621
(0.1375)

0.0009
(0.1216)

0.0621
(0.1375)

0.0009
(0.1216)

-0.0018
(0.1178)

-0.0032
(0.1169)

Distance to the Median

-0.3094*
(0.1713)

-0.3171*
(0.1895)

-0.3094*
(0.1713)

-0.3171*
(0.1895)

-0.3242
(0.2036)

-0.3304*
(0.1976)

Size of Congr. Deleg.

-0.0034*
(0.002)

-0.0034*
(0.002)

-0.0034*
(0.002)

-0.0034*
(0.002)

-0.0009
(0.0022)

-0.0040*
(0.0022)

Committee Chair (1 = Yes)

1.6117***
(0.1587)

1.6099***
(0.1615)

1.6117***
(0.1587)

1.6099***
(0.1615)

1.6404***
(0.1548)

1.6113***
(0.1449)

Majority Leader (1 = Yes)

-0.0471
(0.1738)

-0.0503
(0.1709)

-0.0471
(0.1738)

-0.0503
(0.1709)

-0.0545
(0.1796)

-0.0413
(0.1819)

Minority Leader (1 = Yes)

-0.3013
(0.1836)

-0.2953
(0.1835)

-0.3013
(0.1836)

-0.2953
(0.1835)

-0.3076*
(0.186)

-0.2934
(0.1962)

Speaker (1 = Yes)

-1.2874
(1.0309)

-1.2560
(1.0101)

-1.2874
(1.0309)

-1.2560
(1.0101)

-1.0870
(0.9838)

-1.3166
(0.9493)

-0.4163***
(0.0854)

-0.4165***
(0.105)

-0.4163***
(0.0854)

0.4165***
(0.105)

-0.3954***
(0.0685)

-0.4049***
(0.0951)

0.2149*
(0.1233)
Yes
2,176

0.2447
(0.1512)
Yes
2,176

0.2149*
(0.1233)
Yes
2,176

0.2447
(0.1512)
Yes
2,176

0.1998
(0.1506)
Yes
2,176

0.2892
(0.1883)
Yes
2,176

Gender (1=Female)

Unobservables (ξ)
Intercept
Congress fixed effects
N. Obs.

Committee chair

φ
(7)
0.7865***
(0.0532)
0.5981***
(0.1588)

-0.0285
(0.0873)
-0.1069
(0.095)
-0.1214
(0.0987)
0.0235**
(0.0092)
0.0237
(0.1193)
-0.3407*
(0.1908)
-0.0039**
(0.0019)
0.8194***
(0.2361)
-0.0372
(0.1612)
-0.3057
(0.1918)
-1.3037
(0.9429)
0.4200***
(0.0726)
0.2920**
(0.1473)
Yes
2,176

η
(8)

0.6740***
(0.1806)
-0.4420
(0.4617)
-0.026
(0.0822)
-0.1225
(0.0952)
-0.1147
(0.1065)
0.0228**
(0.0112)
0.003
(0.1224)
-0.3291
(0.2098)
-0.004*
(0.0021)
1.6078***
(0.159)
-0.0381
(0.1683)
-0.2877
(0.1868)
-1.1575
(0.9107)
-0.3341**
(0.1201)
0.3498*
(0.1824)
Yes
2,176

Notes. NLLS estimated coefficients and bootstrapped standard errors with 500 replications (in parentheses) are reported. A precise
definition of control variables can be found in Table A.1. *, **, *** indicate statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level.
According to the theoretical equation (14), 𝜃𝜃0 and 𝜃𝜃1 indicate how how susceptible legislator i’s effectiveness is, while 𝛾𝛾0 and 𝛾𝛾1
indicate the influence of legislator i on other legislators’ effectiveness.

TABLE 6. PARTY EFFECTS
Dep. Var.: Legislative Effectiveness Score (LES)
(1)
(2)
(3)
1.5984***
0.8583***
0.8668***
G**
(0.4742)
(0.2409)
(0.2136)
1.4208***
0.8535***
0.8346***
G*
(0.1000)
(0.0605)
(0.0584)
-0.0335
-0.0304
Gender (1=Female)
(0.0802)
(0.0850)
-0.1053
-0.1071
Non White (1=Yes)
(0.0911)
(0.0919)
-0.1177
-0.1145
Party (1 = Democrat)
(0.1109)
(0.0972)
0.0216
0.0228
Seniority
(0.0093)
(0.0094)
-0.0010
-0.0019
Vote Share
(0.1166)
(0.1074)
-0.3192
-0.3100
Distance to the Median
(0.1975)
(0.1889)
-0.0034*
-0.0034*
Size of Congr. Deleg.
(0.0020)
(0.0019)
1.6195***
1.6097***
Committee Chair (1 = Yes)
(0.1509)
(0.1431)
-0.0498
Majority Leader (1 = Yes)
(0.1772)
-0.2973
Minority Leader (1 = Yes)
(0.2030)
-1.2540
Speaker (1 = Yes)
(0.9746)
-0.8558***
-0.4368***
-0.4216***
Unobservables (ξ)
(0.1432)
(0.0954)
(0.1000)
-0.4075***
0.2295
0.2384
Intercept
(0.1191)
(0.1522)
(0.1543)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Congress fixed effects
2,176
2,176
2,176
N. Obs.
Notes. NLLS estimated coefficients and bootstrapped standard errors with 500 replications (in parentheses) are
reported. A precise definition of control variables can be found in Table A.1. *, **, *** indicate statistical
significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level. G* and G** are the within-party and between-party co-sponsorship
networks in the theoretical equation (15).

TABLE 7 LEGISLATIVE EFFECTIVENESS AT DIFFERENT STAGES OF LEGISLATIVE PROCESS

Φ
Gender (1=Female)
No White (1=Yes)
Party (1 = Democrat)
Seniority
Vote Share
Distance to the Median
Size of Congr. Deleg.
Committee Chair (1 = Yes)
Majority Leader (1 = Yes)
Minority Leader (1 = Yes)
Speaker (1 = Yes)
Unobservables (ξ)
Intercept
Congress fixed effects
N. Obs.

Dep. Var.: BILL
(1)
(2)
0.4093***
0.5634***
(0.0161)
(0.0539)
-0.0973**
-0.1054*
(0.0332)
(0.0566)
-0.1687***
-0.1461**
(0.0377)
(0.0713)
0.2556***
0.2468***
(0.0367)
(0.0479)
0.0053
0.0063
(0.0034)
(0.0051)
-0.0616
-0.0779
(0.0592)
(0.0666)
0.2062**
0.2199**
(0.0835)
(0.0945)
-0.0035***
-0.0030**
(0.0007)
(0.0011)
0.0614
-0.0152
(0.0769)
(0.0649)
-0.2449**
-0.3153***
(0.0854)
(0.0787)
-0.308***
-0.2905***
(0.0772)
(0.0758)
-0.6342
-0.7144
(0.5719)
(0.3065)
-0.1601**
(0.0687)
0.3140**
0.4719***
(0.0577)
(0.0969)
Yes
Yes
2,176
2,176

Dep. Var.: BILL + AIC
(3)
(4)
0.4283***
0.8387***
(0.0177)
(0.0465)
-0.0722**
-0.0829
(0.0358)
(0.0682)
-0.1376***
-0.0834
(0.0407)
(0.0756)
0.0225
0.0468
(0.0395)
(0.0722)
0.0066*
0.0115**
(0.0037)
(0.0072)
0.0434
-0.0365
(0.0641)
(0.0815)
-0.0758
-0.0091
(0.0902)
(0.1464)
-0.0041***
-0.0025
(0.0008)
(0.0016)
1.0509***
0.8044***
(0.0833)
(0.0958)
0.0301
-0.1961
(0.0926)
(0.1243)
-0.3947***
-0.3044**
(0.0835)
(0.1435)
-0.9418
-1.2202**
(0.6165)
(0.4673)
-0.4402***
(0.0647)
0.1373
0.5830***
(0.0624)
(0.1154)
Yes
Yes
2,176
2,176

Dep. Var.: ABC + PASS + LAW
(5)
(6)
0.8643***
0.4765***
(0.0312)
(0.0767)
-0.0167
-0.0162
(0.0587)
(0.1076)
-0.1401
-0.1901**
(0.0665)
(0.1274)
-0.1094*
-0.1808**
(0.0643)
(0.1300)
0.0255***
0.0315***
(0.006)
(0.0140)
0.0515
-0.0352
(0.1051)
(0.1497)
-0.3259**
-0.2279
(0.1472)
(0.2439)
-0.0049***
-0.0036
(0.0013)
(0.0027)
2.4852***
2.1891***
(0.1372)
(0.2213)
0.2825*
0.0272
(0.1525)
(0.2125)
-0.4100**
-0.2807
(0.137)
(0.2295)
-0.8171
-1.3827
(1.0026)
(1.5450)
-0.4284***
(0.0903)
0.1135
0.5459***
(0.1018)
(0.1785)
Yes
Yes
2,176
2,176

Notes. NLLS estimated coefficients and bootstrapped standard errors with 500 replications are reported. *, **, *** indicate statistical
significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level. In columns (1) and (2), the dependent variable measures congressmen effectiveness at the
earlier stages of the legislative process as the fraction of bills that they have introduced in the House of Representatives (BILL). In columns
(3) and (4), the dependent variable also considers the fraction of bills that received any action in committee (AIC). In columns (5) and (6),
the dependent variable indicates the effectiveness of congressmen at the later stages of the legislative process. The variable includes the
fraction of bills that received any action beyond committee on the floor of the House (ABC), that have passed the House (PASS), and
became law (LAW). The three dependent variables (BILL, BILL+AIC, ABC+PASS+LAW) are normalized so that their average take a
value of 1 in each Congress. The Legislative Effectiveness Score (LES) is a weighted average of the five indicators (BILL, AIC, ABC,
PASS, LAW) which is in turn normalized so that the average LES takes a value of 1 in each Congress. The details of this method are in
Volden C. and Wiseman A. E. (2014), Legislative Effectiveness in the United States Congress: The Lawmakers, Cambridge University
Press.

TABLE 8. ROBUSTENESS CHEKS
Dep. Var.: Legislative Effectiveness Score (LES)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
0.6919***
0.8150***
0.7114***
0.4367***
0.4325***
Φ
(0.0233)
(0.026)
(0.0740)
(0.0517)
(0.0664)
-0.0115
-0.0527
-0.0163
-0.0476
-0.0067
Gender (1=Female)
(0.0458)
(0.0509)
(0.0967)
(0.0771)
(0.0959)
-0.1311
-0.1222
-0.1474
-0.1698**
-0.1986***
No White (1=Yes)
(0.0518)
(0.0569)
(0.0978)
(0.0908)
(0.0963)
-0.0662
-0.1041
-0.0811
-0.1621**
-0.1125**
Party (1 = Democrat)
(0.0501)
(0.0555)
(0.1260)
(0.1031)
(0.1188)
0.0222**
0.0222**
0.0260**
0.0168***
0.0244***
Seniority
(0.0047)
(0.0054)
(0.0113)
(0.0102)
(0.0121)
0.0317
0.0119
0.0163
0.0887
0.0598
Vote Share
(0.0814)
(0.0895)
(0.1268)
(0.1017)
(0.1215)
-0.2121
-0.2697**
-0.2502**
-0.3702**
-0.3560**
Distance to the Median
(0.1145)
(0.127)
(0.2256)
(0.1828)
(0.2088)
-0.0040*
-0.0032
-0.0048**
-0.0044***
-0.0055***
Size of Congr. Deleg.
(0.0010)
(0.0013)
(0.0021)
(0.0019)
(0.0021)
1.7824***
1.6679***
1.7559***
1.9226***
1.9097***
Committee Chair (1 = Yes)
(0.1053)
(0.109)
(0.1494)
(0.1542)
(0.1484)
0.0562
-0.0008
0.0180
0.2181*
0.1586
Majority Leader (1 = Yes)
(0.1188)
(0.1257)
(0.1798)
(0.1448)
(0.1618)
-0.2716
-0.3117*
-0.2741
-0.4202***
-0.3379**
Minority Leader (1 = Yes)
(0.1066)
(0.1110)
(0.1943)
(0.1658)
(0.1772)
-1.1174
-1.2668*
-1.1708
-0.8206
-0.8841
Speaker (1 = Yes)
(0.772)
(0.8415)
(0.9493)
(0.9212)
(0.9450)
0.1189
0.1109
0.1102
State legislative experience
(0.0776)
(0.1164)
(0.1370)
-0.0369
0.0301
0.0538
State legislative experience *
(0.1856)
State legislative professionalism
(0.2900)
(0.3383)
-0.2939**
-0.4034***
-0.2961***
Unobservables (ξ)
(0.0968)
(0.0742)
(0.0957)
0.2052
0.2806*
0.1762
0.4918***
0.7062***
0.4362***
Intercept
(0.0959)
(0.1085)
(0.1262)
(0.1728)
(0.1515)
(0.1825)
Congress fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Committee fixed effects
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
1,775
N. Obs.
1,775
1,775
1,775
2,176
2,176
Notes. NLLS estimated coefficients and standard errors (in parentheses) are reported. In columns (2), (4) and (6) standard errors are bootstrapped
with 500 replications. A precise definition of control variables can be found in Table A.1. *, **, *** indicate statistical significance at the 10, 5 and
1 percent level.
(1)
0.4112***
(0.0254)
-0.0015
(0.0502)
-0.1847***
(0.0559)
-0.0974*
(0.0552)
0.0208***
(0.0052)
0.0758
(0.0878)
-0.3172**
(0.1246)
-0.0047***
(0.0012)
1.9359***
(0.1089)
0.1963
(0.1242)
-0.3303**
(0.1097)
-0.8051
(0.8463)
0.1214
(0.0772)
-0.018
(0.1819)

Table A.1: SUMMARY STATISTICS
Variable Definition

Mean

St. Dev

Legislative Effectiveness
Score (LES)

Weighted average of the number of bills introduced, that
received any action in committee and beyond committee,
passed the House, and became law, sponsored by a
congressman. It differentially weights commemorative,
substantive and significant legislation. Created by Volden
C. and Wiseman A. E. (2014).

1.0081

1.4700

Gender (1=Female)

Dummy variable taking value of one if the member of
Congress is female.

0.1723

0.3778

No White (1=Yes)

Dummy variable taking value of one if the member of
Congress is Afro-American or Latino, and zero otherwise.

0.1388

0.3458

Party (1 = Democrat)

Dummy variable taking value of one if the member of
Congress is a Democrat.

0.5051

0.5001

Seniority

Number of consecutive
Representatives.

5.7877

4.4372

Vote Share

Election Margin of Victory of the member of Congress.

0.3526

0.2488

Distance to the Median

Distance to the center in terms of ideology measured using
the absolute value of the first dimension of the dwnominate score created by McCarty et al. (1997).

0.5004

0.2236

Size of Congr. Deleg.

Number of seats assigned to congressman’s State of
election.

19.0988

15.4628

Committee Chair (1 = Yes)

Dummy variable taking value of one if the member of
Congress is a chair of at least one committee.

0.0455

0.2084

Majority Leader (1 = Yes)

Dummy variable taking value of one if the member of
Congress is member of the majority party leadership, as
reported by the Almanac of American Politics.

0.0253

0.1570

Minority Leader (1 = Yes)

Dummy variable taking value of one if the member of
Congress is member of the minority party leadership, as
reported by the Almanac of American Politics.

0.0244

0.1542

Speaker (1 = Yes)

Dummy variable taking value of one if the member of
Congress is speaker of the House.

0.0018

0.0428

2,176

2,176

N. Obs.

years in the House of

