NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

U.S. EMPLOYMENT AND OPIOIDS:
IS THERE A CONNECTION?
Janet Currie
Jonas Y. Jin
Molly Schnell
Working Paper 24440
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24440

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2018, Revised April 2019

We thank participants at the 2017 IZA Workshop on Health and Labor Markets for their helpful
feedback. We gratefully acknowledge support from the program for U.S. Health and Health
Policy at the Center for Health and Wellbeing at Princeton University. The statements, findings,
conclusions, views, and opinions contained and expressed herein are not necessarily those of
IQVIA (nor any of its affiliated or subsidiary entities), QuintilesIMS (nor any of its affiliated or
subsidiary entities), nor of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Janet Currie, Jonas Y. Jin, and Molly Schnell. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

U.S. Employment and Opioids: Is There a Connection?
Janet Currie, Jonas Y. Jin, and Molly Schnell
NBER Working Paper No. 24440
March 2018, Revised April 2019
JEL No. I14
ABSTRACT
This paper uses quarterly county-level data from 2006–2014 to examine the direction of causality
in the relationship between per capita opioid prescription rates and employment-to-population
ratios. We first estimate models of the effect of per capita opioid prescription rates on
employment-to-population ratios, instrumenting opioid prescriptions for younger ages using
opioid prescriptions to the elderly. We find that the estimated effect of opioids on employmentto-population ratios is positive but small for women, while there is no relationship for men. We
then estimate models of the effect of employment-to-population ratios on opioid prescription
rates using a shift-share instrument, and find ambiguous results. Overall, our findings suggest that
there is no simple causal relationship between economic conditions and the abuse of opioids.
Therefore, while improving economic conditions in depressed areas is desirable for many
reasons, it is unlikely on its own to curb the opioid epidemic.
Janet Currie
Department of Economics
Center for Health and Wellbeing
185A Julis Romo Rabinowitz Building
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
jcurrie@princeton.edu
Jonas Y. Jin
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Julis Romo Rabinowitz building
jyjin@princeton.edu

Molly Schnell
Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research
John and Cynthia Fry Gunn Building
Room 227
366 Galvez Street
Stanford, CA 94305
mschnell@stanford.edu

Many observers have decried the effects of the U.S. opioid epidemic on drug overdoses and
mortality. The epidemic is particularly shocking since the majority of users start taking opioids
that are prescribed by their physicians, even if they later progress to illicit or illegal opioid use.
Case and Deaton (2015) point to the opioid crisis as an important cause of recent increases in
mortality among middle-aged non-Hispanic white Americans. And deaths may be viewed as the
tip of the iceberg in that for every person who dies, many more are suffering the debilitating
effects of addiction. Krueger (2017) documents that in a recent survey of prime-aged white men
who were out of the labor force, 50% report chronic pain and daily use of opioid pain
medications.
These observations beg the question of whether the opioid crisis is a consequence of
unemployment and economic dislocation among less-skilled American workers, or whether the
indiscriminate prescription of opioids has promoted economic dislocation by transforming
workers with curable and chronic injuries into addicts. A fundamental barrier to answering these
questions is that areas such as Appalachia, which historically have low employment-topopulation rates, have also been hardest hit by the opioid epidemic. But it is not clear whether
this relationship is causal or reflects omitted factors such as local variation in physician
prescribing behavior.
This paper uses quarterly county-level data to examine the relationship between per capita
opioid prescription rates and employment-to-population ratios. We have data on all prescriptions
of opioids from 2006 to 2014 from IQVIA which can be aggregated to the county-gender-age
group-quarter level. These data are linked to data on employment from the Quarterly Workforce
Indicators and to information on county population from the U.S. Census.

2

We first estimate models with employment-to-population ratios as the dependent variable
and lagged opioid prescriptions as the independent variable. In order to address potential
confounding, per capita opioid prescriptions for younger ages are instrumented using per capita
opioid prescriptions to the elderly. Places with high per capita opioid prescription rates among
the elderly also tend to have high prescription rates among people of working age. The
identifying assumption in these models is that prescriptions to the elderly should not have a
direct effect on employment among younger people.
We find that the estimated effect of opioids on employment-to-population ratios is positive
but small for women, while there is no relationship for men. Specifically, a 100% increase in
opioid prescribing would lead to increases in employment of 3.8% among women in counties
with above-median education and 5.2% among women in counties with below-median
education.
In order to evaluate the hypothesis that economic dislocation causes dependence on
opioids, we also estimate models with per capita opioid prescriptions as the dependent variable
and lagged employment-to-population ratios as the independent variable of interest. In these
models we use a Bartik-style shift share instrument for employment shocks in which the
composition of county employment in a base year (2005) is used to predict the impact of national
industry-level employment fluctuations on employment-to-population ratios at the local level
(Bartik, 1991). Because the sample period covers the Great Recession and the recovery, there is a
lot of local variation in employment to exploit. Arguably, the spike in unemployment,
subsequent recovery, and its differential effect on local economies could not easily have been
forecast in 2005 given knowledge about county employment composition.

3

In these specifications, our results are more ambiguous. We find some evidence that higher
employment-to-population ratios reduce per capita opioid prescriptions among young workers,
though this effect is only statistically significant in the instrumental variable (IV) specifications
and only in counties with above-median education. We conclude that the relationship between
opioid prescribing and employment is actually quite weak and that factors other than economic
dislocation must underlie the sharp increase in deaths due to opioids.
The rest of the paper is laid out as follows: We discuss the background literature in Section
1 and the data in Section 2. Section 3 presents an overview of our methods, while results and
robustness are discussed in Sections 4 and 5. Section 6 offers a discussion and conclusions.

1. Background
Drug overdoses involving opioids rose 200% between 2000 and 2014, becoming an
acknowledged public health crisis, and calls for a public policy response (Chen et al., 2014; Dart
et al., 2015; Rudd et al., 2016). Unlike in past drug epidemics, currently many overdoses and
deaths involve legal opioids prescribed by a physician. Since 1999, the clinical use of opioids has
quadrupled in the U.S., leading to increases in overdoses, emergency room visits, and admissions
for drug treatment in addition to the surge in deaths. Although many opioids are prescribed for
chronic pain, opioids are not effective for this indication over the long term because patients
build up dependence (Frieden and Houry, 2016). Until very recently, prescriptions of opioids
continued to rise despite the rising toll (Health and Human Services, 2014; Meara et al., 2016).
In a ground

eaths

arguing that the worsening economic position of less-educated whites in the US had fueled
increases in deaths due to suicide, alcohol, and drug addiction. This idea suggests that people are

4

dying in large part because of behaviors that are themselves a response to worsening economic
status.
This hypothesis follows naturally from a large body of literature showing that economic
dislocation has health consequences for affected individuals. For example, Bergemann et al.
(2011), Black et al. (2012), Browning and Heinesen (2012), Eliason and Storrie (2009a,b), and
Sullivan and von Wachter (2009) all find negative effects of individual job displacement on
health outcomes.1 This literature suggests that some of these negative effects are generated by
changes in health behaviors, such as increases in smoking (c.f. Black et al., 2012; Falba et al.,
2005).
In contrast to the effects of individual job loss, the broader literature linking general
economic conditions to heath and health behaviors suggests that health is countercyclical. Ruhm
because, for example,
they have more leisure time for physical activity and other health seeking behaviors.
Ásgeirsdóttir et al. (2014) find that the economic crisis of 2008 was associated with many
improvements in health behaviors in Iceland. Therefore, it is by no means certain that areas with
declining employment will also suffer deteriorations in health behaviors.
Recent studies examining the association between economic conditions and opioid abuse
find mixed results. While Hollingsworth et al. (2017), Carpenter et al. (2017), Pierce and Schott
(2017), and Charles et al. (2018) conclude that adverse macroeconomic conditions

including

rising unemployment, detrimental trade shocks, and declining manufacturing employment

have

led to increases in opioid use and mortality, Ruhm (2017) finds that variation in economic

1
Browning et al. (2006), Salm (2009), and Strully (2009) do not find negative effects. However, Browning and
Heinesen (2012) reanalyze the same Danish administrative data used in Browning et al. (2006) and find negative
effects. Furthermore, Salm (2009), and Strully (2009) analyze relatively small data sets and have low power to
detect negative outcomes.

5

conditions can explain at most one-ninth of the variation in the growth in overall drug-related
mortality rates.2

Case and Deaton (2017) paint a more nuanced

portrait than their earlier paper and highlight that deaths of despair were rising even in the early
2000s a time of great economic growth and before the Great Recession.3 Notably, none of
these papers other than Pierce and Schott (2017) use methods that address the possibility of
reverse causality.4
Attributing the rise in opioid abuse to the deterioration of economic conditions is an
appealing narrative, but any causal relationship between opioids and employment could just as
easily run in the opposite direction.5 In fact, in its most recent report on employment in the U.S.,
the Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development states that the opioid epidemic is
responsible for recent declines in labor force participation in the U.S. (OECD, 2018). However,
the evidence for this proposition is primarily descriptive and cross-sectional.
In descriptive work, Krueger (2017) demonstrates using cross-sectional data that places
with the most opioid prescribing in 2015 experienced the largest declines in male labor force
participation between 1999 and 2015, though he acknowledges that labor force participation was
declining in many of the same places prior to the opioid epidemic. Krueger notes that if the

2

Ruhm controls for a variety of demographic covariates, including race, female headship, foreign-born persons. A
possible critique of his approach is that variables such as female headship themselves could be affected by the use of
opioids, so that their inclusion may attenuate the estimated effects.
3
Economic dislocation could strongly affect the propensity for affected individuals to die from deaths of despair
without explaining much of the overall increase in these deaths. There are other factors at work for example,
trends in the prescription of opioids may be a more important root cause of drug overdoses, and these trends may be
due to provider behaviors and lax oversight of prescribing rather than to general economic conditions. Schnell and
Currie (2018) show that county-level mortality rates rise with per capita prescriptions over the time period we
examine. However, since a relatively small proportion of addicts in the labor force die at any point in time, trends in
employment will not necessarily follow trends in mortality.
4
Another potential concern with earlier work is that many studies use county-level unemployment rates from the
Current Population Survey (CPS), although the CPS is not designed to be representative at that level of
disaggregation.
5
Others have argued that untreated pain is a major source of lost productivity in the US (Gaskin and Richard, 2012;
Butikofer and Skira, 2016).

6

correlation is causal, then increased opioid use could explain up to 20% of the observed decline
in labor force participation over the period. Using data for 10 states from 2013 to 2015, Harris et
al. (2017) similarly find a negative effect of opioid prescription rates on labor market outcomes,
although their sample variation is too limited to allow for county fixed effects. 6
To our knowledge then, our paper is the first to examine both the hypothesis that lack of
employment has a causal effect on opioid use and the hypothesis that opioid use has a causal
effect on employment in a similar framework. Our work further builds on previous studies by
using IV strategies to address reverse causality, by using a relatively long panel that allows us to
control for fixed differences across counties, and by incorporating detailed prescriptions and
employment data that allows for county-level analyses within different age and gender groups.

2. Data
We purchased prescription data from IQVIA, a public company specializing in pharmaceutical
market intelligence. This data set contains the number of prescriptions filled for opioid
analgesics at U.S. retail pharmacies in each year from 2006 to 2014.7 In addition to the number
of prescriptions, the IQVIA
the address of the prescriber. These data show a continuous increase in the number of opioid
prescriptions from 2006 to 2012 followed by a slight moderation. To calculate opioids per capita,
we divide opioid prescriptions within a county from IQVIA by county-level population counts
from the 2010 Census.

6
Harris et al. (2017) instrument for the opioid prescription rate using the number of high-volume prescribers per
capita. We do not use this IV strategy because of concerns that the number of high-volume prescribers per capita
may also be endogenous.
7
IQVIA surveys over 90% of U.S. retail pharmacies and projects prescriptions filled at the remaining pharmacies.

7

We construct quarterly, county-level employment data from 2006 to 2014 using
information from the Quarterly Workforce Indicators (QWI). The QWI is a unique jobs-level
data set that is publicly released by the U.S. Census Bureau. Covering 95% of employment in the
US, the data set combines information from a number of sources including administrative
employment records, Social Security data, and Federal tax records. 8 Because the QWI is based
on administrative data, the county-level employment measures are more accurate than
employment counts from surveys such as the Current Population Survey. Moreover, firm- and
worker-level data are linked so that the QWI is the only data set from which it is possible to
obtain employment numbers by gender, age group, county, and two-digit NAICS industry codes
across the US.9
The concept of employment in the QWI is not exactly the same as in either worker-based
surveys or employer-based counts for a number of reasons. First, since the QWI is a jobs-level
data set, it can yield counts that are higher than the number of workers who hold any job due to
multiple job holding. Second, a job-worker link is considered to exist at the beginning of the
quarter if the job existed in the quarter before and in the quarter following. This way of counting
could lead to underestimates of the number of workers with a job when workers switch jobs
between quarters. Finally, since people may live and work in different counties, some areas may
have employment-to-population ratios greater than one when computed using the QWI. Despite
these measurement differences, the QWI accurately captures changes in the number of jobs over
the business cycle and across areas (U.S. Census Bureau, 2017).

8
We drop observations if they are missing or flagged as distorted or suppressed due to failure to meet U.S. Census
Bureau publication standards.
9
We use industry codes in order to construct shift-share style instruments for employment-to-population ratios as
described further below. In doing so, we aggregate the two-digit NAICS codes to two-digit SIC codes in order to
have fewer categories, as shown in Appendix Table 2. There are a few two-digit NAICS industries that map to
multiple two-digit SIC industries; in these cases we select the SIC industry which best fits the NAICS code.

8

Two concerns arise when merging the opioid and employment data that are worth noting.
First, as shown in Appendix Table 1, the age groups provided in the prescription and
employment data do not align perfectly. When constructing the age groups that we
predominately focus on

young adults and prime-aged workers

we therefore use slightly

different age ranges in each data set. In particular, the young adult group consists of individuals
aged 19-44 in the employment data and 20-39 in the prescription data, while the prime-age group
consists of individuals aged 45-64 in the employment data and 40-64 in the prescription data.
An additional source of potential discrepancy between the opioid and the employment data
is that individuals may not work and seek medical care in the same county. For example, an
individual who lives in Princeton, New Jersey and obtains a prescription from a doctor close to
home but who commutes to New York City for work would cause an inconsistency in the count
of individuals involved when matching employment to opioid prescription data.
Much of the previous work on opioids focuses on individuals with low educational
attainment. Although we have access to employment data by education level in the QWI, we do
not know the education level of the patient in the prescription database and therefore cannot
match prescriptions to employment by education. In order to explore this aspect of the opioidemployment relationship, we rank each county based on the proportion of individuals within the
county with highest educational attainment of high school or less as of the 2000 Census. We split
the data set in half based on this criterion and estimate identical regression models on each subset
of the data.
Finally, because health insurance is closely linked to employment in the US, we also
estimate models controlling for the percent of people aged 18 to 64 who are insured in each

9

(SAHIE), which is the only source of data for single-year estimates of health insurance coverage
status for all counties. The SAHIE estimates are based on data from the American Community
Survey, tax returns, administrative data from the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program,
Estimates are
available for males and females (see https://www.census.gov/data-tools/demo/sahie/sahie.html,
accessed October 30, 2017).

Summary Statistics
Table 1 provides means of the employment-to-population ratios and the per capita opioid
prescription rates. The means are shown by gender for all workers and for the two broad age
groups that we consider: young adults and prime-age adults. We also show estimates for counties
with above- and below-median education.
The employment-to-population ratios are higher among men and among workers aged 19
to 44. The most striking difference, however, is between counties with higher and lower levels of
education. On average, counties with a less-educated population have a male employment-topopulation ratio of 0.525 compared to 0.720 in counties with a more-educated population.
Turning to the per capita opioid prescription rates, we see a quite different pattern. Per capita
opioid prescription rates are highest for women and for older workers. Moreover, the per capita
opioid prescription rates are slightly higher in high-education counties, although the differences
by education are dwarfed by the differences across gender and age.
Figure 1 depicts a heat map of opioid prescriptions per capita. The figure illustrates the
large geographic variation in scripts per capita across the country, as well as increases in opioid
prescribing over time which one can see by comparing 2006 and 2014. Areas that were harder hit

10

initially tended to be places with higher-than-average unemployment such as Appalachia, Maine,
and rust belt states such as Michigan and Northern California. By 2014, prescribing had further
intensified in these areas, but much of the rest of the country had begun to catch up, despite the
improving economic conditions in most parts of the country.
Figure 2 shows employment-to-population ratios for workers aged 19 to 64 in the same two
years. These figures also show considerable variation across locations, but much less variation
over time than the heat maps for opioid scripts shown in Figure 1.
Figure 3 compares the employment-to-population ratios computed using the QWI to those
computed using the Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages (QCEW), which comes only
from employer reports for counties with over 100,000 population in 2010. As the figure
indicates, the distributions are substantially similar, though the QWI has a somewhat thicker
right tail. In analyses that are not shown, we also estimated separate regressions using QCEW
instead of QWI employment data and obtained similar results.
Figure 4 shows the contemporaneous relationship between the log of per capita opioid
prescriptions and the log of employment-to-population ratios for the four age-sex groups we
consider. Perhaps surprisingly, the relationship is positive, as indicated by the fitted regression
lines through the scatter plots. Figure 4 shows that the data is quite noisy at the county level. In
order to minimize the impact of this noise in what follows, we keep all counties with over
100,000 in

11

3. Methods
We would like to know if more opioid prescribing in a county causes people to lose their jobs,
and conversely, whether a lack of employment opportunities causes people to turn to prescription
opioids. Posing the questions in this way highlights the potential simultaneity of employment and
opioid prescriptions. We deal with this problem in three ways.
First, we estimate models in which we regress the dependent variables of interest on lagged
values of the independent variables. In so doing, we assume that any effects are not
instantaneous and that it is past opioid use that affects employment and vice versa. Second, we
estimate models with and without county fixed effects in order to gauge the extent to which any
effects that we find are due to constant or long-term characteristics of places rather than shortterm fluctuations in either opioid prescribing or employment opportunities. For demographic
group j in county i in quarter t, these specifications are given by

where

i

are fixed effects for counties,

t

are fixed effects for time periods, and

ijt is

an error

term.

12

Third, we estimate IV models. In models where employment-to-population ratios are the
dependent variable, we instrument for per capita opioid prescriptions to working-aged people
using per capita opioids prescriptions to people aged 65 and older of the same gender. In the IV
version of Equation (1), the first-stage equation is given by

where

indicates the average number of per capita prescriptions

to those aged 65+ of the same gender as group j in county i in quarters t-1 to t-4.
One assumption underlying this instrument is that doctors are more likely to prescribe
opioids to everyone in some places than in others (Schnell, 2017), so that places where elderly
people are more likely to get prescriptions are places where working-age people are also more
likely to get them.10 At the same time, we do not expect prescriptions to the elderly to have a
direct effect on the employment of working-aged people.
A second identifying assumption is that there is no third unobserved variable (other than
opioid prescriptions for those of working age) that affects both the employment of the workingage population and opioid prescription rates for the elderly. While it is always possible that such
a variable exists, it is hard to think of what it might be. Economic conditions should not affect
prescription rates among the elderly, since they are largely out of the labor force and have
prescription drug benefits under Medicare Part D. High rates of manual labor and resulting
disability might lead to high rates of opioid prescribing among the elderly, but these
characteristics of the local labor market would also presumably lead to high opioid prescribing

10

The raw correlations between per capita prescriptions for those aged 20 to 39 (45 to 64) and those aged 65+ are
0.781 (0.934) and 0.721 (0.907) for women and men, respectively.

13

among prime-age workers. To the extent that any such omitted variables are fairly constant over
time, they will be captured by county fixed effects in our models.
In regressions where employment-to-population ratios are the independent variables, we
instrument for employment using a Bartik-style shift-share instrument. Using the industry
from the base year of 2005
predicted employment if the level of employment in each industry had changed in the same ratio
as in the rest of the nation in that industry.11 We sum over industries in each county to calculate
the predicted level of employment (the Bartik instrument) for each gender and age group. Thus,
the expression for the Bartik instrument in county i for demographic group j in quarter t is given
by

In the IV version of Equation (2), the first stage is therefore given by

Recently Goldsmith-Pinkham, Sorkin, and Swift (2017) have argued that the Bartik
instrument amounts to using interactions between initial local employment shares and national
industry employment rates. It is clear that these instruments are much more likely to meet the
exogeneity assumption in models that include county fixed effects than in those without, which
underscores the importance of examining these relationships using panel data.

11

Massachusetts and Washington, D.C. do not have QWI employment data for 2005. Data for Massachusetts start in
Q2 2010, and data for Washington, D.C. start in Q3 2005. We use those quarters as the base years for the calculation
of the shift-share instrument.

14

4. Results
While our primary focus is on models broken down by demographic group using data from the
QWI, Appendix Table 3 shows estimates of Equations (1) and (2) using all working-age people
and comparing estimates obtained using the QWI and the QCEW. We show OLS estimates for
all counties and for counties with above- and below-median education. The estimates are very
similar in the two data sources, though somewhat more precisely estimated in the QWI. In what
follows, we use the QWI because the QWI allows us to use employment numbers broken down
by gender, age group, county, and industry.
Table 2 shows estimates for Equation (1), in which employment-to-population ratios are a
function of per capita opioid prescriptions. We begin with a model without county fixed effects
and estimate models separately by gender and age group (young adults and prime-age adults).
These estimates should arguably be most similar to past research that also does not include
county fixed effects. Because of the log-log formulation, these estimates can be interpreted as
elasticities.
The estimates all suggest a positive effect of lagged opioid prescriptions on employmentto-population ratios. The estimates are higher for workers aged 45 to 64 than for younger adults.
For older workers, the effects are largest in high-education counties, whereas for younger
workers they are largest in low-education counties. IV estimates from a specification similar to
Equation (1) are shown in columns 4 and 5.12 The IV estimates are quite similar to the OLS
estimates in this formulation. However, the instrument may not be valid without fixed effects as
it is possible that prescription rates among the elderly pick up other characteristics of counties.

12

Estimates of the first stage equations are shown in Appendix Table 4. They indicate that prescriptions for the
elderly are indeed strong predictors of prescriptions for working-age people in each of our four age and gender
groups.

15

Table 3 shows estimates of Equation ( ), which includes county fixed effects in order to
control for constant differences across counties. The estimated elasticities are all much smaller
than in Table 2, but remain positive. They are larger in low-education counties and statistically
significant in the OLS models for workers aged 19 to 44 (column 3). The IV estimates show
some evidence of significant positive effects in the models for female workers in low-education
counties, though the IV estimates for males are small and not statistically significant.13
Taken literally, these estimates suggest that opioid prescriptions may help some female
workers to stay in the labor force, though the effects are small. In counties that have below the
median level of education, a 100% increase in per capita opioid prescriptions is estimated to
increase the employment-to-population ratio by 3.3% among women aged 19 to 44 and by 4.3%
among women aged 45 to 64. We do not find any statistically significant effect among men.
In Table 4 we turn to the opposite question of whether higher employment-to-population
ratios discourage reliance on prescription opioids. This table, without county fixed effects,
suggests that there are actually large positive effects of higher employment rates on opioid
prescribing and that these effects are larger for individuals aged 20-39. For these workers, the
estimated effects are once again larger in less-educated than in more-educated counties. The IV
point estimates in columns 4 and 5 are slightly larger than the OLS, but not significantly so. 14
Table 5 shows the same models including county fixed effects. The OLS estimates remain
large and positive. The IV estimates are negative for individuals aged 18 to 44 in high-education

13
Estimates of the first stage equations with county fixed effects are shown in columns 3-4 of Appendix Table 4.
These estimates are quite similar to those without county fixed effects and indicate once again that prescriptions for
the elderly are strong predictors of prescriptions for working-age people in each of our four age and gender groups.
14
First stage equations are shown in Appendix Table 5. The Bartik shift-share instrument has a coefficient slightly
less than one in each of the eight education, age, and gender groups.

16

counties, but large and positive for older women in less-educated counties.15 Taken at face value,
these estimates suggest that younger workers may be less likely to turn to opioids when
employment-to-population ratios are higher. This find

it

might also reflect workers ability to be more selective about their jobs and avoid jobs that cause
them pain or injury. Among older women, there appears to be a positive relationship between
employment-to-population ratios and opioid prescribing, though the lack of significance of the
instrument suggests that we should be careful when interpreting this estimate.

5. Robustness
There are many potential confounders in any county-level analysis. A potentially important
confounder for our study is the prevalence of health insurance in the county, as health insurance
is strongly related to employment in the US. While health insurance varies markedly across
counties, it may not be adequately controlled for by including county fixed effects alone since
the fraction of Americans with health insurance changed over our sample period. Declining
health insurance coverage rates were an important motivation for the Affordable Care Act
(ACA). Starting in 2011, the ACA increased coverage for those aged 18 to 26 by allowing them
to be covered under their parents health insurance plans. In 2014, the health insurance
exchanges created by the ACA opened, and some states expanded their Medicaid coverage to
include childless adults.
Tables 6 and 7 show estimates similar to the models with county fixed effects that were
shown in Tables 3 and 5 but control for the percent insured in each county and gender group.

15

The first stage estimates are shown in the last two columns of Appendix Table 5. They are similar to those from
models without county fixed effects with one exception: the Bartik instrument is no longer a significant predictor of
employment-to-population ratios among females aged 45-64 in high-education counties.

17

Our intent is not to identify a causal effect of insurance coverage, as to do so would require an
additional instrument. Rather, we ask whether the estimates are sensitive to the inclusion of
measures of insurance coverage. Because the county-level insurance data are annual, we first
estimate models similar to Equations ( )

but aggregating our data to the annual level.

Because estimates of insurance coverage are available only for those aged 18 to 64, we also
aggregate the two age categories.
Panels 1 and 3 of Table 6 show that our qualitative findings about the effects of opioids on
employment-to-population ratios continue to hold in the annual pooled-ages data. Panels 2 and 4
of Table 6 show that when we add the percent insured to the model, the estimated effect of
opioid prescriptions on the employment-to-population ratio is unaffected. As before, we find a
significant positive relationship between opioids per capita and employment-to-population
among women and no relationship among men.
Table 7 shows estimates of the effect of employment-to-population ratios on per capita
opioid prescriptions using annual pooled-ages data. The estimates are qualitatively similar to
those shown in Table 5 in terms of the pattern of signs. However, none of the OLS estimates are
statistically significant for high-education counties and none of the IV estimates are statistically
significant. Hence, the estimated effects of employment-to-population ratios on opioid
prescribing are more sensitive to specification than the estimated effects of opioids on
employment-to-population ratios.

6. Discussion and Conclusions
Compared to most previous work, we have the advantage of a long time period that allows us to
control for time-invariant differences across counties using county fixed effects. We also have

18

detailed data on opioid prescriptions as well as quarterly employment data that are available at
the county level and broken down by age and gender groups. This rich data allows us to explore
the extent to which results differ for older and younger workers and for males and females.
The estimated effects of prescription opioids on employment-to-population ratios are robust
to changes in specification and suggest that there is a positive relationship for women and no
significant relationship for men. More specifically, a 100% increase in opioid prescribing would
lead to increases in employment of 3.8% among women in counties with above-median
education and 5.2% among women in counties with below-median education. Our exploration of
the effects of health insurance would appear to rule it out as a major explanation for these
findings. An alternative explanation is that although they are addictive and potentially dangerous,
opioids nevertheless allow some women to keep working who might otherwise withdraw from
the labor force.
When we examine the effects of employment-to-population ratios on opioid prescriptions,
our results are more ambiguous. We find some evidence that higher employment-to-population
ratios reduce per capita opioid prescriptions among young adults, though this effect is only
statistically significant in the IV specification and only in counties with education above the
median.
The limited effect of employment-to-population ratios on per capita opioid prescriptions that
we document should perhaps not be a surprise. As Case and Deaton (2017) clarify, the type of
despair they describe has more to do with a longer-term unraveling of the social fabric than with
short-term variations in employment prospects. Moreover, there is increasing evidence that
opioid prescribing patterns depend more on idiosyncratic factors such as the characteristics and
preferences of local doctors than on local economies (Schnell and Currie, 2018; Schnell, 2017).

19

Overall, our analysis suggests that the relationship between opioid prescribing and
employment is considerably weaker and murkier than popular narratives suggest. The fact that
many opioid users are still in the labor market

and are likely having their scripts paid for by

employer-sponsored health insurance is one reason that opioids are having such a large impact
on American employers. This observation suggests that policy responses should be designed to
take into account the fact that many opioid users work. Treatment options that help people retain
their connection to the labor market are likely to be necessary to effectively combat the
epidemic.

20

References
Ásgeirsdóttir, T., H. Corman, K. Noonan, P. Ólafsdóttir, and N. Reichman. (2014) "Was the
Economic Crisis of 2008 Good for Icelanders? Impact on Health Behaviors." Economics and
Human Biology: 13, 1-19.
Upjohn Institute for Employment Research: Kalamazoo MI.
Discussion Paper. Tilburg:
Network for Studies on Pensions, Aging and Retirement.
Black, S., P. Devereux, and K.G. Salvanes. (2015) "Losing Heart? The Effect of Job
Displacement on Health." Industrial and Labor Relations Review: 68(4), 833-861.
Browning, M., A.M. Dano, and E.
Displacement and StressRelated Health Outcomes. Health Economics: 15, 1061-1075.
Browning, M. and E.
Effect of Job Loss Due to Plant Closure on
Mortality and Hospitalization. Journal of Health Economics: 31, 599-616.
Butikofer, A. and M.
on Sickness Absence and Disability Pension Receipt.
Working Paper.

-2 Inhibitors

Case, A. and A.
Hispanic Americans in the 21st Century. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences:
112(49), 15078-15083.

-

Case, A. and A. Deaton. (2017) Mortality and Morbidity in the 21st Century. Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity. Washington D.C.: Brookings Institution.
Carpenter, C.S., C.B. McClellan, and D.I
and Substance Use D

Economic Conditions, Illicit Drug Use,
Journal of Health Economics: 52, 63-73.

Charles, K.K., E. Hurst, and M.
Decline in U.S. Employment. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Working Paper No. 24468.
Chen, L.H., H. Hedegaard, and M.
Analgesics: United States, 1999 2011.

-poisoning Deaths Involving Opioid

Dart, R., H. Surratt, T. Cicero, M. Parrino, G. Severtson, B. Bucher-Bartelson, and J. Green.
(2015)
. The New
England Journal of Medicine: 372, 241-248.

21

Eliason, M. and D. Storrie. (2009
Swedish Evidence on
Cause-Specific Hospitalization following Involuntary Job Loss. Social Science and
Medicine: 68(8), 1396-1406.
Eliason, M. and D. Storrie.
Resources: 44(2), 277-302.

S

Falba, T., H.M. Teng, J.L. Sindelar, and W.T. Gallo.
The Effect of Involuntary Job Loss
on Smoking Intensity and Relapse.
: 100(9), 1330 1339.
Frieden, T. and D. Houry. (2016) Reducing the Risks of Relief
The CDC Opioid-Prescribing
Guideline. The New England Journal of Medicine: 374, 1501-1504.
Gaskin, D. and P.
13(8), 715-724.

:

Goldsmithand How. Stanford University Department of Economics Working Paper.
Health and Human Services, Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration.
(2014) esults from the 2013 National Survey on Drug Use and Health: Summary of National
Findings.
-48, HHS Publication No. (SMA) 14-4863.
Harris, M.C., L.M. Kessler, M.N. Murray, and M.E. Glenn. (2017)
Labor Market Pains. University of Tennesee Department of Economics Working Paper.
Hollingsworth, A., C. Ruhm, and K. Simon. (
Abuse. Journal of Health Economics: 56, 222-233.
Krueger,
Have all the Workers Gone?: An Inquiry into the Decline of the U.S.
Labor Force Participation Rate. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity. Washington D.C.:
Brookings Institution.
Meara, E., J. Horwitz, W. Powell, L. McClelland, W. Zhou, J. O'Malley, and N. Morden. (2016)
Opioid Use among Disabled Adults.
England Journal of Medicine: 375, 44-53.
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (2018). OECD Economy Surveys:
United States 2018 (OECD Publishing: Paris), http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/eco_surveys-use-2018en.
Pierce, J.R. and P.K. Schott
Counties.
No. 22849. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Rudd, R., N. Aleshire, J. Zibbell, and M.
Overdose Deaths-United States, 2000-2014. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report: 64(50),
1378-1382.

22

Recessions Good for your H

Quarterly Journal of Economics:

115(2), 617-650.
. Journal of Health Economics: 24(2), 341-63.
s? Working Paper No. 24188. Cambridge,
MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
: 18(9), 1075-1089.
Prescription Opioids.

rinceton University Department of Economics Working Paper.

Schnell, M. and J.
Physician Education

Opioid Epidemic: Is There a Role for
American Journal of Health Economics, 4(3), 383-410.

Sullivan, D. and T. von Wachter.
Administrative Data.

: 124 (3), 1265-1306.
. Demography: 46(2), 221-

246.
US Census Bureau. (2017). Quarterly Workforce Indicators 101, Employment Dynamics.
Washington D.C. https://lehd.ces.census.gov/doc/QWI_101.pdf.

23

Figure 1: Opioid Prescriptions per Capita Among Individuals Aged 20-64

Figure 2: Employment-to-Population Ratios Among Individuals Aged 19-64

Figure 3: Comparison of Employment-to-Population Ratios in the QWI and the QCEW

Note: Data is from 2010. Only counties with a population over 100,000 are included.

Figure 4: Employment-to-Population Ratios and Opioid Prescriptions per Capita Across
Counties

Note: Data are at the county-quarter level. “Young Adult” refers to individuals aged 20-39 in the
prescription data and aged 19-44 in the employment data. “Prime Age” refers to individuals aged
40-64 in the prescription data and aged 45-64 in the employment data.

Appendix Table 1. Age Groupings in Prescription and Employment Data
Age group classification
Opioid
Employment
1: Adolescents
0-2, 3-9, 10-19
14-18
2: Young adults
20-39
19-21, 22-24, 25-34, 35-44
3: Prime-age workers
40-59, 60-64
45-54, 55-64
4: Retirees
65-74, 75-84, 85+
65-99
Appendix Table 2. Mapping from Two-digit NAICS Codes to Two-digit SIC Codes
NAICS industry
SIC industry
11 (Agriculture, Forestry, Fishing, and
01-09 (Agriculture, Forestry, and Fishing)
Hunting)
21 (Mining, Quarrying, and Oil and Gas
10-14 (Mining)
Extraction)
23 (Construction)
15-17 (Construction)
31-33 (Manufacturing)
20-39 (Manufacturing)
51 (Information)
22 (Utilities)
40-49 (Transportation and Public Utilities:
48-49 (Transportation and Warehousing)
Electric, Gas, Communications, Sanitary)
42 (Wholesale Trade)
50-51 (Wholesale Trade)
44-45 (Retail Trade)
52-59 (Retail Trade)
72 (Accommodation and Food Services)
52 (Finance and Insurance)
60-67 (Finance, Insurance, and Real Estate)
53 (Real Estate and Rental and Leasing)
55 (Management of Companies and
Enterprises)
54 (Professional, Scientific, and Technical
70-89 (Services)
Services)
56 (Administrative and Support and Waste
Management and Remediation Services)
61 (Educational Services)
62 (Health Care and Social Assistance)
71 (Arts, Entertainment, and Recreation)
81 (Other Services (except Public
Administration))
92 (Public Administration)
91-99 (Public Administration)

24

