                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             TRADE AND MINIMUM WAGES IN GENERAL EQUILIBRIUM:
                           THEORY AND EVIDENCE

                                           Xue Bai
                                       Arpita Chatterjee
                                        Kala Krishna
                                          Hong Ma

                                     Working Paper 24456
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w24456


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   March 2018




We are indebted to David Atkin, Arnaud Costinot, Lorenzo Caliendo, Marc Muendler, Sergey
Lychagin, Kerem Cosar, Roberto Álvarez Espinoza, Michael Koelle, and Lex Zhao for
comments. We are also grateful, to participants of the ASSA Annual Meeting 2018, Princeton
Summer 2017 IES workshop, the Econometric Society 2017 Asian Meeting and 2017 China
Meeting, the TIGN 2017 conference in Montvideo and the CES-IFO Conference on the Global
Economy in Munich, UNSW, Monash University, and Xiamen University for comments. We
thank Meghna Bramhachari and Yingyan Zhao for able research assistance. We are grateful to
Churen Sun, Yi Huang, and Gewei Wang for generously sharing their minimum wage data. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Xue Bai, Arpita Chatterjee, Kala Krishna, and Hong Ma. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Trade and Minimum Wages in General Equilibrium: Theory and Evidence
Xue Bai, Arpita Chatterjee, Kala Krishna, and Hong Ma
NBER Working Paper No. 24456
March 2018
JEL No. H0

                                          ABSTRACT

Do minimum wages affect economic outcomes beyond low-skill employment? This paper
develops a new model with heterogeneous firms under perfect competition in a Heckscher-Ohlin
setting to show that a binding minimum wage raises product prices, encourages substitution away
from labor, and creates unemployment. It reduces output and exports of the labor intensive good,
despite higher prices and, less obviously, selection in the labor (capital) intensive sector becomes
stricter (weaker). Exploiting rich regional variation in minimum wages across Chinese
prefectures and using Chinese Customs data matched with firm level production data, we find
robust evidence in support of causal effects of minimum wage consistent with our theoretical
predictions.

Xue Bai                                          Kala Krishna
Department of Economics                          Department of Economics
Brock University                                 523 Kern Graduate Building
1812 Sir Issac Brock Way                         The Pennsylvania State University
St. Catharines, ON L2S 3A1                       University Park, PA 16802
Canada                                           and NBER
xbai@brocku.ca                                   kmk4@psu.edu

Arpita Chatterjee                                Hong Ma
Australian School of Business                    Tsinghua University
School of Economics                              Department of Economics
UNSW, SYDNEY, 2052                               Beijing, China
chatterjee.econ@gmail.com                        mahong@sem.tsinghua.edu.cn
1       Introduction

Minimum wages are clearly highly relevant for policy and all their implications should be well
understood, both in terms of theory and practice. Countries from Afghanistan to Zambia set a
minimum wage. Australia is widely seen as having the highest minimum wage of about $9.54
compared to $6.26 in the U.S. in terms of 2013 U.S. prices.1 The rationale for a minimum wage
and the level at which it is set can vary with the circumstances. In the U.S. the minimum wage has
traditionally been used to enable workers to have a “living wage” though in the last few decades,
the real minimum wage has fallen so much that it may no longer serve that function.2 As a result,
states and even cities, have taken to setting their own, often far higher, minimum wage. Seattle,
Los Angeles and Washington D.C. are among those with plans to phase in a $15 minimum wage
in the next few years.
    Despite its clear policy relevance, the impact of minimum wage on the economy as a whole
remains a largely open question. As discussed in more detail below, the extensive work in this
area brings to mind the parable of the blind men and the elephant: each feels a different part of its
body, and then describes the elephant in terms of his partial experience. As a result, they disagree
fundamentally on the nature of the beast. In this paper we begin to address these lacunae.
    Our contribution is twofold. First, we provide a new competitive general equilibrium apparatus
that builds on the Heckscher- Ohlin-Samuelson model, but with heterogeneous firms subject to
capacity constraints. We then use the model to make a number of intuitive and clean predictions
about the effects of a minimum wage on selection, the structure of production and trade, factor
intensity of production and survival patterns of heterogeneous firms. Second, we then use produc-
tion and trade data from China, where different prefectures set and frequently change minimum
wages, to test the predictions of the model.3 We exploit the extremely rich regional variation and
two plausible instruments to tease out the causal effect of minimum wages on a host of significant,
yet hitherto unexplained, outcomes. We show that, as predicted by the model, a binding minimum
wage raises product prices, encourages substitution away from labor, though less so for skill and
capital intensive goods, and creates unemployment. Less obviously, it reduces output and exports,
especially of the labor intensive good, despite the price increases. Least obvious is the prediction,
also borne out in the data, that selection in the labor intensive sector becomes stricter, while that in
    1
      See https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2016/04/where-are-the-world-s-highest-minimum-wages/
    2
      “Democrats in the House and Senate have announced a bill to raise the federal minimum wage gradually from its
current $7.25 to $15 by 2024. Advocates for the $15 minimum wage argue that it will help workers make ends meet
and reduce inequality, improve child health and education outcomes, and stimulate the economy with more purchasing
power for low-wage workers. Opponents argue that high minimum wages will kill jobs, hurt small businesses, and
raise prices.” –Michael Reich and Jesse Rothstein, Econofact.org, April, 2017.
    3
      Note that in China the administrative division with the autonomy to set the minimum wage is the prefecture. We
use the term city or location or prefecture interchangeably.


                                                         1
the capital intensive sector becomes weaker. Thus, we not only provide a new model, that makes
new predictions, but we also test these predictions, and show they are very much present in the
data.
    Our work is related to a number of areas. It is related to research in labor economics on the
employment impact of the minimum wage, to the literature in international trade on the effects of
minimum wages in general equilibrium, to some work on the Chinese economy that documents
the effects of the minimum wages in China, and to the recent literature on firm heterogeneity and
trade.
    The bulk of empirical research in Labor Economics has focused on effect of minimum wage on
low-skill employment, in particular on fast food restaurants, with mixed results.4 It is possible that
the literature following Card and Krueger (1994) was looking in the wrong place for the effects of
minimum wages. If fast food establishments have limited substitution possibilities between labor
and capital, it would be hard to observe strong employment effects of higher minimum wages.5
But in the US context, with low levels of minimum wages, fast food is typical of the kind of estab-
lishments where minimum wage is binding. This may change in near future as cities move to set
minimum wages that are, in some cases, significantly higher than state or federal levels.6 Recent
work (see Jardim, Long, Plotnick, van Inwegen, Vigdor and Wething (2017)) on Seattle’s hike
of the minimum wage to $11-13 in 2016 (depending on business size, tips, and health insurance)
suggests a much more central role for minimum wages. While restaurants may not reduce employ-
ment, other industries with greater substitution possibilities seem to do so. In addition, even for
restaurants, Luca and Luca (2017) show that, as one might expect, higher minimum wage results
in exit of lower quality (rated by YELP) restaurants. The literature has also turned to looking at
other relationships such as minimum wage and inequality, migration and factor substitution, and
the valuation of firms.7
   4
      See Neumark and Wascher (2008), Neumark, Salas and Wascher (2014), and Neumark (2017). The approach
has for the most part been to use difference-in-differences comparisons to evaluate the effect of these policies on
employment levels as in Card and Krueger (1994).
    5
      Moreover, franchises may be further limited in how they can adjust. For example, McDonald’s provides fran-
chises with business manuals that lays out required operational procedures at a franchise. See the contract at
https://www.scribd.com/doc/233487415/McDonalds-Franchise-Agreement.
    6
      In the District of Columbia, the hourly minimum wage will be $12.50 (effective Jul.1, 2017) compared to a
Federal one around $8.00, and rise till it reaches $15.00 July of 2020. Similar rates are planned for many large cities,
especially in California. See http://www.paywizard.org/main/salary/minimum-wage/California/california.
    7
      For example, Autor, Manning and Smith (2016) and Lee (1999) study the relationship between minimum wages
and inequality using variation in state level minimum wages in the US, while DiNardo, Fortin and Lemieux (1996)
follows a semi-parametric approach to do so. Monras (2015) argues that higher real minimum wages in a state in the
US resulted in lower unskilled labor migration. Adjusting capital is discussed as a possible mechanism to limit the
response of employment as in Sorkin (2013).
   There has also been considerable work that suggests that the minimum wage may not reduce the level of employment
in a discrete manner, and may in fact affect the growth of wages and employment due to search frictions in the labor
market as in Flinn (2006). See Cahuc, Carcillo and Zylberberg (2014) for a summary of this work. Minimum wage
effects will spillover to segments of the labor market that are not directly constrained via general equilibrium effects


                                                           2
    In the context of the labor literature, our contribution is to provide a unifying tractable general
equilibrium framework to obtain and test for clean predictions regarding a number of outcomes of
interest. These include factor returns and input substitution which have been empirically examined
in isolation (and without a model that ties them together) to date, in addition to new outcomes
of interest such as selection, pricing, the intensive and extensive margin of firms’ production and
exports. Our model is the competitive analogue of the monopolistically competitive heterogeneous
firm setting common in International Trade and Industrial Organization. To make the competitive
model with heterogeneous firms internally consistent. we place limits on the extent of a firm’s
ability to supply at its costs, i.e., have capacity constraints. This allows us to embed the model in
the simple Heckscher Ohlin setting in a transparent fashion and obtain the essential insights.
    In the literature in International Trade, on the other hand, there are seminal papers such as
Brecher (1974) and Davis (1998), that study the effects of a minimum wage in general equilibrium,
though in a homogeneous firm model. Brecher looks at the effects of a minimum wage in a standard
two good, two factor, two country Heckscher Ohlin setting. As a minimum wage raises costs in
the labor intensive sector by more than in the capital intensive one, it reduces the comparative
advantage and exports of a labor abundant country while accentuating the comparative advantage
of a capital abundant one.8 Davis (1998) extends this work to show that trade between an economy
with binding minimum wages and one without, can raise wages in the latter while increasing
unemployment in the former. Put more simply, the economy without a minimum wage gets all the
benefits of higher wages without incurring any of the costs.
    Our contribution here on the theoretical side is the addition of firm heterogeneity and the con-
struction of a new model that allows us to lay out cleanly the array of predictions regarding the
effects of minimum wages. Most novel are the predictions regarding firm selection and minimum
wages. Moreover, despite the theoretical work in International Trade, there is very little empirical
work on minimum wages and the structure of trade. Our empirical application to China is tailor-
made for this. The importance of exports to the Chinese economy can not be overstated. Different
cities in China set different minimum wages, often at fairly high levels, and then change them over
time. This huge cross-sectional and over time variation in minimum wage in a country where many
firms operate under binding minimum wage across a range of industries with varied substitution
possibilities is the ideal setting to study our question.9
    There is a recent literature on minimum wages in China. Wang and Gunderson (2012) look
in search settings. Engbom and Moser (2017) quantifies the impact of minimum wage on earnings inequality using a
search and matching model and matched employer-employee data from Brazil and concludes that about 70% of the
decline in inequality can be attributed to higher minimum wages. There is also very recent work on the effect of an
unanticipated hike in the minimum wage on the valuation of firms, for example Bell and Machin (2016), and on the
incidence of this increase in cost, for example Harasztosi, Lindner, Bank and Berkeley (2017).
    8
      Schweinberger (1978) and Neary (1985) extend the model to allow for more goods and sectors.
    9
      We provide more background on the institutional setting and the patterns of minimum wages set in Section 5.


                                                        3
at minimum wages and employment in Eastern China using the standard difference in difference
approach using data from 2003. They find little effect, and speculate this may be because the
minimum wages are not enforced very strictly before 2004. In contrast, Fang and Lin (2015) us-
ing data from household surveys, find significant effects of minimum wages on employment. A
recent paper, Huang, Loungani and Wang (2014), looks at the effects of minimum wages on firm
employment exploiting the fact that cities in China set different minimum wages and these vary
over time. They find that minimum wages do seem to reduce employment, particularly for low
wage firms. Hau, Huang and Wang (2016) find that “minimum wages accelerate the input sub-
stitution from labor to capital in low wage firms, reduce employment growth, but also accelerate
total factor productivity growth, particularly among the less productive firms under private Chi-
nese or foreign ownership, but not among state owned enterprises.” Interestingly, they argue that
minimum wage increases do not reduce output and attribute this to increased Total Factor Produc-
tivity (TFP) which is especially prevalent in the bottom half of the TFP distribution. They attribute
these effects to differences in management practices and “catch up” by low productivity firms in
the face of competitive pressures. Mayneris, Poncet, Zhang et al. (2017) also document that wage
cost and more interestingly productivity improved among surviving firms, even though survival
productivity declined, using 2004 minimum wage reforms in China.
     It is worth pointing out that in contrast to our paper, none of these papers have a general
equilibrium model which can guide them in terms of the entire set of predictions to test and through
which they can interpret the data. As a result, their model specifications and some empirical results
differ from ours.10
     Our work also contributes to the recent literature on firm heterogeneity and its role in trade.
The standard approaches in this area are based on Melitz (2003) or on Eaton and Kortum (2002).
The former builds on the now standard models of monopolistic competition with constant marginal
costs. The latter assumes that costs are random and that the lowest cost firm making each variety is
the supplier and can supply all that is needed. In contrast, we assume perfect competition and that
firms have capacity constraints. We provide a new and relatively transparent competitive model
with heterogeneous firms subject to capacity constraints in a Heckscher Ohlin setting. We do so
with a view to providing another option in terms of modeling approaches and because the existing
approaches are, perhaps, less well suited to our problem. Our model makes clear the links between
product and factor markets and the channels through which the minimum wage operates in the
  10
     For example, though Hau et al. (2016) look at the response of labor substitution, productivity, exit, export value
and volume to the minimum wage as do we, their specification only uses one dimension of “bindingness”, namely the
minimum wage exposure defined as the elasticity of the average wage paid to the minimum wage. The idea is that
if the average wage paid is low, the minimum wage will be more binding and will have to rise by more, something
we also check for and find. In contrast, our model suggests that factor intensity will also affect such “bindingness”
and our specification is geared to look for this and part of the reason why our findings differ from theirs is that our
specifications differ.


                                                          4
general equilibrium with heterogeneous firms. We also sketch a simple way to embed firms in an
industry so that the model can provide firm as well as industry level predictions in our competitive
setting.
     One could incorporate Melitz (2003) in a Heckscher Ohlin setting as in Bernard, Redding and
Schott (2007). Melitz (2003) highlights the cleansing effect of trade, and Bernard et al. (2007)
show that this cleansing effect of trade liberalization is greater in the comparative advantage sector
but only in the presence of costly trade. There is no such prediction if trade is costless. The
intuition for their result is simple. Trade reduces prices overall since goods can be more widely
sourced. In the presence of trade costs, trade liberalization reduces the relative price index of the
comparative advantage sector since imported goods incur trade costs while domestically produced
ones do not. Competitive pressures rise by more in the comparative advantage sector which makes
selection stricter there.
     Our interest is in building a simple framework which is capable of capturing selection effects
that arise due to an increase in minimum wage. One reason that we chose not to use Bernard et
al. (2007)’s approach as the benchmark model is that their assumptions regarding factor intensities
of entry and production costs specifically exclude selection effects that arise due to changes in
factor prices which occur with minimum wages. Their model can be extended to allow for such
effects at some cost in complexity. It would deliver similar results, as the forces that operate with
minimum wages tend to do so in similar ways across a range of standard models. Minimum wages
would raise costs, and more so in the labor intensive sector so that there would tend to be a loss of
comparative advantage in this sector with consequent effects on prices, production and exports.
     The Eaton and Kortum (2002) approach to firm heterogeneity works elegantly in the Ricardian
setting and is particularly well-suited for quantitative analysis. Their Ricardian model can be
augmented to include two factors with different substitution possibilities across industries to obtain
the kind of insights we obtain in our framework. In their setting, the higher costs, especially of
the labor intensive sector, will reduce the probability of it being the lowest cost supplier of such
varieties so that a higher minimum wage will result in lower exports. We chose not to use their
approach as we want to focus on the qualitative channels through which minimum wages affect
outcomes, rather than estimate a quantitative model.
     The paper proceeds as follows. The setting is explained in Section 2. Section 3 characterizes
the equilibrium with heterogeneous firms in the absence of minimum wages. Section 4 incorporates
minimum wages lays out the key predictions of the model. This section is the heart of the paper.
Section 5 explains how minimum wages are set in China, points to some patterns in minimum
wages over space, and explains our identification strategy. Section 6 looks for the predictions of
the model in the data. Section 7 offers some directions for future work and concludes. Details of
some proofs and simulation results are in the Appendix.


                                                  5
2          The Setting
All markets are perfectly competitive. Consumers in each city consume a homogenous good A
and an aggregate good, S, which is a composite of two aggregate goods X and Y . These aggregate
goods are made up of the different varieties of x and y and each prefecture produces its own unique
variety of x and y.
    Consumers have a utility function

                                                          U = U (S, A)

which is homothetic. In particular, we will assume that

                                                          U = Aα S 1−α

and
                                                                               1
                                                        S = (X ρ + Y ρ ) ρ
                   1
where σ =         1−ρ
                        is the constant elasticity of substitution between X and Y . Also,

                                            "                   # ρ1           "                   # ρ1
                                                X
                                                J                  x               X
                                                                                   J                  y

                                     X=               (xj )ρx          , Y =             (yj )ρy
                                                j=1                                j=1

               1            1
and σx = 1−ρ       (σy = 1−ρ    ) is the constant elasticity of substitution between varieties of X (Y ).
                 x            y
We assume that there are j ∈ J cities, each with its agricultural hinterland.
     Each prefecture j has a capital endowment K j and labor endowment Lj . These factors earn
rental rate rj and wage wj .11 Firms in a prefecture can make the prefecture’s variety of the two
manufactured goods, x and y. How much a firm can make depends on its capacity as explained
below. These goods differ in their factor intensities, and we assume that good x is labor intensive.
Thus, within a city/prefecture and for a given industry (x or y), all manufacturing firms make the
same variety of the manufactured good. Moreover, producers of manufactured goods do not know
their costs ex-ante, but discover them ex-post. First they pay the fixed entry costs in an industry of
fe ce (w, r). This entitles them to produce a single unit of the good at the cost c(w, r)θ where c(·)
is the base unit cost and θ is the inverse of its realized productivity. Firms draw their θ from the
distribution f (θ). A higher θ denotes lower productivity or higher costs. Each firm in a prefecture is
competitive and takes the price for the prefecture’s variety as given. However, as firms are ex-post
heterogeneous, some firms earn quasi rents. There are no financing frictions or credit constraints.
    11
         We will suppress j for simplicity hereon till needed.



                                                                       6
    Each prefecture also makes a homogeneous good, A, in its rural area. This agricultural good,
A, uses one unit of effective labor per unit of output and has a price of unity. Workers have
different effective units embodied in them if they work in agriculture but all workers have the same
productivity in manufacturing. In agriculture, type γ labor produces γ units of output. W is the
earnings of an effective unit of labor and equals unity by definition. Note that a worker of type
γ would make γ units of A and so earn γ in agriculture and w in manufacturing and choose to
go where his earnings are higher. g(·) is the distribution of labor productivity in agriculture. As
all workers are assumed to be equally productive in manufacturing, workers with a high γ choose
not to migrate from the rural to urban areas of a prefecture. Those with a low γ migrate to the
urban area to look for work in manufacturing. As the wage in manufacturing increases, agriculture
contracts, and the productivity of the marginal worker in agriculture rises. This results in the usual
bowed out shape for the production possibility frontier in each prefecture.
    Recall that each prefecture produces its own variety of each of the two goods and all firms in a
given prefecture produce the same variety. X and Y are aggregate goods and made in a constant
elasticity of substitution (CES) fashion from the individual varieties (x and y) made in different
prefectures. Let pjx and pjy denote the factory price of the variety made in prefecture j. There is
an integrated domestic market for each variety of each good so that each location pays the factory
price (which is obtained by the producer) plus any transport costs. Domestic demand for a variety
j of x (similarly for y) in city k is denoted by xjD   jx  X    Y
                                                  k (pk , Pk , Pk , Ik ). N
                                                                            jx
                                                                               is the mass of firms that
                          jx       jy
enter into variety xj . pk and pk will denote the price of the variety manufactured in city j in
city k. We assume there are no transport costs incurred for a city’s own variety and that transport
costs take an iceberg form. As a result, pjx k = p T
                                                    jx jk
                                                          and pjy        jy jk
                                                                k = p T . Note that the price of
the aggregate good, PkX and PkY will vary by location: well connected locations will tend to have
lower aggregate prices than locations that are remote.
    Demand for a typical variety comes from all the cities. The demand for variety j ∈ J made by
location j of good x for example comes from all cities k = 1...J

                                     X                 pjx T jk −σx PkX −σ (1 − α) Ik
                        Djx (·) =             T jk (           ) (     )
                                    k=1,..J
                                                        PkX         Pk         Pk

where pjx is the factory price of variety j of good x, T jk is the iceberg transport cost between j
and k, PkX (PkY ) is the aggregate price index for X (Y ) in prefecture k which take the usual form:


                                                   X                            1
                                 PkX = (                    (pjx T jk )1−σx ) 1−σx
                                                  j=1,..J
                                                   X                  1−σy      1
                                 PkY     = (                (pjy T jk )      ) 1−σy
                                                  j=1,..J


                                                            7
where σi is the elasticity of substitution between varieties of good i, i = x, y. Similarly, Pk is the
price index of the overall aggregate good
                                                X                 1
                                       Pk = (         (Pks )1−σ ) 1−σ
                                              s=X,Y


We will use these definitions when we come to the market equilibrium defined below. We will first
analyze what happens in a single location and then extend our model to many locations.
     Take a representative location (j) and sector (x or y) to begin with. We first show how factory
prices (p) define selection of the ex-post heterogeneous firms making each good. Then we show
how to solve for factor prices and outputs. Once we have this, we are able to write down supply
and together with demand to solve for equilibrium prices.
     If the price of the good is p, only those suppliers who draw a cost below price will produce, that
                                       p
is, θc(w, r) ≤ p, or θ ≤ θ̃(·) = c(w,r)    will choose to produce the good. This defines the marginal
firm as having θ = θ̃(·). Supply of the location’s variety at price p, given N, the mass of firms, and
f (θ), the density of θ is thus:
                                                                       
                                                                 p
                               s(p, N, c(w, r)) = N F                         .                      (1)
                                                               c(w, r)

This defines the industry supply curve in the short run (i.e., for given N ). In the long run, as
there is a cost of entry, and firms only discover their productivity after incurring this cost, N is
endogenous.
    Firms enter until their expected profits equal the fixed cost of entry. Evidently, selection de-
pends on the specification of entry costs.

Lemma 1. (i) If entry costs in a sector are paid solely in terms of the good being made in that
sector, the identity of the marginal firm, θ̃, is fixed and there are no selection effects of a change in
factor price. (ii) If entry requires the use of both goods x and y, then an increase in the price of
a factor makes selection stricter in the good that uses the factor intensively. (iii) If entry costs are
in terms of the numeraire good, then an increase in costs of production makes selection stricter in
both sectors.

Proof. A firm pays a fixed cost of entry, fe , draws a θ, then decides to produce or not. A firm with
cost θc(·) makes 1 unit of output by hiring aL (w, r)θ units of labor and ak (w, r)θ units of capital
and earns p, where aL (w, r) and aK (w, r) are the unit input requirements. It pays θc(w, r) for its
inputs and fe ce (w, r) for its entry costs. Integrating over the range of productivity such that a firm




                                                    8
chooses to produce gives:
                                         p
                                         Z
                                       c(w.r)


                                                (p − θc(w, r)) f (θ)dθ = ce (w, r)fe
                                         0
                                                                           
                                                           Zθ̃
                                                                       
                                                c(w, r)         F (θ)dθ = ce (w, r)fe
                                                           0


where the second line above follows from integration by parts.12 Thus,
                                                            
                                                     Zθ̃
                                                             ce (w, r)
                                                     F (θ)dθ =         fe .                                  (2)
                                                                 c(w, r)
                                                     0


                                   Rθ̃
If c(w, r) = ce (w, r), then             F (θ)dθ = fe which pins down θ̃. In this event, θ̃ does not depend on
                                   0
                                                                                                           e
anything other than the distribution of productivity and the entry cost, fe . More generally, cc(w,r)(w,r)

moves in the same direction as θ̃. If ce (w, r) uses a mix of good x and y, then the intensity of factor
usage in entry costs will lie in between that of x and y. Therefore, an increase in the price of a
                                                                                          e (w,r)
factor will raise costs of the good using it intensively relative to entry costs so that cc(w,r)  will fall
and selection will become stricter. If fe is in terms of the numeraire good, A, then p rises with c(·)
but less than proportionately. Free entry requires
                                                                p              
                                                               Z
                                                               c(w.r)

                                                                              
                                                 c(w, r)               F (θ)dθ = fe .
                                                                 0


                p
Clearly,     c(w, r)
                       must fall as c(·) rises so selection becomes stricter in both sectors.

                                                                                                    Rθ̃
       The free entry condition in equation (2) can be interpreted as the expected quasi rents,           F (θ)dθ,
                                                                                                    0
                                                     e
being equal to the real cost of entry cc(w,r)
                                         (w,r)
                                               fe . With a unit mass of firms entering,13 supply at a cut-
off θ is just F (θ). The area OAB in Figure 1 then is just the area between the supply curve and the
cutoff, which is analogous to producer surplus (the area between the price and the supply curve) in
                                                                     e (w,r)
a competitive setting. Free entry requires that this area equals cc(w,r)     fe which can be thought of as
the cost of entry in terms of the units of the good being made or the real cost of entry. This is what
  12
       Recall that for the marginal firm, price equals cost, we have p = θ̃c(w, r).
  13
       If a mass N enters, both costs and returns increase proportionately.


                                                                     9
                             F (θ)

                             1                                       F (.)




                                                   B




                                                   A
                             0
                                                  θe                    θ

                                     Figure 1. Cutoff Productivity


drives cutoffs.
    Without selection effects, because θ̃ is independent of price, the model will look similar in
many ways to the standard Heckscher Ohlin two good, two factor, two country model. There
are three twists even without any selection effects. First, the analogue to the standard unit input
requirements of input i for good j, denoted by Aij , includes both the requirement in entry and in
production. With some work we show that without selection, though Aij 6= aij , where aij denotes
                                                               ALj     aLj
the unit input requirement in production, we will still have AKj    = aKj   which is what ensures that
the Rybczynski type result goes through. The second twist is that both the price of x and y are
endogenously determined, not just their ratio, so that we need to solve for the price of one good
given the price of the other and then we solve for the equilibrium prices. Third, migration makes
labor supply endogenous. Consequently, product price changes bleed over into factor availability.
For example, an increase in the price of the capital intensive good will raise r and reduce w,
reducing capital intensity and thereby raising the supply of the capital intensive good. The fall in
w also reduces the labor supply available to industry which raises y (the capital intensive good) and
further reduces x á la Rybczynski. In other words, there is a magnified supply response coming
from migration via a Rybczynski like effect.
    Selection adds new challenges and insights, but in essence, the same approach works by con-
tinuity when we limit selection by assuming each good uses mostly its own good in entry costs.
When both goods are used in entry costs, an increase in wages raise the real cost of entry in the la-
bor intensive sector and reduce it in the capital intensive sector. This in turn means that output and
exports of the capital intensive sector expand and those of the labor intensive sector contract, along
with selection becoming weaker in the former and stricter in the latter. We incorporate minimum
wage into the model and derive comparative static properties of the model with a change in min-

                                                  10
imum wage, both without and with limited selection. In the Appendix we show using simulated
examples that even when selection effects are relatively prominent, the key comparative statics of
the model continue to hold.


3          Solving the Model
In this section we look at the different modules that make up the model before turning to the effects
of a minimum wage. Throughout we assume that there are no factor intensity reversals and that
endowments put us in no specialization region in any given location. Note that as each location
makes a different variety of the two manufactured goods, the equilibrium price of these goods can
differ across locations: those with low transport costs would tend to have higher demand for their
manufactured goods, and so face higher product and factor prices, than would less well connected
locations. Trade is implicit in the model. The difference in demand from domestic locations and
supply from a domestic location is exports of that city’s variety while demand for foreign varieties
is met by imports.


3.1         Product Prices and Factor Prices
Cutoffs in a sector depend on w and r as shown in (2). For our two sectors in a city we have14
                                                           
                                             Zθ̃x
                                                   x          cex (w, r)fex
                                                 F   (θ)dθ  =                                      (3)
                                                                  cx (w, r)
                                              0
                                                    
                                             Zθ̃y
                                                 y     cey (w, r)fey
                                             F (θ)dθ =                                             (4)
                                                           cy (w, r)
                                              0

                                        
     Given (w, r) we can get θ̃x , θ̃y from the free entry conditions equations (3) and (4). This
then
 fixes the position      of the price equal cost curves of the marginal firm. Let us call these cutoffs
  θ̃x (w, r) , θ̃y (w, r) .
     With two sectors and each city making its unique variety of the good in each sector,

                                                  px = θ̃x (w, r)cx (w, r)                           (5)
                                                  py = θ̃y (w, r)cy (w, r)                           (6)
                                                   1 = W.                                            (7)
    14
         We allow the draw of costs to differ across sectors.



                                                                11
                     w




                                    e0




                                                  e
                                                                                      0       0
                                                                                  px = θ̃x cx (w, r)
                 e                                                                        0
             w                                                                         px = θ̃x cx (w, r)
                                                                              px,e = θ̃x cx (w, r)
                                                                                  py,e = θ̃y cy (w, r)
                                                                                  0       0
                                                                                py = θ̃y cy (w, r)

                                           re                                         r

                                 Figure 2. Product Prices and Factor Prices


W is the wage per effective unit of labor and equals unity. As there is free entry, once we know
prices, we know w, r. As a result, given product prices, we know factor prices in a manner analo-
gous to that in the simple Heckscher Ohlin setting.15

Lemma 2. When entry costs use both goods, the Stolper Samuelson theorem remains valid and is
magnified by selection effects. An increase in the price of the labor intensive good raises w and
reduces r while making selection stricter in the labor intensive good and weaker in the capital
intensive one. An increase in the price of the capital intensive good raises r and reduces w while
making selection stricter in the capital intensive good and weaker in the labor intensive one.
                                                                                              −   +         +   −
    For this reason, we can write cutoffs in terms of product prices as θ̃x (px , py ), θ̃y (px , py ). To
understand how a price increase would affect factor prices it is useful to think of this as happening
in two steps. In the first step, keep the cutoffs fixed. This is the direct effect of price changes
without incorporating selection. In the second step, let cutoffs change to reflect the selection
effect.
                                                                     0
    Figure 2 depicts the increase in the price of x, from px,e to px . As a result, the equilibrium
moves from e to e0. Suppose we keep the selection cutoff fixed at θ̃x and θ̃y . Then the price change
                                                                                        0
results in w rises and r falls a la Stolper Samuelson. This in turn reduces θ̃x to θ̃x and raises θ̃y
  15
     If there are no selection effects, as is the case when entry costs in each sector are in terms of the good made in
that sector, then θ̃X , θ̃Y are fixed and factor prices are homogeneous of degree one in product prices.


                                                         12
to θ̃y0 which shifts the curve for x further out and for y further in as shown in Figure 2. In effect,
                                          x                   y
the selection effects further increase pθ̃x while reducing pθ̃y . Note, both direct and indirect effects
work in the same direction. So the Stolper Samuelson theorem remains, but is magnified due to
the selection effect.
     Of course, in an analogous manner, an increase in the price of the capital intensive good raises
                                                                                   ey
the rental rate and reduces the wage. It also reduces the “real cost” of entry ( c cy(w,r)
                                                                                      (·)
                                                                                           ) in the capital
                                                                                             ex
intensive good, making selection tighter there, and as it raises the real cost of entry ( c cx(w,r)
                                                                                                (·)
                                                                                                    ) in the
labor intensive good, making selection looser there. A more formal proof is in the Appendix.

3.1.1   Migration and Income

Let G(·) be the cumulative density function of productivity of labor in agriculture. There is overall
a mass L of labor. If the wage is w, agents with agricultural productivity below w will be better
off working in the manufacturing sector and move there. Recall, that all agents are homogeneous
in terms of their productivity in manufacturing. K denotes the exogenous availability of capital
which is used only in manufacturing.16 For simplicity, we assume agriculture uses only effective
labor.
    Given prices, we can get factor prices and hence total income which is the value of factor
payments:

                                      I = γ̄(w)L + wG(w)L + rK                                                  (8)
                                            = γ̄(w)L + px x + py y

where                                  Z
                             γ̄(w) =        γg(γ)dγ = (1 − G(w)) E(γ|γ > w)                                     (9)
                                        w

is the number of effective units of labor in agriculture (with a unit mass of labor (L = 1)) when the
manufacturing wage is w. If the mass is L these workers will earn γ̄(w)L in agriculture. Clearly
γ̄(w) is decreasing in w. We assume that migration is only from the agricultural hinterland of a
  16
    Capital is owned by some agents but as preferences are homothetic, who owns it does not matter. Nor does
migration confer ownership rights to capital so that migrants respond only to differences in their expected earnings
between agriculture and manufacturing in any given location.




                                                        13
prefecture to its urban area for simplicity.17

                             dI = L [−wg(w) + G(w) + wg(w)] dw + Kdr
                                   = LG(w)dw + Kdr

In other words, the change in the labor income is just the change in wage times the number of
workers not in agriculture. This makes sense: workers on the margin of switching out of agriculture
are indifferent between working in agriculture or manufacturing, and so gain nothing from the
switch. The income of those that remain in agriculture is unchanged, while the income of workers
in industry rises with an increase in the wage. Capital income, of course, rises with the rental rate.


3.2     Outputs and Factors
                 R θ̃
Let θ̄x (θ̃x ) = 0 θf (θ)dθ. Clearly, θ̄x (θ̃x ) moves in the same direction as θ̃. A firm of type θ
demands θcw (w, r) + fe cew (w, r) units of labor and θcr (w, r) + fe cer (w, r) units of capital. All
firms that enter incur fe , but only firms with θ below θ̃ are active. Let N x and N y denote the mass
of firms which enter in sector x and y respectively. Hence, factor market clearing (FMC) gives:


                                                                                   
                  N x cxw (·)θ̄x (·) + fe cew (·) + N y cyw (·)θ̄y (·) + fe cew (·) = G(w)L                         (10)
                                                                                   
                   N x cxr (·)θ̄x (·) + fe cer (·) + N y cyr (·)θ̄y (·) + fe cer (·) = K                            (11)

So at given prices and hence at given factor prices, only N x , N y are unknown. Rewriting this more
compactly gives



                                  N x ALx (w, r) + N y ALy (w, r) = G(w)L                                           (12)
                                 N x AKx (w, r) + N y AKy (w, r) = K                                                (13)
  17
    Had we wanted to match migration patterns to the data, we could make locations differ in more than just wages.
Adding utility that varied by source and destination of the agent as well as utility shocks for each location to migrant’s
preferences would allow migration to come from all locations. Making the usual parametric assumptions on shocks
and matching patterns of migration in the data to those in the model would then allow preferences to be backed out.




                                                           14
where Aij , the total unit input requirement in equilibrium of factor i in sector j, is given by:
                        h                                                      i
                            cxw (w, r)θ̄x (θ̃x (w, r))
                                                     +         fe cew (w, r)       = ALx (w, r)
                        h                                            i
                         cyw (w, r)θ̄y (θ̃y (w, r)) + fe cew (w, r)                = ALy (w, r)
                         h                                           i
                           cxr (w, r)θ̄x (θ̃x (w, r)) + fe cer (w, r)              = AKx (w, r)
                         h                                           i
                             y         y y                   e
                           cr (w, r)θ̄ (θ̃ (w, r)) + fe cr (w, r)                  = AKy (w, r)

At given product prices, we have given factor prices and cutoffs and so given Aij ’s. As a result, we
can solve the factor market clearing conditions (equations (12) and (13)) for entry. Factor market
clearing is depicted in Figure 8.
    Note that the Aij ’s themselves do not always move in line with the aij ’s. For example, an
increase in wr reduces the unit labor input requirement in production and in entry for good x, and
as it reduces θ̄x , it also reduces ALx (w, r). Similarly, an increase in wr raises AKy . However, as an
increase in wr reduces the unit labor input requirement in production and in entry for good y, but
as it raises θ̄y , it is not clear how it affects ALy (w, r). Similarly, it is not clear how an increase in
w
 r
   affects AKx (w, r). For this reason, assuming no selection makes things easier to follow, though
this assumption is by no means critical to any of the results.

Assumption 1. Entry costs are in terms of the good being made. In other words, cx (w, r) =
cex (w, r) and cy (w, r) = cey (w, r).

      When Assumption 1 holds, then we can show that even though Aij 6= aij, it remains true that
AKj     a
ALj
      = aKj
          Lj
             , j = x, y.

                                                 ALx (·)        aLx (·)       ALy (·)       aLy (·)
Lemma 3. When Assumption 1 holds,                AKx (·)
                                                           =    aKx (·)
                                                                          >   AKy (·)
                                                                                        =   aKy (·)
                                                                                                    .

Proof.
                                       h                                  i
                        ALx =         cxw (w, r)θ̄x (θ̃x ) + fe cex
                                                                  w (w, r)
                                                                        
                                                                x
                                                            Zθ̃
                                                                        
                                  = cxw (·) θ̃x F (θ̃x ) − F (θ)dθ + fe cex
                                                                            w (·)
                                                                    0
                                                                                                       
                                                                 cex (w, r)fe fe cex (·)
                                  =    cxw (·)        x    x
                                                     θ̃ F (θ̃ ) − x          + xw
                                                                   c (w, r)    cw (·)
                                  = cxw (·)θ̃x F (θ̃x )

where the second line follows from integrating by parts, the third follows from the free entry


                                                               15
                                               ex                       ex
condition. If cex (w, r) = cx (w, r), then c cx(w,r)f
                                                (w,r)
                                                      e
                                                        = fe = feccxw(·)(·) so that ALx = cxw (·)θ̃x F (θ̃x ) and
                                                                   w
as a result, AAKx
               Lx (·)
                  (·)
                      = aLx (·)
                        aKx (·)
                                . The analogous proof   works for other     total input requirements.

    In all the following results summarized in the lemmas, we first consider the case of no selection
such that Assumption 1 holds, and then extend our results to the case of limited selection. First we
turn to look at the effects of endowment changes on entry.

Lemma 4. At given prices, and with limited selection effects, an increase in L raises entry in x,
the labor intensive product, while reducing it in y, the capital intensive one. Similarly, an increase
in K raises entry in y and reduces it in x.

Proof. Given product prices, we have factor prices and this pins down the Aij (·) values. Thus the
factor market clearing conditions (13) and (12) are just straight lines. These are depicted in Figure
3. With N y on the vertical axis and N x on the horizontal axis, the labor market clearing line given
by equation (12) is steeper than the capital market clearing one given by equation (13) as long as
ALx (·)                                  ALy (·)
ALy (·)
        > A Kx (·)
          AKy (·)
                   , that is, AAKx
                                Lx (·)
                                   (·)
                                       > AKy (·)
                                                 . With no selection effects, this is ensured by Lemma 3
                 a   (·)
since aaKx
        Lx (·)
           (·)
                  Ly
               > aKy (·)
                         by assumption. This is what drives the Rybczynski type result. An increase
in L, at given prices, shifts the labor market clearing curve outwards in a parallel manner. This
raises the mass of entry in the labor intensive sector and reduces it in the capital intensive one.
Similarly, an increase in K raises the mass of entry in the capital intensive sector and reduces it
in the labor intensive one. In essence, entry responds to endowments just as output does in the
Heckscher Ohlin model.
                                                                                  ALx (·)   ALy (·)
    Even with selection effects, the same argument works as long as               AKx (·)
                                                                                          > AKy (·)
                                                                                                    . Lemma 3-A
                                                                             ALx   aLx      ALy       aLy
in the Appendix shows that in the presence of selection effects,             AKx
                                                                                 < aKx and AKy > aKy      . In other
                                                                                                        ex
words, selection effects bring the total labor intensities closer together. However, if c (w, r) is
                                                  ALy
close enough to cx (w, r), AAKx
                             Lx
                                 remains above AKy     so that the labor market clearing line in the
presence of limited selection effects, and for given product prices, remains steeper than the capital
market clearing one. This is all we need for the Rybczynski style result to go through.


3.3    Supply, Demand and Equilibrium Prices
By changing the price we can trace out the supply curve at any price. As prices change, so do
factor prices and with them the unit and total unit input requirements, aij and Aij .

Lemma 5. As long as selection effects are limited, there is a positive own price effect and a
                                                                +   −        +   −       −   +   −   +
negative cross price effect on entry so we can write N x (px , py ; L, K), N y (px , py ; L, K). Moreover,
there is a positive own price effect and a negative cross price effect on supply as well.


                                                       16
             Ny
                                N x ALx (w, r) + N y ALy (w, r) = G(w)L


                                      N x ALx (w, r) + N y ALy (w, r) = G(w)(L + ∆L)




                               e                         N x AKx (w, r) + N y AKy (w, r) = K


                                         e0


                                                                                Nx
                                   Figure 3. Entry and Endowments


Proof. Again we first show the logic of the result without selection, and then argue it remains valid
as long as selection effects are limited. As θ̃x is fixed without selection effects, so is θ̄x (θ̃x (w, r)).
As a result, the Aij (·)’s move exactly as the aij (·)’s do. An increase in the price of x, the labor
intensive good, raises w and reduces r, making both goods less intensive overall in their use of
labor. Factor market clearing conditions (given labor availability) then require the entry in x (the
labor intensive good) to rise and y to fall to use up the available labor. This is the logic of the usual
supply response in the Heckscher Ohlin model. In addition to this, the increase in w increases the
available labor through migration, resulting in a magnified response as more available labor further
raises entry in x and further reduces entry in y. Thus, an increase in own price raises own entry
while an increase in the other good’s price reduces own entry. Analogous arguments can be made
for the effects of an increase in the price of good y.
    When we allow for selection there is an additional channel that operates through the effect on
the Aij ’s via θ̄. This effect can work against the Aij ’s behaving analogously to the aij ’s though
it does not always have to do so. For example, an increase in the price of y reduces wr and so
raises cyw (w, r) and cew (w, r) but makes selection stricter in y and so reduces θ̄y (θ̃y (w, r)). As
selection effects are constrained, so is the change in θ̄y (θ̃y (w, r)) induced by them. Once again, by
continuity, we can ensure that the Aij (·)’s move in the same direction with and without selection.
This allows the logic of the normal supply response in these models to operate.
    Turning to the effects on supply, since each firm makes one unit of output, supply is just


                                                    17
N (·)F (θ̃). Without selection effects, supply is driven entirely by the effects on entry as described
above. Consequently, there is a positive own price response for supply and a negative cross price
one. When selection effects are present, there is an additional channel that operates directly on
supply through selection. An increase in the price of a good makes selection stricter in the sector
so F (θ̃) in the sector falls while entry rises. As

                                   ∆Supply ' F (θ̃)∆N + N f (θ̃)∆θ̃

by limiting selection, i.e., ∆θ̃, we can argue that the sign of ∆Supply is the same as that of ∆N .
Again, continuity arguments limit the effect of selection on the outcome. Thus, in an open interval
around the no selection model, supply will remain increasing in own price and decreasing in the
other price.

    Setting supply equal to demand will give the equilibrium price in a representative location for
the two goods (we are suppressing the index j).

                           +   −   +   −         −
                     N x (px , py ; L, K)F x (θ̃x (px )) = Dx (px ; P X , P Y , P, I)              (14)
                           −   +   −   +         −
                      N y (px , py ; L, K)F y (θ̃y (py )) = Djy (py ; P X , P Y , P, I).           (15)

    Demand for a city’s variety depends only on the price of its own variety, given I, P X , P Y and
P . Of course, in equilibrium, these indices are consistent with the ones derived in equilibrium.
The demand for variety j of x depends on its own price, and is downward sloping in price, while
supply depends on the price of both the x and y varieties made. With limited selection, supply rises
in own price and falls with the other price. Equilibrium is given by the intersection of demand and
supply in all markets such that these prices are mutually consistent.
    Equilibrium (given the price of the other good) is depicted in Figure 4 for good x and in Figure
5 for good y. Equilibrium, given a price of the other good, is where demand and supply intersect.
To find the the consistent equilibrium prices in both markets simultaneously it will be useful to
depict the equilibrium as the market clearing price of a variety of x, given a price of the variety
of y, and vice versa. This is done in Figure 7 with py on the y axis and px on the x axis. As
the price of the city’s variety of x rises, there is a positive supply response in x (the supply curve
is upward sloping as drawn in Figures 4 and 5) and a negative one in y (the supply of y shifts
inwards so that the equilibrium price in y rises with an increase in the price of x). This is depicted
in Figure 7 by the line py (px ; L, K) which defines the equilibrium price in y for a given price in x.
Similarly, as the price of y rises, there is a positive supply response in y (the supply curve is upward
sloping as drawn in Figures 4 and 5) and a negative one in x (the supply of x shifts inwards so


                                                     18
                                               px




                px (py,e , w̄) = p̃x (py,e , w̄)
                                           px,e




                                                    S x (px , py,e )             Dx (px )

                                                                            x̃        x

                    Figure 4. Supply, Demand and Minimum Wages in Good X


that the equilibrium price in x rises with an increase in the price of y). This relationship between
the price in y and the equilibrium price in x is depicted in Figure 7 by px (py ; L, K). Note that
py (px ; L, K) and px (py ; L, K) are upward sloping. For stability, px (py ; L, K) needs to be steeper
than py (px ; L, K). This requires own price effects to dominate cross price ones. Equilibrium prices
are given by the intersection of these two curves at (px,e , py,e ) in Figure 7.
    Before we turn to minimum wages let us ask what the new predictions of the model are for
the effects of trade. First, in equilibrium, trade will make selection stricter in the comparative
advantage sector as its price rises and weaker in the comparative disadvantage sector whose price
falls. Thus, existing firms will exit the comparative advantage sector. However, the price increase
will also raise the mass of firms so that entry will rise. Note that trade will raise both exit of
existing firms and entry of new firms in the comparative advantage sector, that is, there will be
more churning in this sector. In the other sector, selection will become easier but fewer firms will
enter. In other words, there will be less churning in the comparative disadvantaged sector. This
result is much like that in Bernard et al. (2007) though the mechanism differs. We are now finally
in a position to look at the effects of a minimum wage in our model.


4     Minimum Wages and Outcomes
How would a minimum wage affect equilibrium? Recall that there are three goods, A, x and y in
each location and we have fixed the price of A at unity. As each variety is unique, and all goods
are essential in demand, all goods are made and that price equals cost for the marginal firm making

                                                                       19
                                py



                                                                     S y (px,e , py )




                              py,e
                     py (px,e , w̄)

                     p̃y (px,e , w̄)




                                                                                        Dy (py )

                                                             ỹ                              y


                  Figure 5. Supply, Demand and Minimum Wages in Good Y


each good. Consider a particular prefecture. Equilibrium will be given by the system of equations.

                                            px = θ̃x (w̄, r)cx (w̄, r)                             (16)
                                            py = θ̃y (w̄, r)cy (w̄, r)                             (17)
                                             1 = W = pA                                            (18)

where w̄ is the minimum wage.
   Again, free entry gives
                                               
                                        Zθ̃x
                                            x     cex (w̄, r)fex
                                        F (θ)dθ =                                                (19)
                                                      cx (w̄, r)
                                        0
                                               
                                        Zθ̃y
                                            y     cey (w̄, r)fey
                                        F (θ)dθ =                .                               (20)
                                                      cy (w̄, r)
                                        0


    If the minimum wage is binding, labor markets do not clear. The supply of labor at the wage
relevant for workers exceeds the demand resulting in unemployment. Let ŵ(w̄) be the expected
wage in the manufacturing sector of a prefecture when the minimum wage is binding at w̄. The
expected wage is the probability of finding a job in the manufacturing sector times the minimum
wage, where the probability of finding a job is less than one due to equilibrium unemployment in
presence of a binding minimum wage. If workers are risk neutral, this will be the relevant wage

                                                       20
for workers choosing to migrate or not.18
    As firms pay the minimum wage, their input decisions are dictated by it, and for this reason
the A0 s depend on the minimum wage and the rental rate. Demand for labor cannot exceed supply
while capital markets clear so that:



                        N x ALx (w̄, r) + N y ALy (w̄, r) = LD ≤ G(ŵ(w̄))L = Ls                                    (21)
                       N x AKx (w̄, r) + N y AKy (w̄, r) = K                                                        (22)

       where the expected wage ŵ(w̄) is given by:
                                                                    
                                                                LD
                                                 ŵ(w̄) =                w̄                                         (23)
                                                                LS

and income, I, in the city is

                                   I = γ̄(ŵ(w̄))L + ŵ(w̄)G(ŵ(w̄))L + rK.                                         (24)

       Goods market clearing will give product prices:

                            Dx (px , I) = N x (px , py , w̄, G(ŵ(w̄)L, K) F x (θ̃x (·)).                           (25)

                           Dy (py , I) = N y ((px , py , w̄, G(ŵ(w̄)L, K) F y (θ̃y (·)).                           (26)


     Consider the determination of factor prices at the equilibrium product prices (px,e , py,e ) in the
absence of a minimum wage in Figure 6. We depict the case where cutoffs are fixed. As px,e =
θ̃x cx (w, r) and py,e = θ̃y cy (w, r) and x is labor intensive, the former is flatter than the latter at any
given wr . At the given equilibrium product prices, and no minimum wage, factor prices are given
by the intersection of the two thick curves depicting px,e = θ̃x cx (w, r) and py,e = θ̃y cy (w, r). This
gives equilibrium factor prices, (we , re ).
     To understand the effects of a minimum wage consider the case where Assumption 1 holds so
there are no selection effects and θ̃x and θ̃y are fixed. A minimum wage, w̄, which is binding at the
equilibrium prices in the absence of a minimum wage is depicted in Figure 6. At (px,e , py,e ) the
minimum wage is binding as w̄ exceeds we . Since good y can afford to pay a higher r (along its
price equal to cost curve) than x can, at these prices only the variety of good y is made. As a result,
given py = py,e , the supply of x is zero until its price reaches p̃x (py,e , w̄) as depicted by the solid
  18
    If they are not risk neutral, then the wage that equates their expected utility will be the relevant one for migration
choices.


                                                           21
                    w




               w̄                              e

              we                                                           p̃x (py,e ) = θ̃x cx (w, r)
                                                                         px,e = θ̃x cx (w, r)
                                                                             py,e = θ̃y cy (w, r)
                                                                         p̃ (px,e ) = θ̃y cy (w, r)
                                                                          y



                                         re                                      r

                    Figure 6. Product Prices and Factor Prices with a Minimum Wage


line in Figure 6. At this price, both goods can afford to pay the same r, given the minimum wage.
This means that in Figure 4, supply of x is zero till the price rises to p̃x (py,e , w̄) which exceeds px,e .
As a result, demand and supply for x intersect at a higher price and lower output. Consequently,
the equilibrium price of x (for the given price of y) is actually p̃x (py,e , w̄). Note that p̃x (py,e , w̄) is
the lowest prices of good x, given py = py,e , and w̄, such that x is made.
     What about good y? Let p̃y (px,e , w̄) be defined analogously as the highest prices of good y
such that x is made, given px = px,e . Recall that at p̃y (px,e , w̄), the two price equal to cost curves
intersect at w̄. If py rises beyond p̃y (px,e , w̄) in Figure 5, only y is made. As a result, there is a
flat part for the supply function at p̃y (px,e , w̄) as depicted. All resources are used in y, but labor
is in excess supply. As the price of y rises above this cutoff, r rises though w remains at w̄. As a
result, labor intensity rises and more of y can be made and supply is upward sloping. Supply with
a minimum wage for good y is depicted by the solid line in Figure 5. As supply has shifted out,
the equilibrium price of y, given the price of x, and the minimum wage w̄, is lower with a binding
minimum wage than without. The equilibrium price of good y, given px = pxe and the minimum
wage w̄ is denoted by py (pxe , w̄). Note that the minimum wage acts like a positive supply shock
for y but a negative one for x.
     Note that p̃x (py , w̄) and p̃y (px , w̄) represent the same thing, namely where the minimum wage
is just binding in (px , py ) space. This is drawn in Figure 7 and labeled as p̃x (py , w̄). p̃x (py , w̄)
lies to the right of px (py ) at py = py,e as drawn. The minimum wage is binding above the curve
p̃x (py , w̄) and not binding below it. Below and to the right of it, x can be made as its price exceeds

                                                      22
the cutoff price needed for it to be made, while above and to the left of this curve, the opposite
is true. The equilibrium price for x, given a price of y, and the minimum wage w̄, is denote by
px (py , w̄). It equals px (py ), the unconstrained equilibrium price when the minimum wage is not
binding and p̃x (py,e , w̄) when it is binding as depicted by the solid blue line in 7.
     It is worth pointing out that the output of x is driven by demand, not supply (which is hori-
zontal) when the minimum wage binds. Output is lower as shown in Figure 4, despite a higher
equilibrium price. The higher the minimum wage, or the more labor intensive is x, the higher is
the price (p̃x ) needed to elicit a positive supply of x, and the lower is the equilibrium output. That
greater labor intensity of x raises p̃x is shown in Lemma 6 in the Appendix. This makes intuitive
sense as the cost of x will rise by more when wage rises if x is more labor intensive. Consequently,
price must also rise by more.
     What about the equilibrium price of good y in the presence of a minimum wage denoted by
  y x
p (p , w̄)? The same logic yields that in the region where the minimum wage is not binding,
the equilibrium price of y, given a price of x, remains py (px ). In the region where it is binding,
py (px , w̄) lies below py (px ) as depicted in Figure 7. py (px , w̄) is depicted by the solid red line
in Figure 7. The intersection of py (px , w̄) and px (py , w̄) occurs where p̃x (py , w̄) intersects py (px )
which is labeled as the “New Equilibrium” in Figure 7.
     Adding selection will make θ̃ depend on the minimum wage and the rental rate. By limiting
selection, the effects in the no selection case will dominate, so that the result will extend to limited
selection as well. We look at the case even with strong selection effects at play in our simulations
in the Appendix and find the same results.

Proposition 1. For a given price of the capital intensive good, a binding minimum wage in a city
raises the price and reduces the output of the labor intensive good, for both the domestic market
and for export, and this is more so, the higher the minimum wage and the more labor intensive the
good.

    Note that both price are pushed up by the minimum wage and that the price increase is larger
for x than y. This means that wr should rise so that the choice of technique becomes more capital
intensive in both sectors. Moreover, though both prices rise, the output of x falls while that of y
rises.

Proposition 2. A binding minimum wage will raise the price of the labor intensive good by more
than that of the capital intensive one. This will raise the wage-rental ratio and raise the capital
intensity in both sectors.

    A higher minimum wage will thus tend to reduce the output of the labor intensive good and
raise that of the capital intensive one while tending to making both goods more intensive in their

                                                     23
         py
                                                     px (py )
                                                                     px (py , w̄)




              Old Equilibrium




                  py (px )
                                                                New Equilibrium

                         py (px , w̄)

                                 p̃x (py , w̄)

                                                                                    px


Figure 7. Equilibrium Prices with and without a Minimum Wage



                                                                                         0
                        AKx new
                    (       )
                        ALx


K        AKy new
     (       )
         ALy



                                                     AKx old
                                                 (       )
                                                     ALx




                  AKy old
              (       )
                  ALy




0
                                                     LG(w)
                                                        LG(E(w))

    Figure 8. Factor Market Equilibrium with Minimum Wages


                                                 24
use of capital. This is depicted in Figure 8 where AALk is depicted as rising with the minimum wage
in both sectors, with N x falling and N y rising. In Figure 8, migration is depicted as increasing
with the minimum wage as the labor available in manufacturing is shown to be higher with the
minimum wage.
    In general, an increase in the minimum wage could raise or lower migration. The demand
for labor is a derived demand from the final goods. As shown above migrants will equate their
productivity in agriculture to their expected wage in manufacturing so that those with ability below
γ̃ migrate where                                              
                                                        LD
                                   γ̃ = ŵ(w̄) =                  w̄
                                                   G(ŵ(w̄))L
or
                                         γ̃G(γ̃)L = LD (w̄)w̄.

The left hand side is increasing in γ. If the right hand side, which is the value of demand for labor,
rises (falls) with the minimum wage, then γ̃ will rise (fall) with an increase in the minimum wage
and there will be more (less) migration to the city. In other words, if labor demand is elastic,
a higher minimum wage will actually reduce migration. Only if labor demand is inelastic will
migration rise with the minimum wage. Thus, whether migration increases with minimum wage
is ultimately an empirical question. Using state-level variation in minimum wage, Monras (2015)
provides evidence that low-skilled workers tend to leave US states that increase minimum wage.

Proposition 3. An increase in the binding minimum wage will raise migration to the city if labor
demand is inelastic and reduce it if labor demand is elastic.


4.1     Predictions of the Model
In this section we summarize the predictions regarding an increase in minimum wage for produc-
tion, exports, prices, factor intensity of production and selection at the industry level on the basis
of the model described above, before turning to the next big question of how we can extend the
model to make predictions at the firm level. These are the predictions of the model that we take to
the data in the empirical section of the paper.

4.1.1   Predictions at the Industry - City Level

Prediction 1. The output of the labor intensive good should fall and its price should rise with a
binding minimum wage. The effects should be more pronounced for more labor intensive sectors.

    This follows from Propositions 1. Recall that as each location makes its own varieties, and
as each variety is essential, the price of each variety is pinned down at p̃x , the flat part of supply

                                                  25
in Figure 4. Output of x will be constrained by demand so that production will fall of the labor
intensive good despite the rise in price. This would be accentuated for more labor intensive goods
as these would require a higher price to be made, i.e., p̃x would be higher in Figure 4, and demand
would be lower. As a result, price would rise while output would fall with the minimum wage,
and more so the more labor intensive the good. This motivates using the minimum wage and the
interaction of the minimum wage and factor intensity as an explanatory variable in both the price
and output regressions.
    A closely related prediction is about exports. Demand comes from all sources and a higher
price results in lower demand from all sources for the labor intensive good i.e., lower exports.

Prediction 2. The exports should fall and their price rise with a binding minimum wage. The
effects should be more pronounced for more labor intensive sectors.

    Whether the value of sales rise or fall depends on elasticity. If world demand has more than
unitary elasticity, the rise in price will reduce the export value of the labor intensive good. If
domestic demand has less than unitary elasticity, then value of domestic sales will rise, despite the
value of export sales falling.
    A rise in the minimum wage will also impact the input choice of firms, encouraging substitution
towards more skill-intensive or capital-intensive mode of production. This prediction is captured
below.19 Given the substitution between factors, this should be more so where the minimum wage
is more relevant, i.e., in sectors which are very labor intensive or where average wages are low so
that firms are more likely to be impacted by the minimum wage.

Prediction 3. A higher minimum wage should raise capital intensity and encourage the use of
capital while discouraging the use of labor. We would expect the increase in capital intensity to be
higher, the more relevant is the minimum wage in the sector. Labor use should fall, and more so
where the minimum wage is more relevant.

    A higher wage-rental ratio has selection effects on the cutoff in both x and y as shown in Lemma
1. A higher minimum wage increases the wage-rental ratio, given prices. Also, in equilibrium the
price of x is likely to rise by more than that of y, which further raises equilibrium wage-rental
ratio via Lemma 2. Consequently, from Lemma 1, selection in x will become stricter while that in
y would become weaker. The more labor intensive the sector (or the higher or more binding the
minimum wage) the more costs rise with the minimum wage and the more the equilibrium price
has to rise due to the minimum wage, and the tighter becomes selection and the higher is average
productivity. Our prediction regarding selection effects of minimum wage is below.
  19
    Note that in the data, in the presence of more than two factors of production, such as capital, unskilled and skilled
labor, complementarity between capital and skilled labor will add more nuances to Prediction3. We discuss this in
more detail in the empirical section.


                                                          26
Prediction 4. Locations with high minimum wages should have a distribution of productivity that
has a higher mean than that of low minimum wage locations, and this should be more pronounced
in more labor intensive sectors.

    Given the effects on output and selection, what can we say about the extensive margin of firms
and a binding minimum wage? A higher minimum wage raises cost and price, but reduces output,
while making selection stricter, especially in labor intensive sectors. Thus, we expect exit to rise in
labor intensive sectors, and more so in more labor intensive sectors. In the capital intensive sector,
existing firms are less likely to exit as selection becomes weaker. As entry falls, we will see less
churning in this sector.

Prediction 5. Exit of existing firms should rise in labor intensive sectors with a binding minimum
wage, and more so in more labor intensive sectors, other things constant.

    While the model we outline above has two goods and factors, the forces driving the results there
should remain in more general settings. While we do not prove the results in a general setting, we
use the intuition they are based on to lay out what we might expect to see in the real world based
on the simple model presented.

4.1.2    From the Industry to the Firm

It is well understood that in the competitive model laid out above, the firm is not well defined. Is a
firm one draw with unit capacity? Is it a collection of draws of unit capacity? If so, what defines
the collection of draws that make up a firm? Clearly, the specification of a firm will depend on the
facts that the researcher is interested in understanding. Since we are interested in understanding
the effects of minimum wages on firm level variables in a tractable general equilibrium framework,
we choose to think of firms as arising essentially from randomness along the lines of Armenter and
Koren (2014).
     Think of firms as bins and capacity draws as balls. A firm is the collection of draws of θ in a
bin where each draw gives the ability to produce one unit of output at cost θc(w, r). In this way
each firm will have a weakly upward sloping supply function. Some firms will have many draws
and some will have few. Some will have good draws of costs and some will have bad draws. Firms
with many good cost draws will have elastic supply at low prices, while firms with only a few bad
draws will be willing to supply a small quantity at relatively high prices.20 Firms with no draws
  20
     Note that even this simple model predicts many of the patterns seen in data. See, for example Bernard, Jensen,
Redding and Schott (2012). Firms with many draws will have a better best draw and a worse worst draw. Thus, by the
logic of order statistics, larger firms will tend to be willing to supply at prices smaller firms will not and larger firms
will look like they are more productive - a common feature of the data. In addition, in the presence of transport costs,
firms whose worst θ draws put their costs below the domestic price but above the transport cost adjusted price will not


                                                           27
have no supply at any price.21
    The cutoff, θ̃, will determine which of its capacity draws a firm will choose to use in the given
equilibrium. This will provide a model of firm level heterogeneity in supply functions that will
allow us to go from industry level predictions to firm level ones. Of course, industry supply will
just be the horizontal sum of the firm supply functions and will be exactly as in the model laid out
above.22 With this view of a firm, it follows that selection at the industry level will be mirrored
in selection at the firm level. As a binding minimum wage makes selection stricter in the x and
weaker in the y sector, firms will drop their high cost capacity in the x sector and do the opposite
in the y sector. As a result, average (firm and industry) productivity will be rising in the former
and falling in the latter.
    With this interpretation of a firm at hand, the predictions at the industry level will carry over
to the firm level. Price will rise with the minimum wage at the firm level. Furthermore, as costs
rise more than price in x (which is why selection becomes stricter) firms will produce and export
less. Moreover, firms whose best draw of cost at the new factor prices exceeds the new price will
exit. Thus, exit should rise in the wake of a minimum wage in x so that the average productivity
of remaining firms will rise. Furthermore, this will be more so for more labor intensive sectors.


5     The Data and Patterns

5.1     How is the Minimum Wage Set in China?
The Chinese Government published its first formal “Minimum Wage Regulation” in 1993, which
was followed by the “1994 Labor Law”. These initial regulations granted provincial governments
authority and flexibility in adjusting their minimum wages. At its onset, only a limited number of
cities adopted minimum wages. It is also widely believed that the growth in minimum wage was
small until early 2000s and the enforcement had huge room for improvement.
    In March 2004, the Ministry of Human Resource and Social Security issued a new regulation,
“The 2004 Regulation on Minimum Wage”, which established a more comprehensive coverage
of minimum wage standards. According to it, the minimum wage depends on the local living
export. This will give rise to another feature often pointed out in the data - larger more productive firms tend to export.
However, the model does not provide any predictions about selection into exporting. As there are no fixed costs of
exporting, the most productive firms do not select into exporting. Rather, all firm produce what is profit maximizing
at the given price and their output is as likely as that of any other firm’s to be exported. Adding fixed cost of exporting
to the model would give the patterns seen in the data. We choose not to do so for simplicity and as this is not the focus
of our paper.
   21
      Note that we need to back away from assuming a continuum of firms for out interpretation to work. With a
continuum all bins would replicate the distribution of costs.
   22
      Note that firms will differ from one another only when there are a finite number of draws. If we had a continuum
of draws, firm demand would just be a scaled down versions of market demand.


                                                           28
costs of workers and their dependents, urban residents’ consumption price index, social insurance
and housing insurance, average wage level of employees, economic development, local employ-
ment rate, etc. Notably, this policy reform also strengthened the enforcement by raising the non-
compliance penalty23 and requiring more frequent minimum-wage adjustments — at least once
every two years (Hau et al., 2016; Mayneris et al., 2017).
    Importantly, the regulation provides a guideline formula for minimum wage. To be concrete,
there are two methods that the local governments can use to set their own level of minimum wages.
The proportion method is based on the minimum income necessary to cover the standard living
costs of an individual living in poor conditions. While the Engel coefficient method is based on the
minimum food expenditure divided by the Engel coefficient, which results in a minimum living
cost.24 In practice, the adjustments of minimum wages are set by the provincial administration
(Gan, Hernandez and Ma, 2016), while prefectural level cities negotiate with their provincial ad-
ministration to determine their actual level of minimum wage (Du and Wang, 2008; Casale and
Zhu, 2013)). In particular, cities in each province are divided into several groups according to
their levels of economic development. Within each group, cities generally have the same mini-
mum wage and follow the same adjustment. However, if a city (or county) is substantially less
developed than other cities/counties in the group, it can be allowed to adopt the minimum wage of
the next less-developed group (Gan et al., 2016).
    The monthly minimum wage data used here was hand collected from local government’s web-
sites and statistical bulletins. Figure 9 illustrates the geographical difference in minimum wage
across prefectural regions of mainland China. It also shows the evolution of minimum wage over
time by presenting separately the geographical distribution in 2000, 2004, 2008, and 2010. Several
interesting patterns emerge: First, there are large variations in minimum wage across regions: the
coastal areas usually set higher minimum wages than the western regions. For example, in 2004,
Shanghai had the highest minimum wage, at 635 Yuan (about 77 US dollars at the 2004 exchange
rate), while most cities in Henan province in central China had the lowest level of minimum wage
at 240 Yuan (29 dollars). Second, there is significant, but unbalanced growth in minimum wages
across regions over time, with the western regions catching up very quickly in later years. Thirdly,
within each province, there are usually several groups of cities that adopt different levels of min-
imum wages — usually the capital city and other large cities adopt higher minimum wage levels
than smaller cities. For example, in 2004, within Guangdong province, the highest monthly mini-
mum wage was in Shenzhen at 610 Yuan (74 dollars), while the lowest was set in Heyuan at 290
Yuan (35 dollars).
    Figure 10 illustrates the evolution of monthly minimum wages between 2000 and 2010. As
  23
       The penalty for non-compliance was increased from 20-100% to 100-500% of the wage shortfall.
  24
       Unfortunately, how different levels of local governments applied these two methods are not transparent to us.



                                                           29
                           Figure 9. Geography of Minimum Wages, 2000-2010


shown in the figure, the median minimum wage rose from around 260 RMB in 2000 (i.e., around
31 US dollars at the 2000 exchange rate), to 750 RMB in 2010 (around 110 US dollar at the 2010
exchange rate).25 There is also an obvious acceleration of minimum wage growth after 2004.


5.2     Firm and Transaction-level Data
Besides city level minimum wage data, our main empirical results are drawn from transaction-
level export and import data, collected by the China Customs General Administration. This dataset
provides the universe of transactions by Chinese firms that participated in international trade over
the 2000-2008 period. It reports for each transaction the value (in US dollars) and quantities at
six-digit HS product level, the destination/origin country, and the firm’s identification code, name
and address. With value and quantity, we could conveniently calculate the unit value for each
transaction.
    The second dataset that we use is the Annual Surveys of Industrial Production (ASIP) from
2000 through 2007, collected by the China National Bureau of Statistics (CNBS). This survey
includes all State-Owned Enterprises (henceforth SOEs) and non-SOEs with sales over 5 million
Chinese Yuan (about 600, 000 US dollars with the exchange rate in 2000). This dataset contains
  25
     The box plot reports the 25, 50, and 75 percentile as the three horizontal lines of the box, the top and bottom line
outside the box are the adjacent values (defined as the 75 percentile + 1.5 inter-quarter range, and 25 percentile − 1.5
inter-quarter range), the dots are deemed as outliners.



                                                          30
                         Figure 10. Evolution of Minimum Wages, 2000-2010


information on the firms’ industry of production, ownership type, age, employment, capital stocks,
total material inputs, value of output and value-added, as well as export values. With additional
information on output and input deflators (Brandt, Van Biesebroeck and Zhang, 2012), we estimate
the total factor productivity (TFP) for each firm using the Levinsohn & Petrin approach (Levinsohn
and Petrin (2003)). For the year 2004 only, we have additional information on the number of the
skilled and unskilled labor 26 employed by each firm. For this reason, we will on occasion reduce
our sample to include only firms that were operating in 2004 as well as other periods (for example
Table 2).
    The advantage of the survey data is we can get information on wages paid and can estimate
TFP. The disadvantages are that it lacks complete coverage and it has no information on destina-
tion of export or unit values or quantities. The customs data is a census covering all firms that
participate in trade. Moreover, product level information is very detailed since it includes not only
quantity and value so the unit values could be calculated, but also the export destination (or import
source) country for each 8-digit HS product exported or imported by a firm, as well as the firms’
location information. The disadvantage is that unless matched with the survey data, many firm
level variables (e.g., the balance sheet information) are not available. To facilitate a thorough anal-
ysis, we also match the two datasets on the basis of firm name, region code, address, and so on.27
  26
     Here we define skilled workers as workers who have obtained college education or above.
  27
     It is worth noting that about 15.3% of exports are unmatched among producing exporters. For example, in 2004,
intermediary firms accounted for 25.6% of the universe of the export values and matched producers (producing ex-


                                                       31
The matched sample, though with fewer observations, enables us to look at the effect of minimum
wage on firms with different TFP.


5.3     Endogeneity of Minimum Wage
Our main predictions focus on the consequence of higher minimum wages. However, a higher
minimum wage might be set because the city is more productive and so has a higher per-capita
income. If cities that are more productive set higher minimum wages and also export more (in
value or quantity) the correlation between higher exports and higher minimum wages would not
be causal. Working with firm level data allows us to control for firm fixed effects (or even firm-
product-destination fixed effects), which to a large extent alleviate concerns regarding such endo-
geneity bias. Nevertheless, endogeneity could be a major problem, especially when we look at the
relationship between the average productivity of firms in a city and the minimum wage (Prediction
4) since in this case, our regressions are at the industry-city level instead of the firm level.
    To correct for endogeneity bias, we adopt an instrumental variable strategy. The minimum
wages are set at the prefecture level. Thus we expect that cities with similar income per capita
tend to set similar minimum wages. To construct the instrumental variables, we group all cities
based on their GDP per capita in each year into 20 groups. Cities in a particular group therefore
have similar levels of income. Then we use the average minimum wage of all other cities in
the group as the instrument for this city’s minimum wage. Section 6 presents all key empirical
predictions using both the OLS results and the 2SLS estimates using this instrument.28
    As an alternative option, we also consider the initial minimum wage as an instrument for future
changes in minimum wage, since synchronization of across-prefecture minimum wage seems to
be a clear policy initiative. Cities with low minimum wages at the start-of-period will have a
strong motivation to raise it. Because this instrument is not time varying, using it would require
changing our baseline empirical specification to a first-difference setup.29 In the robustness checks
section, we compare our benchmark IV results here to those using the initial minimum wage as the
instrument.
porters) accounted for 62.9%. Among the unmatched and unsurveyed firms’ share, small manufacturing firms (with
sales below 5 million Chinese Yuan) account for only 2% of exports, which leaves 9.5% accounted for by unmatched
surveyed producers. See Bai, Krishna and Ma (2017) for the details of this matching.
   28
      It is worth noting that roughly half of the variation in minimum wage between prefectures in each year is within
each GDP per capita group, with the rest being between groups.
   29
      This IV is inspired by a similar IV strategy employed in international trade literature exploring the effect of
tariff reductions by Amiti and Konings (2007). Their paper uses the start-of-period tariff rate to predict future tariff
reductions.




                                                          32
6        Empirical Results
We proceed by presenting all key empirical predictions using both OLS regressions and the IV
estimates, while putting the first stage estimation results in the appendix.


6.1      Minimum Wage and Exports
Predictions 1 and 2 state that the output and exports of labor intensive goods should fall and their
prices should rise with an increasing minimum wage. Furthermore, the effects should be stronger
for more labor-intensive sectors. Due to the lack of price information for firm output in the sur-
vey data (which has firm revenue, not price or quantity), we start by investigating the impact of
minimum wage on exports where we can calculate unit value since we have both export value and
quantity. Our Customs data covers the full transactions of Chinese exporters during 2002-2008.
We start from 2002 because this is the first year after China’s WTO accession, and minimum wages
began to increase more often after 2001. We stop in 2008 to avoid the disturbance of the 2008-
2009 global financial crisis, which had a huge negative impact on exports. More specifically, we
use export information at the firm (i) - product (h) - prefecture/city (c) - destination (d) - time (t)
level. The idea is after controlling for city- and product- specific characteristics, increasing the
minimum wage (ln(mw)ct ) tends to discourage exports, but will discourage them less in more
skilled labor-intensive and capital-intensive sectors.
    The baseline regression is specified as follows.

         ln(Vihcdt ) = α1 · ln(mw)ct + β1 · ln(mw)ct · (S/L)hc + β2 · ln(mw)ct · ln(K/L)hc
                         +µ1 Xct + γ1 Ydt + λihd + λt + εihdt ,                                                 (27)

where the dependent variable Vihcdt refers to export value, price (unit value) or quantity for HS6
product h exported by firm i located in city c to destination country d in time t. ln(mw)ct mea-
sures the log value of minimum wages in prefectural city c in year t. To examine the differential
impact of minimum wages on firms across different industries, we include an interaction term be-
tween minimum wage and an industry-city measure of skill intensity (S/L)hc and capital intensity
ln(K/L)hc . The industry dimension is categorized at the 4-digit Chinese Industrial Classification
(CIC) level , which is drawn from the 2004 ASIP data.30 We also control for other concurrent eco-
nomic factors at city-year level Xct , in particular GDP per capita for income level, and population
for city size. On the other hand, Ydt controls for destination side characteristics, for which we use
    30
     As part of the 2004 economic census, the 2004 ASIP records the number of workers by their education level for
each surveyed firm, which we aggregate up to four-digit CIC industry level as a measure of skill intensity. Specially,
we use the share of workers with college or above education out of total firm employment in 2004 as S/L, and the log
deflated value of net fixed asset over firm employment in 2004 as ln(K/L).


                                                         33
the GDP per capita of the destination country d. We use a firm-product-destination fixed effect
λihd to control for any characteristics that are specific to a firm-product-destination triplet, thus
implying that our identification comes from within firm-product-destination changes over time.
Finally a year dummy is used to control for any macro shocks. All regressions are at exporter-hs6-
destination-year level, using 2002-2008 Custom data, with standard error clustered on city-product
pair.

                                        Table 1: Minimum Wage and Firm Export
                                             (1)             (2)              (3)                  (4)               (5)                 (6)
 Method                                                       OLS                                                    2SLS
 VARIABLES                             ln(export value) ln(unit value) ln(export quantity)   ln(export value)   ln(unit value)   ln(export quantity)

 ln(min wage)                            -0.494***        0.178***         -0.672***           -0.565***           0.199**           -0.764***
                                          [0.0565]         [0.0338]         [0.0600]             [0.146]           [0.0880]            [0.151]
 ln(min wage)× Industry-City (S/L)       1.157***         -0.265***         1.422***            1.323***          -0.306***          1.629***
                                           [0.120]         [0.0750]          [0.129]             [0.108]           [0.0672]            [0.115]
 ln(min wage)× Industry-City ln(K/L)     0.122***        -0.0366***         0.159***            0.139***         -0.0384***          0.178***
                                          [0.0151]         [0.0101]         [0.0160]            [0.0139]          [0.00928]           [0.0148]
 city ln(GDP/population)                 0.0462***        -0.0259**        0.0721***           0.0438***         -0.0251***          0.0689***
                                          [0.0157]         [0.0115]         [0.0160]            [0.0133]          [0.00905]           [0.0134]
 city ln(population)                      0.00512           0.0495           -0.0444             0.00560            0.0517             -0.0461
                                          [0.0407]         [0.0511]         [0.0617]            [0.0379]           [0.0411]           [0.0529]
 destination ln(GDP/population)           0.0643*           0.0104           0.0540              0.0581*            0.0121             0.0460
                                          [0.0361]         [0.0175]         [0.0396]            [0.0307]           [0.0149]           [0.0335]

 Observations                            12,885,836      12,885,836        12,885,836          12,881,448        12,881,448         12,881,448
 R-squared                                  0.793           0.949             0.847               0.016            0.048              0.002
     Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered on city-product pair. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
     All regressions include firm-product-destination fixed effects and year dummies.
     Weak identification test (Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F statistic): 286.216.


    Table 1 reports the baseline results using (log of) export value, export price, and export quantity
as the dependent variable. The OLS results are reported in the first three columns and the 2SLS
results are reported in columns (4)-(6). All first stage regressions are reported in the Appendix in
Section 8.3. Columns (1) and (4) show that increasing minimum wages discourages exports, but
less so for more skill or capital intensive sectors. Based on the IV results (Column 4), the elasticity
of export value relative to minimum wage is:

                              ∂ln(Vihcdt )
                                           = αˆ1 + βˆ1 · (S/L)hc + βˆ2 · ln(K/L)hc
                              ∂ln(mw)ct
                              = − 0.565 + 1.323 · (S/L)hc + 0.139 · ln(K/L)hc .

Note that this elasticity could be positive for firms with high skill and capital intensities, and
negative for those with low skill and capital intensities. Consider a hypothetical city-industry pair at
the 10th percentile of the distributions of both capital intensity and skill intensity with S/L = .0213
and lnK/L = 2.452. For such firms, a 10 percent increase in the city’s minimum wage will lead
to a 2 percent decrease in export value (−0.565 + 1.323 × 0.021 + 0.139 × 2.452). For another
hypothetical city-industry pair at the 90th percentile of the distributions of S/L and K/L with

                                                                      34
S/L = .33 and lnK/L = 5.078, Column (4) states that a 10 percent increase in the city’s minimum
wage will lead to about 5.8 percent increase in export value (−0.565+1.323×0.33+0.139×5.078).
Thus, higher minimum wages discourage exports, but only for those city-industry pairs with low
skill intensity and low capital intensity. About 73 percent of city-industry pairs in our sample have
a positive marginal effect (i.e., ∂ln(V ihcdt )
                                  ∂ln(mw)ct
                                                > 0) while the remaining 27 percent of city-industry pairs
have a negative response.
    This result is consistent with our theoretical framework as the higher price needed to elicit
supply due to the minimum wage reduces demand, as well as the finding by Gan et al. (2016).
Columns (2) and (5) show that export prices rise with increase in minimum wage, but less so for
capital or skill-intensive industries. Columns (3) and (6) consider the impact of a rise in minimum
wage on export quantities, with similar results as the export value. Again, a higher minimum wage
reduces quantity exported and less so for skill or capital intensive industries. Applying the same
procedure as above on the marginal effects shows that about 40 percent of the city-industries pairs
have a negative price response to a rising minimum wage, and about 69 percent have a positive
quantity response. Note also that the levels of the coefficients of interest with and without the IV
are similar. This is the case in all the regressions below as well.


6.2    Minimum Wage and Inputs
As mentioned earlier, the main focus of the labor literature has been on the effect of the minimum
wage on employment. Given our data we are able to look at both margins of labor demand - the
extensive one coming from firms exiting due to the increase in minimum wage, and the intensive
one that comes from each firm using less labor and more capital as the minimum wage rises. In
the following exercise we test the intensive margin of labor demand. The regression equation is
specified as follows.

       ln(Eict ) =α1 · ln(mw)ct + β1 · ln(mw)ct · (S/L)hc + β2 · ln(mw)ct · ln(K/L)hc
                                                                                                     (28)
                   + µ1 Xct + λi + λt + εit ,

where the dependent variable Eict refers to capital intensity, labor, capital or labor cost share for
firm i located in city c and time t. ln(mw)ct measures the log of minimum wages in prefectural
city c in year t. To examine the differential impact of minimum wages on firms across different
industries, we include an interaction term between minimum wage and an industry-city measure
of skill intensity (S/L)hc and capital intensity ln(K/L)hc , at the 4-digit CIC level.
    In Table 2 we test Prediction 3: whether firms respond to a rise in minimum wage by substi-
tuting away from low skilled labor by adjusting factor intensity. We use the ASIP survey data for
the sample period 2002-2007 for this analysis. Here columns (1)-(4) report the OLS results, and

                                                   35
                                    Table 2: Minimum Wage and Factor Intensity:
                                         (1)         (2)         (3)            (4)             (5)        (6)          (7)            (8)
 Method                                                      OLS                                                    2SLS
 VARIABLES                            ln(K/L)       ln(L)      ln(K)      Labor cost share    ln(K/L)     ln(L)        ln(K)     Labor cost share

 ln(min wage)                         0.823***     -0.119*** 0.704***       -0.0236***        1.370***   -0.0281     1.342***      -0.0453***
                                       [0.0586]     [0.0451]  [0.0628]       [0.00172]         [0.158]    [0.114]      [0.144]      [0.00542]
 ln(min wage) × Industry-City (S/L)    0.193**      0.123**  0.316***      -0.00970***         0.176*   0.181***     0.358***      -0.0109***
                                       [0.0941]     [0.0626]  [0.0942]       [0.00306]        [0.0912]   [0.0598]     [0.0940]      [0.00297]
 ln(min wage) × Industry-City ln(K/L) -0.198***   0.0419*** -0.156***      0.00546***        -0.205*** 0.0423***     -0.162***     0.00616***
                                       [0.0135]     [0.0111]  [0.0142]      [0.000419]        [0.0135]   [0.0107]     [0.0142]     [0.000419]
 city ln(GDP/population)              0.295***    -0.0770*** 0.218***      -0.00560***        0.285*** -0.0791***    0.206***     -0.00522***
                                       [0.0187]     [0.0157]  [0.0208]      [0.000699]        [0.0181]   [0.0136]     [0.0207]     [0.000557]
 city ln(population)                  -0.247***      0.0469  -0.200***       0.000260        -0.192***    0.0545      -0.137**      -0.00177
                                       [0.0566]     [0.0401]  [0.0591]       [0.00108]        [0.0558]   [0.0361]     [0.0601]      [0.00129]

 Observations                         810,177      810,177    810,177         760,269        784,870    784,870       784,870        735,816
 R-squared                             0.841        0.921      0.910           0.724          0.048      0.017         0.084          0.059
    Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered on sector-city pair. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
    All regressions include firm fixed effects and year dummies.
    Weak identification test (Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F statistic): 37.305.



columns (5)-(8) the corresponding IV results. Again, first stage results are in the Appendix.
     We start with firm employment. Columns (2) and (6) show that labor falls as the minimum wage
rises, but less so in skill and capital intensive sectors where the minimum wage is less relevant.
For capital stock, columns (3) and (7) show that capital rise with the minimum wage, less so in the
capital intensive sector as the minimum wage is less relevant there, but more so in the skill intensive
sector, possibly because skilled labor also rises and due to complementarity between capital and
skilled labor.
     Column (1) and (5) show that the firm-level capital intensity rises with the minimum wage and
less so for capital intensive sectors (as the minimum wage is less relevant) but more so for skill
intensive sectors, again possibly due to capital skilled labor complementarity. Column (4) and (8)
show labor cost share (measured at fixed wages) falls with the rise in minimum wage, and this
is less pronounced in the more capital-intensive sectors where the minimum wage is less relevant
and more pronounced in skill intensive ones, again possibly due to capital skill complementarity.
The same results are validated using the instrument for minimum wage. Note that unlike the
prediction for exports, a higher wage rental ratio is predicted to raise capital intensity across the
board. Consistent with this we find that at all S/L and K/L deciles, the marginal effect of an
increase in the minimum wage in the regressions with the IV is to raise skill and capital intensity as
well as capital used. Labor used and labor cost share also rises everywhere which could be coming
from the rise in skilled labor outweighing the fall in unskilled labor due to complementarity in
skilled labor and capital.




                                                                     36
6.3    Minimum Wage, Average Productivity and Firm Exit
Our theoretical framework predicts that under reasonable conditions, a binding minimum wage
should make selection stronger in the labor intensive sector and weaker in the capital intensive
sector. Thus, average productivity of surviving firms in a more labor intensive sector is higher with
higher minimum wage, after controlling for other city and industry specific factors (Prediction 4).
Related to this, we expect to see more exit from exporting or from producing with a higher mini-
mum wage, and more so in labor intensive sectors (Prediction 5). In order to test these predictions
we use the ASIP survey data since the richness of production data on output and inputs allow us
to estimate total factor productivity. We follow Bai et al. (2017) to construct the variables and
estimate firm-level TFP following the control function method proposed in Levinsohn and Petrin
(2003).
    The benchmark regression for testing the selection effect is specified as follows:

               T F Phct =α1 · ln(mwct ) + β1 · ln(mw)ct · (Bindingness)hc + µ1 Xct
                                                                                                        (29)
                            + λhc + λt + εhct ,

where the dependent variable is the mean productivity of each 4-digit industry in each city. In-
dependent variables of interest are the minimum wage and its interaction with a measure of how
relevant/binding the minimum wage is in a city- industry, (Bindingness)hc . The variables we
use for relevance/bindingness are industry-city measures of skill intensity (S/L)hc , capital inten-
sity ln(K/L)hc , and the share of surveyed firms with wage lower than minimum wage of each
4-digit industry in each city. Their values are evaluated at their 2001 levels. If firms use little
labor, the effect on their costs of a minimum wage will be smaller, as will be the price increase
needed to cover the cost increase due to the minimum wage. Similarly, if the wage paid is already
above the minimum wage, it will raise costs by less. The theoretical prediction is therefore that
α1 > 0, and β1 < 0. In other words, the minimum wage raises TFP and more so when it is more
relevant/binding. Other independent variables used as controls are city specific variables such
as average wage in a city, population and population density, industry-city fixed effects and year
dummies. These city specific variables are controlled for to separate agglomeration from selection
following Combes, Duranton, Gobillon, Puga and Roux (2012).31
    The results are reported in Table 3. Here columns (1) and (2) report the OLS results, and
columns (3)-(4) report the corresponding IV results. The estimated β1 is negative if capital intensity
is used as a measure of bindingness (see Columns (1) and (3)) while the interaction of S/L and
ln(min wage) is negative but not significantly different from zero at 10 percent level. In Columns
  31
    Richer cities may have higher minimum wage and higher density both of which may affect average TFP. Thus,
we control for agglomeration effects following Combes et al. (2012).



                                                     37
                                  Table 3: Minimum Wage and Mean Productivity

                                                                            (1)      (2)                    (3)        (4)
  Method                                                                        OLS                              2SLS
  VARIABLES                                                              Avg TFP   Avg TFP                Avg TFP    Avg TFP

  ln(min wage)                                                         0.161***           0.150***        0.590***     0.576***
                                                                        [0.0247]          [0.0288]         [0.0880]    [0.0912]
  ln(min wage) ×Industry-City S/L                                       -0.0443            -0.0604         -0.0318      -0.0499
                                                                        [0.0410]          [0.0479]         [0.0464]    [0.0536]
  ln(min wage) ×Industry-City ln(K/L)                                  -0.0141**         -0.0163**       -0.0200***   -0.0167**
                                                                       [0.00554]         [0.00639]        [0.00624]   [0.00712]
  ln(min wage) ×(shr of firms < min wage in 2001)                                         0.208***                     0.268***
                                                                                          [0.0269]                     [0.0307]
  city ln(avg wage)                                                    0.0918***         0.0998***       0.0862***    0.0914***
                                                                       [0.00984]          [0.0112]       [0.00994]     [0.0113]
  city ln(population)                                                  -0.176***         -0.182***       -0.144***    -0.147***
                                                                        [0.0364]          [0.0383]        [0.0372]     [0.0392]
  city population density                                              0.0351***         0.0412***       0.0408***    0.0470***
                                                                        [0.0103]          [0.0108]        [0.0104]     [0.0109]

  Observations                                                           160,711          117,231         159,752      117,051
  R-squared                                                               0.973            0.975           0.042        0.043
    Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses, not clustered. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
    All regressions include industry-city fixed effects and year dummies.
    Weak identification test (Cragg-Donald Wald F statistic): 731.94.



(2) and (4), we add the share of firms with average wage less than the minimum wage as an
additional measure of bindingness. A higher minimum wage indeed has stronger selection effects
when there is a greater share of firms that pay less than the minimum wage, though productivity is
lower for such sectors. It is also worth noting that the marginal effect of a higher minimum wage
is to raise TFP at all deciles of S/L and lnK/L as predicted by the model.32
     Regarding extensive margins of firm survival, prediction 5 states that an increase in the mini-
mum wage will lead to more exit from exporting, but the effect should be less so in more skill or
capital intensive industries. Thus in Table 4 we use a linear regression equation specified similarly
as equation 29 but examine how minimum wage affects the one-period forward exit decision.
     In Table 4, we use EXITcht , the share of firms in the 4-digit industry - city h pair that export in
this period t but exit in next period t + 1, as the dependent variable. Columns (1) and (2) report the
OLS results, and Columns (3) and (4) report the IV estimates. In Columns (2) and (4) we further
use the share of firms with wage less than minimum wage in 2001 as an additional measure of
  32
     If more productive cities set higher minimum wages, the OLS estimates of the effects of the minimum wage on the
mean productivity would be biased upwards. With interactions between the minimum wage and the factor intensities,
however, the direction of bias becomes ambiguous as the direction of the bias depends on the entire set of correlations
in the explanatory variables and the error term.


                                                                    38
                                  Table 4: Minimum Wage and Exit from Export
                                                                        (1)         (2)                    (3)          (4)
 Method                                                                       OLS                                 2SLS
 VARIABLES                                                         Exit Share    Exit Share             Exit Share   Exit Share

 ln(min wage)                                                      0.0362***          0.0377***          0.0528**       0.0478*
                                                                    [0.00689]          [0.00774]          [0.0245]      [0.0245]
 ln(min wage) ×Industry-City S/L                                   -0.0385***          -0.0249*          -0.0264**      -0.0158
                                                                     [0.0114]           [0.0129]          [0.0129]      [0.0143]
 ln(min wage) ×Industry-City ln(K/L)                                -0.00271*        -0.00486***        -0.00353**   -0.00604***
                                                                    [0.00154]          [0.00172]         [0.00173]     [0.00191]
 ln(min wage) ×(shr of firms < min wage in 2001)                                      0.0357***                       0.0339***
                                                                                       [0.00723]                       [0.00823]
 Avg TFP                                                          0.00535***          0.00636***        0.00528***   0.00633***
                                                                  [0.000776]          [0.000868]        [0.000783]    [0.000875]
 city ln(avg wage)                                                0.0206***           0.0185***         0.0203***     0.0185***
                                                                   [0.00274]           [0.00301]         [0.00276]     [0.00303]
 city ln(population)                                                 -0.0118             -0.0126           -0.0113       -0.0126
                                                                    [0.0101]            [0.0103]          [0.0103]      [0.0105]
 city population density                                           0.000421            0.000264          0.000615      0.000307
                                                                   [0.00286]           [0.00291]         [0.00288]     [0.00292]

 Observations                                                        160,711           117,231           159,752      117,051
 R-squared                                                            0.225             0.205             0.020        0.022
   Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses, not clustered. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
   All regressions include industry-city fixed effects and year dummies.
   Weak identification test (Cragg-Donald Wald F statistic): 728.73.



bindingness at the 2-digit industry level. All results are consistent with the theoretical prediction.


6.4    Robustness Checks
Selection not only happen along the dimension of the extensive margin of enter and exit, but also on
firms’ choices of export destinations and export regimes. For example, when an exporter exports
the same product to two destination markets, an increase in minimum wage is more likely to induce
the firm to exit from the market with lower income. This is because richer countries tend to demand
more skill or capital intensive products (Caron, Fally and Markusen, 2014), therefore exports to
them are less affected by increasing minimum wages. To this end, columns (1) and (3) of Table 5
show that higher minimum wage increases exporters’ share of exports to the OECD countries, and
this effect is weakened in more skill-intensive or/and capital-intensive sectors, possibly because
the minimum wage has less of an effect in these sectors.


   Columns (2) and (4) of Table 5 examine the share of processing exports by each firm. It is well
known that firms that do export processing in China are more labor intensive and less productive

                                                                   39
                           Table 5: Minimum Wage and Export Selection Patterns

                                                       (1)                   (2)                     (3)             (4)
 VARIABLES                                       share to OECD         processing share        share to OECD   processing share

 ln(min wage)                                        0.0901***            -0.0229***             0.0840***       -0.0200***
                                                      [0.0168]             [0.00666]               [0.0156]       [0.00676]
 ln(min wage)× Industry-City (S/L)                   -0.254***               0.0138               -0.236***         0.0163
                                                      [0.0258]             [0.00983]               [0.0255]        [0.0101]
 ln(min wage)× Industry-City ln(K/L)                -0.0170***            0.00738***             -0.0173***      0.00701***
                                                     [0.00465]             [0.00175]              [0.00433]       [0.00178]
 lag ln(firm total export value)                                                                 0.00163***      0.00235***
                                                                                                 [0.000312]      [0.000135]
 city ln(GDP/population)                            -0.0197***             0.0155***             -0.0241***       0.0124***
                                                     [0.00613]             [0.00233]              [0.00575]       [0.00221]
 city ln(population)                                 0.118***              0.0158***              0.0628***       0.0108***
                                                      [0.0138]             [0.00270]               [0.0101]       [0.00266]

 Observations                                       10,191,176             10,191,176              8,191,565      8,191,565
 R-squared                                             0.868                  0.935                  0.873          0.937
   Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered on product. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
   All regressions include year dummies and firm-HS6 specific fixed effects.



compared with firms that do normal trade (Dai, Maitra and Yu, 2016). As shown in these columns,
a higher minimum wage leads to a lower share of processing exports, while this effect is weakened
in more skill or capital intensive sectors, possibly because the minimum wage has less of an impact
there. We further control for productivity in Columns (3) and (4) using lagged firm total export
value.
    Table 6 performs some robustness checks on export value, quantity and unit value respectively.
In particular, we report empirical results from regressions at exporter-hs6-year level, using 2002-
2007 Custom-survey merged data, with firm-hs6-destination fixed effects and year dummies. All
our theoretical predictions and empirical patterns in Table 1 are confirmed using the merged sample
while controlling for productivity in Table 6. Table 6 shows that export value (columns 1-2) and
export quantity (columns 5-6) fall with the minimum wage and less so for skilled labor and capital
intensive goods, while export unit value (columns 3-4) rises with the minimum wage but less so for
skilled labor and capital intensive goods. It is also reasonable that higher productivity firms export
more as shown. We also see that unit value is higher for more productive firms suggesting they
produce higher quality. In addition, firms that paid higher wages in the past exported less in value
and quantity, and tended to charge a higher price. Such firms were also less affected by higher
minimum wages as expected.




                                                                  40
                    Table 6: Minimum Wage and Export Value, Price and Quantity
                                          (1)          (2)        (3)            (4)        (5)         (6)
 VARIABLES                                ln(export value)          ln(unit value)        ln(export quantity)

 TFP                                   0.275***   0.269*** 0.0246*** 0.0267***           0.251***    0.242***
                                        [0.0225]  [0.0252]  [0.00412]  [0.00523]          [0.0230]    [0.0261]
 ln(min wage)                          -0.795*** -0.996*** 0.230***    0.276***          -1.024***   -1.272***
                                        [0.0732]   [0.103]   [0.0284]   [0.0366]          [0.0760]     [0.106]
 ln(min wage)× Industry-City (S/L)     1.508***   1.347*** -0.528***   -0.490***         2.036***    1.837***
                                         [0.185]   [0.199]   [0.0723]   [0.0763]           [0.199]     [0.207]
 ln(min wage)× Industry-City ln(K/L)   0.197***   0.201*** -0.0321*** -0.0237***         0.229***    0.224***
                                        [0.0191]  [0.0213]  [0.00753]  [0.00827]          [0.0200]    [0.0223]
 lagged firm wage                                -0.512***             0.223***                      -0.735***
                                                   [0.152]              [0.0520]                       [0.150]
 lagged firm wage × ln(min wage)                 0.0841***            -0.0346***                     0.119***
                                                  [0.0242]             [0.00832]                      [0.0240]
 destination ln(GDP/POP)                -0.130**   -0.0485 -0.0814*** -0.0864***          -0.0482      0.0379
                                        [0.0611]  [0.0670]   [0.0209]   [0.0227]         [0.0633]     [0.0698]
 city ln(GDP/POP)                      0.0475** 0.0631** -0.0716*** -0.0579***           0.119***    0.121***
                                        [0.0218]  [0.0259]   [0.0106]   [0.0130]         [0.0210]     [0.0248]
 city ln(POP)                          -0.146***   -0.0761   0.00370     0.0193          -0.150**      -0.0954
                                        [0.0556]  [0.0653]   [0.0221]   [0.0254]         [0.0593]     [0.0693]

 Observations                          4,024,982   3,531,449   4,024,982     3,531,449   4,024,982   3,531,449
 R-squared                               0.026       0.022       0.039         0.037       0.010       0.008
 Number of fpd id                      2,276,910   2,053,620   2,276,910     2,053,620   2,276,910   2,053,620


6.5     First Difference Setup
In the next set of robustness checks, we first estimate all our key empirical specifications in the
first difference setup. The main purpose of this exercise is to incorporate the initial minimum
wage as an instrument for future changes in minimum wage to cross-validate our key empirical
results. Figure 9 demonstrates that initially low-minimum wage areas experienced a high growth
in minimum wage in later years, confirming that synchronization of across-prefecture minimum
wage is a clear policy initiative. In this setup, we instrument the annual change in minimum
wage by the 5-year lagged minimum wage, following Amiti and Konings (2007). This restricts
our sample to 2005-2007, since the earliest minimum wage in our sample is the year 2000. The
empirical specifications to be tested are described below.
     From the transaction level trade data, we test whether export volume and quantity fall and ex-
port price increases with increase in minimum wage, and less so in more skill- or capital-intensive
industries. The baseline regression, in first difference, is specified as follows.

      ∆ln(Vihcdt ) =α1 ∆ln(mwct ) + β1 ∆ln(mw)ct · (S/L)hc + β2 ∆ln(mw)ct · ln(K/L)hc
                                                                                                           (30)
                      + µ1 ∆Xct + γ1 ∆Ydt + λt + εihcdt ,



                                                      41
where the dependent variable ∆Vihdt refers annual change in export value, price or quantity for
firm i in city c, HS6 product h, destination d and time t. ∆ln(mw)ct measures the change in log
of minimum wages in prefectural city c in year t. To examine the differential impact of minimum
wages on firms across different industries, we include an interaction term between change in mini-
mum wage and an industry-city measure of skill intensity (S/L)hc and capital intensity ln(K/L)hc ,
at the 4-digit Chinese Industrial Classification level , which is drawn from the 2004 ASIP data. To
control for other concurrent economic factors at city-year level ∆Xct , we use change in city GDP
per capita, and population, and ∆Ydt controls for change in destination side characteristics, for
which we use the per capita GDP of the destination country d. Given the first difference setup,
we no longer use the firm-product-destination specific fixed effects so that our baseline and IV
results remain directly comparable to the level regressions in Section 6. 33 A year dummy is used
to control for any macro shocks. Thus, all regressions are at exporter-hs6-destination-year level,
using 2005-2007 Custom data, with standard error clustered on city-product pair. In Table 7 we
report OLS regression results for value, price and quantity in columns (1)-(3), and columns (4)-
(6) reports the IV results using 5-year lag minimum wage of the city as the instrument for annual
change in minimum wage. Both OLS and IV results, in the first difference setup, confirm our key
theoretical predictions and baseline empirical findings: export volume and quantity falls and prices
increase with rise in minimum wage, and the effects are weaker in more skill- or capital-intensive
industries.
    In the next empirical exercise, we test whether increase in minimum wage leads to substitution
away from low skilled labor by investigating how firms change their capital- intensity, employ-
ment of labor and capital and cost share of labor in response to a change in minimum wage. The
regression equation is specified in the first difference setup based on Equation (28). As before, we
use five-year lagged minimum wage at the prefecture level as the instrument for annual change. In
Table 8, columns (1)-(4) show the OLS results, and columns (5)-(8) the corresponding IV results,
and confirm our theoretical predictions and baseline empirical results. However, as observed in the
baseline level regressions, the interaction effects for skill-intensity are often of the opposite sign,
possibly due to capital-skill complementarity.
    Next, we investigate whether industry-city level productivity responds to a change in minimum
wage in the fashion predicted by our theoretical framework. An increase in minimum wage leads
to a tougher competitive environment and stricter selection among firms such that only higher
productivity firms can survive in the market, and this selection effect is stronger in more low-skill
labor intensive industries. This endogenous selection mechanism would lead to growth in average
industry productivity in cities experiencing an increase in minimum wage, but less so in industry-
  33
     In the final set of robustness exercise, we do check whether our key empirical predictions hold if we allow for
different trend growth rates.



                                                        42
                         Table 7: Minimum Wage and Export Value, Quantity and Price
                                                   (1)              (2)                 (3)              (4)                (5)                  (6)
 Method                                                              OLS                                                    2SLS
 VARIABLES                                   ∆ ln(value)      ∆ ln(unit value)     ∆ ln(quantity)    ∆ ln(value)      ∆ ln(unit value)      ∆ ln(quantity)

 ∆ ln(min wage)                              -0.513***              0.323***         -0.836***       -0.908***                -0.0404         -0.867***
                                               [0.127]              [0.0578]          [0.0977]        [0.0662]               [0.0284]          [0.0688]
 ∆ ln(min wage) × Industry-City ln(K/L)       0.745***             -0.457***         1.202***        1.281***               -0.545***          1.826***
                                               [0.138]               [0.115]           [0.172]        [0.0699]               [0.0300]          [0.0726]
 ∆ ln(min wage) × Industry-City (S/L)         0.100***            -0.0402***         0.140***        0.133***              -0.0838***          0.217***
                                              [0.0191]             [0.00961]          [0.0155]       [0.00762]              [0.00327]         [0.00792]
 ∆ city ln(GDP/population)                   0.0954***               0.112**           -0.0162       0.0958***               0.117***        -0.0217***
                                              [0.0272]              [0.0480]          [0.0314]       [0.00544]              [0.00233]         [0.00565]
 ∆ city ln(population)                       0.0811***                0.134            -0.0531        0.124***               0.234***         -0.110***
                                              [0.0236]              [0.0905]           [0.107]        [0.0184]              [0.00789]          [0.0191]
 ∆ destination ln(GDP/population)             0.337***              0.477***            -0.140        0.524***               0.929***         -0.405***
                                              [0.0889]              [0.0455]           [0.100]        [0.0583]               [0.0250]          [0.0605]

 Observations                                 4,661,267             4,661,267        4,661,267        4,661,266            4,661,266          4,661,266
 R-squared                                      0.000                 0.002            0.000            0.000                -0.002             0.000
  Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered on city-product pair. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
  All regressions include year dummies.


                                        Table 8: Minimum Wage and Factor Intensity
                                             (1)            (2)          (3)            (4)            (5)           (6)        (7)               (8)
 Method                                                              OLS                                                   2SLS
 VARIABLES                                ∆ ln(K/L)       ∆ ln(L)      ∆ ln(K)     ∆ Labor share    ∆ ln(K/L)      ∆ ln(L)   ∆ ln(K)         ∆ Labor share

 ∆ ln(min wage)                           1.203***       -0.239***      0.964***    -0.0186***       2.051***      -0.00666      2.044***      -0.0631***
                                           [0.0612]       [0.0373]      [0.0633]     [0.00147]        [0.218]       [0.141]       [0.259]       [0.00641]
 ∆ ln(min wage) × Industry-City (S/L)       0.147         0.110**       0.258***     -0.000616       0.306***      0.326***      0.632***       -0.00436
                                           [0.0925]       [0.0558]      [0.0905]     [0.00222]        [0.112]      [0.0701]       [0.120]       [0.00345]
 ∆ ln(min wage) × Industry-City ln(K/L)   -0.301***      0.0873***     -0.214***   0.00409***       -0.480***      0.130***     -0.350***     0.00595***
                                           [0.0144]      [0.00903]      [0.0150]    [0.000347]       [0.0193]      [0.0118]      [0.0211]      [0.000606]
 ∆ city ln (GDP/population)               0.131***        -0.00555      0.125***   -0.00279***       0.142***       0.0151       0.157***     -0.00475***
                                           [0.0130]      [0.00866]      [0.0132]    [0.000417]       [0.0185]      [0.0121]      [0.0207]      [0.000576]
 ∆city ln (population)                    -0.122***      0.0923***       -0.0294     0.000994       -0.132***      0.0610**       -0.0710     0.00337***
                                           [0.0365]       [0.0231]      [0.0353]    [0.000809]       [0.0449]      [0.0301]      [0.0486]       [0.00130]

 Observations                              448,236        448,236       448,236      416,090         448,234       448,234       448,234        416,088
 R-squared                                  0.004          0.004         0.004        0.003           0.002         -0.007        -0.004         -0.058
  Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered on city-product pair. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
  All regressions include year dummies.



city pairs with higher skill- or capital-intensity. In order to test this, we estimate a version of
Equation (29) in the first difference.
    The dependent variable is the annual change in the mean productivity of each 4-digit industry
in each city. Independent variables of interest are the change in minimum wage and its interaction
with a measure of how binding the minimum wage is in an industry, (Bindingness)h . The two
options we use for this are skill or capital intensity at the 4-digit industry-city level and the share
of surveyed firms with wage lower than minimum wage of each 2-digit industry in each city. The
results are demonstrated in Table 9. Columns (1)-(2) show the OLS results for different measures
of bindingness of minimum wage and columns (3)-(4) are the corresponding IV results. OLS
results in the first difference setup are very similar to the level regressions, as expected, and a
completely different IV also confirm all the key predictions.


                                                                           43
    In our final set of robustness checks, we confirm if our results hold allowing for firm- or
product- specific time trends. In order to test this, the most comprehensive setup would be to
include firm-product-destination specific fixed effects in the first-difference setup (which already
absorbs the firm-product-destination specific time-invariant fixed effects). However, such a setup
leads to absorbing all remaining variation in the data. Instead in our exercise, we allow for 4 digit
industry, city and year fixed effects, in addition to controlling for different firm or product charac-
teristics to lead to different trend growth based on the current literature. In this exercise, based on
empirical firm dynamics literature (Evans (1987)) we allow for different trend growth depending
on age of the firm. We also allow for different trends for firms in special economic zones and for
high-tech firms. Also, based on the spectacular growth observed by least traded goods in Kehoe
and Ruhl (2013), we allow for a product-specific trend growth if the product is a least traded good
in our sample.34 The empirical specification is

         ∆ln(Vihdt ) =α1 ∆ln(mwct ) + β1 ∆ln(mw)ct · (S/L)h + β2 ∆ln(mw)ct · ln(K/L)h
                                                                                                               (31)
                       + µ1 ∆Xct + γ1 ∆Ydt + λt + λi + λh + εihdt ,

where relative to Equation (31), we add firm- and product- specific trends. In order to construct
our firm- specific trend dummies, here we use our merged sample. Table 10 confirms our results.
In this Table, columns (1)-(3) show the response of change in volume of export in the baseline,
after controlling for firm-specific trends and after controlling for firm- and product-specific trends,
respectively. Similarly, columns (4)-(6) show the response of change in export price, and columns
(7)-(9) show the response of change in export quantity, in the same order. In all cases, firm- and
product- specific trends reduce the magnitudes of the impact of minimum wage, but our empirical
predictions continue to hold.


7        Conclusion
This paper has three components. First, it develops a new heterogeneous firm model of supply
in general equilibrium under competition in a Heckscher-Ohlin setting. Firm heterogeneity coex-
ists with competition because firms are capacity constrained which prevents the more productive
firms from taking over. Entry is free and firms enter in search of quasi rents that accrue to more
productive firms. Second, the model is used to predict the how minimum wages affect selection,
production, prices, technique of production, exports and entry/exit patterns. In other words, unlike
much of the work in the area, it highlights the rich set of predictions in general equilibrium rather
    34
    Least traded goods are goods whose cumulative share in exports is less than 10 percent in the initial year 2002.
This definition is following Kehoe and Ruhl (2013)



                                                        44
                                        Table 9: Minimum Wage and Average Productivity
                                                                                      (1)             (2)                 (3)                  (4)
                 VARIABLES                                                         ∆ Avg TFP       ∆ Avg TFP           ∆ Avg TFP            ∆ Avg TFP

                 ∆ ln (min wage)                                                    0.364***        0.375***            1.275***             1.386***
                                                                                     (0.0567)        (0.0568)            (0.331)              (0.351)
                 ∆ ln (min wage) × Industry-City S/L                                  0.0839          0.0810             -0.324*             -0.339**
                                                                                     (0.0985)        (0.0984)            (0.169)              (0.172)
                 ∆ ln (min wage) × Industry-City ln(K/L)                           -0.0678***      -0.0676***           -0.0426*              -0.0413
                                                                                     (0.0141)        (0.0141)           (0.0256)             (0.0258)
                 ∆ ln (min wage) × (shr of firms¡min wage in 2001)                                    0.0607                                  -0.0625
                                                                                                     (0.0383)                                 (0.117)
                 ∆ city ln(avg wage)                                               0.0232**          0.0161*             -0.0563*           -0.0769**
                                                                                   (0.00914)        (0.00915)            (0.0321)            (0.0356)
                 ∆city ln(population)                                               -0.113*          -0.109*            -0.187***           -0.192***
                                                                                    (0.0625)         (0.0625)            (0.0718)            (0.0727)
                 ∆ population density                                                -0.402           -0.416              -0.167               -0.171
                                                                                     (0.460)          (0.460)             (0.484)             (0.487)

                 Observations                                                       85,131            85,131              85,043               85,043
                 R-squared                                                          0.002             0.003               -0.072               -0.085
                     Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered on city-product pair. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, ***
                     p < 0.01.
                     All regressions include year dummies.




                            Table 10: Minimum Wage and Export Value, Quantity and Price
                                              (1)            (2)           (3)          (4)           (5)              (6)            (7)           (8)           (9)
VARIABLES                                             ∆ ln(export value)                         ∆ ln(unit value)                           ∆ ln(export quantity)

∆ ln(min wage)                             -0.0861*       -0.0862*       -0.0785      0.307***      0.306***          0.304***     -0.393***     -0.393***     -0.383***
                                           (0.0515)       (0.0508)      (0.0509)      (0.0322)      (0.0321)          (0.0320)      (0.0518)      (0.0505)      (0.0505)
∆ ln(min wage) × Industry-City (S/L)       0.461***       0.449***      0.432***     -0.201***     -0.200***         -0.195***     0.662***      0.649***      0.627***
                                            (0.109)        (0.108)       (0.108)      (0.0531)      (0.0526)          (0.0526)       (0.114)       (0.111)       (0.110)
∆ ln(min wage) × Industry-City ln(K/L)      0.00139        0.00506       0.00514      0.000960      0.000871          0.000862     0.000435       0.00419       0.00427
                                          (0.00775)      (0.00717)     (0.00717)     (0.00142)     (0.00143)         (0.00143)     (0.00768)     (0.00708)     (0.00707)
∆ TFP                                     0.245***       0.238***       0.238***     0.0303***    0.0306***         0.0307***       0.215***      0.208***      0.207***
                                           (0.0196)       (0.0191)      (0.0190)     (0.00473)     (0.00469)         (0.00469)      (0.0215)      (0.0208)      (0.0207)
∆ city ln(GDP/population)                 0.0710***      0.0795***     0.0796***     0.0941***    0.0937***         0.0936***        -0.0231       -0.0142       -0.0140
                                           (0.0217)       (0.0233)      (0.0233)      (0.0214)      (0.0212)          (0.0212)      (0.0149)      (0.0146)      (0.0146)
∆ city ln(population)                     -0.000968        0.00554       0.00564       -0.0344       -0.0347           -0.0349        0.0335        0.0402        0.0405
                                           (0.0404)       (0.0400)      (0.0400)      (0.0385)      (0.0384)          (0.0384)      (0.0285)      (0.0282)      (0.0280)
∆ destination ln(GDP/population)           0.224***       0.251***      0.249***      0.223***      0.221***          0.222***       0.00108        0.0300        0.0265
                                           (0.0717)       (0.0734)      (0.0733)      (0.0286)      (0.0285)          (0.0285)      (0.0694)      (0.0707)      (0.0706)
young                                                     0.115***      0.115***                    -0.00167          -0.00169                    0.117***      0.117***
                                                         (0.00774)     (0.00776)                   (0.00253)         (0.00253)                   (0.00740)     (0.00741)
old                                                       -0.00213      -0.00268                  0.00891***        0.00896***                     -0.0110       -0.0116
                                                         (0.00705)     (0.00703)                   (0.00323)         (0.00324)                   (0.00790)     (0.00787)
1 if firm is in Special Economic Zone                       0.0367        0.0377                    0.0433**          0.0427**                    -0.00663      -0.00498
                                                           (0.126)       (0.126)                    (0.0199)          (0.0196)                     (0.111)       (0.112)
1 if firm is a high-tech firm                               0.0137        0.0132                    -0.00555          -0.00541                      0.0193        0.0186
                                                          (0.0120)      (0.0120)                   (0.00392)         (0.00393)                    (0.0135)      (0.0135)
least traded goods                                                     0.0369***                                    -0.0125***                                0.0494***
                                                                       (0.00755)                                     (0.00414)                                 (0.00915)
Constant                                   0.101***        0.0766      -0.239***     -0.117***     -0.168***         -0.141***     0.218***      0.245***     -0.0982***
                                           (0.0116)       (0.0522)      (0.0273)     (0.00958)      (0.0126)          (0.0169)     (0.0146)      (0.0464)       (0.0258)

Observations                               1,615,926      1,615,926    1,615,498     1,615,926     1,615,926        1,615,498      1,615,926     1,615,926    1,615,498
R-squared                                    0.006          0.007        0.007         0.008         0.008            0.008          0.006         0.007        0.007
  Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered on city-product pair. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
  All regressions include year dummies and city and 4 digit industry fixed effects.




                                                                                   45
than focusing on a single one or a small subset of them. Third, it tests these predictions using
Chinese customs and survey data at the firm level. The OLS and the IV results provide robust
empirical evidence in favor of the entire range of theoretical predictions.
    In future work we plan to look at two related aspects that we do not study here. First, we
want to explore migration patterns and their response to minimum wages. It is often presumed that
higher minimum wages attract more migrants. However, this need not be the case if employment
opportunities for migrants shrink fast enough with the rise in the minimum wage. Second, we
want to look for evidence of agglomeration effects. If agglomeration effects are strong and higher
minimum wages do not attract low skilled workers, differences in minimum wages could magnify
inequality. Cities with high minimum wages could end up attracting skill intensive sectors and
high skilled labor whose returns are magnified by agglomeration effects. US cities are beginning
to set their own minimum wages in a bid to offer workers a living wage, It would be ironic if this
attempt backfired and resulted in even more inequality through this channel.




                                               46
References
Armenter, Roc and Miklós Koren, “A balls-and-bins model of trade,” The American Economic
  Review, 2014, 104 (7), 2127–2151.

Autor, David H., Alan Manning, and Christopher L Smith, “The contribution of the minimum
  wage to US wage inequality over three decades: a reassessment,” American Economic Journal:
  Applied Economics, 2016, 8 (1), 58–99.

Bai, Xue, Kala Krishna, and Hong Ma, “How you export matters: Export mode, learning and
  productivity in China,” Journal of International Economics, 2017, 104, 122–137.

Bell, Brian and Stephen J Machin, “Minimum wages and firm value,” Mimeo, London School of
  Economics, 2016.

Bernard, Andrew B, J Bradford Jensen, Stephen J Redding, and Peter K Schott, “The em-
  pirics of firm heterogeneity and international trade,” Annual Review of Economics, 2012, 4 (1),
  283–313.

  , Stephen J Redding, and Peter K Schott, “Comparative advantage and heterogeneous firms,”
  The Review of Economic Studies, 2007, 74 (1), 31–66.

Brandt, Loren, Johannes Van Biesebroeck, and Yifan Zhang, “Creative accounting or creative
  destruction? Firm-level productivity growth in Chinese manufacturing,” Journal of Development
  Economic, 2012, 97 (2), 339–351.

Brecher, Richard A, “Minimum wage rates and the pure theory of international trade,” The Quar-
  terly Journal of Economics, 1974, pp. 98–116.

Cahuc, Pierre, Stéphane Carcillo, and André Zylberberg, Labor economics, MIT press, 2014.

Card, David and Alan B Krueger, “Minimum wages and employment: A case study of the
  fast-food industry in New Jersey and Pennsylvania,” American Economic Review, 1994, 84,
  772–793.

Caron, Justin, Thibault Fally, and James R Markusen, “International trade puzzles: A solution
  linking production and preferences,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2014, 129 (3), 1501–
  1552.

Casale, Giuseppe and Changyou Zhu, “Labour administration reforms in China,” 2013.




                                               47
Combes, Pierre-Philippe, Gilles Duranton, Laurent Gobillon, Diego Puga, and Sébastien
  Roux, “The productivity advantages of large cities: Distinguishing agglomeration from firm
  selection,” Econometrica, 2012, 80 (6), 2543–2594.

Dai, Mi, Madhura Maitra, and Miaojie Yu, “Unexceptional exporter performance in China?
  The role of processing trade,” Journal of Development Economics, 2016, 121, 177–189.

Davis, Donald R, “Does European unemployment prop up American wages? National labor mar-
  kets and global trade,” American Economic Review, 1998, pp. 478–494.

DiNardo, John, Nicole M Fortin, and Thomas Lemieux, “Labor market institutions and the
  distribution of wages, 1973-1992: A semiparametric approach,” Econometrica, 1996, 64 (5),
  1001–1044.

Du, Yang and Meiyan Wang, “The implementation of minimum wage system and its effects in
 China.,” Journal of Graduate School of Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, 2008, 6, 56–62.

Eaton, Jonathan and Samuel Kortum, “Technology, geography, and trade,” Econometrica, 2002,
  70 (5), 1741–1779.

Engbom, Niklas and Christian Moser, “Earnings inequality and the minimum wage: Evidence
  from Brazil,” 2017.

Evans, David S, “Tests of alternative theories of firm growth,” journal of political economy, 1987,
  95 (4), 657–674.

Fang, Tony and Carl Lin, “Minimum wages and employment in China,” IZA Journal of Labor
  Policy, 2015, 4 (1), 22.

Flinn, Christopher J, “Minimum wage effects on labor market outcomes under search, matching,
  and endogenous contact rates,” Econometrica, 2006, 74 (4), 1013–1062.

Gan, Li, Manuel A Hernandez, and Shuang Ma, “The higher costs of doing business in China:
 Minimum wages and firms’ export behavior,” Journal of International Economics, 2016, 100,
 81–94.

Harasztosi, Péter, Attila Lindner, Magyar Nemzeti Bank, and HU Berkeley, “Who pays for
 the minimum Wage?,” Mimeo, University College London, 2017.

Hau, Harald, Yi Huang, and Gewei Wang, “Firm response to competitive shocks: Evidence
 from China’s minimum wage policy,” 2016.


                                                48
Huang, Yi, Prakash Loungani, and Gewei Wang, “Minimum wages and firm employment:
 Evidence from China,” IMF Working Papers, 2014, 184.

Jardim, Ekaterina, Mark C Long, Robert Plotnick, Emma van Inwegen, Jacob Vigdor, and
  Hilary Wething, “Minimum wage increases, wages, and low-wage employment: evidence from
  Seattle,” NBER Working Paper, 2017, No. 23532.

Kehoe, Timothy J and Kim J Ruhl, “How important is the new goods margin in international
  trade?,” Journal of Political Economy, 2013, 121 (2), 358–392.

Lee, David S, “Wage inequality in the United States during the 1980s: Rising dispersion or falling
  minimum wage?,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1999, 114 (3), 977–1023.

Levinsohn, James and Amil Petrin, “Estimating production functions using inputs to control for
  unobservables,” The Review of Economic Studies, 2003, 70 (2), 317–341.

Luca, Dara Lee and Michael Luca, “Survival of the fittest: the impact of the minimum wage on
  firm exit,” Harvard Business School Working Paper, 2017, 17-088.

Mayneris, Florian, Sandra Poncet, Tao Zhang et al., “Improving or disappearing: firm-level
 ddjustments to minimum wages in China,” 2017.

Melitz, Marc J, “The impact of trade on intra-industry reallocations and aggregate industry pro-
 ductivity,” Econometrica, 2003, 71 (6), 1695–1725.

Monras, Joan, “Minimum wages and spatial equilibrium: Theory and evidence,” 2015.

Neary, J Peter, “International factor mobility, minimum wage rates, and factor-price equalization:
  A synthesis,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1985, 100 (3), 551–570.

Neumark, David, “The employment effects of minimum wages: Some questions we need to
  answer,” NBER Working Paper, 2017, No. 23584.

   and William L Wascher, Minimum wages, MIT Press, 2008.

  , J. M. Ian Salas, and William Wascher, “Revisiting the minimum wage-employment debate:
  Throwing out the baby with the bathwater?,” ILR Review, 2014, 67 (3 suppl), 608–648.

Schweinberger, Albert G, “Employment subsidies and the theory of minimum wage rates in
  general equilibrium,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1978, pp. 361–374.

Sorkin, Isaac, “Minimum wages and the dynamics of labor demand,” Technical Report, Mimeo,
  February 2013.

                                               49
Wang, Jing and Morley Gunderson, “Minimum wage effects on employment and wages: dif-in-
 dif estimates from eastern China,” International Journal of Manpower, 2012, 33 (8), 860–876.



8     Appendix

8.1       Proofs of the Propositions
Lemma 1. From equation (2) it is straightforward to show that (i) If entry costs in a sector are paid
solely in terms of the good being made in that sector, the identity of the marginal firm, θ̃, is fixed
and there are no selection effects of a change in factor price. (ii) If entry requires the use of both
goods x and y, then an increase in the price of a factor makes selection stricter in the good that
uses the factor intensively. Below is the proof of (iii) If entry costs are in terms of the numeraire
good, then an increase in costs of production makes selection stricter in both sectors, i.e. if entry
costs are in terms of the numeraire good, then 0 < dp  c
                                                    dc p
                                                         < 1.

Proof. Totally differentiating the above with respect to c(·) and p gives

                                         p      [cdp − pdc]    fe
                                  F(          )        2
                                                            = − 2 dc
                                       c(w.r)        c         c

so that
                                       dp c   − fpe + F ( c(·)p
                                                                )
                                            =           p         <1
                                       dc p        F ( c(·) )
Also, as
                                                        p
                                                      Z
                                                      c(w.r)
                                  p       p                                  fe
                             F(        )       >               F (θ)dθ =           ,
                                c(w, r) c(w.r)                             c(w, r)
                                                      0

we know that
                                                   p
                                            F(          )p > fe
                                                 c(w.r)
so − fpe + F ( c(·)
                p
                    ) > 0.


Lemma 2. An increase in the price of the labor intensive good raises w and reduces r and makes
selection stricter in the labor intensive good and weaker in the capital intensive one. Analogously,
an increase in the price of the capital intensive good reduces w and raises r and makes selections
stricter in the capital intensive good and weaker in the labor intensive one.



                                                     50
Proof. We know that

                                                     px = θ̃x (w, r)cx (w, r)                                 (32)
                                                     py = θ̃y (w, r)cy (w, r)                                 (33)

Generically,

                                                 p = θ̃(w, r)c(w, r)
                                            ln p = ln θ̃(w, r) + ln c(w, r)

Using hat notation and totally differentiating gives:

                                                                            ∧
                                                 x
                                            p̂           = θLx ŵ + θKx r̂ + θ̃x                              (34)
                                                                            ∧
                                                 y
                                            p̂           = θLy ŵ + θKy r̂ + θ̃y                              (35)
                                             p̂e = θLe ŵ + θKe r̂,                                           (36)

                                                                                                         ei
where θij is the cost share of i in j for i = L, K and j = x, y, e while p̂ei = dccei (w,r)
                                                                                       (w,r)
                                                                                             as “hats”
denote percentage changes. For ease of notation we will not differentiate entry costs by industry
but it is easy to check the same proofs go through if we do.
    As                                            
                                      Zθ̃j
                                                   ce (w, r)fe
                                          F (θ)dθ = j
                                                       c (w, r)
                                                     0

differentiating this gives

                                                     dθ̃j   fe [cew (w, r)dw + cer (w, r)dr]
                                             θ̃j F (θ̃j ) =
                                                      θ̃j                cj (w, r)
                                                                                           
                                              ce (w, r)fe wcjw (w, r) dw rcjr (w, r) dr
                                             − j                             + j
                                              [c (w, r)]    cj (w, r) w          c (w, r) r
                                 dθ̃j            ce (w, r)fe
                  θ̃j F (θ̃j )          =                    [[θLe ŵ + θKe r̂] − [θLj ŵ + θKj r̂]] .
                                  θ̃j             cj (w, r)




                                                                 51
                        "                     #
                            Rθ̃                          ce (w,r)fe
Using the fact that               F (θ)dθ =                c(w,r)
                                                                    ,
                            0

                                              "                    #
                                                  Rθ̃j
                                                         F (θ)dθ
                                  dθ̃j            0
                                       =                                [(θLe − θLj ) ŵ + (θke − θkj ) r̂]
                                  θ̃j              θ̃j F (θ̃j )

     Consequently:

                                    ∧
                                     θ̃x = v x [(θLe − θLx )ŵ + (θKe − θKx )r̂]                              (37)
                                    ∧
                                     θ̃y = v y [(θLe − θLy )ŵ + (θKe − θKy )r̂]                              (38)

                                                      
            θ̃Rx                       θ̃Rx

       F (θ)dθ                F (θ)dθ 
where  0F (θ̃x )θ̃x  = v x ,  0F (θ̃y )θ̃y  = v y . Note that v x , v y ∈ (0, 1).

     Substituting (37) and (38) into (34) and (35) gives:

                        p̂x = θLx ŵ + θKx r̂ + v x [(θLe − θLx )ŵ + (θKe − θKx )r̂]
                        p̂y = θLy ŵ + θKy r̂ + v y [(θLe − θLy )ŵ + (θKe − θKy )r̂]




                    p̂x = [θLx (1 − v x ) + v x (θLe )] ŵ + [θKx (1 − v x ) + v x (θKe )] r̂
                    p̂y = [θLy (1 − v y ) + v y (θLe )] ŵ + [θKy (1 − v y ) + v y (θKe )] r̂

or
                                                                  h i       h    i
                                                         p̂x =     θ̆Lx ŵ + θ̆Kx r̂
                                                                  h i       h    i
                                                          p̂y   = θ̆Ly ŵ + θ̆Ky r̂

where

                                                  [θLx (1 − v x ) + v x (θLe )] = θ̆Lx
                                                  [θKx (1 − v x ) + v x (θKe )] = θ̆Kx
                                                   [θLy (1 − v y ) + v y (θLe )] = θ̆Ly
                                                  [θKy (1 − v y ) + v y (θKe )] = θ̆Ky

                                                                            52
    Since θLx > θLe and θLy < θLe and θ̆L0 s are convex combinations of θL and θLe we know
that θ̆Ly < θ̆Lx . This is depicted below.

                                           θLy < θ̆Ly < θLe < θ̆Lx < θLx

   Similarly, θ̆Ky > θ̆Kx .
   As                                  "             #       "               #"                #
                                            p̂x                  θ̆Lx θ̆Kx         ŵ
                                                         =
                                            p̂y                  θ̆Ly θ̆Ky         r̂
                                       "         #       "                #−1 "                #
                                           ŵ                θ̆Lx θ̆Kx                 p̂x
                                                     =
                                           r̂                θ̆Ly θ̆Ky                 p̂y
so that
                              "        #                     "                     #"                #
                                  ŵ          1                  θ̆Ky −θ̆Kx                    p̂x
                                           =                                                             .
                                  r̂         DetA                −θ̆Ly θ̆Lx                    p̂y
Solving gives


                                                         1              h                    i
                          ŵ =                                         θ̆Ky p̂x − θ̆Kx p̂y
                                           θ̆Lx θ̆Ky − θ̆Ly θ̆Kx
                                                         1              h                     i
                           r̂ =                                        −θ̆Ly p̂x + θ̆Lx p̂y
                                           θ̆Lx θ̆Ky − θ̆Ly θ̆Kx

DetA = θ̆Lx θ̆Ky − θ̆Ly θ̆Kx > 0 as θ̆Ly < θ̆Lx and θ̆Ky > θ̆Kx .
  So if p̂x = 0, p̂y > 0

                                                             1           h          i
                              ŵ =                                        − θ̆Kx p̂y < 0
                                                θ̆Lx θ̆Ky − θ̆Ly θ̆Kx
                                                          1           h                    i
                                                                                       y
                                  r̂ =                                       θ̆Lx p̂           >0
                                                θ̆Lx θ̆Ky − θ̆Ly θ̆Kx

In other words, an increase in the price of the capital intensive good reduces w and raises r. Anal-
ogously, an increase in the price of the labor intensive good reduces r and raises w.
    Moreover




                                                                  53
                               ∧
                                θ̃x = v x [(θLe − θLx )ŵ + (θKe − θKx )r̂]
                               ∧
                                θ̃y = v y [(θLe − θLy )ŵ + (θKe − θKy )r̂]

as θLx > θLe , θKx < θKe , θLe > θLy , θKe > θKy and θ̆Ky > θ̆Kx , θ̆Ly < θ̆Lx . So if w rises and r
                          !
           ∧         ∧
falls, then θ̃x < 0, θ̃y > 0.

    This proves that a rise in the price of the labor intensive good also makes selection tighter in
the labor intensive good and weaker in the capital intensive one. Analogously, a rise in the price of
the capital intensive good makes selection tighter in the capital intensive good and weaker in the
labor intensive one.
               AKx       AKy
Lemma 3-A.     ALx
                     <   ALy
                               if fe is small enough or cj (·) ≈ cje (·).

Proof. We know

                                                    Zθ̃
                                       θ̄(θ̃) =           θf (θ)dθ
                                                    0

                                                                   Zθ̃
                                                = θ̃F (θ̃) −             F (θ)dθ                (39)
                                                                   0


Hence
                                                                           
                                                            Zθ̃
                                                                         
                           AL = cw (·) θ̃F (θ̃) −                 F (θ)dθ + fe cew (·)
                                                               0
                                                                                        
                                                            Zθ̃
                                                                               fe cew (·) 
                                  = cw (·) θ̃F (θ̃) −             F (θ)dθ +               
                                                                                 cw (·)
                                                               0
                                                                                        
                                                      ce (w, r)fe fe cew (·)
                                  = cw (·) θ̃F (θ̃) −            +
                                                        c(w, r)    cw (·)

where we use equation (39) and the free entry condition

                                          Zθ̃
                                                               ce (w, r)fe
                                                F (θ)dθ =
                                                                 c(w, r)
                                          0


                                                          54
in the second and last lines respectively. Similarly




                                  AK = cr (·)θ̄(θ̃(w, r)) + fe cer (·)
                                                                             
                                                          ce (·)fe fe cer (·)
                                     = cr (·) θ̃F (θ̃) −             +
                                                            c(·)       cr (·)

     Thus,
                                               h             e (w,r)f                e
                                                                                           i
                                AL       cw (·) θ̃F (θ̃) − c c(w,r)      e
                                                                           + fcewcw(·)(·)
                                       =         h                                       i
                                AK                              e (·)f
                                          cr (·) θ̃F (θ̃) − c c(·)     e
                                                                                 e
                                                                          + fcercr(·)(·)
                                               h                   e
                                                                                                 i
                                                                                      fe cew (·)
                                         cw (·) θ̃F (θ̃) − θθLe cwcw(w,r)f
                                                                       (w,r)
                                                                             e
                                                                               +        cw (·)
                                       =         h           L
                                                                                              i
                                                              θK fe cer (·)        fe cer (·)
                                          cr (·) θ̃F (θ̃) − θe cr (·) + cr (·)
                                                                K
                                               h             e
                                                                                       i
                                         cw (·) θ̃F (θ̃) + cwcw(·)f
                                                                  (·)
                                                                      e
                                                                        (1 −    θL
                                                                                 e
                                                                                θL
                                                                                      )
                                       =       h             e
                                                                                       i
                                         cr (·) θ̃F (θ̃) + crcr(·)f
                                                                 (·)
                                                                     e
                                                                       (1  −   θK
                                                                               θe
                                                                                     )
                                                                                       K


                                                                 θLx                         θLy
If entry costs are made up of x and y, then (1 −                  e )
                                                                 θLx
                                                                         < 0 and (1 −         e )
                                                                                             θLy
                                                                                                    > 0,

                               h                                          i
                                  x      x      cex
                                                 w (w,r)fe           θLx
                                θ̃ F (θ̃ ) + cx (w,r) (1 − θe )               θ̃x F (θ̃x )
                                                  w
                                h                     ex
                                                                      Lx
                                                                         i  <              =1
                                  θ̃x F (θ̃x ) + feccxr(·)(·) (1 − θθKx
                                                                     e )
                                                                              θ̃x F (θ̃x )
                                                   r                Kx


so
                                                        ALx   aLx
                                                            <
                                                        AKx   aKx
By the same argument,
                "                                        # "                                    #
                                    ey                                          ey
                                  c    (w, r)f e     θLy                  f e c    (·)     θ Ky
                    θ̃y F (θ̃y ) + wy            (1 − e ) > θ̃y F (θ̃y ) + yr          (1 − e )
                                    cw (w, r)        θLy                    cr (·)         θKy

               θLy                    θKy
     as (1 −    e )
               θLy
                      > 0 and (1 −     e )
                                      θKy
                                             < 0 so that

                                                    h                       ey
                                                                                                    i
                                                                                             θ
                               ALy   aLy               θ̃y F (θ̃y ) + feccyww(w,r)
                                                                               (w,r)
                                                                                       (1 − θLye  )
                                   =                   h                      ey
                                                                                               Ly
                                                                                                   i
                               AKy   aKy                                                   θ
                                                         θ̃y F (θ̃y ) + feccyrr(·)(·) (1 − θKy
                                                                                             e   )
                                                                                            Ky
                                          aLy
                                        >     .
                                          aKy


                                                               55
                                                    a                                                        A
     Thus, in general, even if aaKx
                                 Lx    Ly
                                    > aKy , we cannot in general say AAKx
                                                                        Lx      Ly
                                                                            > AKy  as selection raises
the total labor intensity in y and reduces it in x bringing them closer together. However, if entry
costs are similar enough to production costs, or fe is small enough, then AAKL approaches aaKL . Thus,
 ALx    ALy
AKx
      > AKy  will hold even with selection and the Rybczynski theorem will hold.
                                                                 +   −              −    +
Lemma 4. When Assumption 1 holds, N x (.; L, K), N y (.; L, K).

Proof. Using Lemma 3 in equation (13) and (12) gives:

                       N x cxw (w, r)θ̃x F (θ̃x ) + N y cyw (w, r)θ̃y F (θ̃y ) = G(w)L                                                   (40)
                          N x cxr (w, r)θ̃x F (θ̃x ) + N y cyr (w, r)θ̃y F (θ̃y ) = K                                                    (41)

Product prices pin down factor prices so at given product prices, entry mass changes satisfy

                          aLx (·)θ̃x F (θ̃x )dN x + aLy (·)θ̃y F (θ̃y )dN y = G(w)dL                                                     (42)
                       aKx (·)θ̃x F (θ̃x )dN x + aKy (·)θ̃y F (θ̃y )dN y = dK                                                            (43)

    so that

                                                    λLx N̂ x + λLy N̂ y = L̂                                                             (44)
                                                λKx N̂ x + λKy N̂ y = K̂                                                                 (45)

              x   x   x               aLy (·)θ̃y F (θ̃y )N y              aKx (·)θ̃x F (θ̃x )N x             aKy (·)θ̃y F (θ̃y )N y
where aLx (·)G(w)L
             θ̃ F (θ̃ )N
                         = λLx ,            G(w)L
                                                                = λLy ,            K
                                                                                                   = λKx ,            K
                                                                                                                                      = λKy .
   Solving gives
                                         "          #       "                  #−1 "           #
                                             N̂ x               λLx λLy                   L̂
                                                        =
                                             N̂ y               λKx λKy                   K̂
                      "          #                                   "                               #"          #
                             x
                          N̂                      1                           λKy −λLy                    L̂
                                     =
                          N̂ y           (λLx λKy − λKx λLy )                −λKx λLx                     K̂
so that
                      ("                                                                                       #)
                                      K̂λLy − L̂λKy                K̂λLx − L̂λKx
                           N̂ x =                      , N̂ y = −
                                     λKx λLy − λKy λLx            λKx λLy − λKy λLx




                                                                     56
Since

                                                       λLy   λLx
                  λKx λLy − λKy λLx = λKx λKy (            −     )
                                                       λKy λKx
                                                          aLy (·)θ̃y F (θ̃y )N y       aLx (·)θ̃x F (θ̃x )N x
                                                                G(w)L                        G(w)L
                                         = λKx λKy (                               −                            )
                                                          aKy (·)θ̃y F (θ̃y )N y       aKx (·)θ̃x F (θ̃x )N x
                                                                   K                            K
                                                        K    ALy   ALx
                                         = λKx λKy         (     −     )<0
                                                      G(w)L AKy AKx

it follows that

                   N̂ x           λLy              N̂ x         −λKy
                          =                   < 0,      =                   >0
                   K̂       λKx λLy − λKy λLx       L̂    λKx λLy − λKy λLx
                   N̂ y             −λLx             N̂ y          λKx
                          =                     > 0,      =                   <0
                   K̂         λKx λLy − λKy λLx       L̂    λKx λLy − λKy λLx

                          +   −           −   +
This proves that N x (.; L, K), N y (.; L, K).
                                                  +   −                 −    +
Lemma 5. When Assumption 1 holds, N x (px , py ; .), N y (px , py ; .).

Proof. Recall that

                                     cxw (w, r)θ̃x F (θ̃x ) = ALx (w, r)
                                     cyw (w, r)θ̃y F (θ̃y ) = ALy (w, r)
                                      cxr (w, r)θ̃x F (θ̃x ) = AKx (w, r)
                                      cyr (w, r)θ̃y F (θ̃y ) = AKy (w, r).


                                     ALx  cx (w, r)θ̃F (θ̃)   aLx (·)
                                         = w                =
                                     AKx   x
                                          cw (w, r)θ̃F (θ̃)   aKx (·)
which is decreasing in w and increasing in r.



                                  N x ALx (w, r) + N y ALy (w, r) = G(w)L                                           (46)
                              N x AKx (w, r) + N y AKy (w, r) = K                                                   (47)

   Differentiating




                                                      57
                                                                                          wG0 (w)
                  λLx N̂ x + λLy N̂ y + λLx ÂLx (·) + λLy ÂLy (·) = L̂ +                        ŵ                (48)
                                                                                           G(w)
                λKx N̂ x + λKy N̂ y + λKx ÂKx (·) + λKy ÂKy (·) = K̂                                              (49)

                N x ALx (w,r)             N y ALy (w,r)             N x AKx (w,r)              N y AKy (w,r)
where λLx =        G(w)L
                              , λLy   =      G(w)L
                                                        , λKx   =        K
                                                                                  , λKy    =        K
                                                                                                               are usage
shares.
   Since
                                                  dcji (w, r)
                                            Âij = j          = âij
                                                   ci (w, r)


                                                                                          wG0 (w)
                   λLx N̂ x + λLy N̂ y + λLx âLx (·) + λLy âLy (·) = L̂ +                       ŵ                (50)
                                                                                           G(w)
                λKx N̂ x + λKy N̂ y + λKx âKx (·) + λKy âKy (·) = K̂                                              (51)

     Setting L̂ = K̂ = 0

                                        daLj      ∂aLj w dw ∂aLj r dr
                           âLj (·) =           =            +
                                         aLj        ∂w aLj w   ∂r aLj r
                                      = ηwLj ŵ + ηrLj r̂
                                      = ηwLj (ŵ − r̂)

as aLj is homogeneous of degree 0 in (w, r) so that ηwLj +ηrLj = 0. Also note that ηwLj < 0, ηwKj > 0.
Hence,

                                            âLx = ηwLx (ŵ − r̂)
                                            âLy = ηwLy (ŵ − r̂)
                                           âKx = ηwKx (ŵ − r̂)
                                           âKy = ηwKy (ŵ − r̂) .

So

                                            wG0 (w)                        
                 λLx N̂ x + λLy N̂ y =              ŵ − λLx ηwLx + λLy ηwLy (ŵ − r̂)                              (52)
                                             G(w)
                                                                 
                 λKx N̂ x + λKy N̂ y      = − λKx ηwKx + λKy ηwKy (ŵ − r̂)                                         (53)




                                                        58
     Recall that

                                                           1               h                    i
                               ŵ =                                       θ̆Kx p̂x − θ̆Kx p̂y
                                               θ̆Lx θ̆Ky − θ̆Ly θ̆Kx
                                                           1               h                     i
                                r̂ =                                      −θ̆Ly p̂x + θ̆Lx p̂y
                                               θ̆Lx θ̆Ky − θ̆Ly θ̆Kx

     and if there is no selection θ̆ij = θij so that
                                                                                       
               x           y                                                    wG0 (w)                          
         λLx N̂ + λLy N̂         = −           λLx ηwLx   +    λLy ηwLy       −           ŵ + λLx ηwLx + λLy ηwLy r̂
                                                                                 G(w)
                                 = B11 ŵ + B12 r̂
                                                       
        λKx N̂ x + λKy N̂ y      = − λKx ηwKx + λKy ηwKy (ŵ − r̂) = B21 (ŵ − r̂)

Denote by
                                                                                             
                                                                                    wG0 (w)
                               B11 = −                λLx ηwLx   +    λLy ηwLy    −
                                                                                     G(w)
                                                     wG0 (w)
                                          = −B12 +            >0                                                        (54)
                                                      G(w)
                                                              
                               B12        = λLx ηwLx + λLy ηwLy < 0
                                                                 
                               B21        = − λKx ηwKx + λKy ηwKy = −B22 < 0.

     Therefore             "                      #"             #        "                #"          #
                                λLx λLy                   N̂ x                B11 B12             ŵ
                                                                     =
                                λKx λKy                   N̂ y                B21 −B21            r̂
so                       "            #       "                      #−1 "                  #"          #
                               N̂ x               λLx λLy                       B11 B12            ŵ
                                          =
                               N̂ y               λKx λKy                       B21 −B21           r̂
so using equation (54) we get




                                                                     59
     "          #                  "                           # "                       #"         #
         N̂ x          1                λKy −λLy                     B11 B12                   ŵ
                    =
         N̂ y         DetΛ             −λKx λLx                      B21 B22                   r̂
                           "                                    0 (w)                      # "    #
                       1     − (λKy B12 − λLy B22 ) + λKy wG  G(w)
                                                                       λ Ky B12 − λ Ly B22     ŵ
                    =                                  0 (w)
                      DetΛ    λKx B12 − λLx B22 − wG G(w)
                                                             λKx      −λKx B12 + λLx B22       r̂
                       "        # "     #
                      1 + −         ŵ
                    =
                      + − +          r̂


     where

                    DetΛ = λLx λKy − λLy λKx
                           N x ALx (w, r) N y AKy (w, r) N y ALy (w, r) N x AKx (w, r)
                         =                              −
                              G(w)L            K            G(w)L            K
                             x y
                           N N (ALx (w, r)AKy (w, r) − ALy (w, r)AKx (w, r))
                         =
                                                 G(w)LK
                                                                                     A    (w,r)       AKx (w,r)
                                       N x N y ALx (w, r)ALy (w, r)( AKy
                                                                      Ly (w,r)
                                                                               −                      ALx (w,r)
                                                                                                                )
                               =                                                                                    > 0.
                                                                 G(w)LK

.
     As an increase in px raises w and reduces r as shown in Lemma 2, so ŵ > 0, r̂ < 0 in
                                             "          #            "                   # "        #
                                                 N̂ x            1       + −                   ŵ
                                                               =                                        .
                                                 N̂ y            +       − +                   r̂
Thus
                                            "           #                "                # "           #
                                                N̂ x             1 + −                            +
                                                               =
                                                N̂ y             + − +                            −
                                                                   "   #
                                                                 1   +
                                                               =
                                                                 + −

     N̂ x             N̂ y                              N̂ x                  N̂ y
so   p̂x
            > 0 and   p̂x
                             < 0. Analogously,           p̂y
                                                               < 0 and        p̂y
                                                                                     > 0.

Lemma 6. An increase in the minimum wage raises the price needed for good x to be made, and
more so, the more labor intensive is good x.




                                                                         60
Proof. As

                                                px = θ̃x cx (w, r)
                                                py = θ̃y cy (w, r)

differentiating gives



                                         p̂x = θ̃x (λLx ŵ + λKx r̂)
                                         p̂y = θ̃y (λLy ŵ + λKy r̂)

With a minimum wage, we want to know how p̃x (w̄, r, py ) changes with the minimum wage. Recall
that we get p̃x (w̄, r, py ) as the price of x needed to make price equal to cost when the price of y is
fixed in the presence of a minimum wage. Thus, we know that p̂y = 0. So 0 = λLy ŵ + λKy r̂ and

                                                     λLy
                                           r̂ = −        ŵ
                                                     λKy
                                                        λLy
                                                 = −            ŵ.
                                                     (1 − λLy )

Substituting this back into p̂x = θ̃x (λLx ŵ + λKx r̂) and some rearranging we get
                                                                           
                                   x        x                     λLy
                              p̂       = θ̃ λLx ŵ − λKx                 ŵ
                                                              (1 − λLy )
                                                             
                                            x   (λLx − λLy )
                                       = θ̃                      ŵ
                                                  (1 − λLy )
                                                (ky − kx )
                                       = θ̃x                ŵ.
                                              ky 1 + wr kx

as
                                                            waLx          waLy
                                       (λLx − λLy )         cx (·)
                                                                     −     cy (·)
                                                    =                   waLy
                                        (1 − λLy )            1−        cy (·)
                                                            r
                                                            w
                                                              (ky −kx )
                                                            cx (·)cy (·)
                                                       =       raky
                                                               cy (·)
                                                              (ky − kx )
                                                       =                 .
                                                            ky 1 + wr kx

As kx rises the numerator falls and the denominator rises. Thus, given w/r and ky , the higher is


                                                       61
kx , the lower the price increase needed to compensate for a wage increase. Thus, the price of the
labor intensive good should rise with a minimum wage and more so the more labor intensive the
good.


8.2     Simulations
In this section we construct numerical examples given simple functional forms and distributional
assumptions to demonstrate that our key comparative static results of change in minimum wage,
summarized as predictions in Section 4.1, continue to hold in presence of selection effects.

8.2.1   Solving the Model

In the model without minimum wage, we solve 8 equations (3)-(4), the free entry conditions, (5)-
(6), the price equals cost of the marginal firm (12)-(13) the factor market clearing conditions, and
(14)-(15) the product market clearing conditions. This gives eight equations in 8 unknowns for
w, r, θ̃x , θ̃y , N x , N y , and px and py . Once we know w and r, we know income from equation (8).
Once we know w, we also know which workers migrate which pins down labor availability. We
can solve for the problem block recursively. Given prices, the block of equations (3)-(6) can be
solved for w, r, θ̃x , θ̃y . Given these solutions, we can solve for N x , N y from factor market clearing
conditions (12)-(13), which then give supply and demand at these prices. Equilibrium prices then
come from equating demand and supply as in (14)-(15).
     In the model with a minimum wage, we solve 8 equations (19)-(20), the free entry conditions,
(16)-(17), the price equals cost of the marginal firm along with the complementary slackness con-
ditions, so if the marginal firm cannot afford to produce, there is zero supply, (21)-(22) the factor
market clearing conditions, where the equality in (12) is replaced by an inequality so that demand
can fall short of supply for labor, and (25)-(26) the product market clearing conditions. There are
two main changes in the solution procedure. First, as we are fixing the minimum wage, w̄, we are
solving for unemployment and through it, for the expected wage ŵ(w̄). How can one solve the
system with a minimum wage?
     Set prices. If the minimum wage is not binding then solve as above. If the minimum wage is
binding at these prices, only good y will be made unless price is p̃x (py ) or more. If both goods are
essential in demand as assumed, both need to be made so that we know that px = p̃x (py ). Thus,
we solve for p̃x (py ), and r and the two cutoff productivity levels from (18)-(19) and (15)-(16).
     Second, to solve for entry, we need to know income and from it demand at the given prices
p̃x (py ), py , w̄, r, θ̃x , θ̃y . Income in equation (8) needs to be adjusted as now

                              I = γ̄(ŵ(w̄))L + ŵ(w̄)G(ŵ(w̄))L + rK


                                                   62
which has expected wage in manufacturing for rural migrants as an unknown. Expected wage
is defined by probability of finding a job in manufacturing times the minimum wage, and this
probability depends on labor demand in manufacturing which in turn depends on number of firms
in operation in each sector. Expected income affects demand. Hence, now we need to solve factor
market and goods market clearing conditions simultaneously. Given a set of values for N x and
N y , we can obtain labor demand from (20) as the A’s are known once we have factor prices and
cutoffs. Then
                                                  LD
                                       ŵ(w̄) =           w̄
                                                G(ŵ(w̄))
gives the expected wage and hence income, and hence, demand for both goods.35 Setting

                                Dx (p̃x (py ), py , I(N x , N y )) = N x F (θ̃x )
                                Dy (p̃x (py ), py , I(N x , N y )) = N y F (θ̃x )

allows us to solve for N x and N y for the given py .
    Finally, for the given py , we have demand for capital equal to supply of capital.

                                        N x AKx (·) + N y AKy (·) = K

If at this py , demand is more than supply, reduce py ,else increase it. Note that labor markets will
not clear, and at these prices, we will get unemployment in equilibrium.

8.2.2     Examples

In the numerical examples, we consider following functional forms for unit production costs:



                                           cx (w, r) = wηx r1−ηx
                                           cy (w, r) = wηy r1−ηy

and following functional forms for unit entry costs:

                                          cxe (w, r) = wηe,x r1−ηe,x
                                          cye (w, r) = wηe,y r1−ηe,y

       As x is more labor-intensive than y, we set ηx > ηy . No selection effect for change in minimum
  35
    Note that as G(·) is increasing in the expected wage, the RHS is decreasing in expected wage so that there is a
unique intersection of the 45 degree line and the RHS.


                                                        63
wage requires ηx = ηe,x and ηy = ηe,y which implies that in each sector, production and entry costs
employ labor and capital using same factor intensity. Selection effects would occur when we set
parameters such that ηx > ηe,x , ηe,y > ηy .
   Consumers have a utility function

                                            U = Aα S 1−α

and
                                                           1
                                          S = (X ρ + Y ρ ) ρ
                 1
where σ = 1−ρ      is the constant elasticity of substitution between X and Y . For now, we are
considering the case of no trade–thus there is only one variety of x and y in the consumption
bundle of location j. For the distributional assumption, we make the simplest possible assumption
that agricultural productivity γ is distributed Uniform (0, b] and firm efficiency θ is distributed
Pareto with scale parameter a and shape α∗ .
    In the first numerical example, we consider the case with no selection effects of a change in the
minimum wage. The parameter values used in this example are in Table 11:

                           Table 11: Numerical Example: No Selection

                                        Parameters     Values
                                        ηx               .8
                                        ηy               .1
                                        ηe,x             .8
                                        ηe,y             .1
                                        α               0.5
                                        σ                2
                                        b               50
                                        L               170
                                        K               200
                                        a                1
                                        α∗               5


    Figure 11 demonstrates the key comparative static effects of change in minimum wage, closely
paralleling the predictions outlined in Section 4.1. The flat parts in all the figures occur for values
of minimum wage for which minimum wage is not binding. Naturally, when the minimum wage
is not binding, none of the comparative statics are influenced by change in minimum wage. For
high values of minimum wage, it starts to bind. For this range of values, an increase in minimum
wage raises the price of both goods but more so for the labor intensive x good as shown in panel
(a), and reduces equilibrium production of both goods, but more so for the labor intensive good in


                                                  64
              a: Price                                 b: Output                           c: Number of firms
300                                     100                                      100


200
                                        50                                       50
100


 0                                       0                                        0
      0      50        100        150         0       50        100        150         0       50        100        150
             Minwage                                   Minwage                                 Minwage

                  Py         Px                            Sy         Sx                            Ny         Nx




           d: Cutoff cost                         e: Wage rental ratio           f: Migration to manufacturing
 4                                       5                                       60

                                        4.5
 3                                                                               58
                                         4
 2                                      3.5                                      56

                                         3                                       54
 1
      0      50        100        150   2.5
             Minwage                                                             52
                                         2
                  3y         3x
                                        1.5                                      50
                                              0       50        100        150         0       50        100        150
                                                       Minwage                                 Minwage


          Figure 11. Comparative Statics of Minimum Wage without Selection




                                                           65
                      a: Price                                b: Output                            c: Number of firms
        250                                    100                                      100

        200

        150                                    50                                        50

        100

         50                                     0                                         0
               0    50        100        150         0       50        100        150          0       50        100        150
                     Minwage                                  Minwage                                  Minwage

                         Py         Px                            Sy         Sx                             Ny         Nx




                   d: Cutoff cost                        e: Wage rental ratio            f: Migration to manufacturing
         3.5                                    8                                       49.5

          3                                     7

         2.5                                    6

                                                5
          2                                                                              49
                                                4
         1.5
               0    50        100        150    3
                     Minwage
                                                2
                         3y         3x
                                                1                                       48.5
                                                     0       50        100        150          0       50        100        150
                                                              Minwage                                  Minwage


                   Figure 12. Comparative Statics of Minimum Wage with Selection


panel (b). In this case, there is no selection effect as panel (d) shows and the change in the number
of firms in panel (c) parallels the change in output in panel (b). Corresponding to this, panel (e)
shows the rise in equilibrium wage rental ratio. Finally, panel (f) shows that for the parameters
selected, there is an increase in migration with a rise in the minimum wage. This is not unexpected
- substitutability between x and y is low enough for the derived demand for labor to be inelastic
which ensures migration will increase with a higher minimum wage.
    In the next numerical example, we consider the case of presence of some selection effect of
change in minimum wage. Compared to Table 11, in order to allow for selection, we let ηe,x to
differ from ηx and also let ηe,y to differ from ηy . In particular, in this example we set ηe,x to .7 and
ηe,y to .2, and leave ηx and ηy at .8 and .1 respectively. This difference in skill intensities between
entry cost and production in each sector reflects the possibility that entry in each sector requires
some combination of both manufacturing goods. We leave the rest of the parameters unchanged
from Table 11.
    In this case, as documented in panel (d) of Figure 12, selection gets stricter in the labor intensive


                                                                  66
x sector and weaker in the capital intensive y sector with an increase in the minimum wage. As
shown in Figure 12, all the key comparative static effects of minimum wage are unchanged in the
neighborhood of the no selection case. Even where the selection effects are stronger as when entry
cost in both sectors use factors in the same intensity (ηe,x = ηe,y = .5) while their skill intensities in
production continue to be very different, all the comparative static results continue to hold. Results
are available upon request.


8.3        First Stage Estimates
In Tables 12 to 15, we present the first stage regression results of the IV regressions corresponding
to Tables 1-4. We do not have weak identification problems as the values for the Kleibergen-Paap
rk Wald F statistics36 (for Tables 12 and 13) and the Cragg-Donald Wald F statistics (for Tables 14
and 15) are above the critical levels.

                    Table 12: Minimum Wage and Firm Export: IV Regression First Stage

                                                                    (1)                      (2)                  (3)
                                                               ln(min wage)           ln(min wage)×        ln(min wage)×
                                                                                    Industry-City (S/L) Industry-City ln(K/L)
   ln(min wage) IV                                                0.158∗∗∗               -0.085∗∗∗            -3.009∗∗∗
                                                                  (0.010)                 (0.001)              (0.034)
   ln(min wage) IV× Industry-City (S/L)                            0.010                  0.993∗∗∗              0.037
                                                                  (0.012)                 (0.005)              (0.044)
   ln(min wage) IV× Industry-City ln(K/L)                         0.011∗∗∗                0.001∗∗∗             1.037∗∗∗
                                                                  (0.002)                 (0.000)              (0.006)

   city ln(GDP/population)                                        -0.054∗∗∗                -0.002∗∗∗                     -0.171∗∗∗
                                                                   (0.003)                  (0.000)                       (0.011)
   city ln(population)                                            -0.125∗∗∗                -0.010∗∗∗                     -0.452∗∗∗
                                                                   (0.007)                  (0.001)                       (0.024)
   destination ln(GDP/population)                                 -0.054∗∗∗                -0.004∗∗∗                     -0.172∗∗∗
                                                                   (0.002)                  (0.000)                       (0.007)
       Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered on city-product pair. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
       All regressions include firm-product-destination fixed effects and year dummies.
       Weak identification test (Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F statistic): 286.216.




  36
       We use the Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F statistics in these two tables as the standard errors are clustered.


                                                                       67
            Table 13: Minimum Wage and Factor Intensity: IV Regression First Stage

                                                              (1)                      (2)                  (3)
                                                         ln(min wage)           ln(min wage)×        ln(min wage)×
                                                                              Industry-City (S/L) Industry-City ln(K/L)
ln(min wage) IV                                             0.256∗∗∗               -0.096∗∗∗            -2.860∗∗∗
                                                            (0.027)                 (0.006)              (0.110)
ln(min wage) IV× Industry-City (S/L)                         -0.019                 0.941∗∗∗              -0.067
                                                            (0.044)                 (0.024)              (0.188)
ln(min wage) IV× Industry-City ln(K/L)                      -0.009∗                  0.000               0.939∗∗∗
                                                            (0.005)                 (0.001)              (0.019)

city ln(GDP/population)                                      -0.011                    0.001                           -0.017
                                                             (0.013)                  (0.002)                          (0.052)
city ln(population)                                         -0.103∗∗∗                -0.015∗∗∗                        -0.391∗∗∗
                                                             (0.024)                  (0.003)                          (0.087)
 Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered on sector-city pair. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
 Weak identification test (Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F statistic): 37.305.




          Table 14: Minimum Wage and Mean Productivity: IV Regression First Stage

                                                   (1)                  (2)                       (3)                         (4)
                                              ln(min wage)        ln(min wage)×             ln(min wage) ×             ln(min wage) ×
                                                                Industry-City (S/L)      Industry-City ln(K/L)        (share of firms <
                                                                                                                      min wage in 2001)
ln(min wage) IV                                 0.355∗∗∗               -0.095∗∗∗               -2.507∗∗∗                  -0.056∗∗∗
                                                  (0.009)               (0.002)                 (0.035)                    (0.003)
ln(min wage) IV×Industry-City (S/L)              0.055∗∗∗              1.005∗∗∗                0.225∗∗∗                     0.005
                                                  (0.011)               (0.002)                 (0.046)                    (0.003)
ln(min wage) IV×Industry-City ln(K/L)              0.001                 0.000                 0.993∗∗∗                     -0.000
                                                  (0.001)               (0.000)                 (0.006)                    (0.000)
ln(min wage) IV×                                -0.042∗∗∗              -0.005∗∗∗               -0.163∗∗∗                  0.957∗∗∗
(share of firms< min wage in 2001)                (0.006)               (0.001)                 (0.025)                    (0.002)

city ln(avg wage)                                 0.003                0.003∗∗∗                0.031∗∗∗                   -0.003∗∗∗
                                                 (0.002)                (0.000)                 (0.010)                    (0.001)
city ln(population)                             -0.042∗∗∗              -0.008∗∗∗               -0.160∗∗∗                  -0.009∗∗∗
                                                 (0.008)                (0.002)                 (0.033)                    (0.002)
city population density                         -0.013∗∗∗              -0.002∗∗∗               -0.066∗∗∗                  -0.002∗∗∗
                                                 (0.002)                (0.000)                 (0.009)                    (0.001)
 Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses, not clustered. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
 All regressions include industry-city fixed effects and year dummies.
 Weak identification test (Cragg-Donald Wald F statistic): 731.94.




                                                                  68
           Table 15: Minimum Wage and Exit from Export: IV Regression First Stage

                                                   (1)                  (2)                      (3)                       (4)
                                              ln(min wage)        ln(min wage)×            ln(min wage) ×           ln(min wage) ×
                                                                Industry-City (S/L)     Industry-City ln(K/L)      (share of firms <
                                                                                                                   min wage in 2001)
ln(min wage) IV                                  0.354∗∗∗              -0.095∗∗∗               -2.510∗∗∗               -0.056∗∗∗
                                                   (0.009)              (0.002)                 (0.035)                 (0.003)
ln(min wage) IV×Industry-City (S/L)               0.055∗∗∗             1.005∗∗∗                0.225∗∗∗                  0.005
                                                   (0.011)              (0.002)                 (0.046)                 (0.003)
ln(min wage) IV×Industry-City ln(K/L)               0.001                0.000                 0.993∗∗∗                  -0.000
                                                   (0.001)              (0.000)                 (0.006)                 (0.000)
ln(min wage) IV×                                 -0.043∗∗∗             -0.006∗∗∗               -0.167∗∗∗               0.957∗∗∗
(share of firms< min wage in 2001)                 (0.006)              (0.001)                 (0.025)                 (0.002)

avg TFP                                          0.004∗∗∗              0.000∗∗∗                0.015∗∗∗                0.001∗∗∗
                                                  (0.001)               (0.000)                 (0.003)                 (0.000)
city ln(avg wage)                                  0.003               0.003∗∗∗                0.030∗∗∗                -0.003∗∗∗
                                                  (0.002)               (0.000)                 (0.010)                 (0.001)
city ln(population)                              -0.042∗∗∗             -0.008∗∗∗               -0.158∗∗∗               -0.009∗∗∗
                                                  (0.008)               (0.002)                 (0.033)                 (0.002)
city population density                          -0.013∗∗∗             -0.002∗∗∗               -0.067∗∗∗               -0.002∗∗∗
                                                  (0.002)               (0.000)                 (0.009)                 (0.001)
 Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered on city-product pair. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
 All regressions include industry-city fixed effects and year dummies.
 Weak identification test (Cragg-Donald Wald F statistic): 728.73.




                                                                  69
