                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 MORTGAGE MARKET CREDIT CONDITIONS AND U.S. PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS

                                      Alexis Antoniades
                                     Charles W. Calomiris

                                      Working Paper 24459
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24459


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   March 2018




We thank Howard Rosenthal, participants in the October 2015 Meetings of the International
Atlantic Economic Society, and seminar participants at Georgetown University, University of
Heidelberg, University of Cyprus, and the Max-Planck Institute in Bonn for comments. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Alexis Antoniades and Charles W. Calomiris. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Mortgage Market Credit Conditions and U.S. Presidential Elections
Alexis Antoniades and Charles W. Calomiris
NBER Working Paper No. 24459
March 2018
JEL No. D72,E51,G01,G21,L51,N22,N42,P16

                                         ABSTRACT

Voters punish incumbent Presidential candidates for contractions in the local (county-level)
supply of mortgage credit during market-wide contractions of credit, but they do not reward them
for expansions in mortgage credit supply in boom times. Our primary focus is the Presidential
election of 2008, which followed an unprecedented swing from very generous mortgage
underwriting standards to a severe contraction of mortgage credit. Voters responded to the credit
crunch by shifting their support away from the Republican Presidential candidate in 2008. That
shift was particularly pronounced in states that typically vote Republican, and in swing states.
The magnitude of the effect is large. If the supply of mortgage credit had not contracted from
2004 to 2008, McCain would have received half the votes needed in nine crucial swing states to
reverse the outcome of the election. The effect on voting in these swing states from local
contractions in mortgage credit supply was five times as important as the increase in the
unemployment rate; if unemployment had not increased from 2004 to 2008, that improvement in
local labor markets would only have given McCain only 9% of the votes needed to win the nine
crucial swing states. We extend our analysis to the Presidential elections from 1996 to 2012 and
find that voters’ reactions are similar for Democratic and Republican incumbent parties, but
different during booms and busts of mortgage credit. These asymmetric results indicate that
voters react strongly and negatively to credit supply contraction; however, organized political
bargaining (the “smoke-filled room channel”) rather than voting was the primary vehicle for
rewarding politicians for supporting government subsidies for mortgage risk during booms.


Alexis Antoniades
Georgetown University
aa658@georgetown.edu

Charles W. Calomiris
Columbia Business School
3022 Broadway Street, Uris Hall
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
cc374@columbia.edu
I. Introduction


         Empirical work on the economic voter hypothesis consistently shows that the state of the

economy affects voting behavior. 1 But the same work fails to pin down at the micro level the

economic variables (e.g. inflation, unemployment) that matter the most for voters. Here we offer

another economic variable for consideration, which is the change in the supply of credit.


         There are good reasons to suspect voting and credit subsidies are related: government policies

subsidizing homeownership have been a hallmark of American politics for nearly a century and have

also figured prominently in various electoral campaigns across the world. That said, we also recognize

that there are mechanisms other than voting that may reward politicians for supporting credit

subsidies. For example, apart from voting, politicians may be rewarded by the financial or political

support of well-defined and organized vested interests, which may include banks and urban activist

organizations, which played a crucial role in promoting mortgage credit subsidies, especially from

1992 to 2007 (Calomiris and Haber 2014). We will refer to these two alternatives as “the smoke-filled

room channel” and “voting channel,” respectively. 2


         While there is ample evidence of the strong relation between the state of the macro-economy

and elections’ outcomes (Fair 1978, 1996, 1998, 2002; Lewis-Beck and Stegmaier 2000) there is no

micro evidence of the relation between changes in credit supply and voting behavior. In this paper,

we provide the first such micro evidence and find that voters do, in fact, punish incumbent Presidential

candidates for experienced contractions in the supply of mortgage credit. We build on Fair’s work by

connecting votes for President at the county level to county-level conditions in the mortgage market,

as well as other economic variables, including unemployment. Using the Home Mortgage Disclosure


1
 For a review of the literature see Lewis-Beck and Stegmaier (2000) and references therein.
2
 We avoid referring to political support for mortgage credit subsidies as reflecting “populist politics” because populism
has multiple meanings. Our results are more consistent with Riker’s (1982) broad definition of populism than with the
narrower definition that refers to claiming to represent the interests of common people.
                                                            1
Act (HMDA) data on banks’ provision of mortgage credit, we identify supply shifts in mortgage

credit at the county level and examine how shifts in the supply of mortgage credit affected voting in

the Presidential election of 2008. We focus primarily on the period 2004 to 2008, and the election

results of 2008 because this four year period saw an unprecedented swing from the most generous

underwriting standards for mortgages in U.S. history in 2004-2006 to a severe contraction of

mortgage credit during the subprime crisis of 2007-2009. It also saw a dramatic swing in electoral

results, with the Republican Presidential candidate winning many key swing states in 2004, but losing

those same states in 2008.


       We find that, after controlling for other relevant factors, voters responded to the contraction

in credit by shifting their support away from the Republican Presidential candidate in the 2008

Presidential election (John McCain). The shift toward the Democratic Presidential candidate (Barack

Obama) was particularly pronounced in swing states (those that have the least predictable support for

either party). The magnitude of the effect of mortgage credit supply shifts on voting is large in 2008.

Our estimates indicate that in the absence of the mortgage credit supply contraction, some important

swing states – most obviously, North Carolina – would have cast their electoral votes for McCain. In

other swing states, the absence of mortgage credit supply contraction by itself would not have

reversed the electoral result, but nevertheless, would have substantially narrowed the gap between

votes received by McCain and Obama in 2008. Overall, taking into account the effects of mortgage

credit in the crucial swing states that voted for Obama, we find that if mortgage credit supply had not

shifted adversely from 2004 to 2008, McCain would have received half the votes needed to capture

all nine of the swing states that Bush had won in 2004 but that McCain lost in 2008, which would

have reversed the outcome of the election. In that sense, the contraction in mortgage credit supply

from 2004 to 2008 was five times as important as the increase in the unemployment rate; if



                                                  2
unemployment had not increased from 2004 to 2008, that improvement in local labor markets would

only have given McCain 9% of the votes he needed in those crucial swing states.


       We extend our analysis to other Presidential elections from 1996 to 2012. Consistent with the

findings for 2008, we find that contractions in credit supply from 2008 to 2012 penalized the

incumbent party and benefited the candidacy of Mitt Romney. In the mortgage credit boom phase,

however, which was relevant for the 2000 and 2004 elections, there is no evidence that counties with

relatively high credit expansion voted in favor of either the Democratic Presidential candidate in 2000

or the Republican Presidential candidate in 2004. In other words, voters did not reward Presidential

candidates of the incumbent party in response to experiencing a greater than average local boom in

mortgage credit supply. These results suggest that the way voters react to mortgage credit changes do

not vary substantially according to the political party of the incumbent, but do vary according to

whether a boom or a contraction in credit is occurring. Voters don’t reward Presidential candidates

for booms of credit, but they do punish them for contractions.


       Our findings have important implications for research on the politics of mortgage credit. Most

importantly, our findings do not lend support to the view that Presidential candidates gained direct

votes from supporting the relaxation of underwriting standards for mortgage lending from 1996 to

2004. If political rewards attended that support, those rewards would have had to come from other

sources (the smoke-filled room channel). The contraction of credit supply, however, had large and

tangible consequences for Presidential candidates. That finding suggests at least part of the

explanation for recent policies by the Obama Administration to relax underwriting standards may be

a concern for electoral consequences. Indeed, our findings may help explain the recent actions by Mel

Watt, the recently appointed Director of the Federal Housing Finance Agency (FHFA) to lower

downpayment requirements on Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac mortgages, and to limit the insurance


                                                  3
premium charged by the Federal Housing Administration (FHA). 3 GSE mortgage-backed securities

were also exempted from the Volcker Rule’s prohibition on proprietary trading. Finally, although the

Dodd-Frank Act of 2010 called for strict new standards for “qualifying mortgages,” rather than create

two standards (strict and less strict), regulators opted to only create a single, less strict standard, after

considerable lobbying pressure and pressure from members of Congress pushed the regulatory

agencies to weaken previously proposed standards (Gordon and Rosenthal 2016).


        Section II provides an overview of the related literature. Section III describes our data and

empirical methodology. Section IV reports our findings. Section V concludes.


II. Literature Review


        II.1 Mortgage Credit Subsidies, Banking Crises, and Politics


        Government policies subsidizing homeownership have been a hallmark of American politics

for nearly a century. Those policies have taken many forms, most of which operate through the

subsidization of mortgage credit risk (making the amount of credit and the price of credit risk paid by

the borrower lower than it would be without government subsidies). Such mortgage cost subsidization

can take the form of Federal Housing Administration or Veterans Administration guarantees,

mandates for subsidized mortgage purchases or guarantees from the Housing GSEs (Fannie Mae and

Freddie Mac), regulatory pressures on lenders to provide subsidized lending to favored groups

(through enforcement of the Community Reinvestment Act), low and risk-insensitive minimum

capital ratio requirements associated with mortgage lending, and forbearance from closing down

insolvent mortgage lenders (as during the U.S. thrift crisis). Calomiris and Haber (2014, Chapters 6-

8) review those policies over the past century and show that all of them have been used extensively


3
 See http://www.marketwatch.com/story/freddie-mac-ceo-wants-more-low-down-payment-mortgages-2015-10-20 and
http://www.fhfa.gov/Media/PublicAffairs/Pages/Prepared-Remarks-Director-Watt-at-MBA-Annual-Convention-and-
Expo-2015.aspx
                                                     4
to channel subsidies to mortgage borrowers. Leading up to the subprime mortgage debacle, those

subsidies resulted in a massive debasement of underwriting standards in mortgage lending and

substantial undercapitalization on the part of mortgage lenders. 4


        The United States is not the only country in which the prevalence of housing subsidization,

generally via mortgage subsidies, has figured prominently in electoral politics. Margaret Thatcher’s

popularity owed no small part to her championing of the privatization of council flats. In the U.K.

today, the credit risk subsidies from the “help-to-buy” program were the major exception from the

government’s austerity policies, and Prime Minister Cameron has made increased housing

opportunities a hallmark of his current electoral campaign. In Brazil’s 2014 election, President Dilma

Roussef squeaked to a narrow electoral victory, which some observers attributed to her “Minha Casa

Minha Vida” home-buying program. Neither is the United States the only country that has

experienced a severe banking crisis associated with subsidized housing credit. Jorda, Schularick and

Taylor (2014) show that the share of mortgages on banks’ balance sheets doubled during the 20th

century for the 17 advanced economies that they track since 1870. Jorda, Schularick and Taylor

(2015) show the credit-financed housing bubbles have become the single most important contributor

to banking crises for these 17 countries. Laeven and Valencia (2012) document the unprecedented

pandemic of costly banking crises during the period 1970-2010, which has seen over a hundred major

banking crises throughout the world, with the negative net worth of failed banks averaging about 16

percent of GDP. Real estate collapses figure prominently in these crises, too. In the United States, as

elsewhere, prospective homeowners are generally regarded as a powerful political constituency, and

mortgage credit subsidies have been used as a primary means of subsidizing the acquisition of a home.




4
  See also Mayer, Pence and Sherlund (2009), Rajan (2010), Rajan, Seru and Vig (2010), Acharya et al. (2011),
Agarwarl, Benmelech and Seru (2012), Fishback et al. (2014), and McCarty, Poole and Rosenthal (2013), pp. 17, 19,
44, 126-133.
                                                         5
There is a long theoretical and empirical literature in political economy that seeks to explain these

facts, and study their variation over the business cycle and electoral cycle. 5


        With respect to the question of how subsidies are delivered to politically favored recipients,

it is widely recognized that the granting of access to cheap credit can be politicians’ preferred means

of subsidizing favored groups, either because other more direct means of taxes and transfers are

blocked by political obstacles that do not apply to banking regulations (Rajan 2010, Calomiris and

Haber 2014), or because those bearing the costs of providing credit subsidies may not be able to detect

those costs easily. With respect to the latter point, Coate and Morris (1995) show that, for that reason,

in the presence of imperfect information by voters, inefficient methods of redistribution (like credit

subsidies) may be preferred. 6


        Where government owns and directly controls major lenders, there is substantial evidence that

hidden credit subsidies are used to favor particular borrowers, including both firms and individuals.

With respect to favored credit to firms, Sapienza (2004) studies the behavior of state-owned banks in

Italy. She finds that state-owned banks provide cheap credit to large firms and to firms residing in

depressed areas, and that the size of the subsidy provided reflects the extent of the dominance of the

local political party. Dinc (2005) finds that state-owned banks in emerging market countries

substantially increase their lending in election years relative to private banks. Khwaja and Mian

(2005) study Pakistani state-owned banks, and find that they favor politically connected firms with

cheap credit, and that the size of the subsidies received reflect the degree of the political power of the

recipient. Claessens, Feijen and Laeven (2008) study the political quid pro quo for firms in Brazil.


5
  For contributions and reviews of the political business cycle literature, see Nordhous (1975), Alesina, Roubini and
Cohen (1997), Drazen (2000), and Person and Tabellini (2002).
6
  Employment of constituents is another example of an inefficient tax and transfer method that is chosen because the
implied subsidy is hard for voters to identify (Alesina, Baqir and Easterly 2000). Hidden patronage via employment can
also occur within politically influential firms that expect to be rewarded for that behavior (Bertrand et al. 2007).


                                                          6
They find that firms that contribute to politicians experience higher stock returns than other firms if

those politicians are elected. They trace that superior performance to credit subsidies that those firms

receive from banks. Carvalho (2014) finds that Brazilian politicians use credit subsidies from state-

controlled banks to pressure firms in politically important areas to increase their employment near

elections, and presumably the politicians do so to improve their electoral outcomes. Firms that

increase their employment as a quid pro quo for receiving government credit subsidies act as

intermediaries who ensure that politicians are rewarded for their credit subsidies by the votes of their

workers (by firing featherbedding workers if their subsidies end as the result of their patrons losing

the election).


         The recent U.S. experiment with government investments into banks reveals similar evidence

of favoritism that took the form of financing subsidies to politically influential firms. Duchin and

Sosyura (2012) find that politically connected banks were more likely to be funded by the Troubled

Asset Relief Program (TARP) than other banks, ceteris paribus. Blau et al. (2013) find that politically

connected banks also received a greater amount of TARP support, and received it faster, than other

banks.


         Channeling subsidized credit by politicians to powerful firms in exchange for contributions

or other political favors is one thing, but credit subsidies to the masses must operate through a

different mechanism, namely voting or other forms of mass support (e.g., demonstrations or rallies in

support of the politicians). In the case of demonstrations, unions or other activist groups can act as

intermediaries in the deal between the politicians and the masses (Calomiris and Haber 2014, Chapter

7). But anonymous programs for subsidizing mortgage credit, such as Fannie and Freddie credit

subsidies, FHA subsidies, low minimum capital ratios for mortgage lending, and forbearance policies

toward mortgage lenders lack any intermediaries able to credibly commit to generate votes in

exchange for credit. In countries with a secret ballot, like the United States, politicians expecting to
                                                   7
gain votes for delivering cheap mortgage credit must rely on the loyalty of individual voters to reward

them for having done so.


       There is plenty of evidence that politicians in the United States and other democracies behave

as if they believe that voters will reward them for delivering cheap credit. In a study of state-owned

bank agricultural lending in India, Cole (2009) finds that agricultural credit increases by 5-10

percentage points in election years (resulting in a spike in post-election defaults), and that election-

year increases in state bank lending are larger in districts for which the election is closely contested.

In the United States, Liu and Ngo (2014) find that in states where governors are up for reelection,

bank failure is 45% less likely in the year leading up to the election. This effect is twice as strong in

states where the governor has control of both the upper and lower houses of the state legislature

heading into the gubernatorial election. Romer and Weingast (1991) find similar evidence about

political pressures in the U.S. Congress to delay thrift closures in the 1980s. They argue that Congress

was the main source of delay in closing insolvent thrifts in the mid-1980s. Romer and Weingast study

Congressional voting on a key 1987 piece of legislation that would have limited forbearance for

insolvent thrifts. They find that contributions from thrifts to Congressional campaigns were influential

on voting. They also find that Representatives from Congressional districts that were heavily

populated by under-capitalized thrifts were more likely to support forbearance. They describe

politicians’ behavior as “fairly routine politics,” reflecting politicians’ concerns both about campaign

contributors and about the supply of mortgage credit in their districts.


       The same combination of lobbying by mortgage lenders, and concerns about voters’ responses

to tightening mortgage credit policies underlay Congressional behavior during the mortgage credit

boom and bust of 2000 to 2009. During 2000-20007, Igan, Mishra and Tressel (2011) find that the

riskiest mortgage lenders were the most active lobbyers of Congress. Mian, Sufi and Trebbi (2013)

find that as the political stakes rose in the early 2000s mortgage industry firms increased their
                                                   8
campaign contributions to Congress sharply, and that campaign contributions had an increasingly

powerful influence on Representatives’ voting behavior on housing-finance legislation. Campaign

contributions had a significant effect on roughly 20 percent of the mortgage-finance-related votes in

2003-2004; in contrast, only 3 percent of mortgage-finance-related votes seem to have been affected

by campaign contributions in 1995-96. Mian, Sufi and Trebbi (2013) also find that the presence of

subprime borrowers influenced Representatives’ voting behavior, not just campaign contributions.

As in the case of the thrift crisis, Representatives acted not only in response to money, but also to

expand and preserve mortgage credit in response to their constituents. When the mortgage default

crisis began, Mian Sufi and Trebbi (2010) find that the same combination of campaign contributions

and constituents’ circumstances predict the voting patterns of Representatives. Representatives whose

constituents experienced a sharp increase in mortgage defaults – especially in more competitive

districts, and especially if the constituents belonged to same political party as the Representative –

were more likely to support the Foreclosure Prevention Act of 2008.


       Presidential politics seems to have also been influenced by housing finance policy, and here,

as in Congress, the support was bipartisan. As Calomiris and Haber (2014, Chapter 7) show,

Presidents George H.W. Bush, Bill Clinton, and George W. Bush all were vocal and active supporters

of expanding mortgage credit subsidies. George H.W. Bush signed the GSE Act of 1992 establishing

mortgage purchase mandates for low-income and urban housing for Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.

President Clinton substantially expanded those mandates and weakened FHA lending standards.

President George W. Bush further expanded the GSE mandates as part of his “blueprint for the

American dream.” Barack Obama has also supported expanded mortgage credit. He not only enacted

a mortgage relief program, but also appointed former Congressman Mel Watt in 2014 to oversee the

renewed expansion of GSE credit. Calomiris and Haber (2014) argue that the bipartisan presidential

support for housing credit subsidies reflected, in part, the growing importance of cities. No one

                                                  9
running for President can win without capturing many important swing states, such as Ohio and

Florida, which are highly urban, and therefore, have been especially dependent on GSE and other

mortgage credit subsidies.


       The empirical literature on the political economy of mortgage credit subsidies and the actions

of Presidents George H.W. Bush, Bill Clinton, George W. Bush, and Barack Obama clearly show

that politicians act as if they believe that they will gain at the polls from expanding the supply of

mortgage credit to their constituents. Nevertheless, to our knowledge, there is no direct evidence that

constituents’ voting behavior actually rewards politicians who deliver cheap mortgage credit.


       II.2 Voting Behavior


       It is far from obvious that voters will reliably reward politicians when they see improvements

in the supply of mortgage credit. The smoke-filled room channel may be more important. Politicians

may be more swayed by special interest groups, including bankers, GSEs, and urban activist groups

that reward politicians’ actions with contributions, influence on other matters, or public

demonstrations of support. Although unions and activist groups may be able to organize their

supporters to help politicians in observable ways, the secret ballot prevents credible (i.e., verifiable)

contracting with politicians or their intermediaries regarding votes. Furthermore, as an individual act,

voting cannot be analyzed by any simple theory purporting to explain the private gains to the voter

from the anticipated outcome of the voter: there is zero probability that a voter can affect the outcome.

People, therefore, must be voting to fulfill some psychic or sociological need – to feel patriotic, to

feel avenged, or to gain the respect of those that observe them taking the time to fulfill their civic

duty. Economists since Hotelling (1929) have assumed that voters vote for politicians with whom




                                                   10
they are more aligned philosophically (the one whose policy proposal is closest to their “bliss” point). 7

Whatever the explanation for voter behavior, the goals of the voter cannot hope to achieve any

objective outcome as the result of voting one way or the other.


         Nonetheless, there is a vast literature in economics and political science establishing the

empirical grounds for believing that voters respond to economic circumstances (e.g., Key 1966,

Kramer 1971, Hibbs 1987a, 1987b, Lewis-Beck 1988, Alesina et al. 1993, Campbell and Garand

2000, Persson and Tabellini 2000), including Fair’s (1978, 1996, 1998, 2002) influential time series

analysis of the roles of inflation, economic growth, and economic events on Presidential elections.

There is an indisputable, strong relationship between the state of the economy and voters’ reactions

to incumbents; when inflation is low, output growth is high, and no adverse economic shocks are

apparent, voters tend to support incumbents, and when those indicators are opposite, voters tend to

oppose incumbents.


         The literature on “political psychology,” which uses experimental and other data to sort out

the connection between the economic environment and voting, provides a more nuanced view of the

connection between the economy and voting. First, there is some evidence that voters’ responses to

economic outcomes reflect their identification with a group interest, rather than a selfish attempt to

“vote their pocketbook.” The context also seems to be important. Sears (1987) reviews the early

literature on the relationship between voting and economic outcomes and argues that "[s]trong self

interest effects do seem to occur when the stakes are high and clear or when the threat is high and

ambiguous and the political remedy is clear and certain but these prove to be rather rare circumstances

in the political world of the ordinary citizen." In other words, one would expect to find strong voting



7
  See Kamada and Kojima (2014) for a discussion of the theoretical literature in economics on voting, and a review of
some of the most important studies of voters’ utility functions. Most of the interesting theoretical questions about voters
that come from these perspectives pertain to multi-dimensional voting behavior, where concavity vs. convexity of utility
can have important consequences. See also Boleslavsky and Cotton (2015).
                                                            11
responses when the economic outcome is especially important and visible to the voter. From this

perspective, mortgage credit supply change appears to be an obvious candidate for a strong voter

response.


           Lewis-Beck and Stegmaier’s (2000) review of the voting literature concludes that “good times

keep parties in office, bad times cast them out. This proposition is robust, as the voluminous body of

research reviewed here demonstrates.” The economic voter, according to Lewis-Beck and

Stegmaier’s review of the literature, symmetrically “holds the government responsible for economic

performance, rewarding or punishing it at the ballot box.” The authors report that voters tend to be

retrospective rather than prospective in their reactions to economic matters and they report more

mixed findings on the question of whether voter behavior reflects the voter’s own “pocketbook,” as

opposed to their “sociotropic” sense of the public good. 8 Alesina et al. (1993) espouse a somewhat

opposing view, in which voters are not only prospective, but consider the overall balance of power

within the government between opposing forces, and the consequences of their vote for that balance,

when casting their votes.


           Additional contributions gauge the circumstances under which economic issues receive great

weight by the electorate compared to other issues. For example, Kayser and Wlezien (2011) find that

in Western Europe the declining of partisan identification of voters has increased the relative

importance of economic issues in electoral outcomes over time. In the United States, the partisan

divide has intensified over recent decades, which raises the question of whether they may have been

a declining importance of economic issues in U.S. elections. Lewis-Beck, Nadeau and Elias (2008)




8
    For early contributions to that debate, see Kinder and Kiewiet (1981), and Kramer (1983).


                                                            12
disentangle the respective roles of partisanship and economic influences in the American context and

find that economic influences on voting tend to dominate partisan ones.


          An interesting finding in some of the voting literature is that the state of the economy may

matter asymmetrically for affect voting behavior. In particular, there is evidence that voters punish

incumbents for bad economic outcomes, but fail to reward them for good ones (see Jordan 1960;

Campbell et al. 1965; Bloom and Price 1975; Pacek and Radcliff 1995; Nannestad and Paldam 1997;

Quinn and Woolley 2001; Alcaniz and Hellwig 2011; and Jensen et al. 2015). As Bloom and Price

(1975) state: “we believe that economy conditions play a small role in determining of voting behavior

in times of prosperity. During these times, their impact is dominated by such forces as the underlying

balance of party identification and other, more salient political issues.” Therefore, we may expect the

effect of credit expansions on voting to be muted, whereas that of credit contractions to be more

pronounced. Indeed, as we show later, we are able to confirm this in our study. Asymmetries in voting

response may reflect attribution bias. When a voter gets a job or secures a mortgage, he or she may

conclude that this is a consequence of his or her achievements; when a voter loses a job or is rejected

for a mortgage, he or she may find it easier (in the sense of avoiding cognitive dissonance) to blame

others.


          The teasing out of economic influences on voting can be particularly challenging in the

context of time series analysis, where endogeneity problems can produce spurious inferences,

especially if voting itself affects expected economic outcomes through partisan biases in expectations.

Indeed, Wlezien, Franklin and Twiggs (1997) and Ladner and Wlezien (2007) argue that, for that

reason, time series studies have led to a general overstatement of the extent to which voters respond

to economic outcomes. To the extent that this is true, analyses that make use of cross-sectional and

panel evidence on voting are better suited to avoid spurious identification problems associated with

endogeneity. Indeed, Gerber and Huber (2009) find that when using county-level data to analyze
                                                   13
voting patterns, partisan expectations – reflected in consumption behavior – are an important

influence on economic expectations.


III. Data and Methodology


         We obtain loan level data from the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA). HMDA requires

the collection of detailed data regarding applications for mortgage loans, which include information

about whether the mortgage application was approved or denied, as well as information about some

of the borrower’s personal characteristics and the location of the property. 9


         We use the application outcomes in the millions of mortgage applications included in HMDA,

to isolate a bank-specific measure of mortgage credit supply growth. More specifically, we condition

on an application having been filed – to control for the demand for credit –, and trace the supply of

credit by estimating an OLS model of the application decision (reject-not reject). 10 We extract the

bank-specific supply of credit from the (negative of the) coefficients of bank-year dummies in the

model, where, to rid the estimates from the confounding effects of borrower/market risk, we also

control for variation in individual borrower-specific attributes and for differences in the economic

environment of counties (using county fixed effects) in which would-be mortgage borrowers are

located. Data from the 2004 and 2008 HMDA files are pooled together, and all variables and fixed

effects are interacted with time. We refer to this as the first-stage regression model.


         We then use the bank-specific measures of credit supply to compute county-specific changes

in mortgage-credit-supply. We do that in two steps. First, for each county and year (2004, 2008) we




9
  Very small banks are not required to participate in the HMDA survey. Presumably, the effect of these omissions on
changes in credit supply are much smaller, given that only changes in unreported small bank lending are missing from
our measure of mortgage credit supply change.
10
   When a large number of fixed effects needs to be estimated, OLS produces consistent estimators for the coefficients
of these fixed effects, while a logisitic specification produces inconsistent estimates. For more on this issue – known as
the incidental parameters problem – see Wooldridge (2002, p484) and references therein.
                                                            14
take a weighted average of the estimated bank-specific fixed effects over all banks that operated in a

county that year. For weights, we use the number of loan applications received within each county

and year to account for bank importance. Then, we compute the 2004-to-2008 difference of the two

separately computed county-level measures of mortgage-credit-supply aggregates.


         Because the first-stage model of mortgage rejection includes a full range of the relevant

controls capturing borrower, location, and contract characteristics, it removes all demand-side

variation that is associated with the changing composition of borrowers. It also likely removes some

supply-side influences that are location-specific. For example, banks may target credit differentially

to some locations in response to changes in location-specific risk (e.g., expected house price

appreciation differences). Such supply-side influences would be captured within the time-interacted

county fixed effects in our first-stage regressions. Therefore, we interpret our measure of credit-

supply change (based solely on changes in bank fixed effects) as a partial, but clean, measure of

mortgage-credit-supply change, recognizing that additional location-specific information (in county

fixed effects) captures a mixture of supply and demand influences. In our robustness analysis of the

second-stage regression conclusions, we investigate the potential importance of excluding location-

specific exogenous factors from our measure of mortgage credit supply growth. As we discuss further

below, we find that this does not affect our conclusions about the importance of mortgage-credit-

supply change (measured using bank fixed effect changes) on electoral outcomes. 11 In other words,

while we recognize that there may be additional location-specific factors influencing mortgage credit

supply that our model does not capture, omitting those does not affect the estimated influence of the

components of mortgage credit supply on election outcomes that we capture in our model. In that



11
   Specifically, we find that when we include the change in county-level fixed effects (estimated from our first-stage
mortgage-rejection regressions) in the second stage regression, the inclusion of these fixed effects does not alter the
coefficient of credit-supply change captured by the weighted change in bank fixed effects. The change in county fixed
effects (estimated separately for 2004 and 2008) does not enter significantly in the second-stage regression.
                                                           15
sense, our conclusions should be considered conservative; others influences on mortgage-credit

supply that cannot be identified cleanly may have exerted additional effects on electoral outcomes

that we do not capture. 12


         We then connect the identified change in county-specific mortgage credit supply to changes

in voting behavior within each county by running a second-stage OLS regression, where the

dependent variable is defined as the change in the percentage of votes within the county in support of

the Democratic Presidential candidate, the challenger, over the period 2004 to 2008. The second-

stage regression includes county attributes to control for other differences in the local environment

that may affect voting behavior, such as changes in personal income, the unemployment rate, and

various demographic characteristics that are subject to change over time within each county.


         Finally, we use the estimation results of this second-stage regression analysis to gauge the

importance of mortgage-credit supply changes for the 2008 election by asking the counterfactual

question of how much the shifts in mortgage-credit supply contraction mattered for election results

in important swing states.


         Summary statistics of data we employ from the HMDA database are presented in Table 1. We

have a sample of 8.6 million applications in 2004 and 4.8 million in 2008. 13 Despite the decline in

the number of applications, mortgage rejection rates are 37% in 2008, compared to 25% in 2004. In

our analysis, we control for all of these attributes of the applicant and the mortgage, as well as

additional county-level attributes collected from the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA), Bureau of


12
   Additionally, the fact that our results are robust to including county-level variation in mortgage rejection rates as a
control in the second-stage regression mitigates concerns about possible selectivity bias related to individuals’ decisions
about whether to apply for a mortgage. To the extent that local conditions are correlated with cross-sectional differences
in that selectivity bias, including county-level controls for mortgage-credit supply reduces that potential source of
selectivity bias.
13
   From the HMDA data we drop loans purchased from other institutions or loans withdrawn (22% of all observations),
non-conventional loan applications (10%), and loan applications with missing demographics (9%). We also drop the
smallest banks (defined as those that process less than 1% of all loan applications processed within a state-year) because
of computing constraints in estimating all the county- and bank-specific fixed effects (27%) in the first stage.
                                                            16
Labor Statistics (BLS), and American Consumer Survey (ACS), all of which are defined in Table 2.

For example, we include personal income in our model, as reported by the BEA, which is defined as

the sum of net earnings by place of residence, property income, and personal current transfer receipts.

We also include measures of religious affiliations, to capture potential ideological or partisan

differences. Here our source is the 2000 and 2010 U.S. Religion Census: Religious Congregations &

Membership Study (RCMS). These are all measures that are shown in previous work to affect voting,

and that are available annually at the county-level.


        After analyzing the effects on voting of the growth in mortgage credit supply from 2004 to

2008 in Sections IV.1-IV.3, we repeat this exercise for three other Presidential election cycles in

Section IV.4, using comparable data for 1996, 2000, and 2012, to construct mortgage-credit-supply

growth measures at the county level for the periods 1996 to 2000, 2000 to 2004, and 2008 to 2012.


IV. Empirical Findings


        IV.1 First-Stage Results: Election of 2008


        Our first-stage OLS regressions for each year take the form:




(1)     LAR ijkt = α + βkt + γit + δ Xjt + ζ Xjt AFTERt + η Yjt + λ Yjt AFTERt + e ijkt,




where LAR denotes Loan Application Rejection, which takes the value of 1 if the application is

rejected, and 0 if it is accepted; j indexes the particular loan application; i indexes the particular lender

considering the application; k indexes the county in which the applicant resides; t indexes the year

the application is made (t=2004, 2008); βkt denote county fixed effects; γit denote bank fixed effects;


                                                     17
vectors X and Y capture various applicant and loan type controls, respectively; AFTER takes the value

of 1 if the year is 2008, 0 otherwise; and e is the error term. Applicant and loan characteristics are

interacted with time in order to capture potential shifts in aggregate risk aversion among loan officers.

Bank and county fixed effects are also allowed to vary across time. 14


        Table 3 reports our first-stage regression results for predicting mortgage application denial in

2004 and 2008, with standard errors clustered by bank. As expected, we find that application rejection

depends on a variety of personal attributes, as well as county and bank fixed effects (not reported

here). Table 4 reports descriptive statistics for our county-specific measure of the change in mortgage

credit supply (ΔMortgage Credit Supply) from 2004 to 2008, which is the aggregation of the (negative

of the) weighted bank fixed effects for the banks rejecting mortgage applicants from that county.


        Of interest is to examine how changes in the computed supply of credit at the bank level

between 2004 and 2008 vary across lenders. Our sample of lenders (referred to as “banks” for

convenience) includes all types of mortgage lenders, not just depository institutions. In results not

reported here, we grouped lenders by type according to their primary regulator (the Office of the

Comptroller of the Currency, the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation,

the Office of Thrift Supervision, the National Credit Union Administration, and the Department of

Housing and Urban Development) and compared their ΔMortgage Credit Supply from 2004 to 2008.

Average or median values were quite similar across the seven groups. The most negative group

average was negative 19% for Federal Reserve System-regulated institutions, and the most positive

group average was negative 16% for those regulated by the Department of Housing and Urban

Development). We also divided the lenders into two groups based on lender size. Smaller and larger

lenders exhibited similar ΔMortgage Credit Supply. For lenders regulated by the Federal Reserve


14
  To allow meaningful comparisons, we ensure that the omitted county and bank is always the same across the two
years (04 and 08) in the specification.
                                                        18
System, smaller institutions had slightly more negative average values of ΔMortgage Credit Supply,

but for lenders regulated by others, smaller lenders exhibited average declines in mortgage credit

supply that were equal to, or slightly less than, those of larger banks. None of these average

differences across size categories within a regulatory group was large (the maximum difference was

0.05, and four of the seven group size differences either were zero or 0.01). We conclude from our

investigation of lenders that the changes in credit supply are quite similar across regulated types and

bank size types. 15


         To check the plausibility of our measure of ΔMortgage Credit Supply, we regressed the

estimated change in each bank’s fixed effect on the change in bank return on assets (ROA) from 2004

to 2008, where ROA is defined as the ratio of net earnings to total assets. 16 Data on earnings and total

assets are obtained from the Reports of Condition and Income, widely known as Call Reports. The

estimated coefficient on the change in ROA is 3.09 and is statistically significant (with a t statistic of

2.8) and an R-Squared of 0.07. Obviously, ROA change does not, and should not, capture most of the

variation in credit supply change; nevertheless, it is reassuring that it is positively and significantly

correlated with our measure of credit supply change.


         Figure 1 maps the geographical variation across counties in our measure of the change in

mortgage credit supply from 2004 to 2008, and Figure 2 graphs the density function of the county-

specific change in mortgage credit supply between 2004 and 2008. As both figures reveal, credit

supply contracted in almost all counties. This change may understate the change that voters perceived,

given that the peak of mortgage credit supply was in late 2006, after which supply retreated. The




15
   As part of our general due diligence investigating potential patterns of cross-sectional differences in ΔMortgage
Credit Supply, we also checked to see whether the relative generosity in the level of credit supply in 2004 was
associated with a greater decline in 2008. We found no such patterns of association..
16
   Our approach for attributing changes in the supply of credit to bank-specific variables follows Cornett et al. (2011)
Puri et al. (2011), Jimenez et al. (2012), and Antoniades (2014).
                                                            19
comparison between 2004 and 2008 reported here, therefore, may understate the extent of the

experienced decline just prior to the election.


       IV.2 Second-Stage Results: Election of 2008


       Our second-stage regression regresses the change in the percentage of county-level votes for

the Democratic party candidate (Δ%DemCan), over the period 2004 to 2008, on the estimated

mortgage credit supply change (ΔMortgage Credit Supply), which is measured by the change in the

county-weighted aggregation of the bank fixed effects, estimated in the first-stage regressions). The

regression also includes various county-level control variables that potentially affect voting.

Specifically, we estimate:




(2)    Δ%DemCan kt = α+β(ΔMortgage Credit Supply kt ) + γZkt +δSzt + qkt,




where k indexes the county in which the voter resides; z indexes the state in which the county is

located; t indexes the election year (2008 initially); Z captures various county-level characteristics; S

denotes state fixed effects; and q is the error term.


       Table 5 presents second-stage regression results, where the dependent variable is the change

in the proportion of votes going to Barack Obama in 2008, less the percentage for John Kerry in 2004

within each county. Standard errors are clustered by Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA). The number

of counties for which all data fields are populated is 1,545. We find that a number of control variables

capturing changes in counties’ economic and demographic characteristics affect the change in each

county’s support for the Democratic Presidential candidate (which is a vote against the incumbent

party in 2008). As predicted by Fair’s (and others’) analyses, a rise in the unemployment rate or a
                                                   20
drop in personal income improves Democratic voting margins. Younger people, college graduates,

and minorities were associated with gains for Democratic shares of votes in 2008, while the presence

of Evangelicals (who are typically more likely to vote for Republican candidates) had a negative

influence. Perhaps surprisingly, a higher proportion of males tended to favor a rise in the Democratic

share, too. In other words, although women tend to vote more for Democrats, they apparently

preferred Kerry to Bush even more than they preferred Obama to McCain, ceteris paribus. 17


         Following Powell and Whitten (1993) we add a swing vote variable that controls from short-

term shifts in voter support during the previous election cycle, which is meant to capture temporary

shifts in voting preferences. Consistent with the literature, we find that these temporary shifts in

voting behavior during the 2004 election are reversed in 2008. That is, we find we positive relation

between democratic gains/ republican losses in 2008, and the republican gains/democratic losses in

2004.


         Column (1) of Table 5 includes only control variables. Column (2) includes the change from

2004 to 2008 in the county’s raw mortgage application rejection rate rather than ΔMortgage Credit

Supply. Column (3) includes ΔMortgage Credit Supply and the controls. The coefficient on the raw

mortgage rejection rate is negative (the “wrong” sign), indicating that greater decreases in mortgage

credit supply are associated, ceteris paribus, with a decline in the share of Democratic votes, but this

coefficient is not statistically significant. Column (3) presents our main finding: decreases in

mortgage credit supply from 2004 to 2008 (after controlling for other factors) have a large and highly

statistically significant positive effect on increased support for the Democratic candidate. The

comparison of columns (2) and (3) shows the importance of identifying mortgage credit supply.



17
   We considered alternative specifications of the control variables, which defined them alternatively in levels or growth
rates. As Table A1 shows, neither of these alternative specifications reduces the coefficient on
ΔMortgage Credit Supply; in fact, we conservatively chose to report the main specification in Table 5 partly because it
implies the lowest coefficient value of the three.
                                                           21
Voters reacted to supply shifts, not to changes in raw rejection rates, per se, which reflect a

combination of supply-side and demand-side influences.


        IV.3 Other Specifications


        Here we investigate the robustness of our results to a variety of alternative specifications,

which are presented in detail in the Appendix. First, as discussed above, we consider how adding

county fixed effects for mortgage credit supply, estimated in equation (1), affect our results. We

regard those fixed effects as reflecting a mixture of exogenous demand and supply influences not

otherwise captured by the variables included in equation (1). When we add the estimated change from

2004 to 2008 in the county fixed effects estimated by separate cross-sectional regressions in 2004 and

2008 from equation (1), and include the change in those county fixed effects as a county characteristic

in equation (2), the estimated coefficient (-0.002) is small and insignificant statistically (its standard

error is 0.03). The inclusion of this variable slightly raises the magnitude of the estimated coefficient

on ΔMortgage Credit Supply.


        With respect to our analysis of the effects of the unemployment rate, we considered whether

voters may have been reacting in anticipation of unemployment rate changes rather than in reaction

to experienced unemployment (a possibility discussed in several articles reviewed in Section II.2).

To investigate this possibility, in our analysis of the 2008 election, we added to our existing model

the county-level change in the unemployment rate over the period 2008 to 2009. This variable was

insignificant economically and statistically and had no effect on our 2008 voting results. We also

experimented with including the homeownership rate in the county and found that it had no effect on

our results.


        We considered whether voter reactions to mortgage credit supply contraction in 2008 perhaps

reflected reactions to other variables that might have been correlated with mortgage credit supply

                                                   22
change. Obvious candidates include foreclosures, home vacancy rates, or changes in housing prices.

The home vacancy rate did enter significantly and negatively in the voting regression (indicating that

high home vacancy rates in the county led voters to penalize the Republican party in 2008), but the

coefficient on the change in the supply of mortgage credit was essentially identical across all these

various specifications, including in the presence of the home vacancy rate.


       IV.4 The Importance of Mortgage-Credit Supply for the 2008 Election


       We approach the question of the importance of the change in mortgage-credit supply

contraction for the election by asking a counterfactual question: how much would the electoral result

have changed if mortgage-credit supply had been unchanged from 2004 to 2008? We compute the

counterfactual voting difference that would have resulted for each county, and aggregate those voting

differences to the state level. We measure the importance of the effect by comparing this implied vote

difference for each state (if ΔMortgage Credit Supply were zero for all counties in that state in 2008)

to the number of votes by which Obama won that state. Obviously, importance is going to be highest

in swing states, where Obama’s margin of victory was relatively small – in very “blue” or “red” states,

the effects of changing economic circumstances are unlikely to swing the state to one or the other

candidate.


       For nine swing states (defined as the states where Bush won in 2004 but Obama won in 2008),

Figure 3 displays the relative magnitudes of the Obama victory margin (shown in blue) and the

counterfactual change in voting for Obama from zeroing out the ΔMortgage Credit Supply effect

(shown in red). We also show brackets surrounding the counterfactual change indicating the range of

values associated with plus or minus one standard error around the estimated effect.


       In North Carolina, the implied improvement in the Republican vote share is much larger than

Obama’s margin of victory, implying that, absent the ΔMortgage Credit Supply effect, North

                                                  23
Carolina’s electoral votes would have gone to McCain. In each of the states of Indiana, Florida, and

Ohio, zeroing out the ΔMortgage Credit Supply is almost enough to shift these states’ electoral votes

from Obama to McCain. Indeed, assuming the upper range of the estimated coefficient value

(between one and two standard errors above the estimate), all three of these states would have shifted

to McCain, implying a shift of 79 electoral votes relative to the needed 93 electoral votes to change

the outcome of the election.


       Another way to measure the importance of the ΔMortgage Credit Supply effect is to aggregate

across the swing states and compare the number of votes in swing states that would have remained

Republican under the counterfactual to the total amount of votes needed to win all of the swing states.

If ΔMortgage Credit Supply had been zero, fully 51% of the votes needed to win all the swing states

would have shifted to McCain (82% if one adds a standard error to the coefficient estimate). In

comparison, if unemployment had not risen from 2004 to 2008, the McCain would only have received

9% of the votes necessary to win all the swing states.


       IV.5 Extending the Analysis to Other Presidential Elections


       The adverse mortgage-credit-supply shift from 2004 to 2008 seems likely to have been

particularly dramatic in the minds of voters. How did voters react to mortgage credit supply changes

in other periods? We extend our analysis to the other elections over the period 1996 to 2012. As

before, we estimate first-stage regressions for mortgage application denials, and use the weighted

bank fixed effects from those regressions to estimate cross-sectional differences in county-specific

mortgage-credit supply, which are then differenced across election years to produce measures of

ΔMortgage Credit Supply at the county level. Figure 4 is analogous to Figure 2, and displays the

density functions for the implied cross-sectional mortgage credit supply changes for 1996 to 2000,




                                                  24
2000 to 2004, 2004 to 2008, and 2008 to 2012. Table 6 reports summary statistics analogous to Table

1 for each presidential election year from 1996 to 2012.


         Table 7 reports the second-stage regressions comparable to those in column (3) of Table 5,

where the dependent variable, as before, is the change in the share of Democratic votes – from 1996

to 2000, from 2000 to 2004, from 2004 to 2008 (which were the focus of our discussion above), and

from 2008 to 2012. Due to some data limitations, the specifications reported in Table 7 are not

identical to one another across years, but they are very similar. 18


         Consistent with the findings for 2008, we find that contractions in credit supply from 2008 to

2012 penalized the incumbent (Democratic) party and benefited Mitt Romney’s candidacy. In the

halcyon days of mortgage credit expansion, encompassing the 2000 and 2004 election years,

however, there is no evidence that counties with relatively high credit expansion voted in favor of the

incumbent party’s Presidential candidate (the coefficients on the change in mortgage credit supply

are statistically zero). That is true both when the incumbent was a Democrat (in 2000) and when the

incumbent was a Republican (in 2004). In other words, neither incumbent party was rewarded in

countries experiencing unusually high expansion of mortgage credit supply during those elections.


         These findings indicate an important fact about voters’ reactions to local credit conditions.

Apparently, the cross-sectional differences in relative credit supply shifts across counties do not affect

voting behavior much in an environment of booming average credit supply. Put somewhat differently,

voters don’t reward politicians for experiencing a boom in local credit supply, but are quick to punish

politicians for a contraction. This result resonates with the findings reported in Mian, Sufi and Trebbi

(2014) in their cross-country analysis of political reactions to financial crises. They find important




18
  The absence of the GINI coefficient in the 1996 and 2000 regressions reflects the fact that county-level data on
inequality only became available in the 2008 version of the American Consumer Survey and onward.
                                                           25
and unusual shifts in voting patterns in response to financial crises. The results also resonate with

studies we cited above in Section II.2 that find muted responses of voting to economic conditions

when the economy is performing well.


       Our results regarding asymmetric voter responses across years led us to consider whether

those same asymmetries in voter responses are visible across counties within years. Specifically, we

wanted to investigate whether in 2008, counties with positive credit supply growth had a zero

coefficient on ΔMortgage Credit Supply, and similarly, whether in 2004, counties with negative credit

supply growth punished incumbent party candidates. Unfortunately, as Figure 4 shows, all of our

election years are extreme cases of either nationwide positive, or nationwide negative, mortgage

credit supply change. There are not enough positive-value counties in 2008 and 2012, or negative-

value counties in 2000 and 2004, to permit testing for within-year asymmetries.




V. Conclusion


       Mortgage-credit supply has been an especially active arena for public policy interventions

toward the financial system, in the United States and around the world. There is substantial empirical

evidence from the behavior of U.S. Presidential candidates, as well as Congressional Representatives,

Senators and Governors, which suggests that politicians expect to be rewarded for policies that

subsidize mortgage risk and thereby expand the supply of mortgage credit. It is less clear whether

those rewards flow through what we have labeled the smoke-filled room channel or the voting

channel. To our knowledge, however, prior to this study, there had been no existing empirical study

investigating whether voters actually reward politicians for expansions in the supply of mortgage

credit, or punish them for contractions.



                                                 26
       We identify mortgage-credit supply contractions by modeling the mortgage rejection behavior

of banks, using HMDA and other data to control for other influences on mortgage rejections. We find

that changes in the supply of mortgage credit at the county level do, in fact, affect voting patterns in

Presidential elections.


       In the 2008 election, in the wake of the most dramatic reversal in the supply of mortgage

credit in U.S. history, the incumbent Republican party suffered huge vote losses (relative to 2004) as

the result of contractions in mortgage credit supply. The effects on voting in swing states were

particularly pronounced. In the absence of this influence, even if other geopolitical and

macroeconomic problems such as the Iraqi War and higher unemployment had remained in place, the

election would have been much closer. Half of the votes needed to reverse the election’s outcome in

nine crucial swing states would have gone to McCain in 2008 if not for the contraction in mortgage

credit from 2004 to 2008.


       The election of 2012 saw a qualitatively similar effect on vote losses for Barack Obama.

However, voting in the elections of 2000 and 2004 – which occurred in the middle of a mortgage

credit supply boom – was not affected by changes in local mortgage credit supply. Apparently,

relative supply changes do not matter for voting during a boom, but do matter in a bust.


       Our results have important implications for the study of the relationship between economic

phenomena and electoral outcomes. One econometric lesson is that identification matters: if we had

employed county-level measures of mortgage application denial rates, rather than identifying the

extent to which those denials reflected supply-side contraction, we would have concluded that there

was a muted effect on voting from changes in mortgage credit supply.


       The asymmetrically high response of voters to relative supply contraction during a bust

indicates that voters’ respond very differently to expansions of credit than to contractions. It remains

                                                  27
to be seen if other responses of voters to other economic influences exhibit the same asymmetry. In

Table 7, we do find statistically significant responses to unemployment only in the 2012 election,

which is suggestive of a similar potential asymmetry in voting reactions to it.


       Our finding that voters do not reward the incumbent party for expansions of credit suggests

that the “smoke-filled-room” channel is the more important means through which the political process

rewards politicians for expanding the supply of mortgage credit. This has two important implications

for the potential reform of mortgage credit subsidies. First, reformers seeking to reduce mortgage

credit subsidies should focus their efforts during the expansion phase of the credit cycle, which avoids

electoral consequences from reforms that limit the expansion of credit supply. Second, that reform

bargain should focus on placating special interests rather than voters, given the likely importance of

the smoke-filled-room channel during expansion phases of the mortgage credit cycle.


       It is interesting that voting responses were especially high in swing states. That finding makes

it unlikely that our results can be ascribed to partisan biases that are only coincidentally related to

economic differences (a theme of some of the criticisms of the literature claiming to connect

economic circumstances with voting outcomes, summarized in Section II.2).


       Our findings don’t provide conclusive evidence about the debate over whether voters “vote

their pocketbooks” rather than that voting for “sociotropic” reasons, but they do indicate that if

“sociotropic” reasons are relevant to voters, they include local, not just national factors. Voters react

to local mortgage-supply conditions, after taking into account other influences (fixed effects) that

apply more broadly to their states or to the nation as a whole. That could mean either that voters are

“voting their pocketbooks,” or it could mean that they view local mortgage credit supply change as

an important sociotropic criterion, over and above news related to state-level or national-level

economic concerns.

                                                   28
References


Acharya, Viral, Matthew Richardson, Stijn van Nieuweburgh, and Lawrence J. White. 2011.
Guaranteed to Fail: Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac and the Debacle of Mortgage Finance. Princeton:
Princeton University Press.

Agarwal, Sumit, Efraim Benmelech, and Amit Seru. 2012. “Did the Community Reinvestment Act
Lead to Risky Lending?” University of Chicago Booth School, Working Paper.

Alesina, Alberto, Reza Baqir, and William Easterly. 2000. “Redistributive Public Employment,”
Journal of Urban Economics 48, 219-241.

Alesina, Alberto, J. Londregan, and Howard Rosenthal. 1993. “A Model of the Political Economy of
the United States,” American Political Science Review 87, 12-33.

Alesina, Alberto, Nouriel Roubini, and Gerald Cohen. 1997. Political Cycles and the Macroeconomy.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Alcañiz, I. and Hellwig, T., 2011. “Who’s to Blame? The Distribution of Responsibility in
Developing Democracies,” British Journal of Political Science, 41(02), 389-411.

Antoniades, Adonis. 2014 “Liquidity Risk and the Credit Crunch of 2007-2008: Evidence from
Micro-Level Data on Mortgage Loan Applications,” Journal of Financial Analysis forthcoming

Bertrand, Marianne, Francis Kramarz, Antoinette Schoar, and David Thesmar. 2008. “Politicians,
Firms and the Political Business Cycle: Evidence from France,” Working Paper.

Blau, Benjamin M., Tyler Brough, and Diana W. Thomas. 2013. “Corporate Lobbying, Political
Connections, and the Bailout of Banks,” Journal of Banking and Finance 37, 3007-3117.

Bloom, H.S. and Price, H.D., 1975. “Voter Response to Short-run Economic Conditions: The
Asymmetric Effect of Prosperity and Recession,” American Political Science Review, 69(04), 1240-
1254.

Boleslavsky, Raphael, and Christopher Cotton. 2015. “Information and Extremism in Elections,”
American Economic Journal: Microeconomics 7, 165-207.

Calomiris, Charles W., and Stephen H. Haber. 2014. Fragile By Design: The Political Origins of
Banking Crises and Scarce Credit. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Campbell, A., 1980. The American Voter. University of Chicago Press.

Campbell, J.E., and J.C. Garand. 2000. Before the Vote: Forecasting American National Elections.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.



                                                29
Carvalho, Daniel. 2014. “The Real Effects of Government-Owned Banks: Evidence from an
Emerging Market,” Journal of Finance 69, 577-609.

Claessens, Stijn, Erik Feijen, and Luc Laeven. 2008. “Political Connections and Preferential Access
to Finance: The Role of Campaign Contributions,” Journal of Financial Economics 88, 554-580.

Coate, Stephen, and Stephen Morris. 1995. “On the Form of Transfers to Special Interests,” Journal
of Political Economy 103, 1210-1236.

Cole, Shawn. 2009. “Fixing Market Failures or Fixing Elections? Elections, Banks, and Agricultural
Lending in India,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 1, 219-250.

Cornett, Marcia Millon, Jamie John McNutt, Philip E. Strahan, and Hassan Tehranian. 2011
“Liquidity Risk Management and Credit Supply in the Financial Crisis.” Journal of Financial
Economics 101, 297–312.

Dinc, Serdar. 2005. “Politicians and Banks: Political Influences on Government-Owned Banks in
Emerging Markets,” Journal of Financial Economics 77, 453-470.

Drazen, Allan. 2000. “The Political Business Cycle after 25 years,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual
15, 75-117.

Duchin, Ran, and Denis Sosyura. 2012. “The Politics of Government Investment,” Journal of
Financial Economics 106, 24-48.

Fishback, Price, Kenneth Snowden, and Eugene N. White, Eds. 2014. Housing and Mortgage
Markets in Historical Perspective. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Fair, Ray C. 1978. “The Effect of Economic Factors on Votes for President,” Review of Economics
and Statistics 60, 159-73.

Fair, Ray C. 1996. “Econometrics and Presidential Elections,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 10,
89-102.

Fair, Ray C. 1998. “The Effect of Economic Events on Votes for President: 1996 Update,” Working
Paper, November.

Fair, Ray C. 2002. Predicting Presidential Elections and Other Things. Stanford: Stanford Business
Books.

Gerber, Alan S., and Gregory A. Huber. 2009. “Partisanship and Economic Behavior: Do Partisan
Differences in Economic Forecasts Predict Real Economic Behavior?” American Political Science
Review 103, 407-426.

Gordon, Sanford, and Howard Rosenthal. 2016. “Political Actions by Private Interests: Mortgage
Market Regulation in the Wake of Dodd-Frank,” Working paper, New York University.

Hibbs, D. A., Jr. 1987a. The Political Economy of Industrial Democracies. Cambridge, MA: Harvard.
                                                30
Hibbs, D.A., Jr. 1987b. The American Political Economy. Cambridge, MA: Harvard.

Hotelling, Harold. 1929. “Stability in Competition,” Economic Journal 39, 41-57.

Igan, Deniz, Prachi Mishra, and Thierry Tressel. 2012. “A Fistful of Dollars: Lobbying and the
Financial Crisis,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 26, 195-230.

Jensen, J.B., Quinn, D.P. and Weymouth, S., 2015. “Globalization’s Concentrated Costs (and
Benefits): Import Competition, Globally Engaged Firms, and US Presidential Voting,” Georgetown
University.

Jimenez, Gabriel, Steven Ongena, Jose-Luis Peydro, and Jesus Saurina. 2012. “Credit Supply and
Monetary Policy: Identifying the Balance-Sheet Channel with Loan Applications,” American
Economic Review 102, 2301-2326.

Jorda, Oscar, Moritz Schularick, and Alan M. Taylor. 2014. “The Great Mortgaging: Housing
Finance, Crises, and Business Cycles,” NBER Working Paper No. 20501, September.

Jorda, Oscar, Moritz Schularick, and Alan M. Taylor. 2015. “Leveraged Bubbles,” NBER Working
Paper No. 21486, August.

Jordan, N., 1965. “The" Asymmetry" of" Liking" and" Disliking": A Phenomenon Meriting Further
Reflection and Research,” The Public Opinion Quarterly, 29(2), 315-322.

Kamada, Yuichiro, and Fuhito Kojima. 2014. “Voter Preferences, Polarization, and Electoral
Policies,” American Economic Journal: Microeconomics 6, 203-236.

Kayser, Mark Andreas, and Christopher Wlezien. 2011. “Performance Pressure: Patterns of
Partisanship and the Economic Vote,” European Journal of Political Research 50, 365-394.

Key, V.O. 1966. The Responsible Electorate. New York: Vintage.

Khwaja, Asim, and Atif Mian. 2005. “Do Lenders Favor Politically Connected Firms? Rent Provision
in an Emerging Financial Market,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 120, 1371-1411.

Kinder,, Donald R., and D. Roderick Kiewiet. 1981. “Sociotropic Politics: The American Case,”
British Journal of Political Science 11, 129-161.

Kramer, Gerald H. 1971. “Short-Term Fluctuations in U.S. Voting Behavior, 1896-1964,” American
Political Science Review 65, 131-143.

Kramer, Gerald H. 1983. “The Ecological Fallacy Revisited: Aggregate- versus Individual-Level
Findings on Economics and Elections, and Sociotropic Voting,” American Political Science Review
77, 92-111.

Ladner, Matthew, and Christopher Wlezien. 2007. “Partisan Preferences, Electoral Prospects, and
Economic Expectations,” Comparative Political Studies 40, 571-596.

                                               31
Laeven, Luc, and Fabian Valencia. 2012. “Systemic Banking Crises Database: An Update,”
International Monetary Fund Working Paper 12/163.

Lewis-Beck, Michael. 1988. Economics and Elections: The Major Western Democracies. Ann Arbor,
MI: University of Michigan Press.

Lewis-Beck, Michael, Richard Nadeau, and Angelo Elias. 2008. “Economics, Party, and the Vote:
Causality Issues and Panel Data,” American Journal of Political Science 52, 84-95.

Lewis-Beck, Michael, and Mary Stegmaier (2000). “Economic Determinants of Electoral Outcomes,”
Annual Review of Political Science 3, 183-219.

Liu, Wai-Man, and Phong T.H. Ngo. 2014. “Elections, Political Competition and Bank Failure,”
Journal of Financial Economics 12, 251-268.

Mayer, Christopher, Karen Pence and Shane Sherlund (2009). “The Rise in Mortgage Defaults,”
Journal of Economic Perspectives 23, 27-50.

McCarty, Nolan, Keith T. Poole, and Howard Rosenthal. 2013. Polarized America: The Dance of
Ideology and Unequal Riches. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Mian, Atif, Amir Sufi, and Francesco Trebbi. 2010. “The Political Economy of the U.S. Mortgage
Default Crisis,” American Economic Review 100, 1967-1998.

Mian, Atif, Amir Sufi, and Francesco Trebbi. 2013. “The Political Economy of the U.S. Mortgage
Credit Expansion,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 8, 373-408

Mian, Atif, Amir Sufi, and Francesco Trebbi. 2014. “Resolving Debt Overhang: Political Constraints
in the Aftermath of Financial Crises,” American Economic Journal: Microeconomics 6, 1-28.

Nannestad, P. and Paldam, M., 1997. “The Grievance Asymmetry Revisited: A Micro Study of
Economic Voting in Denmark, 1986–1992,” European Journal of Political Economy, 13(1), 81-99.

Nordhous, William. 1975. “The Political Business Cycle,” Review of Economic Studies 42, 169-190.

Pacek, A. and Radcliff, B., 1995. “The Political Economy of Competitive Elections in the
Developing World,” American Journal of Political Science, 745-759.

Persson, Torsten, and Guido Tabellini. 2002. Political Economies: Explaining Economic Policy.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Powell, Bingham Jr., and Guy D. Whitten. 1993. “A Cross-National Analysis of Economic Voting:
Taking Account of the Political Context,” American Journal of Political Science 37, 391-414.

Puri, Manju, Jorg Rocholl, and Sascha Steffen. 2011. “Global Retail Lending in the Aftermath of the
U.S. Financial Crisis: Distinguishing between Supply and Demand Effects,” Journal of Financial
Economics 100, 556-578.

                                                32
Quinn, D.P. and Shapiro, R.Y., 1991. “Economic Growth Strategies: The Effects of Ideological
Partisanship on Interest Rates and Business Taxation in the United States,” American Journal of
Political Science, 656-685

Quinn, D.P. and Woolley, J.T., 2001. “Democracy and National Economic Performance: the
Preference for Stability,” American journal of political science, 634-657.

Rajan, Raghuram G. 2010. Fault Lines: How Hidden Fractures Still Threaten the World Economy.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Rajan, Uday, Amit Seru, and Vikrant Vig. 2010. “Statistical Default Models and Incentives,”
American Economic Review 100, 506-510.

Riker, William H. 1982. Liberalism against Populism: A Confrontation between the Theory of
Democracy and the Theory of Social Choice. San Francisco: W.H. Freeman.

Romer, Thomas and Barry R. Weingast. 1991. “Political Foundations of the Thrift Debacle,” in
Politics and Economics in the 1980s, edited by Alberto Alesina and Geoffrey Carliner, 175-214.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Sapienza, Paola. 2004. “The Effects of Government Ownership on Bank Lending,” Journal of
Financial Economics 72, 357-384.

Sears, David O. 1987. “Political Psychology,” Annual Review of Psychology 38, 229-255.

Wlezien, Christopher, Mark Franklin, and Daniel Twiggs. 1997. “Economic Perceptions and Vote
Choice: Disentangling the Endogeneity,” Political Behavior, 19, 7-17.

Wooldridge, J. M. 2002. Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.




                                                33
Table 1 – Summary statistics of the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA) data.


                                                               2004        2008

 States                                                          51          51

 Counties                                                     3,180       3,168

 Census Tracts                                               19,011      18,971


 Financial Institutions (Banks)                                 317         369

 Loan Applications                                         8,557,111   4,811,881

 Applicant Income (average, in thousand US dollars)           87.04      100.84

 Loan Amount (average, in thousand US dollars)               165.19      192.63

 Loan to Income Ratio                                           2.25        2.37


 Type of Loan: Home Purchase (% of total)                       0.35        0.28

 Type of Loan: Home Improvement (% of total)                    0.08        0.12

 Type of Loan: Home Refinance (% of total)                      0.56        0.60


 Female Applicants (% of total)                                 0.32        0.33

 Hispanic Applicants (% of total)                               0.12        0.10

 Minority Applicants (% of total)                               0.18        0.17

 Applications with Co-Applicant (% of total)                    0.46        0.48


 Loan Rejection Rate                                            0.25        0.37




                                                      34
Table 2 – Data description

  Variable Name                   Source                  Description
  Female Applicant                HMDA                    Indicator function -- 1 if loan applicant's gender is
                                                          female, 0 otherwise.
  Ethnicity: Hispanic             HMDA                    Indicator function -- 1 if loan applicant's ethnicity is
                                                          hispanic, 0 otherwise.
  Race: Minority                  HMDA                    Indicator function -- 1 if loan applicant's race is
                                                          minority (non-white), 0 otherwise.
  Loan to Income                  HMDA                    Requested loan amount over applicants' income (total
                                                          income for application with co-applicant).
  Log(Income)                     HMDA                    log(Applicants' Income).
  Log(Loan Amount)                HMDA                    Log(Loan Amount).
  Loan Purpose: Home              HMDA                    Indicator function -- 1 if loan purpose is home purchase,
  Purchase                                                0 otherwise.
  Loan Purpose: Home              HMDA                    Indicator function -- 1 if loan purpose is home
  Improvement                                             improvement, 0 otherwise
  Loan Purpose: Home              HMDA                    Indicator function -- 1 if loan purpose is home
  Refinance                                               refinance, 0 otherwise
  Co Applicant                    HMDA                    Indicator function -- 1 if application has a co-applicant,
                                                          0 otherwise.
  Δ(Personal Income)              BEA                     Change in per capita personal income between two
                                                          election years.
  Δ(Unemployment Rate)            BLS                     Change in unemployment rate between two election
                                                          years.
  Median Age                      ACS, Census 2000        Median age of household members.
  Median Income                   ACS, Census 2000        Median income of household members.
  Black                           ACS, Census 2000        Black or African American -- Share of total population.
  Evangelical                     RCMS 2000, 2010         Evangelical Protestant -- Rates of adherence per 1,000
                                                          population.
  BA Graduate                     ACS, Census 2000        Total population 25 and over -- Percent bachelor's
                                                          degree or higher.
  Sex Ratio                       ACS, Census 2000        Males per 100 females.
  Age Dependency Ratio            ACS, Census 2000        (Population below 18 + Population above
                                                          64)/population(18 to 64)
  Gini Coefficient                ACS                     Gini coefficient at the county level.
  Δ(Raw mortgage rejection        HMDA                    Loan Applications rejected - Percentage of total
  rate)                                                   applications filed at each county.
  Voting                          CQ Voting and           US Presidential Elections voting data by county, 1996-
                                  Elections Collection    2012.
  Votes (t-1)                     Authors’                Share of votes received by the challenges in the
                                  calculations            previous election.
  Swing votes                     Authors’                Change in challenger’s voting share during the previous
                                  calculations            election cycle.
Notes: ACS = American Consumer Survey. BEA = Bureau of Economic Analysis. BLS = Bureau of Labor Statistics,
HMDA = Home Mortgage Disclosure Act. RCMS = Religious Congregations & Membership Study. The ACS 3-year
surveys of 2008 and 2012 are used because of high coverage (about 1,550 counties sampled each time versus 700 in the
ACS 1-year survey). ACS 3-year surveys are not available prior to 2007. For 2000, US Census 2000 are used. 2004 data
are the county average of Census 2000 and ACS 2008 data. Evanrate for 2008 and 2012 are based on Census 2010, and
are identical for each county across the two periods. Gini coefficient is only available for 2008 and 2012. Data on Hispanic
applicants are not available in the HMDA dataset for the years 1996 and 2000.
                                                            35
Table 3 – First stage OLS regression results. Dependent variable: Loan Application Rejection



  Female Applicant                                                      -0.00317           (0.00310)
  Female Applicant * AFTER                                             0.00896**           (0.00444)
  Ethnicity: Hispanic                                                  0.0486***            (0.0105)
  Ethnicity: Hispanic * AFTER                                          0.0547***            (0.0156)
  Race: Minority                                                       0.0653***           (0.00560)
  Race: Minority * AFTER                                                  0.0170            (0.0122)
  Log(Income)                                                             0.0243            (0.0162)
  Log(Income) * AFTER                                                     0.0223            (0.0259)
  Log(loan amount)                                                    -0.0631***            (0.0173)
  Log(loan amount) * AFTER                                              -0.00626            (0.0274)
  Loan to income                                                       0.0387***           (0.00636)
  Loan to income * AFTER                                                  0.0128            (0.0119)
  Loan Purpose: Home Purchase                                         -0.0497***           (0.00753)
  Loan Purpose: Home Purchase * AFTER                                  -0.0542**            (0.0214)
  Loan Purpose: Home Improvement                                          0.0468            (0.0344)
  Loan Purpose: Home Improvement * AFTER                                 -0.0119            (0.0413)
  Co Applicant                                                        -0.0291***           (0.00506)
  Co Applicant * AFTER                                                  -0.00282           (0.00863)
  County Fixed Effects                                                     YES
  Bank Fixed Effects                                                       YES
  Constant                                                               0.328***           (0.0265)
  Observations                                                          13,090,171
  R-squared                                                                0.285
  Notes: Standard errors in parenthesis, clustered by bank, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                         36
Table 4 - Descriptive statistics, change in county-level mortgage credit supply, 2004 to 2008

                              (1)                  (2)
                           Unweighted            Weighted

  Counties                    3,069                3,069

  Min                          -0.51               -0.51
  Max                           0.17                0.17

  Mean                         -0.18               -0.20
  Standard Deviation            0.07                0.03

  p10                            -0.26              -0.24
  p25                            -0.22              -0.22
  p50                            -0.19              -0.20
  p75                            -0.15              -0.18
  p90                            -0.10              -0.15
Notes: In the Weighted specification, changes in mortgage credit supply are (weighted) averaged across US counties
based on total votes casted in 2004 and 2008 in each county.




                                                           37
Table 5 - Second stage regression results. Dependent variable: Change in Democratic votes (% share),
2008


                                                    (1)                   (2)                 (3)
  Δ(Personal Income)                          -0.0735***            -0.0693***          -0.0724***
                                                (0.0154)              (0.0155)            (0.0168)
  Δ(Unemployment Rate)                           0.00192               0.00166             0.00178
                                               (0.00187)             (0.00131)           (0.00157)
  Median Age                                 -0.00319***           -0.00315***         -0.00317***
                                              (0.000463)            (0.000510)          (0.000554)
  Black                                         0.100***              0.101***            0.101***
                                                (0.0217)              (0.0225)            (0.0211)
  Evangelical                                -7.11e-05***          -6.78e-05***        -6.78e-05***
                                               (1.36e-05)            (1.37e-05)          (1.52e-05)
  BA Graduate                                0.000909***           0.000918***         0.000910***
                                              (0.000145)            (0.000139)          (0.000138)
  Sex Ratio                                     0.000137              0.000150            0.000162
                                              (0.000129)            (0.000105)          (0.000114)
  Age Dependency Ratio                        0.00129***            0.00129***          0.00130***
                                              (0.000227)            (0.000208)          (0.000280)
  Swing Vote                                    0.298***              0.309***            0.304***
                                                (0.0463)              (0.0506)            (0.0433)
  Votes(t-1)                                  -0.0724***            -0.0753***          -0.0723***
                                                (0.0200)              (0.0192)            (0.0152)
  Δ(Raw mortgage rejection rate)                                        0.0218
                                                                       -0.0172
  Δ(Mortgage credit supply)                                                              -0.0634***
                                                                                           (0.0215)
  State Fixed Effects                             YES                   YES                  YES
  Constant                                      0.102***             0.0949***            0.0846***
                                                (0.0229)              (0.0201)             (0.0214)
  Observations                                    1,544                 1,544                1,544
  R-squared                                       0.726                 0.728                0.729
  Notes: Bootstrapped standard errors in parentheses. Clustered by MSA. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                        38
Table 6 - Summary statistics of the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA) data, 1996 - 2012.

                                                      1996         2000        2004        2008        2012


 States                                                   51         51          51          51          51

 Counties                                            3,185        3,182       3,180       3,168       3,166

 Census Tracts                                      15,381       15,437      19,011      18,971      23,607


 Financial Institutions (Banks)                        505          369         317         369         463

 Loans                                            4,215,083    4,683,734   8,557,111   4,811,881   5,227,738

 Applicant Income (avg, in thousand US dollars)      57.82        71.88       87.04      100.84      114.78

 Loan Amount (avg, in thousand US dollars)           75.24       102.30      165.19      192.63      201.04

 Loan to Income Ratio                                  1.41         1.62        2.25        2.37        2.25


 Type of Loan: Home Purchase (% of total)              0.51         0.57        0.35        0.28        0.17

 Type of Loan: Home Improvement (% of total)           0.18         0.12        0.08        0.12        0.06

 Type of Loan: Home Refinance (% of total)             0.31         0.31        0.56        0.60        0.77


 Female Applicants (% of total)                        0.25         0.29        0.32        0.33        0.28

 Hispanic Applicants (% of total)                          .           .        0.12        0.10        0.77

 Minority Applicants (% of total)                      0.19         0.24        0.18        0.17        0.13

 Applications with Co-Applicant (% of total)           0.61         0.52        0.46        0.48        0.55


 Loan Rejection Rate                                   0.29         0.28        0.25        0.37        0.22




                                                     39
Table 7 - Second stage regression results. Dependent variable: Change in Democratic votes (%
share), 2000 – 2012


                                             2000                 2004               2008               2012
  Challenger                                  REP                 DEM                DEM                 REP
  Δ(Personal Income)                        -0.0146             -0.00708         -0.0724***            0.0333*
                                          (0.00968)             (0.0146)           (0.0137)           (0.0190)
  Δ(Unemployment Rate)                     0.000454              0.00179            0.00178         -0.00174**
                                         (0.000446)            (0.00115)          (0.00141)         (0.000777)
  Median Age                             0.00159***          0.000798***        -0.00317***        0.000984***
                                         (0.000322)           (0.000288)         (0.000524)         (0.000180)
  Black                                  -0.0925***            0.0676***           0.101***         -0.0476***
                                          (0.00712)             (0.0114)           (0.0230)          (0.00929)
  Evangelical                           7.20e-05***          -3.71e-05***      -6.78e-05***           6.25e-06
                                          (1.05e-05)           (1.22e-05)         (1.23e-05)         (7.40e-06)
  BA Graduate                           -0.00270***           0.00165***       0.000910***            7.54e-05
                                         (0.000173)           (0.000191)         (0.000131)          (8.81e-05)
  Sex Ratio                             0.000651***            -0.000117           0.000162          -8.41e-05
                                          (8.70e-05)          (0.000131)         (0.000136)         (0.000108)
  Age Dependency Ratio                     2.18e-05          -0.000372**         0.00130***        -0.000274**
                                         (0.000129)           (0.000162)         (0.000239)         (0.000127)
  Gini Coefficient                                                                -0.124***           0.0408**
                                                                                   (0.0372)           (0.0196)
  Swing                                    -0.0748**               0.0251          0.304***           -0.00434
                                            (0.0369)             (0.0417)          (0.0453)           (0.0340)
  Votes(t-1)                              -0.0758***           -0.0422***        -0.0723***          0.0399***
                                            (0.0123)             (0.0120)          (0.0201)          (0.00817)
  Δ(Mortgage credit supply)                  0.0212              0.00850         -0.0634***         -0.0370***
                                            (0.0155)             (0.0173)          (0.0198)           (0.0143)
  State Fixed Effects                         YES                   YES               YES                YES
  Constant                                   0.0149               -0.0250         0.0846***            -0.0132
                                            (0.0174)             (0.0215)          (0.0242)           (0.0141)
  Observations                               2,966                  1,504            1,544              1,485
  R-squared                                  0.663                  0.604            0.729              0.660
  Notes: Bootstrapped standard errors in parenthesis, clustered by MSA, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. 2004 data
  extrapolated from Census 2000 and ACS 2008 data.




                                                        40
Figure 1 – Geographic representation of county-level growth in mortgage credit supply, 2004-2008




Notes: We superimpose the 2004-to-2008 changes in mortgage credit supply at the county level to a
map of the US. Each county is represented by a cell. The magnitude of the change is color-coded
from white (no change) to dark red (large negative change). Because credit expansion occurred in
only 4% of the US counties, it is not observable on the map.




                                               41
Figure 2 - County-level growth in mortgage credit supply between 2004 and 2008.




                                              42
Figure 3 - Swing states electoral counterfactual, 2008.


  North Carolina

         Indiana

         Nevada

    New Mexico

           Iowa

         Virginia

       Colorado

            Ohio

         Florida

                    0                 50000                 100000                 150000
                              Actual votes republicans needed to win state.



Notes: Swing states are those where the Democrats won the popular vote in 2008, but not in 2004. In total, had the
mortgage credit supply not changed between the 2004 and 2008 elections, the Republicans would have received 51% of
the votes needed to win all swing states (82% if we add a standard deviation,). In contrast, had the unemployment rate
not changed, they would have received only 9% of the votes.




                                                         43
Figure 4 – County-level growth in mortgage credit supply between presidential elections, 1996 to
2012.




                                              44
                                               Appendix
Here we present second-stage results from alternative specifications discussed in section IV.3.


        First, we consider a specification where all control variables enter in levels and another one

where they enter as changes between the years 2004 and 2008. The results from these specifications

are shown in columns 2 and 3, respectively, of Table A1 below. For comparison purposes, the original

specification is also included in column 1. In all three specifications, the change in the supply of

mortgage credit on voting behavior appears to be statistically significant and the magnitude is the

same.


        Second, we consider omitted variable bias by including additional controls that could

potentially matter. Specifically, we add foreclosure rates to test whether the actual concern of voters

is not the change in the supply of credit, but rather the expectation that foreclosure rates will rise

(which is correlated with the drop in credit). We control for variation in the characteristics of the

housing markets across the US by including loan rates, vacancy rates, home-ownership rates, and the

peak-to-trough change in housing prices across counties. Finally, if consumers perceive a drop in the

supply of credit as a signal that local unemployment will rise in the near future, then the voting effect

we document here may be due to the voters’ sensitivity to changes in future unemployment and not

to changes in the supply of credit. To test this, we include the true unemployment rate between 2008

and 2009 as a proxy for the change in expected future unemployment.


        The results from these alternative specifications are summarized in Table A2. We present

results when each variable is added into the baseline specification, along with the baseline

specification (column 1) and a specification with all these variables added together (column 8). We

find that changes in the supply of credit affect voting robustly. This effect remains statistically

significant and the magnitude does not change across the various specifications.


                                                   45
Table A1 - Second stage regression results: alternative specification of control variables
                        (1)                                         (2)                                            (3)
               Baseline Specification                         In Levels (2008)                        In Differences, 2004 to 2008

  Δ(Personal Income)              -0.0724***    Personal Income                  -2.34e-07    Δ(Personal Income)             -0.0632***
                                   (0.0164)                                      (1.58e-07)                                   (0.0194)
  Δ(Unemployment Rate)             0.00178*     Unemployment Rate             0.000616        Δ(Unemployment Rate)             0.00181
                                   (0.00104)                                 (0.000689)                                       (0.00165)
  Median Age                      -0.00317***   Median Age                   -0.00310***      Δ(Median Age)                   -0.00175
                                   (0.000479)                                 (0.000493)                                      (0.00136)
  Black                            0.101***     Black                            0.101***     Δ(Black)                        0.805***
                                   (0.0218)                                      (0.0214)                                      (0.167)
  Evangelical                    -6.78e-05***   Evangelical                 -6.51e-05***      Δ(Evangelical)                0.000179***
                                  (1.42e-05)                                 (1.26e-05)                                      (4.05e-05)
  BA Graduate                     0.000910***   BA Graduate                  0.00110***       Δ(BA Graduate)                 0.00145***
                                   (0.000130)                                (0.000171)                                      (0.000441)
  Sex Ratio                         0.000162    Sex Ratio                     0.000152        Δ(Sex Ratio)                   -0.00165**
                                   (0.000144)                                (0.000147)                                      (0.000803)
  Age dependency ratio            0.00130***    Age dependency ratio         0.00130***       Δ(Age dependency                0.00148*
                                  (0.000236)                                 (0.000233)       ratio)                         (0.000762)
  Swing Vote                       0.304***     Swing Vote                       0.309***     Swing Vote                      0.311***
                                   (0.0524)                                      (0.0536)                                     (0.0568)
  Votes(t-1)                      -0.0723***    Vote(t-1)                    -0.0758***       Vote(t-1)                       -0.00522
                                   (0.0188)                                   (0.0184)                                        (0.0143)
  Δ(Mortgage credit               -0.0634***    Δ(Mortgage credit            -0.0684***       Δ(Mortgage credit               -0.0684**
  supply)                          (0.0204)     supply)                       (0.0189)        supply)                          (0.0275)
  State Fixed Effects                   YES     State Fixed Effects                YES        State Fixed Effects               YES
  Constant                         0.125***     Constant                         0.117***     Constant                       0.0410***
                                   (0.0290)                                      (0.0239)                                     (0.0104)
  Observations                          1,545   Observations                       1,545      Observations                      1,545
  R-squared                             0.733   R-squared                          0.729      R-squared                         0.653




Notes: We compare coefficient estimates from three alternative specifications: (1) baseline, (2) with all variables entering
in levels, and (3) with all variables entering as 2004 to 2008 differences. The impact of credit supply in voting is significant
across all specifications. Bootstrapped standard errors in parentheses. Clustered by MSA. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                      46
Table A2 – Second stage regression results: additional controls included


                                    (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)         (7)          (8)

  Foreclosure rate                              0.118                                                                      0.0184
                                               (0.0956)                                                                    (0.234)

  Vacancy rate                                              -0.119**                                                      -0.127***
                                                            (0.0500)                                                       (0.0478)

  Loan rate                                                               0.0273                                            0.0290
                                                                         (0.0221)                                          (0.0407)

  Δ(un rate between 08 and 09)                                                       0.000763                             0.000529
                                                                                     (0.000919
                                                                                          )                               (0.00111)

  OFHEO price change                                                                             -0.0243                   -0.0179
                                                                                                 (0.0298)                  (0.0532)

  Home ownership rate                                                                                         -0.0252*    -0.0378**
                                                                                                              (0.0147)     (0.0181)

  Δ(Mortgage credit supply)      -0.0634***   -0.0625***   -0.0635***   -0.0632***   -0.0648**   -0.0626**   -0.0623***   -0.0624***
                                  (0.0215)     (0.0224)     (0.0232)     (0.0225)     (0.0256)    (0.0257)    (0.0227)     (0.0229)

  Observations                     1,544        1,544        1,544        1,544        1,544       1,544       1544         1,544
  R-squared                        0.729        0.729        0.731        0.729        0.729       0.729       0.729        0.732



Notes: We provide further robustness checks by examining how changes in foreclosure rates (column 2),
vacancy rates (column 3), loan rates (column 4), changes in expected unemployment rate (proxied by the actual
change in the rate between 2008 and 2009, column 5) and OFHEO price changes (column 6) affect our results.
The baseline specification (presented in column 1) and the specification with all regressors included (presented
in column 7) are also reported. The data, with the exception of the unemployment rates for 2008 and 2009 and
the home ownership rates come from the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD,
http://www.huduser.gov/portal/datasets/nsp_foreclosure_data.html). The unemployment data come from the
Bureau of Labor Statistics (wwwbls.gov). According to HUD, Foreclosure rate estimates the number of
foreclosures starts over 18 months through June 2008 divided by number of mortgages over the same period.
The Vacancy rate is the share of addresses that remain vacant for 90 days or longer divided by total addresses
as of June 2008 times 100. The Loan rate is the percent of loans made between 2004 and 2006 shown to be
high cost according to HMDA data. The OFHEO price change is a measure of price decline in home values
that uses data from the OFHEO Housing Price Index (HPI) to calculate price decline from peak value in the
second quarter of any year between 2000 and 2008 and the second quarter home price of 2008. Home-
ownership rates come from the American Consumer Survey. Bootstrapped standard errors in parenthesis,
clustered by MSA, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. In all specifications, changes in mortgage credit supply
do affect voting behavior.




                                                               47
