                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT AND KNOWLEDGE DIFFUSION IN POOR LOCATIONS:
                       EVIDENCE FROM ETHIOPIA

                                        Girum Abebe
                                     Margaret S. McMillan
                                      Michel Serafinelli

                                      Working Paper 24461
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24461


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   March 2018




We thank Nathaniel Baum-Snow, Loren Brandt, Pamela Campa, David Card, Kunal Dasgupta,
Enrico Moretti, Marco Gonzales Navarro, Peter Morrow, Jonas Hjort, Thierry Mayer, Seyhun
Orcan Sakalli, William Strange, Petra Thiemann, Eric Verhoogen, Genet Zinabou and seminar
participants at Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona, Oxford, NBER Summer Institute PRDP,
CEPR - PEDL Research Workshop, IGC Growth Week, Trinity College Dublin, SAEe 2017,
RCEF 2016, University of Toronto, York University, University of Bristol, CEMFI,Wilfrid
Laurier University and the Asian Investment and Structural Transformation in Africa workshop in
Addis Ababa for suggestions, and Yiwei Jiang, Jed Silver and Genet Zinabou for excellent
research assistance. Thanks are also due to plants’ employees who have generously given their
time in interviews. We thank the International Food Policy Research Institute’s program Policies,
Institutions and Markets, PEDL, and the University of Toronto Connaught Fund for financial
support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Girum Abebe, Margaret S. McMillan, and Michel Serafinelli. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Foreign Direct Investment and Knowledge Diffusion in Poor Locations: Evidence from Ethiopia
Girum Abebe, Margaret S. McMillan, and Michel Serafinelli
NBER Working Paper No. 24461
March 2018
JEL No. D24,F21,R10

                                           ABSTRACT

We quantify foreign direct investment (FDI) spillovers by comparing changes in total factor
productivity (TFP) among domestic plants in districts that attracted a large greenfield foreign
plant and districts where greenfield FDI was licensed but not yet operational. Treated and
untreated districts have similar trends in TFP prior to the opening of the large greenfield foreign
plant. Over the four years starting with the year of the opening, TFP of domestic plants is 8%
higher in treated districts. Using an alternative identification strategy that exploits the assignment
of land for FDI by the Ethiopian Government, we obtain similar results. Foreign plants also
attract new economic activity to treated districts. Exposure to foreign firms enhances domestic
firms’: (i) production processes; (ii) managerial and organizational practices; (iii) logistics and;
(iv) knowledge about exporting. Knowledge transfer is more likely among labor or vertically
linked firms but also occurs outside these channels.

Girum Abebe                                        Michel Serafinelli
EDRI                                               Department of Economics
Addis Ababa                                        University of Toronto
Ethiopia                                           Max Gluskin House, 150 St. George Street, 270
girumpop@yahoo.com                                 Toronto, Ontario M5S 3G7, Canada
                                                   michel.serafinelli@utoronto.ca
Margaret S. McMillan
Tufts University
Department of Economics
114a Braker Hall
Medford, MA 02155
and International Food Policy Research Institute
and also NBER
margaret.mcmillan@tufts.edu
1    Introduction

     The gaps in productivity between developed and developing countries are large; the
poorer the country, the larger the gap. Foreign direct investment (FDI) could be a powerful
tool for reducing these productivity gaps. Standard means of raising productivity such as
investments in education and health are obviously important but they are costly and typically
take a long time to bear fruit. By contrast on-the-job training and other types of learning
by doing could be less costly and have more immediate payoffs (Romer, 1992). Many de-
veloping countries including Ethiopia have policies designed to attract FDI (Harrison and
Rodrı́guez-Clare, 2010).
    Despite their theoretical and practical importance, the existence and magnitude of knowl-
edge spillovers from foreign to domestic plants in poor countries are considered open ques-
tions. In a review of the literature on FDI spillovers, Harrison and Rodrı́guez-Clare (2010)
argue that there is little evidence of spillovers among plants in the same line of business and
a lot of evidence of spillovers between foreign plants and their suppliers. However, they also
note that much of the literature suffers from a lack of proper identification because FDI is
likely to be attracted to the most productive industries and the most productive plants. There
is also very little systematic evidence on the mechanisms by which knowledge is transferred
from foreign to domestic plants (Balsvik, 2011; Poole, 2013; Newman, Rand, Talbot, and
Tarp, 2015).
    In this literature, interactions between foreign and domestic plants are typically classified
into horizontal and vertical spillovers. Horizontal spillovers occur between plants classified
in the same industry while vertical spillovers occur between foreign plants and their sup-
pliers or their customers (Harrison and Rodrı́guez-Clare, 2010). While these definitions are
analytically useful, they may be too restrictive. For example, Poole (2013) finds evidence of
knowledge sharing through labor movements from foreign to domestic plants irrespective of



                                               2
industry. Moreover, recent evidence indicates that managerial skills which are not a priori
industry specific are a key determinant of plant productivity (Bloom and Van Reenen, 2010).
For example, human resource management in the textile industry may not be that different
from human resource management in the food and beverages industry.
       The key question is whether knowledge from foreign plants can be assimilated by do-
mestic plants through observation and imitation. When put in these terms, the similarity
between research that investigates knowledge diffusion between foreign and domestic plants
and research on agglomeration externalities becomes evident. For example, Duranton and
Puga (2004), explain that geographic proximity plays a key role in the acquisition of skills
and that one of the benefits of clustering is that it facilitates learning.1 Thus, one may expect
that the externalities stemming from the presence of foreign plants would be obtained first
by nearby domestic plants, and maybe slowly diffuse to other, more distant domestic plants.
This is likely to be the case for instance if trained employees move from a foreign plant
to a neighboring domestic plant or if the foreign plant uses a product, production process,
managerial technique, organizational form, or export market formerly unknown to domestic
plants. A geography based approach is also supported by our data; the evidence in Figure 1
indicates that more than 90% of domestic plants in labor, customer and supply linkages with
foreign plants are physically located in a geographic area with FDI.
       This paper has two objectives. First, we test for and quantify the magnitude of spillovers
from FDI in manufacturing by estimating how the productivity of domestic plants changes
when a large greenfield foreign plant opens in an Ethiopian district (Woreda). We estimate
augmented Cobb-Douglas production functions that allow the TFP of domestic plants to de-
pend on the presence of the new foreign plant using plant-level data from Ethiopia’s Annual
Census of Manufactures. Second, we examine the mechanisms by which knowledge is trans-
   1
     Greenstone, Hornbeck, and Moretti (2010) quantify these agglomeration spillovers by comparing changes
in total factor productivity (TFP) among incumbent plants in “winning” counties that attracted a large manu-
facturing plant and “losing” counties that were the new plant’s runner-up choice.



                                                     3
ferred using a survey designed by us and administered as part of the manufacturing census
by Ethiopia’s Central Statistical Agency in 2013. The module contains a host of questions
designed to identify linkages between foreign and domestic plants. We consider several dif-
ferent forms of knowledge transfer including: (i) labor flows from foreign to domestic plants;
(ii) learning by observation and; (iii) customer and supplier relationships.
       Because the foreign plant’s location decision is made to maximize profits, the chosen
district may differ substantially from an average or randomly chosen district, both at the
time of opening and in future periods. District characteristics that affect the foreign and
domestic plant’s TFP and that are difficult to measure include local transportation infrastruc-
ture, current and future costs of factors of production, quality of the workforce, presence of
intermediate input suppliers, and any other local cost shifters. Valid estimates of the plant
opening’s spillover effect must account for these characteristics directly or indirectly.
       We use two alternative strategies to identify the causal relationship between the open-
ing of a foreign plant and domestic plants’ productivity. First, we compare changes in TFP
among domestic plants in “treatment” districts to changes in TFP in “control” districts. Treat-
ment districts are defined as districts in which a large greenfield foreign plant opened. Using
restricted-access administrative data from the Ethiopian Investment Commission, we define
a control district as a location in which a foreign plant in the same industry and around the
same time, applied for a license, got approval but then did not open the plant during the
period in which the foreign plant was operating in the treated district.2 The pre-trends in
the treatment and control districts look similar; this finding is consistent with our identifying
assumption that plants in the control districts form a valid counterfactual for the plants in the
treated districts. Our baseline estimates show an increase in TFP for local domestic plants
following the opening of a greenfield foreign plant. Over the four years starting with the
year in which the foreign plant opens the average increase in the TFP of domestic plants is
   2
     As explained below, bureaucratic hurdles, foreign currency shortages and financing issues are the most
cited explanations why there exists a lag in investment translations.

                                                    4
8 percent. These results are robust to alternative specifications addressing the issue of the
endogeneity of inputs, and are not driven by attrition of domestic plants, government expen-
ditures, or changes in the intensity of capital usage. In addition, the estimated FDI effect
does not appear to reflect higher output prices. We also find that following the entry of the
foreign plant in a district there is an increase in the number of domestic plant openings.
       Our second identification strategy exploits the government designation of locations for
greenfield foreign plants, in combination with an event study research design.3 We consider
as valid events the openings of foreign plants reporting that their location was allocated
by the authorities – information which is reported in our knowledge transfer survey. Our
research design then compares the TFP of domestic plants within a district before and after
the opening. The regions targeted by the government are arguably non-random. In particular
the government often targets regions with lower levels of pre-existing investment.4 However,
the exact geographic location within a broader region is typically determined by the timing
of the availability of land. Moreover, there is often uncertainty about the exact year in which
the foreign plant will start production. We estimate our econometric model with and without
the never treated localities; in the latter case identification comes from the differential timing
of treatment onset among the treated localities. The estimates using this second research
design are qualitatively similar to those using the first research design.5
       Having found evidence of spillovers between foreign and domestic plants that are ge-
ographically close, we use information from the knowledge transfer survey to explore the
mechanisms driving the productivity increases. Overall, evidence from the survey clearly
indicates the existence of knowledge diffusion. Labor flows from foreign to domestic plants
   3
     In this respect, our paper is also related to the growing literature on place-based policies (Glaeser and
Gottlieb, 2008; Kline, 2010; Kline and Moretti, 2014; Neumark and Simpson, 2015).
   4
     We include region trends in all our specifications.
   5
     We conduct a falsification test in order to verify that our results do not capture a general pattern in local
outcomes following designation of plant locations according to government plans of regional development,
unrelated to the presence of a large foreign plant. We consider the entry of large domestic plants that report
”Did not choose the location, was allocated by the authorities.” We fail to reject the null hypothesis of no local
impact of these domestic openings.

                                                        5
emerge as a clear mechanism, but there is also suggestive evidence of a role for learning by
observation and backward and forward linkages in the supply chain.
   Our work contributes to the literature on knowledge spillovers from FDI. The resulting
evidence has been mixed, with studies in developed countries more likely to show evidence
of positive FDI effects than those in developing countries. Overall, because of non-trivial
measurement challenges, disagreement remains over the existence and magnitude of these
effects. Additionally, although a large body of work has been devoted to estimating the effect
of FDI on the productivity of host country plants - see for example, Haddad and Harrison
(1993); Aitken and Harrison (1999); Javorcik (2004); Haskel, Pereira, and Slaughter (2007);
Blalock and Gertler (2008); Keller and Yeaple (2009); Kosova (2010); Fons-Rosen, Kalemli-
Ozcan, Sørensen, Villegas-Sanchez, and Volosovych (2013); Fons-Rosen, Kalemli-Ozcan,
Sorensen, Villegas-Sanchez, and Volosovych (2017) - we still have very little direct evidence
on the mechanisms at work. Exceptions are the work by Javorcik (2004) and Newman, Rand,
Talbot, and Tarp (2015) who find evidence that plants in supply relationships with foreign
plants experience enhanced productivity and the work by Poole (2013) and Balsvik (2011)
who find evidence that labor linkages lead to productivity gains.
   Our work also contributes to the empirical literature which examines the productivity
advantages of agglomeration. Although there is evidence, mostly from analysis using data
for developed countries, that significant advantages of agglomeration exist, the jury is still
out over the nature of the microeconomic mechanisms that can account for these advantages
(Rosenthal and Strange, 2003; Ellison, Glaeser, and Kerr, 2010; Arzaghi and Henderson,
2008; Greenstone, Hornbeck, and Moretti, 2010; Combes, Duranton, Gobillon, Puga, and
Roux, 2012; Baum-Snow, 2013)
   The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section II presents our conceptual
framework and a simple model. Section III presents the data. Section IV presents our esti-
mating frameworks and econometric evidence on productivity spillovers. Section V presents


                                              6
evidence from the knowledge transfer module. Section VI concludes.



2     Theoretical Framework

Our goal is to identify how the opening of a foreign plant affects domestic plants’ outcomes.
Drawing on the large literature on this topic, we begin by reviewing the theory of linkages
between domestic and foreign plants. We distinguish between linkages that are mediated
through market mechanisms such as increases in input prices and externalities which are not
mediated through market mechanisms such as knowledge spillovers. This is an important
distinction because the existence of externalities can be a justification for subsidies to for-
eign plants from host country governments. A comparison between these theories and the
literature on agglomeration reveals an overlap that we exploit in our empirical work. We end
this section with a simple model that makes this overlap clear and which guides our empirical
work.


2.1          Theories of Linkages between Foreign and Domestic Plants

The extant literature on linkages between foreign and domestic plants tends to group linkages
into the following categories: vertical linkages and horizontal linkages. Horizontal linkages
are defined as interactions between foreign and domestic plants that operate in the same
industry. Vertical linkages are defined as linkages between foreign plants and the plants to
which they sell (forward linkages) and the plants from which they source inputs (backward
linkages).
    Horizontal linkages are thought to operate through a variety of channels. The first chan-
nel is direct competition between foreign and domestic plants in output markets and input
markets. The second channel is often referred to as the knowledge spillover channel and
occurs in a variety of ways including labor sharing, observation, informal communication


                                              7
and technology licensing. Empiricists typically look for these linkages between foreign and
domestic plants in the same industry since two plants producing similar products are more
likely to compete in output and input markets and since knowledge about production pro-
cesses in foreign plants are thought to be more useful to domestic plants in the same indus-
try. However, it is clear that these kinds of linkages need not be confined to plants in similar
industries. For example, plants in different industries are likely to compete for the same pool
of unskilled workers and workers trained in management practices such as accounting and
bookkeeping have skills that could be applied in a wide range of industries.
   Vertical linkages are thought to operate primarily between foreign plants and their do-
mestic suppliers. The logic for the existence of such spillovers is that foreign plants have
an incentive to upgrade both the quality of the inputs purchased domestically as well as the
efficiency with which they are produced in order to boost their own profits. Javorcik (2008)
explains that there is quite a lot of empirical evidence to support this hypothesis. Abebe
and Schaefer (2014) provide a nice example of this in the context of the Ethiopian leather
industry. They explain that the recent entry of Chinese investment in the tanning sector has
demonstrated that low grade skins and hides that were previously rejected could in fact be
used with the correct technology. This technology has allowed domestic plants to utilize
hides and skins that were previously thrown away. Forward linkages between foreign and
domestic plants could occur if foreign plants engage in activities such as product demonstra-
tion or installation for domestic plants which purchase products from foreign plants.


2.2          FDI Linkages and Theories of Agglomeration

Agglomeration economies are the benefits that come when plants and people locate near one
another in cities and industrial clusters (Glaeser, 2010). Some of the benefits of agglomer-
ation that have been highlighted by researchers in this area are: (i) labor market pooling;
(ii) reduced transportation costs; (iii) increased likelihood of knowledge spillovers; (iv) in-

                                               8
creased access to local amenities and; (v) natural advantages or productive amenities like
access to natural resources. An implication of this literature for research on linkages be-
tween foreign and domestic plants is that domestic plants which are ‘closer’ to foreign plants
are more likely to benefit (or be harmed by) FDI. In particular, a model by Rosenthal and
Strange (2004) raises that domestic plants are more likely to be affected by FDI when they
are geographically and economically close to foreign plants, and closer to the time when
foreign plants open in a locality.


2.3           A Simple Model

Our model adapts insights from Rosenthal and Strange (2004) and Greenstone, Hornbeck
and Moretti (2010, henceforth GHM). Like GHM (2010) and for the sake of simplicity, we
focus on the case of Hicks neutral technological progress. Instead of focusing on the number
of plants in a county, we allow linkages between domestic and foreign plants to depend upon
the geographical, economic and temporal distance between foreign and domestic plants.
Thus, we are not strictly testing for agglomeration economies; instead we are using relevant
insights from this literature to set up our model.
   We assume that all domestic plants use a production technology that employs labor, cap-
ital, land and other material inputs to produce a nationally traded good whose price is nor-
malized to one. Domestic plants choose the amount of inputs to maximize the following
expression:
                            max f (A, L, K, T ) − wL − rK − qT,
                            L,K,T


where w, r , and q are input prices and A is a productivity shifter. A includes all factors that
affect the productivity of labor, capital and land equally such as knowledge spillovers from
FDI.
   We model A as a function of the geographic proximity between domestic and foreign


                                               9
plants, the economic proximity between domestic and foreign plants and the temporal prox-
imity between domestic and foreign plants. To keep the equation manageable, we denote
these three distances as lower case p but in our empirical work, we will distinguish between
these three types of distance. Thus we can write the expression for A in the following way:


                                          A = A(p)                                          (1)


We define factor neutral knowledge spillovers as the case in which an increase in the proxim-
ity of domestic to foreign plants increases the knowledge spillovers from foreign to domestic
plants so that ∂A/∂p > 0.
   We define L*(w,r,q) as the optimal level of labor inputs, given market wages, the cost of
capital and the cost of industrial land. Similarly, we define K*(w,r,q) and T*(w,r,q) as the op-
timal levels of capital and land respectively. In equilibrium, L*, K* and T* are chosen so that
the marginal product of each of the three factors is equal to its price. In Ethiopia, the mar-
kets for credit and land cannot be characterized as perfectly competitive. Instead, land and
capital are typically allocated through a central mechanism with subsidies to both domestic
and foreign plants in the manufacturing sector. According to the urban land lease procla-
mation, along with religious institutions and embassies, investments in the manufacturing
sector are entitled to easy and cheap access to land directly from the government (FDRE,
2011). Credit is also subsidized by the Development Bank of Ethiopia (DBE) through its
generous 70 (loan):30 (equity) loan policy for priority sectors which include manufacturing
(AFDB, 2014). Thus, in our optimization, we do not allow the prices of land or capital paid
by domestic plants to be influenced by the distance between foreign and domestic plants.
Instead we take the prices of land and capital as exogenous.
   However, we allow for wages to depend on the proximity of domestic plants to foreign
plants. The extent to which wages would rise as foreign plants enter local labor markets in


                                              10
Ethiopia is unclear. Job opportunities in Ethiopia’s formal sector are limited and unemploy-
ment is high. At the same time, labor productivity in Ethiopia’s traditional sectors is very
low. Taken together, these facts suggest a relatively flat horizontal labor supply curve at a low
level of wages. Indeed cheap labor is one of the reasons foreign firms are drawn to Ethiopia.
On the other hand, the literature provides ample evidence from other albeit more developed
countries that foreign plants pay a wage premium. Thus, domestic plants in close proximity
to foreign plants may be forced to pay higher wages to keep or attract labor, especially in
managerial or administrative positions.
   Summarizing, we allow w to vary as a function of p writing this as w(p) and we take r
and q as fixed by the central government. Note that although the prices of land and capital
are set centrally, plants still choose quantities to employ in the production process. Thus, we
can write equilibrium profits in the following way:




             π ∗ = f [A(p), L∗ (w(p), r, q), K ∗ (w(p), r, q), T ∗ (w(p), r, q)] +

                      −w(p)L∗ (w(p), r, q) − rK ∗ (w(p), r, q) − qT ∗ (w(p), r, q)           (2)


   Equation (2) makes it clear that domestic plants’ profits, TFP and wages depend on their
proximity to foreign plants.
         To understand the relationship between domestic plants’ profits and changes in do-
mestic plants’ proximity to foreign plants, we totally differentiate equilibrium profits. This
yields the following expression:



 dπ ∗   ∂f ∂A ∂w ∂L∗ ∂f                  ∂K ∗ ∂f            ∂T ∗ ∂f
      =      +  {[  (   − w) − L∗ ] + [(     )(  − r)] + [(     )(  − q)]} (3)
 dp     ∂A ∂p ∂p ∂w ∂L                    ∂w ∂K             ∂w ∂T




                                               11
   If domestic plants are price takers, and factors are employed until their marginal value
product equals their price, equation (3) simplifies to the following:

                                    dπ ∗   ∂f ∂A ∂w ∗
                                         =       −    L                                      (4)
                                    dp     ∂A ∂p   ∂p

Equation (4) makes it clear that being closer to foreign plants has two opposing effects on
domestic plants. If there are knowledge spillovers from foreign plants to domestic plants, the
first term in equation (4) will be positive raising the profits of domestic plants. The second
term in equation (4) represents the negative effect that foreign plants could have on domestic
plants if being close to foreign plants implies an increase in wages that domestic plants must
pay to keep labor. Note that although we did not include material costs in our specification,
this result would generalize to the cost of other inputs. In other words, the demand by foreign
plants for material inputs which are produced locally could raise the prices of these inputs.


2.4           Empirical Predictions

The simple framework above leads to predictions that inform our empirical analysis. In
particular, the opening of a foreign plant may change:


   1.        the TFP of domestic plants;

   2.        the entry of domestic plants in a location - new manufacturing domestic plants
        may choose to locate in the districts receiving FDI to gain access to these productivity
        advantages and;

   3.        input prices and in particular wages.


   In addition, our framework makes it clear that the magnitude of these effects are increas-
ing in the domestic plants proximity – geographic, economic, temporal – to foreign plants.


                                               12
These insights encourage an empirical analysis which takes into account the proximity of
foreign plants to domestic plants.



3     Background and Data

3.1    Background

The first recorded presence of FDI in the Ethiopian manufacturing sector dates back to the
turn of the 20th century. In the first half of the 20th century, most of the new investment in the
country was dominated by foreign capital (Chole, 1995). Coinciding with the consecutive
five year development plans between 1957 and 1974, the imperial regime enacted several
investment proclamations and tax codes to promote the flow of both foreign and domestic
investment towards the manufacturing sector. While private domestic investment slightly in-
creased in this period, the manufacturing sector was largely dominated by foreign nationals.
FDI inflows increased in subsequent decades until coming to an abrupt end in 1974 with the
overthrow of the imperial regime by the military junta, also called the Derg.
    The socialist economic system adopted by the military government led to the introduction
of severe restrictions on private capital thereby driving away both existing and prospective
FDI. With the collapse of the Derg regime in the late 1980s, the restrictions on private sector
investment were gradually lifted and more market-friendly policies, such as the privatization
of state owned enterprises and liberalization of both domestic and international trade, were
introduced in the early 1990s.
    In the same vein, during the past decades, there have been several reforms targeted at at-
tracting foreign capital to the country. With the objective of creating a favorable investment
environment for private businesses, the investment proclamation, for example, has been re-
vised seven times between 1996 and 2014, and three times between 2008 and 2014. The
revisions removed a myriad of restrictions on business areas open to foreign investment and

                                               13
introduced generous incentives for investors entering into the manufacturing and export sec-
tors. Crucially, the first comprehensive industry strategy paper that carved out an important
role for FDI in the industrialization effort of the country was drafted in 2002/03. More re-
cently, FDI appears to increasingly flow from emerging countries, such as China, Turkey and
India (EIC, 2016).
       In the government’s recent five year development program called the Growth and Trans-
formation Plan (GTP II) attracting quality FDI, defined as investments that generate positive
spillover effects towards the local economy through both direct and indirect linkages, has
been identified as a key priority to transform the manufacturing sector (FDRE, 2016). More-
over, in the investment proclamation, there is a stipulation that foreign plants must trans-
fer technology to local enterprises and to their workers. In practice, however, enforcement
mechanisms are weak.6


3.2      Data and Descriptive Statistics

This study uses three data sources: plant-level manufacturing census data for the years 1997-
2013 collected by the Central Statistical Agency (CSA), a knowledge transfer survey mod-
ule designed by us and restricted-access administrative data from the Ethiopian Investment
Commission. We describe these data below.


Manufacturing Census             The source of manufacturing plant data is the annual Large and
Medium Scale Manufacturing (LMSM) Establishment Census of the CSA. It consists of
enterprises engaged in “the mechanical, physical, or chemical transformation of materials,
substances, or components into new products and the assembling of component and parts
   6
     For example, the employment of expatriate workers is permitted conditional on the pledge by employers to
transfer production and management skills to local workers. Such skills transfer schemes are aimed at replacing
highly paid expat professionals with trained Ethiopian workers. Successful skills transfer schemes would thus
not only build local production and managerial capacity but also help reduce repatriation of foreign currencies.




                                                      14
of manufactured products” (CSA, 2015).7 The available information includes employment,
material and non-material inputs, capital stock, sales, geographic location, date of plant es-
tablishment, and asset ownership. It is worth pointing out that with these records it is possible
to construct a genuine panel of manufacturing plants. We faced three main challenges trying
to link plant identifiers (IDs) across years: 1) verifying that, pre-2011/12, unique IDs were
consistent across years, that is, that they identify the same plant across the different rounds;
2) doing the same for the 2011/12 and 2012/13 rounds independently of the pre-2011/12
data, and; 3) linking plants between these two separate datasets. During the first stage of cre-
ating the panel we checked the consistency of the existing unique plant ID numbers across
pre-2011/12 and post 2011/12 rounds – independently, as there is no ID variable in the raw
data to link plants between these two set of rounds. See Section A.I for details on the data
construction. Figure A.1 shows the count of plants and the total employment by year in the
matched CSA sample. Table A.1 reports descriptive statistics.


Technology Transfer Survey                The survey module contains a set of questions on FDI-
domestic plant interactions for 1,708 manufacturing plants belonging to the CSA dataset,
interviewed in February 2014.8 An English translation of the document used in the survey
is available at this link. To bolster the analysis, in June 2016, we visited several plants and
interviewed managers about the history of their enterprises and their current operations. In
the following months, we also conducted targeted interviews with officials at the Ministry
of Industry and the Ethiopian Investment Commission, and with owners and managers at
    7
      In principle, any formal manufacturing plant in the country that employs at least 10 people and uses
electricity in its production process forms part of the target population. In practice, out of the 20,711 plant-year
observations, 5,445 feature a number of employees smaller than 10. These are observations for plants that at
some point reach 10 employees (and therefore enter the business directory that CSA compiled as a “framework”
for the census) but then have a lower number of employees at the date in which they are re-surveyed. In the
TFP estimation, we remove domestic plant-year observations with remarkably high or low values (outside the
1% - 99% range) for the number of employees.
    8
      In February 2014, these manufacturing plants were asked both the questions from the CSA usual survey
instrument (whose answers represent the observations for year 2013) and the questions from our survey module.



                                                        15
foreign and domestic plants. We classify as FDI all plants that report a nationality of main
owner (or owners if the plant is a joint venture) other than ”Ethiopian” (e.g. Chinese, In-
dian, etc.) in answering our survey. For the years before our survey module, we define
as foreign the plants for which at least 5 percent of assets are foreign owned (Aitken and
Harrison, 1999).9 For FDI presence to generate productivity spillovers, a plant-specific ad-
vantage should be observed at foreign plants that could be the basis for knowledge transfer
to other local plants. In Table 1 we directly compare plant size, performance and technology
indicators between domestic and foreign plants in 2013. Foreign plants on average employ
more workers than domestic plants and feature significantly larger value added per worker.
Foreign plants are also more likely to export than local plants, to conduct in-house research
and development (R&D), to hold internationally recognized patents and to use foreign tech-
nology licenses for their product or in production processes. Table A.2 shows that foreign
plants pay significantly higher wages for workers in higher-skilled occupations and that their
production workforce is on average better educated. The evidence in Table 1 and Table A.2
is important for establishing the potential for knowledge transfer in Ethiopia.
       As discussed at length in Section 2, linkages are important conduits of technology dif-
fusion and spillover effects. Horizontal and vertical interactions in the input and product
markets create opportunities for less expensive or advanced technological and managerial
practices to diffuse from foreign to domestic plants. In our analysis, we characterize link-
ages between domestic and foreign plants in three ways. We define domestic plants as (a)
labor-linked, if they have employed former workers of foreign plants; (b) backward-linked,
if they directly sell their products to foreign plants; and (c) forward-linked, if they procure
materials or inputs directly from foreign plants. Around 7 % of domestic plants are labor-
linked, 3 % are backward-linked and 3.5 % are forward-linked.
   9
    Aside from asset ownership , the earlier CSA survey module did not ask detailed questions on the nature
of ownership including nationality of the owner.




                                                    16
Administrative Data For the first research design, we use restricted-access administrative
data from the Ethiopian Investment Commission. This dataset contains the list of licensed
FDI manufacturing investment projects during our sample period. It includes information on
the date of permit, the industry, the location and the status of the investment (whether or not it
is operational).



4    Estimating the magnitude of FDI spillovers

We now turn to an econometric analysis with the goal of estimating augmented Cobb-
Douglas production functions that allow the TFP of domestic plants to depend on the pres-
ence of FDI in the district (Woreda) - see Figure A.2 for a map which shows Woreda bound-
aries. Specifically, we evaluate the changes in TFP when a foreign plant is added to a district.
The underlying idea is that, presumably the benefits from FDI would be localized at least
initially, with domestic plants in the same district to be better placed to benefit from FDI
presence. The primary identification challenge is that foreign companies do not select the
location for their greenfield plants randomly. Foreign companies’ objective is to maximize
profits and their location decision depends on local cost shifters (such as the quality of the
labor force and transportation infrastructure) which are likely to be correlated with the TFP
of domestic plants, and are often difficult to quantify. Consequently, a simple contrast of
the TFP of domestic plants in districts where a greenfield foreign plant opens with the TFP
of domestic plants in districts where a foreign plant does not open would probably produce
biased estimates of FDI spillovers. We address this empirical challenge in two ways. First,
we compare districts where an FDI plant actually invested to districts in which a foreign
plant (in the same industry and around the same time) applied for a license, got approval but
then did not open the plant during the period in which the foreign plant was operating in the
treated district. Second, we exploit the government designation of locations for greenfield


                                               17
foreign plants, in combination with an event study research design.


4.1       Actual vs Planned FDI Investments

4.1.1      Research Design, Econometric Model and Descriptive Statistics

We compare changes in TFP among domestic plants in “treatment” districts to changes in
TFP in “control” districts. We define treatment districts as those districts where a foreign
plant actually invested. For each treatment district, at least one control district is chosen as a
location where a foreign plant in the same industry and around the same time, applied for a
license, got approval but then did not open the plant during the period (going from one up to
four years) in which the foreign plant was observed operating in the treatment district. The
algorithm used to find control districts is described in Section A.II. The identifying assump-
tion is that the domestic plants in the control districts represent a valid counterfactual for the
domestic plants in the treatment districts, after conditioning on plant fixed effects, industry
by year fixed effects, and other control variables. Regarding the patterns of ”conversion”
from the investment stage to operational phase, the World bank concludes that:

         Currently 2 out of 3 potential FDI firms do not reach the operational state. Even
         though an One Stop Shop service is operational its effectiveness record is mixed.
         Bureaucratic hurdles continue to affect project implementation [...]. Further re-
         search is needed to identify those factors that facilitate the conversion of suc-
                                                                    10
         cessful FDI in Ethiopia (Geiger and Moller, 2015, p.44).

       Delays related to foreign currency shortages and financing issues are also sometimes
cited as explanations as to why there exists a lag in investment translations - see Altenburg
(2010), USDOC (2017) and Moller and Wacker (2015). As we show below, before the
foreign plant opening, plants in treatment and control districts were similar along several key
  10
       For a similar discussion see Chen, Geiger, and Fu (2015)

                                                       18
dimensions, and there were not significant differences in TFP trends. This evidence supports
the validity of our identifying assumption. Even if we cannot draw definite conclusions
regarding the validity of our research design, we believe that the identifying assumptions are
less stringent with our strategy than when using regression adjustment to compare the TFP
of domestic plants in districts with new entrants to the other (nearly 300) districts in our data
featuring manufacturing activity, or employing a matching approach based on observables.
   The regression equation that forms the basis of our empirical analysis on the sample of
domestic plants is:


   ln(Ypidrt ) =βL ln(Lpidrt ) + βK ln(Kpidrt ) + βM ln(Mpidrt ) + δ1(OP EN IN G)p
                                                                                              (5)
      +κ1(τ ≥0)t + ϕ[1(OP EN IN G)p · 1(τ ≥ 0)t ] + αp + µit + T rendrt + εpidrt ,


where p references plant, i industry, d district, r region and t year; Ypidrt is the value of
total plant production, and we allow the total number of employees Lpidrt , total capital in-
puts Kpidrt and material inputs Mpidrt to have separate impacts on output; we also allow
for permanent differences across plants αp , and a stochastic error term εpidrt . We report re-
sults with and without allowing for industry-specific time-varying shocks µit . The dummy
1(OP EN IN G) is equal to one if plant p is located in a treatment district; τ denotes year, but
it is normalized so that the year of the foreign plant opening is τ = 0; the variable T rendrt
is a region-specific trend. A concern for the validity of our interpretation of the estimates
arises from the observation that the dependent variable in the econometric model is the value
of output. Therefore, the estimated spillover effect may reflect higher output prices rather
than higher productivity. We explore this possibility in Section 4.3. We report standard errors
clustered at the district level. Given that the number of districts is equal to 27, we also report
the p-values obtained using wild bootstrap (Wu, 1986) with null imposed, as recommended
by Cameron, Gelbach, and Miller (2008) - we use the boottest Stata routine developed by
Roodman (2018).

                                               19
    Our aim is to identify a substantial shock to the district’s economy. We therefore require
a large relative increase in local employment. In order to qualify as a usable foreign manu-
facturing opening, we impose that the foreign plant’s labour force is at least 100 employees
or constitutes at least 1% of total employment in local manufacturing in τ = 0 or τ = 1.
We also impose that the location is not assigned by the government. Table A.3 displays
descriptive information on the 12 usable openings. We have a total of 27 districts, 15 of
which are controls. Openings tend to be in food and beverages (5), chemicals and chemical
products (3), and other non-metallic mineral products (3). Table 2 displays the means of
plant-level variables across districts in the year before the opening. These means are shown
for treatment and control districts in columns 1 and 2 respectively. Column 3 reports the
p-value from a test of equality between columns 1 and 2. Column 4 reports the p-values
obtained using the procedure recommended by Cameron, Gelbach, and Miller (2008). This
exercise offers a chance to evaluate the soundness of the empirical strategy, as measured
by preexisting observable plant characteristics. To the extent that these observable features
are balanced among treated and control districts, this lends support to the research design.
The table shows that plants in treated districts tend to be older (2 years). This difference is
significant at 10% when clustering at the district level, and not significant when using the
Cameron, Gelbach, and Miller (2008) procedure. There are not significant differences in
output, capital, the number of employees, output per worker, capital per worker and plant
level average wage (constructed as total wage bill divided by the number of employees).
Overall we conclude that the covariates are balanced between plants in treatment and control
districts.


4.1.2    Main Results

Figures 2 and 3 plot the estimated coefficients from a version of equation 5 where the natural
log of output is regressed on the natural log of inputs, year by two-digit industry fixed effects,


                                               20
plant fixed effects, and the event time indicators. The sample is restricted to include only
plant by year observations within the period of interest (where τ ranges from −4 through 3).
Figure 2 reports the yearly difference between estimated mean TFP in treatment and control
districts, with confidence intervals. The displayed coefficients on the event time dummies
in Figure 3 indicate yearly mean TFP in treatment districts and control districts, relative to
the year before the foreign plant opened. In the years before the opening of the new plant,
treatment and control districts do not have significantly different trends in productivity. This
evidence brings support to the validity of the research design. Starting in the year of the FDI
opening, there is a sharp upward break in the difference in TFP between the treatment and
control districts.
       Table 3 shows the estimated mean shift parameter ϕ in equation 5 in the mean shift row.
Column 1 reports baseline estimates. Column 2 allows for industry-specific time-varying
shocks µit and is therefore the preferred specification. The estimates imply an increase in
TFP of approximately 8 percent. Estimates are similar when domestic plants are required to
be in the data for at least 3 years prior to the event, which addresses concerns related to the
endogenous opening of new plants and compositional bias (Column 3).


4.2       Making use of government designation of locations

4.2.1     Research Design, Econometric Model and Descriptive Statistics

In order to implement this second empirical strategy, we asked plant managers what the most
important reason for choosing the location for the production facility was. We consider as
valid events for our identification strategy the openings of foreign plants reporting ”Did not
choose the location, was allocated by the authorities”.11 We now provide some institutional
  11
     The other possible answers are “Cheap labour”, ”Good infrastructure”, ”Located close to raw materials and
input suppliers”, ”Located close to customers”, ”Located close to producers of similar products”, ”Expected
that many more producers would be located in this site”, ”Others (specify)”.




                                                     21
background to the investment land allocation process. Both federal and regional offices are
in many cases involved in the process. In an email interview (Dec 23, 2015), the General
Director of Policy and Program Studies at the Ministry of Industry explained how the min-
istry, after receiving a request from a potential investor typically contacts a Regional office
responsible for investment land administration. The Regional office then provides informa-
tion on the land availability. The regions targeted by the federal government are arguably
non-random. In particular, in order to foster equitable regional growth, the government often
targets regions (outside Addis and its surrounding areas) with lower levels of pre-existing
investment (FDRE, 2011). However, during our period of analysis, the exact district within a
broader region is typically determined by the timing of availability of land. As pointed out to
us by the General Director of Policy and Program Studies in the same email interview, in no
case is the process coercive. An investor can always refuse to carry on with the investment
or choose some other location instead.12 However, the fact that plant managers report that
location was not chosen but allocated provides support to our strategy of using government
designation to obtain quasi-experimental variation in the treatment. Moreover, there is often
uncertainty in which year the foreign plant will start production.
       In the words of a manager at a foreign plant:


         It was not up to us to choose the location for our company. The government
         gave us the location that we have now. That is the case in many cases. [...] After
         asking for the land, we just waited for the responses of the government. After
         a long time they gave us the location. [...] The time we waited was two years.
         [..] This is because of the procedures that the offices of the government follow
         which often take time. [...] It has taken them long time to identify a location for
         us. That is because they were also looking for locations and land for many other
  12
     If the investor is interested in the location, negotiations take place on the price and terms of lease. Note
that in Ethiopia land is publicly owned and both local and foreign plants can enter into lease-hold or rental
arrangements to acquire land for investment.

                                                      22
      investors and companies at that time. [...] I didn’t think that it would take such
      a long period of time to get land for investment (Jan 10, 2017).


    In general, the local TFP impact of the entry of the foreign plants may be identified
provided that there are no district-specific pre-trends in the outcomes of interest, a condition
that appears to be satisfied in the data. We evaluate the local impact of FDI using an ”event-
study” research design as in Kline (2011), whose exposition we follow here. This design
allows us to test for the presence of district-specific pre-trends in the outcome of interest and
to recover any dynamics of the opening effect. Our main approach is to compare the ”treated”
districts both to districts that have not yet been treated and districts that will never be treated
during our sample period. We then re-estimate our econometric model without the never
treated localities, so that identification comes from the differential timing of treatment onset
among the treated. The regression equation that forms the basis of our empirical analysis is:


                                                                               τ
ln (Y pidrt ) = β L ln (Lpidrt ) + β K ln (K pidrt ) + β M ln (M pidrt )+τ βτ Ddrt +αp +µit +T rendrt + εpidrt
                                                                                                  (6)
       τ
where Ddrt are a sequence of ”event-time” dummies indicating that the foreign plant opened
(in district d) τ periods ago (where τ may be negative). Formally:


                                        τ
                                       Ddrt ≡ I[t − e = τ ],


where I[.] is an indicator function for the expression in brackets being true, and e is the year
of the plant entry. Therefore the βτ coefficients characterize the time path of TFP relative
to the date of the foreign plant opening for treated districts. The results are obtained by
estimating Equation (6) by OLS, including a series of event-time dummies along with dum-
mies for the plant and region-specific trends. We report results with and without including
industry-year fixed effects. We normalize the first lead (-1 in event time) to zero, so that


                                                 23
all post-event coefficients can be interpreted as treatment effects. We also put in place the
endpoint restrictions13 :
                                                     β     if τ ≥ 3
                                             βτ =
                                                     β if τ ≤ −4

       These endpoint coefficients give different weight to districts experiencing the entry of
the foreign plant early or late in the sample period.14 Therefore, in discussing the effect of
the opening, we concentrate on the event-time coefficients falling within τ = 0 and τ = 2
that are identified off of a nearly balanced panel of districts. In order to qualify as a usable
FDI manufacturing opening, we impose the following criteria. First, the location has to
be assigned by the government. In our data 36% of FDI manufacturing openings report
the location to be assigned by the government. Second, the FDI plant’s labour force is at
least 100 employees or constitutes at least 1% of total employment in local manufacturing
in τ = 0 or τ = 1.15 Third, the opening is not preceded or followed by the entry of FDI
whose location was chosen by the plants’ owners (i.e. non ”allocated by the authorities”) and
employing at least either 100 employees or 1% of the local manufacturing labour force.16
Table A.4 displays descriptive information on the 17 usable openings. We have a total of
223 control districts of which 206 are never treated.17 Openings tend to be in non-metallic
mineral products (8), food and beverages (4), and wood, furniture and paper (3). Figure
A.3 displays the geographic distribution of treated districts. Table 4 displays the means
of plant-level variables across districts for 1998, that is at the beginning of our panel, and
also the year before the earliest event. Table A.5 displays these means for 2006, that is
the middle of our panel.18 These means are shown for districts that experience the event
  13
     This constraint aids to diminish some of the collinearity between the year and event-time dummies.
  14
     Notice that the sample of treated districts is unbalanced in event time.
  15
     In our data 39% of these large FDI manufacturing openings report the location to be assigned by the
government.
  16
     Specifically we exclude districts that receive such openings in τ = (−3,3).
  17
   We exclude never-treated districts receiving the opening of a large foreign plant whose location
was not ”allocated by the authorities.”
  18
       This is the year before the fourth event. Since we want to explore the balancing of covariates pre-treatment,


                                                         24
and for never-treated districts in columns 1 and 2 respectively. Column 3 reports the t-
statistics from a test of equality between columns 1 and 2. This exercise offers a chance
to evaluate the soundness of the empirical strategy, as measured by preexisting observable
plant characteristics. To the extent that these observable features are balanced among the
two sets of districts, this should lend support to the research design. The numbers should be
interpreted cautiously because, as shown in Figure A.1, we have fewer plants in the matched
CSA sample and therefore more noise in the first half of the panel. If this concern is set aside,
the numbers show that the plants in treated districts tend to have lower levels of capital per
worker (significant at 10%) in 1998, though not in 2006. The difference in 1998 is consistent
with the government targeting regions with lower levels of pre-existing investment. There
are not significant differences between the two groups in plant age, output, capital, number
of employees, output per worker and plant-level average wages.


4.2.2    Main Results

Figure 4 plots the estimated βτ coefficients from estimating Equation (6).19 There is no
pretreatment trend in the coefficients but a rather sharp upward break in TFP of local domes-
tic plants after the entry of a government-assigned foreign plant. While the general pattern
in Figure 4 is quite clear, the individual βτ coefficients are not estimated very precisely. We
therefore offer more formal tests of the null hypothesis that the FDI plant entry has no impact
on local plants’ TFP. To increase statistical power, in Table 5 we follow the approach in Kline
(2011) and test hypotheses about the average of the βτ coefficients over the period between
τ = 0 and τ = 2. Column 1 reports baseline estimates. Column 2 allows for industry-
specific time-varying shocks µit and is therefore the preferred specification. The estimated
average increase over the three years starting with the year of the opening is 16 percent.
To put the size of the estimated impact of the FDI opening in perspective, we compute the
we remove from the set of treated, the three districts which experience the event before 2006.
  19
     We include industry-year fixed effects.

                                                      25
portion of total variation in average manufacturing TFP explained by the FDI opening. TFP
varies a great deal across Ethiopian districts. A 16 percent increase in TFP corresponds to
moving from the 10th percentile of the district-level TFP distribution to the 25th percentile;
put differently, it corresponds to a 0.3-standard-deviation increase in the distribution of dis-
trict TFP.20 The FDI openings we consider are a key occurrence for these districts, and the
implied change in the relative standing of districts is arguably sizable but not improbable.
When we drop the never treated localities, and therefore identification comes from the dif-
ferential timing of treatment onset among the treated localities, the patterns are qualitatively
similar (Column 3 of Table 5; Figure 5). The patterns are qualitatively similar also when we
require domestic plants in treated districts to be in the data for at least 3 years prior to the
event (Column 4 of Table 5).


4.3     Validity and Robustness

The main empirical result so far is that after the opening of a large foreign plant, the TFP of
domestic plants is significantly higher in treated districts. We now investigate the sensitivity
of this finding to various specifications, and explore several possible alternative explanations
for the estimated effects.


Transmission bias A significant conceptual concern is the possibility of ‘transmission
bias’, which arises from plants’ reaction to unobservable productivity shocks when mak-
ing input choices (Eberhardt and Helmers, 2010). Unlike the typical estimation of plant
level production functions, our goal is to obtain a consistent estimate of the event-study co-
efficients corresponding to the FDI entry, so transmission bias is important only to the extent
that it causes biased estimates of these coefficients (GHM p.583). In order to explore the
  20
   We obtain these quantities using the cross-sectional plant-level data from the LMSM Census for 2006 (the
midpoint of our sample period). Specifically, log output is regressed on log inputs and a complete set of districts
dummies. We then look at the distribution of the district dummies, which represent the average productivity
among all plants in a particular district (GHM, p. 589).

                                                       26
significance of transmission bias in our setting, we employ the most popular estimators in
the econometric literature on production functions (Olley and Pakes, 1996; Levinsohn and
Petrin, 2003; Ackerberg, Caves, and Frazer, 2015). The results across the 6 specifications,
shown in Table A.6, are qualitatively similar to the main results.


Attrition of Sample Plants A gap in attrition in the sample of domestic plants in treatment
and control districts could contribute to the measured gap in TFP among survivors after the
FDI opening. The evidence suggests that this is unlikely to explain our finding of positive
FDI effects in treatment districts. We find that, in the sample used in Section 4.1, similar
numbers of treatment and control plants remained in the sample at its end: 52 percent in
treatment districts and 54 percent in control districts (i.e., the number of plants at τ = 3 as a
fraction of the number of plants at τ = 0).
   Regarding the sample used in Section 4.2, we estimate:


                                           τ
                    ln (Deathsdrt ) =τ βτ Ddrt +αd +ψt + T rendrt + εdrt .                   (7)


The estimated average of the event study coefficients over the three years starting with the
year of the opening is 0.25 and not significant (s.e. 0.46).


Changes in the intensity of capital usage      If the capital stock in treated districts was used
below capacity, then incumbent plants may react to the FDI opening by growing the intensity
of their capital usage and therefore increase production (GHM p. 585). To explore this
possibility, we control for the ratio of the dollar value of energy usage (which is increasing
in the use of the capital stock) to the capital stock. The estimates are qualitatively similar to
the main ones. Specifically, using the first research design, the estimated ϕ is 0.08 (s.e.0.05).
Using the second research design, the estimated average of the event study coefficients over
the three years starting with the year of the opening is 0.19 (significant at 10% level).


                                               27
Changes in the Price of Plant Output              As mentioned above, another concern for the va-
lidity of our interpretation of the estimates arises from the observation that the dependent
variable in the econometric model is the value of output. The theoretically correct depen-
dent variable in a productivity study is the quantity of output, but, due to data limitations,
this study (and most of the empirical literature on productivity in a large sample of plants)
uses price multiplied by quantity. Therefore, the estimated spillover effect may reflect higher
output prices rather than higher productivity. To explore this possibility we adopt two ap-
proaches. First, we remove domestic plants in a supply link with the new entrant, plants
for which output price effects might be largest. The estimates are qualitatively similar to
those in Section 4.1 and 4.2. Specifically, using the first research design the estimated ϕ is
0.27 and significant at conventional levels.21 When using the second research design, the
estimated average of the event study coefficients over the three years starting with the year
of the opening is 0.097 (s.e 0.062).
       Second, we follow GHM and investigate whether the TFP increase is bigger for plants
that sell more locally. Specifically, in our survey we have asked domestic plants the distance
to the most important customer.22 This allows us to estimate a version of equation (3) that
interacts 1(OP EN IN G), 1(τ ≥ 0) and [1(OP EN IN G) · 1(τ ≥ 0)] with this distance. We
do not find that the TFP increase is bigger for plants that sell more locally. Specifically, the
coefficient of the interaction of [1(OP EN IN G) · 1(τ ≥ 0)] with this distance is equal to
-0.0002 and not significant (s.e. 0.0004).


Government expenditures             The federal and local governments in some cases set up worker
training funds, construct new roads, and make other infrastructure investments around the
time of entry of a foreign plant. It is possible that these investments benefit domestic plants
  21
     Since we observe the presence of a supply link only in the last year we focus on the sample that survives
until the end of our sample period.
  22
     Across all sample plants, the median distance is 10km, the 75th percentile is 50km.



                                                     28
in addition to the foreign plant. To examine this possibility, we control for government to-
tal capital expenditures and government construction expenditures. Using the first research
design, the estimated diff-in-diff coefficient ϕ is 0.12 (significant at 5% level) both when
controlling for government total capital expenditures and government construction expendi-
tures. Using the second research design, the estimated average of the event study coefficients
over the three years starting with the year of the opening is 0.20 when controlling for total
expenditures and 0.19 when controlling for construction expenditures (significant at 10%
level in both cases).


Falsification Test      Lastly, we conduct a falsification test in order to verify that our results
using our second research design do not capture a general pattern in local outcomes follow-
ing designation of plant locations according to government plans of regional development,
unrelated to the presence of a large foreign plant. We consider the entry of large domestic
plants that report ”Did not choose the location, was allocated by the authorities.” We fail to
reject the null hypothesis of no local impact of these domestic openings. The estimated aver-
age of the event study coefficients over the three years starting with the year of the opening
is -0.002 and not significant (s.e. 0.052).


4.4    Further Analysis

Do the foreign plants attract new economic activity?          Baseline estimates showed positive
TFP changes for local domestic plants following the opening of the new foreign plant. Thus,
new manufacturing domestic plants may choose to locate in the districts receiving FDI to
gain access to these productivity advantages. Motivated by this observation, we estimate,




                                                 29
using the first research design:


 Birthsjdrt =δ1(OP EN IN G)dj + κ1(τ ≥ 0)jt + ϕ[1(OP EN IN G)dj · 1(τ ≥ 0)jt ]+
                                                                                                       (8)
               +αd +ψt + T rendrt + εjdrt ,


where Births is either the simple count of new domestic plants or the count weighted by
the number of employees at entry, and ψt is a year effect. The regression equation using the
second research design is:


                                        τ
                          Births =τ βτ Ddrt +αd +ψt + T rendrt + εdrt .                                (9)


       Table 6 presents the results. Although the FDI effect is not estimated precisely in two
out of the four specifications, it is always positive. In terms of magnitude the range is be-
tween 0.14 and 0.54 of a standard deviation.23 Overall, these results are consistent with the
estimated increases in TFP since it appears that the foreign plants attracted new economic
activity in the manufacturing sector to the receiving districts.


Employment and wages at incumbent domestic plants                     What are the FDI effects on the
number of employees at incumbent domestic plants? Using the first research design with
(log) employment as dependent variable we estimate a significant positive effect of the FDI
opening on employment. The estimated Diff-in-Diff coefficient is equal to 0.22 and sig-
nificant at 5% level when clustering at district level, and at 10% when using the Cameron,
Gelbach, and Miller (2008) procedure. When using the second research design, the esti-
mated average of the event study coefficients over the three years starting with the year of
the opening is not significant (-0.05 with s.e. 0.09).
       What are the FDI effects on wages? Our estimates should be interpreted cautiously
  23
    Estimates are qualitatively similar when (a) using Log(Births) as dependent variable; and (b) using the
count weighted by the value of total plant production at entry.


                                                    30
because we do not have individual-level wage data and we are forced to use (log) plant level
average wage. If this concern is set aside, the estimated Diff-in-Diff coefficient using the
first research design with (log) plant level average wage as dependent variable is equal to
-0.08 and not significant when clustering at district level (s.e. 0.07), nor when using the
Cameron, Gelbach, and Miller (2008) procedure. When using the second research design,
the estimated average of the event study coefficients over the three years starting with the
year of the opening is 0.02 and not significant (s.e. 0.10).



5    Evidence from the Survey Module

In this section, we analyze responses to our survey module in order to better understand
the mechanisms behind the productivity increases we reported in Section 4. We begin by
reporting answers to questions about the changes experienced by domestic plants as a result
of FDI. We then classify domestic plants according to how they are linked to foreign plants
and examine modes of technology transfer by linkage. Finally, we examine the benefits
associated with FDI as reported by domestic plants.
    Table 7 displays 6 FDI-related outcomes of domestic plants. While all of the reported
changes displayed in the table may lead to an increase in the productivity of domestic plants,
only the first four outcomes qualify as externalities; using a technology licensed from a
foreign plant and changing production technologies due to foreign competition are mediated
through market mechanisms. However, in the case of Ethiopia, it may be that domestic
plants would not learn about the availability of these technologies if foreign plants were not
physically present in the country. This could be because Ethiopia is relatively remote, travel
is expensive and access to the internet is still very spotty. To the extent that these things are
true, there may be an information externality associated with the presence of FDI.
    Definitional issues aside, Table 7 indicates that 12.5% of domestic plants directly adopted


                                               31
production processes by observing foreign plants in the same industry (outcome 1). The vast
majority of plants that imitate foreign plants indicate that foreign plants did not try to block
the learning from happening - a finding consistent with those in von Hippel (1987)’s case-
study of the U.S. steel minimill industry. Table 7 also shows that about 7% of domestic plants
report that the employment of former workers of foreign plants generated positive effects
(outcome 2). Domestic plants also report acquiring technology from their FDI customers
and suppliers, albeit with lower proportions (outcomes 3-4).
       The remainder of Table 7 shows that around 10% of domestic plants use technology
licensed from foreign plants (outcome 5) and that 15% of domestic plants changed their pro-
duction technologies as the result of competition from foreign plants (outcome 6).24 Overall,
17.8% of plants report at least one of the first 4 outcomes, and 24.6 % report at least one of
the 6 outcomes.
       To better understand the relationship between linkages and technology transfer we exam-
ine three modes of technology transfer by linkage type in Table 8. The information in Table
8 is organized in the following way. Across the top we classify domestic plants according to
the types of linkages defined in Section 3.2. Plants that report none of these three linkages
may or may not be in direct competition with foreign plants. For each type of linkage, we
report the share of plants reporting a technology transfer mode for linked plants and non-
linked plants. For example, column (1) of Table 7 indicates that 37% of domestic plants in
a labor link with foreign plants directly adopted production processes by observation while
11% of plants not in a labor link with foreign plants also adopted production processes by
observation. The p-value of the difference between the two numbers is reported in column
(3) and indicates that plants in a labor linkage are statistically significantly more likely to
adopt production processes by observation than plants not in a labor linkage.
  24
    FDI presence can stimulate higher competition and innovation in procurement and marketing techniques
as well as product quality encouraging domestic plants to adopt better production technologies to attenuate the
heightened risk of elimination from the market.



                                                     32
       In general, columns (10) – (12) show that domestic plants in formal links with foreign
plants are more likely to: (i) adopt production processes by observing foreign plants; (ii)
use technology licensed from foreign plants and; (iii) change production technologies due
to competition from foreign plants. However, the evidence in column (11) also indicates
that 9% of domestic plants not in a formal relationship with foreign plants report adopt-
ing production processes through observation, 8% report using technology licensed from
foreign plants and 10% report changing production technologies due to competition from
foreign plants. In total, 26% of domestic plants report technology improvements associated
with the presence of FDI; 69% of this technology transfer took place through formal link-
ages while the remaining 31% of the technology transfer occurred outside formal linkages.
These findings are consistent with those of Charlot and Duranton (2004) who, using data for
France, find evidence of various forms of communication externalities: face-to-face meet-
ings, word-of-mouth communication and direct interactions between skilled workers from
different plants.”
       The evidence on labor linkages presented in these tables also lends support to the idea that
the strong localized aspect of knowledge spillovers discussed in the agglomeration literature
arises – at least in part – from the propensity of workers to change jobs within the same
                        25
local labor market:          knowledge is partly embedded in workers and diffuses when workers
move between plants. These findings are in line with previous evidence from developed
  25
     There exist at least two reasons why geographic proximity might be important for observed worker flows.
First, distance may act as a barrier for workers’ job mobility because of commuting costs or idiosyncratic
preferences for location. Descriptive statistics in Combes and Duranton (2006) show that labor flows in France
are mostly local: about 75% of skilled workers remain in the same employment area when they switch plants.
The degree of geographical mobility implied by this figure is small, since the average French employment area
is comparable to a circle of radius 23 kilometers. In Dal Bó, Finan, and Rossi (2013), randomized job offers
produce causal estimates of the effect of commuting distance on job acceptance rates. Distance appears to be a
very strong (and negative) determinant of job acceptance: applicants are 33% less likely to accept a job offer if
the municipality to which they are assigned is more than 80 kilometers away from their home municipality. The
estimates in Manning and Petrongolo (2017) also suggest a relatively fast decay of job utility with distance.
Another reason geographical proximity may be an important determinant of job mobility is that the plant’s
informational cost of identifying the “right” employee are larger across localities than within them. A similar
argument can be made for the informational costs for workers.



                                                      33
countries. Serafinelli (2017) finds evidence of labor market based knowledge spillovers in the
Veneto region of Italy. In a similar vein, (Saxenian, 1994, p.37) maintains that the geographic
proximity of high-tech plants in Silicon Valley is associated with a more efficient flow of new
ideas. They report that “When engineers moved between companies, they took with them
the knowledge, skills and experience acquired at their previous jobs”.
   So far in this section, we have reported only positive outcomes associated with FDI. This
is because we are trying to get at the mechanisms behind the increases in TFP that we docu-
mented in Section 4. However, as pointed out by Aitken and Harrison (1999), foreign plant
entry may pull demand from domestic plants forcing them to spread their fixed costs over a
smaller number of produced units, thereby raising average costs. Row 1 of Table A.7 shows
that 11.5% of domestic plants report critically important product market competition from
foreign plants. The productivity of domestic plants may also be affected by competition in
the labor market. As a result of foreign plant entry, domestic plants may be left to hire infe-
rior workers. Row 2 of Table A.7 shows that 6% of domestic plants report facing competition
from foreign plants in the local labor market. If foreign plants poach high-ability employees
from domestic plants, the quality of the workforce in domestic plants may decrease. Row
3 of A.7 shows that 8% of domestic plants report having lost skilled workers to FDI. This
evidence is consistent with research that finds detrimental effects of FDI.
   However, the overall positive effects we report in Section 4 suggest that on average the
benefits of FDI to domestic plants outweigh the costs. In addition, we find that the total
value of production by domestic plants increases after the entry of foreign plants in a locality
mitigating the concerns raised by Aitken and Harrison (1999).




                                              34
6     Concluding Remarks

This paper makes three main contributions. First, by comparing changes in TFP among
domestic plants in “treated” districts that attracted a large greenfield foreign plant and “un-
treated” districts where greenfield FDI in the same industry was licensed but not yet oper-
ational causal estimates of the magnitude of knowledge spillovers are identified. Over the
four years starting with the year of the foreign plant opening, the TFP of domestic plants is
8% higher in treated districts. These estimates are comparable to estimates obtained using an
alternative identification strategy that exploits the assignment of land to foreign investors by
the Ethiopian government. We also find evidence that foreign plants attract new economic
activity to recipient districts.
    Second, we provide direct evidence on the ways in which knowledge is transferred from
foreign to domestic plants and on the types of knowledge that is transferred. Domestic plants
report that they adopt technology from foreign plants through: (i) learning by observation;
(ii) hiring workers who previously worked at foreign plants; (iii) direct contact via customer
and supplier relationships; (iv) licensing technology from foreign plants and; (v) competi-
tive pressures. Although this learning is more common when domestic plants engage with
foreign plants through labor or customer and supplier linkages, the evidence indicates that
knowledge transfer through more informal channels is also important. Knowledge about
production processes is the most common type of benefit associated with FDI but domes-
tic plants also learn from foreign plants about managerial and organizational practices and
logistical aspects of the supply chain, including exporting. This evidence underscores the
usefulness of an empirical strategy that moves beyond the confines of industrial classifica-
tions.
    Third, domestic plants do not appear to pay higher labor costs in order to obtain these
productivity spillovers. The finding that average labor costs do not rise with the entry of



                                              35
foreign plants is consistent with Arthur Lewis’s description of unlimited supplies of labor in
underdeveloped countries (Lewis, 1954). This analysis is necessarily limited by the nature of
the employment data and further research is needed to identify the possibility that labor costs
for skilled labor increased. In addition, although domestic plants do report some competition
from foreign plants, the TFP estimates reveal that on average FDI entry raised TFP.
   This paper has demonstrated knowledge transfer from foreign to domestic plants in
Ethiopia’s manufacturing sector. It has also demonstrated the mechanisms by which knowl-
edge is transferred. The results underscore the importance of locating foreign plants in close
proximity to domestic plants. The results also provide some support for the Ethiopian gov-
ernment’s industrial policy although more research is needed to quantify the cost of the in-
centives provided to foreign plants and to compare these costs with the benefits of knowledge
spillovers.




                                              36
References

A BEBE , G.,   AND   F. S CHAEFER (2014): “High Hopes and Limited Successes: Experiment-
  ing with Industrial Polices in the Leather Industry in Ethiopia,” Ethiopian Development
  Research Institute Working Papers, 011.
ACKERBERG , D. A., K. C AVES ,         AND   G. F RAZER (2015): “Identification Properties of
  Recent Production Function Estimators,” Econometrica, forthcoming.
AFDB (2014): “East African Manufacturing sector: Promoting technology productivity and
  linkages,” Ethiopia country report, African Development Bank.
A ITKEN , B. J.,     AND   A. E. H ARRISON (1999): “Do domestic firms benefit from direct
  foreign investment? Evidence from Venezuela,” American economic review, pp. 605–618.
A LTENBURG , T. (2010): “Industrial policy in Ethiopia,” .
A RZAGHI , M.,     AND     J. V. H ENDERSON (2008): “Networking off madison avenue,” The
  Review of Economic Studies, 75(4), 1011–1038.
BALSVIK , R. (2011): “Is Labor Mobility a Channel for Spillovers from Multinationals?
  Evidence from Norwegian Manufacturing,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 93(1),
  285–297.
BAUM -S NOW, N. (2013): “Urban Transport Expansions, Employment Decentralization, and
  the Spatial Scope of Agglomeration Economies,” .
B LALOCK , G.,   AND     P. J. G ERTLER (2008): “Welfare gains from foreign direct investment
  through technology transfer to local suppliers,” Journal of International Economics, 74(2),
  402–421.
B LOOM , N.,   AND    J. VAN R EENEN (2010): “New approaches to surveying organizations,”
  The American Economic Review, 100(2), 105–109.


                                                37
C AMERON , A. C., J. B. G ELBACH , AND D. L. M ILLER (2008): “Bootstrap-based improve-
  ments for inference with clustered errors,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 90(3),
  414–427.
C HARLOT, S.,   AND   G. D URANTON (2004): “Communication externalities in cities,” Jour-
  nal of Urban Economics, 56(3), 581–613.
C HEN , G., M. G EIGER ,     AND   M. F U (2015): “Manufacturing FDI in Sub-Saharan Africa:
  Trends, Determinants, and Impact,” .
C HOLE , E. (1995): Democratisation processes in Africa: Problems and prospects. Codesria.
C OMBES , P., G. D URANTON , L. G OBILLON , D. P UGA ,       AND   S. ROUX (2012): “The pro-
  ductivity advantages of large cities: Distinguishing agglomeration from firm selection,”
  Econometrica.
C OMBES , P. P., AND G. D URANTON (2006): “Labour Pooling, labour Poaching, and Spatial
  Clustering,” Regional Science and Urban Economics, 36(1), 1–28.
CSA (2015): “Report on Large and Medium Scale Manufacturing and Electricity Industries
  Survey,” Statistical bulletin 580, Central Statistical Agency.
DAL B Ó , E., F. F INAN ,   AND   M. A. ROSSI (2013): “Strengthening state capabilities: The
  role of financial incentives in the call to public service,” The Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics, 128(3), 1169–1218.
D URANTON , G.,     AND     D. P UGA (2004): “Micro-foundations of Urban Agglomeration
  Economies,” Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, 4, 2063–2117.
E BERHARDT, M.,       AND    C. H ELMERS (2010): Untested Assumptions and Data Slicing:
  A Critical Review of Firm-Level Production Function Estimators. Department of Eco-
  nomics, University of Oxford.
EIC (2016): “Ethiopia remains the Prime Choice for FDI,” News release, Ethiopian Invest-
  ment Commission, available at http://www.investethiopia.gov.et/information-center/news-
  and-events/359-ethiopia-remains-the-prime-choice-for-fdi-2.


                                                38
E LLISON , G., E. L. G LAESER ,   AND   W. K ERR (2010): “What Causes Industry Agglomer-
  ation? Evidence from Coagglomeration Patterns,” American Economic Review, 3, 1195–
  1213.
FDRE (2011): “Urban Land Lease Holding Proclamation No. 721/2011 18th year, No.4,”
  Discussion paper, Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.
          (2016): “Growth and Transformation Plan II (GTP II) (2015/16-2019/20,” Volume
  1: Main text, National Planning Commission, Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia.
F ONS -ROSEN , C., S. K ALEMLI -O ZCAN , B. E. S ØRENSEN , C. V ILLEGAS -S ANCHEZ ,
  AND   V. VOLOSOVYCH (2013): “Quantifying productivity gains from foreign investment,”
  Discussion paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.
F ONS -ROSEN , C., S. K ALEMLI -O ZCAN , B. E. S ORENSEN , C. V ILLEGAS -S ANCHEZ ,
  AND   V. VOLOSOVYCH (2017): “Foreign Investment and Domestic Productivity: Iden-
  tifying knowledge spillovers and competition effects,” Discussion paper, National Bureau
  of Economic Research.
G EIGER , M. T., AND L. C. M OLLER (2015): “Fourth Ethiopia economic update : overcom-
  ing constraints in the manufacturing sector,” Working paper 97916, World Bank.
G LAESER , E. L. (2010): Agglomeration economics. University of Chicago Press.
G LAESER , E. L., AND J. D. G OTTLIEB (2008): “The Economics of Place-Making Policies,”
  Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2008(1), 155–253.
G REENSTONE , M., R. H ORNBECK , AND E. M ORETTI (2010): “Identifying Agglomeration
  Spillovers: Evidence from Winners and Losers of Large Plants Openings,” Journal of
  Political Economy, 118, 536–598.
H ADDAD , M., AND A. H ARRISON (1993): “Are there positive spillovers from direct foreign
  investment?: Evidence from panel data for Morocco,” Journal of development economics,
  42(1), 51–74.
H ARRISON , A.,   AND   A. RODR ÍGUEZ -C LARE (2010): “Trade, foreign investment, and in-


                                             39
  dustrial policy for developing countries,” in Handbook of development economics, vol. 5,
  pp. 4039–4214. Elsevier.
H ASKEL , J. E., S. C. P EREIRA ,     AND   M. J. S LAUGHTER (2007): “Does inward foreign
  direct investment boost the productivity of domestic firms?,” The review of economics and
  statistics, 89(3), 482–496.
JAVORCIK , B. (2004): “Does foreign direct investment increase the productivity of domes-
  tic firms? In search of spillovers through backward linkages,” The American Economic
  Review, 94(3), 605–627.
JAVORCIK , B. S. (2008): “Can survey evidence shed light on spillovers from foreign direct
  investment?,” The World Bank Research Observer, 23(2), 139–159.
K ELLER , W.,   AND   S. R. Y EAPLE (2009): “Multinational enterprises, international trade,
  and productivity growth: firm-level evidence from the United States,” The Review of Eco-
  nomics and Statistics, 91(4), 821–831.
K LINE , P. (2010): “Place-based Policies, Heterogeneity, and Agglomeration,” American
  Economic Review, 100(2), 383–387.
K LINE , P. (2011): “The impact of juvenile curfew laws on arrests of youth and adults,”
  American Law and Economics Review, p. ahr011.
K LINE , P.,   AND   E. M ORETTI (2014): “Local Economic Development, Agglomeration
  Economies, and the Big Push: 100 Years of Evidence from the Tennessee Valley Au-
  thority,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(1), 275–331.
KOSOVA , R. (2010): “Do foreign firms crowd out domestic firms? Evidence from the Czech
  Republic,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 92(4), 861–881.
L EVINSOHN , J.,     AND   A. P ETRIN (2003): “Estimating Production Functions Using Inputs
  to Control for Unobservables,” Review of Economic Studies, 70(2), 317–42.
L EWIS , W. A. (1954): “Economic development with unlimited supplies of labour,” The
  Manchester School, 22(2), 139–191.


                                               40
M ANNING , A.,      AND   B. P ETRONGOLO (2017): “How local are labor markets? Evidence
  from a spatial job search model,” American Economic Review, 107(10), 2877–2907.
M OLLER , L. C., AND K. M. WACKER (2015): “Ethiopia’s Growth Acceleration and How to
  Sustain It: Insights from a Cross-Country Regression Model,” World Bank Policy Research
  Paper Series, (7292).
N EUMARK , D., AND H. S IMPSON (2015): “Place-Based Policies,” in Handbook of Regional
  and Urban Economics, ed. by J. V. H. Gilles Duranton, and W. C. Strange, vol. 5 of
  Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, pp. 1197 – 1287. Elsevier.
N EWMAN , C., J. R AND , T. TALBOT,     AND   F. TARP (2015): “Technology transfers, foreign
  investment and productivity spillovers,” European Economic Review, 76, 168–187.
O LLEY, G.,   AND   A. PAKES (1996): “The Dynamics of Productivity in the Telecommunica-
  tions Equipment Industry,” Econometrica, 64(6), 1263–97.
P OOLE , J. P. (2013): “Knowledge transfers from multinational to domestic firms: evidence
  from worker mobility,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 95(2), 393–406.
ROMER , P. M. (1992): “Two strategies for economic development: using ideas and produc-
  ing ideas,” The World Bank Economic Review, 6(suppl 1), 63–91.
ROODMAN , D. (2018): “BOOTTEST: Stata module to provide fast execution of the wild
  bootstrap with null imposed,” .
ROSENTHAL , S., AND W. S TRANGE (2003): “Geography, Industrial Organization, and Ag-
  glomeration,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 85(2), 377–393.
        (2004): “Evidence on the Nature and Sources of Agglomeration Economies,” Hand-
  book of Regional and Urban Economics, 4, 2119–2171.
S AXENIAN , A. (1994): Regional Advantage: Culture and Competition in Silicon Valley and
  Route 128. Harvard University Press.
S ERAFINELLI , M. (2017): “Good Firms, Worker Flows and Local Productivity,” Journal of
  Labor Economics, forthcoming.


                                              41
USDOC (2017):        “Ethiopia- Market Challenges,” https://www.export.gov/
  article?id=Ethiopia-Market-Challenges.
VON   H IPPEL , E. (1987): “Cooperation between rivals: Informal know-how trading,” Re-
  search Policy, 16(6), 291–302.
W U , C.-F. J. (1986): “Jackknife, bootstrap and other resampling methods in regression
  analysis,” the Annals of Statistics, pp. 1261–1295.




                                             42
                                Figure 1: Domestic Plants’ Linkages by Proximity to FDI
                  0.7

                                                         844
                  0.6


                  0.5
Share of plants




                  0.4


                  0.3

                                                                                                               296
                  0.2           230


                  0.1

                                                                                    25
                   0
                        Linked plants in FDI   Non-linked plants in FDI   Linked plants in non-FDI   Non-linked plants in non-
                             woredas                  woredas                     woredas                  FDI woredas

The Figure shows the count of domestic plants with customer, supply, or labor linkages to FDI
plants by whether an FDI plant is located in the same woreda.




                                                                    43
Figure 2: Difference in domestic plants’ productivity in treated vs control districts, relative
to the year of a foreign plant opening (Research Design: Actual vs Planned).
                                                       .4
         TFP Difference: Treatment - Control Districts
      -.2              0              .2




                                                            -4   -3   -2      -1         0       1   2   3
                                                                           Years since opening

 Note: The figure plots point estimates for leading and lagging indicators for the large foreign plant
 opening. The omitted category is one period prior to the large foreign plant opening. Vertical bars
 correspond to 95 percent confidence intervals with district-clustered standard errors.




                                                                                44
Figure 3: Domestic plants’ productivity, relative to the year of a foreign plant opening (Re-
search Design: Actual vs Planned).
         .3
         .2
        .1
      TFP
         0
         -.1




               -4        -3         -2         -1         0            1          2          3
                                            Years since opening

                                                 Treatment Districts
                                                 Control Districts

 Note: The figure plots point estimates for leading and lagging indicators for the large foreign plant
 opening. The omitted category is one period prior to the large foreign plant opening.




                                                  45
Figure 4: Domestic plants’ productivity, relative to the year of a foreign plant opening (Re-
search Design: government designation).
         .4
         .2
      TFP
         0
         -.2




               -4        -3         -2         -1         0            1          2          3
                                            Years since opening

 Note: The figure plots point estimates for leading and lagging indicators for the large foreign plant
 opening. Event time indicator ”-4” set to 1 for periods up to and including 3 periods prior to
 the event and 0 otherwise. Event time indicator ”+3” set to 1 for all periods 3 periods after the
 event and 0 otherwise. The omitted category is one period prior to the large foreign plant opening.
 Vertical bars correspond to 95 percent confidence intervals with district-clustered standard errors.




                                                  46
Figure 5: Domestic plants’ productivity, relative to the year of a foreign plant opening (Re-
search Design: government designation). Treated districts only.
         1.5
         1
      TFP
       .50
         -.5




               -4        -3         -2         -1         0            1          2          3
                                            Years since opening

 Note: The figure plots point estimates for leading and lagging indicators for the large foreign plant
 opening. Event time indicator ”-4” set to 1 for periods up to and including 3 periods prior to
 the event and 0 otherwise. Event time indicator ”+3” set to 1 for all periods 3 periods after the
 event and 0 otherwise. The omitted category is one period prior to the large foreign plant opening.
 Vertical bars correspond to 95 percent confidence intervals with district-clustered standard errors.




                                                  47
    Table 1: Size, performance and technology indicators by ownership type (2013)

                               (1)      (2)       (3)                 (4)
                          Full Sample   FDI     Domestic    p-value of diff. (2)-(3)
Number of
workers                      86.7       150.1     72.7               0.00

Value added
per worker                   143        188       133                0.06

Percent of output
sold to FDI (%)               2.9        5.1      2.4                0.00

Percent of plants
that export                   5.6       14.2      3.7                0.00

Percent share of
export in total sales         2.5        6.6      1.8                0.00

Conducted R & D in the
last three years              7.1       11.0      6.3                0.00

Hold internationally
recognized patent             1.9        4.2      1.4                0.00

Use technology licensed
from abroad                  10.8       13.6      10.2               0.08
Number of observations      1,708       310      1,398

Note: Author’s compilation based on CSA census and FDI survey module. All mone-
tary amounts are in 1000s of birr.




                                         48
Table 2: Plant Characteristics by Treatment Status, One Year Prior to a foreign plant Opening
(Research Design: Actual vs Planned).
                                            Treatment     Control        p-value          p-value
                                             Districts    Districts      (1)-(2)          (1)-(2)
                                                                       (Clustered)     (Cameron et al)
                                               (1)           (2)           (3)              (4)
    Output                                   12230         11325           .78              .77
    Capital                                   4932          6404            .5              .53
    Employees                                 82.1          93.2           .51              .57
    Plant Age                                 12.9           11           .08*              .11
    Output per Worker                        120.72        125.14          .84              .84
    Capital per Worker                         75           62.7           .43              .47
    Plant-level Average Yearly Wage           6649          5431           .11              .18

    P-values in Col 3 are calculated from standard errors clustered at the district level. P-values in Col
    4 are obtained using the bootstrap procedure the procedure developed by Cameron, Gelbach, and
    Miller (2008). All monetary amounts are in 1000s of birr.




                                                     49
Table 3: Changes in Domestic plants’ productivity, following a foreign plant opening (Re-
search Design: Actual vs Planned).
                                 (1)       (2)               (3)
                                                       At least 3 years

 logK                                0.063*** 0.059***                 0.051***
                                      (0.018)  (0.016)                  (0.015)
 logM                                0.567*** 0.564***                 0.552***
                                      (0.056)  (0.059)                  (0.061)
 logL                                0.258*** 0.255***                 0.273***
                                      (0.064)  (0.062)                  (0.062)
 Mean Shift                            0.046    0.083                    0.110
                                      (0.039) (0.048)*                 (0.044)**
                                      [0.204] [0.099]*                 [0.029]**

 Year by 2-digit industry FE         NO         YES               YES
 Year Dummies                       YES          NO                NO
 Observations                      10,822      10,822            9,265
 Adjusted R-squared                 0.906       0.907            0.907
 The table reports results from estimating eq. (5). Plant FE and re-
 gion trends are always included. Standard errors clustered at district
 level in parentheses. For the mean shift, we report in brackets the p-
 value obtained using the bootstrap procedure the procedure developed
 by Cameron, Gelbach, and Miller (2008). In Column 3 incumbent do-
 mestic plants in treated districts are required to be in the data for at least
 3 years prior to the event.


Table 4: Plant Characteristics by Treatment Status, One Year Prior to first foreign plant
Opening (1998); Research Design: Government Allocation.
                                               (1)                     (2)                       (3)
                                        Treated Districts     Never-Treated Districts       (1)-(2) t-stat
  Output                                     20706                    6437                      0.94
  Capital                                     6426                    5904                      0.14
  Employees                                    215                     68                        1.6
  Plant Age                                   11.2                    10.2                      0.58
  Output per Worker                           58.6                     68                       0.63
  Capital per Worker                          31.9                    50.8                      1.74*
  Plant level average yearly wage             3.35                    3.53                       0.4

  Reported t-statistics are calculated from standard errors clustered at the district level. All monetary
  amounts are in 1000s of birr.



                                                      50
Table 5: Domestic plants’ productivity: average of the event-study coefficients between
τ = 0 and τ = 2 (Research Design: Government Allocation).
                             (1)         (2)        (3)           (4)
                                                    Treated Only At least 3 years
 Average change              0.109       0.159      0.261         0.286
                             (0.055)** (0.087)* (0.136)*          (0.162)*
                                                    [0.050]*      [0.080]*

 Year by 2-digit industry FE   NO          YES         YES             YES
 Year Dummies                  YES         NO          NO              NO
 Observations                  4,799       4,799       968             569
 Number of Districts           223         223         17              13

    This Table accompanies Figure 4. Estimates taken from specification of form
    given in Equation (1). ”Average change” refers to the average of the coeffi-
    cients in periods t = 0, 1, and 2. Column 3 drops the never treated localities.
    Column 4 reports estimates from the specification of Column 3 but incumbent
    domestic plants are required to be in the data for at least 3 years prior to the
    event. For Column 3 and 4, we report in brackets the p-value obtained using
    the bootstrap procedure developed by Cameron, Gelbach, and Miller (2008).
    Plant FE and region trends are always included.




                                             51
           Table 6: New economic activity following a foreign plant opening.
                    Births              Weighted by L
                      (1)                      (2)
                     Panel A: Research Design: Actual vs Planned
Mean Shift          4.093                   303.534
                   (2.706)               (129.333)**
                  [0.1410]                [0.0260]**
Observations         212                      212
Mean y              10.94                    529.2
SD y                28.79                     1704
                  Panel B: Research Design: Government Allocation
Average change 1.763*                        77.75
                   (0.924)                  (60.84)
Observations        1358                      1358
Mean y control       1.28                    45.31
SD y control         2.75                    227.6

The table reports results from estimating eq. (8) and eq. (9). Dependent
variable in Column 1 is the simple count of new domestic plants; in
Column 2 is the count weighted by the number of employees at entry.
”Average change” refers to the average of the coefficients in periods t
= 0, 1, and 2. Standard errors clustered at district level in parenthe-
ses. For the mean shift, we report in brackets the p-value obtained
using the bootstrap procedure developed by Cameron, Gelbach, and
Miller (2008).Year Dummies, Districts FE and Region Trends always
included.




                                           52
        Table 7: FDI-related outcomes of domestic plants (% of domestic plants)

(1) Directly adopted production processes
by observing foreign plants in same industry                  12.6

   foreign plants did not try
   to prevent the observation/adoption                        77.3
   (% of plants answering ”YES” to above question)

(2) Benefited from employing
Former FDI workers                                            7.2

(3) Technology transfer
from FDI customers                                            4.5

(4) Technology transfer
from FDI suppliers                                            1.79

(5) Use technology
licensed from foreign plants                                  10.2

(6) Changed production technologies
due to competition from FDI                                   15.3

At least one of the
above outcomes (1) to (4)                                     17.8

At least one of the
above outcomes (1) to (6)                                     24.6

Number of                                                    1,398
observations

Note: Author’s compilation based on and FDI survey module




                                          53
                                                  Table 8: Linkages and Change of Technology by Domestic Plants
                                                  Labor link                           Customer link                            Supply link                               Any link
                                         (1)         (2)       (3)              (4)         (5)        (6)              (7)         (8)       (9)              (10)        (11)          (12)
                                         Yes         No      p-value            Yes         No      p-value             Yes        No       p-value            Yes          No          p-value
                                                             of diff.                                of diff.                               of diff.                                    of diff.
     Directly adopted
     production processes                .37          .11          .00           .27          .12          .00          .24          .11          .00          .28           .09           .00
     by observing FDI plants
     in the same industry




54
     Use technology licensed             .31          .09          .00           .18          .10          .01          .17          .09          .01          .20           .08           .00
     from foreign plants

     Changed production
     technologies due to                 .45          .13          .00           .39          .14          .00          .38          .13          .00          .38           .10           .00
     competition from FDI
     N                                    97         1,298                       90         1,305                       125         1,270                      255         1,140
     Labor linked plants are defined as those hiring a former FDI employee, supply-linked plants are defined as those selling output to FDI plants, and customer-linked plants are defined as those
     buying raw material from FDI plants. Columns compare plants reporting each type of linkage to those who do not.
            Table 9: Reported Benefits from Domestic Firms’ Linkages to FDI Firms
Benefit                                                        Share of observations
Labor Linkages
Production Technologies                                                0.65
Management and Organizational Practices                                0.14
Knowledge of How to Export                                             0.09
Others                                                                 0.11
Customer Linkages
Production Technologies                                                0.65
Management and Organizational Practices                                0.17
Knowledge of How to Export                                             0.01
Others                                                                 0.16
Supply Linkages
Product Design                                                         0.40
Worker Training                                                        0.19
Production Technologies                                                0.18
Logistics                                                              0.11
Organization Structure                                                 0.12
Any Linkage
Production Technologies                                                0.45
Product Design                                                         0.20
Management and Organizational Practices                                0.13
Logistics Including Exporting                                          0.07
Worker Training                                                        0.07
Others                                                                 0.08
  Notes: The total number of firms included is equal to 179. Product design includes increases in the variety
  and quality of products. Worker training includes training of managers and those they supervise. Supply
  chain logistics includes better marketing and distrubution of products as well as supply chain management.
  Management and organizational practices include managerial practices, organizational structures and physical
  upkeep of premises.




                                                  55
                                              Appendix

A.I     Dataset construction

We faced three main challenges trying to link IDs across years: 1) verifying that, pre-
2011/12, unique IDs were consistent across years, that is, that they identify the same plant
across the different rounds; 2) doing the same for the 2011/12 and 2012/13 rounds indepen-
dently of the pre-2011/12 data, and; 3) linking plants between these two separate datasets.
          During the first stage of creating the panel we checked the consistency of the exist-
ing unique plant ID numbers across pre-2011/12 and post 2011/12 rounds – independently,
as there is no ID variable in the raw data to link plants between these two set of rounds.
For each period (pre- or post- 2011/12), we pooled together all rounds and used as much
information in the data as possible to determine the validity of the existing unique plant IDs.
We relied on any information available on phone numbers, location of the plant (e.g. re-
gion, zone, woreda, etc.),26 the Ethiopian Electric Power Corporation (EEPCO) number of
the plant, and the P.O. box number.
          As a further consistency check, we used the business directory that CSA compiled
as a “framework” for the census for 2008/09.27 This list is compiled by CSA every year
with data from different ministries and government agencies as a reference to identify which
plants exist and should be part of the data for the year was compiled by CSA. The list includes
the name and plant number that CSA assigns to each plant during that round, as well as phone
number and locational information (i.e. region, zone, woreda, town, etc.). This information
   26
      CSA is only concerned with gathering and publishing data at the regional level and not at the level of
smaller geo-political units (like zones or woredas). As a result, enumerators are only required to fill-in infor-
mation about the establishment’s region, effectively leaving the option open for the enumerator to record or
not the rest of the locational information of the establishment. Thus, it is not uncommon to see, for the same
establishment, years for which all locational information is complete and years for which only the region was
recorded.
   27
      Unfortunately, similar lists for other rounds of the LMSM are not available. According to the Director of
the Business Statistics Directorate, due to changes in management and issues with the storing of data, the lists
for other years have been lost.


                                                      56
was useful to determine which plant numbers may be duplicated or incorrect, at least circa
2008/09.
           While there is typically no electronic record of the plant’s name in the database, it
is possible to compile this information directly from the paper questionnaires. CSA’s staff
went through all available paper questionnaire that CSA had in storage, collected plant’s
name from each paper questionnaire, and linked plants across available years using this
information.28 This effort was crucial in creating the panel identifiers for two reasons. First,
it provided a link between the pre- and post-2011/12 rounds. Second, it provided us with
additional information to validate unique plant IDs for rounds between 2008/09 and 2010/11.
       During the final stage we evaluated the different matches obtained from all methods
described above and determined which matches were valid. This was done using Stata to
the extent possible but, in most cases, a visual inspection of the validity of each match was
necessary to ascertain the match provided by Stata. If matches did not seem valid then, a
case-by-case match was done manually. If no valid match was found, the observation was
left unmatched and a new unique ID was created for those plants.


A.II       Algorithm used to find control districts

Our analysis in Section 4.1 required us to find at least one control district for each treatment
one. We implemented an algorithm based on information on industry and time of approval
of a FDI project. Let τ lic tr denote year, but be normalized so that the year when the FDI
project got approved (in a treatment district) is τ lic tr = 0. Our algorithm consisted of the
following steps.


   1. For each treatment district (characterized by a given year of approval of the project
         and a given industry) look for a control in the same year and with a foreign plant in
  28
      Unfortunately, CSA staff was only able to retrieve paper questionnaires for the last 5 rounds of the LMSM
– it is CSA’s policy to store paper questionnaires for no more than 5 years.


                                                     57
       same 4-digit industry (i.e. a district where an FDI plant in the same 4-digit industry
       and in the same year got approval but then did not open the plant during the period in
       which the foreign plant was operating in the treatment district)

   2. If you cannot find one, look for a control in the same year in same 3-digit industry

   3. If you cannot find one, look for a control in the same year in same 2-digit industry

   4. If you cannot find one, look for a control district where the project was approved
       between τ lic = −1 and τ lic = 1 (in the same 4-digit industry)

   5. If you cannot find one, look for a control district where the project was approved
       between τ lic = −1 and τ lic = 1 (in the same 3-digit industry)

   6. And so on for τ lic ∈ [−2, 2] and τ lic ∈ [−3, 3], until τ lic ∈ [−3, 3] and same 2-digit
       industry

   7. For the foreign plants which start operation but have a missing year of licence, assume
       the year of the licence is τ l = τ − 3. 29

   8. Repeat steps 1-6 using the second list of treatment districts obtained in step 7

   9. If multiple control districts are identified, keep them

  10. If in a given year there are two treatment districts and one usable control district, pick
       randomly one treated district and discard the other

  11. If in a given year there are three treatment districts and two usable control districts,
       pick randomly two treated districts and discard the third. Assign randomly the two
       control districts to the two treatment districts
  29
     Three years is the mean lag between licence and entry in the sample of FDI plants (a) whose labour force
is at least 100 employees or constitutes at least 1% of total employment in local manufacturing in τ = 0 or
τ = 1; and (b) whose location is not assigned by the government. See Figure A.4.



                                                     58
A.III                     Additional Figures and Tables


                                                              Figure A.1: CSA Matched Sample

                                              Distribution of plants by year                                                  Distribution of employment by year




                                                                                                       200000
                        2000




                                                                                                                     150000
                                     1500
          Total number of plants observed




                                                                                             Total employment observed
                                                                                                      100000
                     1000




                                                                                         50000
        500             0




                                                                                                       0




                                            1998   2001   2004 2007   2010   2013                                             1998   2001   2004 2007   2010   2013
                                                             Year                                                                              Year


 The Figure shows the count of plants and the total employment by year in the matched CSA
 sample.




                                                                                    59
                          Figure A.2: Administrative Map of Ethiopia




Source: UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs




                                Table A.1: CSA Matched Sample
     Variable               Mean       (Std. Dev.) Min.      Max.                            N
Output                   10486.382 (27715.159) 20.6 328553.938                             16889
Capital                   3839.554     (9139.566) 0.555 96957.102                          16751
Employes                    59.891      (106.925)    1        814                          17150
Plant Age                   12.247       (12.395)    1        63                           16925
Output per Worker          156.295      (282.275)  2.698   2552.79                         16889
Capital per Worker          60.748       (99.208)  0.202   736.191                         16751
Yearly Wage                  7.557        (6.761)  0.653    53.342                         17126

Summary statistics from 6,321 unique plants, observed across all years (1996-2013). All monetary amounts in
’000s of birr. Average Yearly Wage is the plant-level average yearly wage




                                                  60
Figure A.3: Geographic distribution of treated districts (research design: government desig-
nation)




 Red circles denote the treated districts. Dark lines denote regional boundaries.




                                             61
            Figure A.4: Difference between year of entry and year of permit
    8
    6




                                                                    Median= 2
                                                                    Mean=3.22
                                                                    S.D.= 2.71
Frequency




                                                                    N=23
    4
    2
    0




            0                       5                      10                    15
                                         Difference




                                          62
     Table A.2: Wages and workforce education by ownership type, sample means

                               FDI                Domestic                p-val
Number of workers              187                  81                    0.00
Production workers
Monthly wage                  1,706                 1,464                 0.38
Years of schooling            9.88                   9.53                 0.01
Percent with TVET diploma     19.5                  16.7                  0.02

Supervisor Foremen and
quality control personnel
Monthly wage                  2,081                 1,849                 0.13
Years of schooling             12.0                  11.8                 0.23

Marketing workers
Monthly wage                  2,389                 2,075                 0.00
Years of schooling             12.3                  12.1                 0.10

Administrative Staff
Monthly wage                  2,606                 1,920                 0.00
Years of schooling             12.3                  12.0                 0.09

Managers including
low level managers
Monthly wage                  5,674                 4,840                 0.00
Years of schooling             14.5                  14.3                 0.58

Number of observations         310                  1,398

Note: TVET is Technical and vocational education training. All monetary
amounts are in birr.
Author’s compilation based on CSA census and FDI survey module




                                        63
Table A.3: Sample of FDI Opening and Districts (Research Design: Actual vs. Planned)
   FDI Openings                                              12

   Number of controls per treatment district:

   1                                                                            9

   2                                                                            3


   Reported year of foreign plant opening

   2004-2007                                                                    5

   2008-2010                                                                    7


   Foreign plant industries:

   Food & beverages                                                             5

   Chemicals & chemical products                                                3

   Non-metallic mineral products                                                3

   Motor vehicles                                                               1


   Foreign plant characteristics:

   # Employees                                                              113.71
                                                                           (187.00)

   Share of local labor market (%)                                           9.91
                                                                            (18.48)
   This Table displays descriptive information on the usable openings and districts used in the
   first research design. The algorithm used to find control districts is described in Section A.II.
   The values for Employees and Share of local labor market are the average between τ = 0 and
   τ = 1. Standard deviations are shown in parentheses




                                                   64
Table A.4: Sample of FDI Opening and Districts (Research Design: Government Allocation)
     Sample FDI openings                                       17

     Never-treated districts                                               206


     Reported year of foreign plant opening:

     1999-2005                                                              3

     2006–2012                                                              14


     Foreign plant industries:

     Non-metallic mineral products                                          8

     Wood, furniture & paper                                                4

     Food & beverages                                                       3

     Basic metals                                                           1

     Chemicals & chemical products                                          1



     Foreign plant characteristics:

     # Employees                                                          51.29
                                                                         (90.06)

     Share of local labor market (%)                                      18.69
                                                                         (16.35)

     This Table displays descriptive information on the usable openings and districts used in the
     second research design. The values for Employees and Share of local labor market are the
     average between τ = 0 and τ = 1. Standard deviations are shown in parentheses




                                                   65
Table A.5: Plant Characteristics by Treatment Status, Year 2006; Research Design: Govern-
ment Allocation.
                                                (1)                     (2)                       (3)
                                         Treated Districts     Never-Treated Districts       (1)-(2) t-stat
 Output                                       21065                    9099                      0.82
 Capital                                       5748                    7413                      0.44
 Employees                                      99                      49                       1.08
 Plant Age                                      9.7                     9.4                      0.31
 Capital per Worker                            48.5                     58                       0.58
 Output per Worker                              116                    109.3                     0.21
 Plant-level Average Yearly Wage               4.92                    4.53                      0.59

 Reported t-statistics are calculated from standard errors clustered at the district level. All monetary
 amounts are in 1000s of birr. 2006 is the year before the fourth event. Since we want to explore the
 balancing of covariates pre-treatment, we remove from the set of treated, the three districts which
 experience the event before 2006.




                                                      66
Table A.6: Changes in Domestic plants’ productivity, following a foreign plant opening,
Robustness to Specifications Adressing Transmission Bias
                                                               Materials-
                                                              Capital and
                              Investment- Materials-           Materials-
                                Capital       Capital            Labor
                              Interactions Interactions       Interactions
                                   (1)          (2)                (3)
                                 Panel A: Research Design: Actual vs Planned

 Mean Shift                    0.295***      0.100**          0.093**
                                (0.085)       (0.046)          (0.044)
 Observations                    5,541        10,822           10,822
                              Panel B: Research Design: Government Allocation

 Average change τ = 0 − 2        0.124         0.168*              0.162**
                                (0.139)        (0.086)             (0.082)
 Observations                    3,240          6,230               6,230

     Dependent variable: Log(Output). The table reports results from fitting
     several versions of eq. (3) and eq. (6). Column 1 controls for a fourth-
     degree polynomial function of log capital and log investment and the
     interaction of both functions (see Olley and Pakes 1996). Column 2 in-
     cludes the same controls as col. 1 but replaces log investment with log
     materials (see Levinsohn and Petrin 2003). Column 3 adds interactions
     between log materials and log labor to the controls in col. 2 (see Acker-
     berg et al. 2015). ”Average change τ = 0 − 2” refers to the average of
     the coefficients in periods t = 0, 1, and 2. Standard errors clustered at
     district level in parentheses. Industry X Year Dummies, Plant FE and
     Region Trends always included.




                                            67
 Table A.7: Competition from FDI in Product and Labor Market (% of domestic plants)

(1) Product market competition
from foreign plants critically important                11.5

(2) Faced competition
in the local labor market                               5.9

(3) Lost skilled workers
to foreign plants                                       7.7

Number of                                            1,398
observations

Note: Author’s compilation based on FDI survey module




                                           68
