                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    TWO EMPIRICAL TESTS OF HYPERCONGESTION

                                     Michael L. Anderson
                                       Lucas W. Davis

                                      Working Paper 24469
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24469


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                           March 2018, Revised May 2019




Previously circulated as "Does Hypercongestion Exist? New Evidence Suggests Not." Neither of
us have received any financial compensation for this project, nor do we have any financial
relationships that relate to this research. We are grateful to Gilles Duranton, Jonathan Hughes,
Mark Jacobsen, Ian Parry, and Kenneth Small, as well as to the editor (Hunt Allcott) and three
anonymous reviewers for helpful comments. Neither of us have received any financial
compensation for this project, nor do we have any financial relationships that relate to this
research. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Michael L. Anderson and Lucas W. Davis. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Two Empirical Tests of Hypercongestion
Michael L. Anderson and Lucas W. Davis
NBER Working Paper No. 24469
March 2018, Revised May 2019
JEL No. C36,H23,R41,R42,R48

                                         ABSTRACT

There is a widely-held view that as demand for travel goes up, this decreases not only speed but
also the capacity of the road system, a phenomenon known as hypercongestion. We revisit this
idea. We propose two empirical tests motivated by previous analytical models of
hypercongestion. Our first test uses instrumental variables to empirically isolate the effect of
travel demand on highway capacity. Our second test uses an event study analysis to measure
changes in highway capacity at the onset of queue formation. We apply these tests to three
highway bottlenecks in California for which detailed data on traffic flows and vehicles speeds are
available. Neither test shows evidence of a reduction in highway capacity at any site during
periods of high demand. Across sites and specifications we have sufficient statistical power to
rule out small reductions in highway capacity. This lack of evidence of hypercongestion has
important implications for travel supply and demand models and raises questions about highway
metering lights and other traffic interventions aimed at regulating demand.


Michael L. Anderson
Department of Agricultural and Resource Economics
207 Giannini Hall, MC 3310
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
mlanderson@berkeley.edu

Lucas W. Davis
Haas School of Business
University of California
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
and NBER
ldavis@haas.berkeley.edu
1    Introduction

The relationship between the number of vehicles on the road and the speed at which
they travel is fundamental to transportation and urban economics. To anyone who
has driven in traffic, it is clear that traffic congestion decreases speed. But there is
also a view that as demand for travel goes up, this decreases not only speed but also
the capacity of the road system, a phenomenon known as hypercongestion. Stan-
dard reference texts show a backward-bending speed-flow curve (May, 1990; Lindsey
and Verhoef, 2008; Transportation Review Board, 2016), and a number of economic
analyses have taken hypercongestion as given (see, e.g. Walters, 1961; Johnson, 1964;
Newbery, 1989; Mun, 1999; Fosgerau and Small, 2013; Hall, 2018a,b).

Our paper revisits this idea. We propose two empirical tests of hypercongestion.
Both tests are novel in the literature but correspond closely with how previous studies
have modeled hypercongestion. We apply our tests to three highway bottlenecks in
California. We observe traffic flows and vehicle speeds at several locations before
and after each bottleneck. Although the three sites differ, all have bottlenecks that
generate slowed traffic and queues during afternoon hours.

Our first test uses instrumental variables to measure the effect of queue length on
highway capacity. Though we are unaware of any previous attempt to estimate a
regression of this form, our estimating equation corresponds closely with how previous
studies have modeled hypercongestion (Yang and Huang, 1997; Fosgerau and Small,
2013; Small, 2015). We instrument using time-of-day to empirically isolate the effect
of travel demand and find no evidence that capacity decreases during periods of high


                                           1
demand. In short, no matter how long the queue gets, the number of vehicles passing
through the bottleneck per minute remains stable.

Our second test uses an event study analysis to measure changes in traffic flows
at the moment each afternoon when the queue initially forms. Several studies find
what the literature calls “capacity drop”, “flow breakdown”, or the “two capacity
phenomenon” at bottlenecks (Banks, 1990, 1991; Hall and Agyemang-Duah, 1991;
Persaud et al., 1998; Cassidy and Bertini, 1999; Bertini and Malik, 2004; Zhang and
Levinson, 2004; Chung et al., 2007; Oh and Yeo, 2012), referring to a drop in roadway
capacity upon queue formation. In contrast to the vast majority of these studies, we
find no evidence of a decrease in traffic flows at the moment the queue forms. Across
sites, flows are essentially constant throughout the period of queue formation, with
no discernible capacity drop whatsoever.

Thus we find no evidence of hypercongestion with either test. Though the findings
are similar, the two tests are quite different, exploiting independent sources of vari-
ation and relying on distinct identifying assumptions. The results of the two tests
are complementary, with neither test revealing a reduction in highway capacity as
demand increases. This lack of evidence of hypercongestion is not due to a lack of
statistical precision. At each site our data include tens of thousands of five-minute
periods across hundreds of days. Given the modest fluctuations in observed flows
during peak periods, this size of data set yields sufficient statistical power to rule out
even small reductions in highway capacity. Throughout the analysis we report stan-
dard errors and 95% confidence intervals and show that we can reject economically
significant capacity reductions, including those of the magnitudes suggested in the

                                            2
existing literature.

These findings have significant policy implications. Hypercongestion has long been
a rationale for highway ramp metering lights and other traffic interventions aimed
at regulating demand (Diakaki et al., 2000; Smaragdis et al., 2004; Cassidy and
Rudjanakanoknad, 2005), but our evidence raises questions about the applicabil-
ity of these interventions. Our results also imply that the marginal damages from
driving are substantially lower than those implied by supply curves exhibiting hy-
percongestion. Nevertheless, as we explain in the paper, the implications for efficient
“Pigouvian” congestion pricing are less clear.

Our paper is germane to a growing empirical literature on the formation of traffic
congestion. Couture et al. (2018) develops an econometric methodology for estimat-
ing city-level supply curves for trip travel, and constructs travel speed indices for
large U.S. cities. Yang et al. (2018) measures the effect of traffic density on speed
in Beijing, using variation in traffic from driving restrictions. Akbar and Duranton
(2017) uses travel surveys and other data from Bogotá, Colombia to estimate the
deadweight loss of traffic congestion. Adler et al. (2017) examines the effects of
public transit strikes in Rome on arterial road congestion and concludes that hyper-
congestion, while rare, accounts for approximately 30 percent of congestion-related
welfare losses.1
   1
    Farther afield, there are also a number of studies by economists that examine the effect of
building highways on traffic congestion, suburbanization, and other outcomes (see, e.g. Baum-
Snow, 2007; Duranton and Turner, 2011). In other related work, Hanna et al. (2017) shows that
elimination of high-occupancy vehicle lanes in Jakarta worsened traffic and Kreindler (2018) uses
data from a smartphone app to study traffic congestion in Bangalore, India, finding at the city-level
an approximately linear relationship between traffic volume and travel time.



                                                 3
Before proceeding, we note two important caveats. First, our study focuses on high-
ways, not arterial street networks. Highways are a vital component of the road
network, accounting for the majority of vehicle miles traveled (Lomax et al., 2018).
Indeed, all of the transportation engineering papers that we cite above focus on
highways. Highway geometry, however, differs fundamentally from arterial road ge-
ometry because highways lack conflicting cross traffic. Our results do not speak to
whether hypercongestion occurs on a dense street network with conflicting directions
of traffic. Second, our study focuses on standard bottlenecks in which the queue does
not obstruct other upstream routes. Particularly in dense urban networks, a queue
from a bottleneck on one route may sometimes spill over onto a different route that
does not traverse the bottleneck, blocking that route and creating a “triggerneck”
(Vickrey, 1969). Our results do not apply to triggernecks.




2     Conceptual Framework

2.1    Interpretations of the Speed-Flow Curve

Figure 1 shows eight examples of speed-flow curves. The first panel comes from the
Highway Capacity Manual, the standard reference text in transportation engineering
(Transportation Research Board, 2016), and the other panels come from the trans-
portation literature (Drake and Schofer, 1966; Allen et al., 1985; May, 1990; Ni, 2015)
and the economics literature (Keeler and Small, 1977; Newbery, 1989; Mun, 1999).
In all cases, the horizontal axis measures traffic flow and the vertical axis measures


                                          4
speed.

The upper part of the speed-flow curve exhibits a negative correlation between speed
and flow. Speeds are high at low flow levels. For example, in the first panel, average
speeds are near 70 miles-per-hour for flow levels below 1,500 vehicles/hour/lane.
In all eight panels speeds are then lower at higher flow levels. In the first panel,
for example, speeds tend to be between 60 and 70 miles-per-hour for flows above
1,500.

The lower part of the curve is more surprising, however. In all eight panels, there
is a lower part of the curve that exhibits a positive correlation between speed and
flow. Particularly striking are the observations with both very low speeds and very
low flows. For example, the first panel from the Highway Capacity Manual includes
observations with speeds below 10 miles-per-hour and flow rates below 1,000 vehi-
cles/hour/lane.

There is a lack of consensus over how to interpret this lower region of the speed-flow
curve. The Highway Capacity Manual explains that this region of the speed-flow
curve exhibits “flow breakdown” and “oversaturated flow”, with severe decreases in
speed as well as decreases in capacity, and flow rates falling well below the observed
maximum. This backward-bending curve is described as one of the “basic relation-
ships” in traffic, with the lower part of the curve often drawn all the way to the
origin, at which point both speed and flow are equal to zero.

Early economic analyses interpreted this speed-flow curve as a causal relationship.
Walters (1961) and Johnson (1964), for example, interpreted the relationship as a


                                          5
supply curve for travel, and used parametrized versions to derive efficient congestion
prices. Later economic analyses similarly adopted a causal interpretation. For ex-
ample, Newbery (1989) writes, “there is a sharp discontinuity in the mode of traffic
flow as traffic reaches capacity. A small increase in the traffic flow, typically resulting
from an extra inflow of traffic from a junction, causes a transition from relatively free
flow to congested flow; speed drops sharply, and so does total flow.” (p. 193).

Some later studies took a different, more descriptive interpretation. It is an empirical
fact that low-speed, low-flow observations exist, but more recent economic analyses
have argued that this relationship cannot be interpreted as a supply curve. For
example, Small and Chu (2003) argues that “hypercongestion occurs as a result of
transient demand surges and can be fully analyzed only within a dynamic model.”2
Similarly, Lindsey and Verhoef (2008) explains that these low-speed, low-flow obser-
vations occur “in queues upstream of a bottleneck”.3,4
   2
     This article, titled “Hypercongestion”, notes that the standard “engineering relationship” has
a backward-bending region known as hypercongestion. It then presents a series of dynamic models
for straight uniform highways and dense street networks in which transient demand surges cause
long vehicle queues, resulting in large travel time increases. It stresses the importance of studying
hypercongestion using dynamic models, “Hypercongestion is a real phenomenon, potentially cre-
ating inefficiencies and imposing considerable costs. However, it cannot be understood within a
steady-state analysis because it does not in practice persist as a steady state.” (p. 342).
   3
     While the term “hypercongestion” appears frequently in the literature, there is confusion regard-
ing its exact definition. Mun (1999), for example, notes, “There is no commonly used terminology to
represent [traffic jams] among disciplines. Although traffic engineers use the term ‘congested flow,’
this is not appropriate here because ‘uncongested flow’ in engineering is still regarded as congested
flow in an economic sense. On the other hand, some economists use the term ‘hypercongestion’...”
(p. 323). Small and Chu (2003) defines hypercongestion as the region in the speed-flow diagram “in
which speed increases with flow” and notes that it is “unsuitable as a supply curve for equilibrium
analysis”, (p. 319).
   4
     Low-speed, low-flow observations are common upstream of bottlenecks. For example, Hall
and Agyemang-Duah (1991) documents low-flow observations immediately upstream of a major
highway entrance ramp. Relatedly, Sugiyama et al. (2008) and Tadaki et al. (2013) performed a
pair of remarkable field experiments in which college students drove vehicles around a circle in



                                                  6
With or without explicit reference to the speed-flow curve, other later studies have
continued to assume that there is a backward-bending part of the supply curve, i.e.
that road capacity decreases at high levels of demand. Mun (1999), for example,
constructs a bottleneck model with hypercongestion to calculate the gains from ef-
ficient congestion pricing.5 Fosgerau and Small (2013) constructs a model in which
road capacity declines with the length of the queue, and then uses this framework to
calculate marginal damages and analyze alternative congestion pricing regimes. Hall
(2018a) uses a hypercongestion model to show how highway pricing can generate a
Pareto improvement when agents are heterogeneous, even before redistributing toll
revenues.



2.2     Two Empirical Tests of Hypercongestion

In this paper we design and implement two empirical tests of whether highway ca-
pacity decreases during periods of high demand. To our knowledge, both tests are
novel to this context, but both tests correspond closely with hypercongestion mod-
els proposed in the existing literature. Our first test uses instrumental variables to
an outdoor area and indoor baseball field, respectively. Varying the number of vehicles driving
in the loop, the researchers demonstrate a pronounced decrease in vehicle flows as vehicle density
increases. While they interpret this as evidence of low-speed, low-flow observations even without a
bottleneck, an alternative interpretation would be that the loop effectively simulates the experience
of being permanently in a queue, as the loop never empties into an uncongested “drain”.
    5
      In bottleneck models drivers face a tradeoff between time delays and trip departure times
(Vickrey, 1969; Small, 1982; Arnott et al., 1990, 1993, 1994). Arnott (2013) argues that a key
weakness of the standard bottleneck model is that it fails to incorporate hypercongestion, “In
assuming that the discharge rate of the bottleneck is independent of the length of the queue behind
it, the model assumes away hypercongestion, which most urban transport economists believe to be
quantitatively important.” (p. 119). Arnott (2013) proposes a “bathtub” model of hypercongestion
for downtown areas in which capacity decreases at high levels of traffic density.



                                                 7
measure the effect of queue length on highway capacity. Our second test uses an
event study analysis, measuring the change in traffic flows when a queue forms. The
two tests use different sources of identifying variation and have different identifying
assumptions.

Both tests of hypercongestion are designed to be applied in highway settings with
a single bottleneck — locations where some physical feature of the highway serves
to reduce traffic flow during periods of high demand. The most lucid example, and
one that directly evokes the idea of the “neck” of a bottle, is a setting in which
there is a sharp decrease in the number of lanes available for travel. We do not
envision applying these tests to roadways with no spatial variation in capacity, which
tend to have far fewer delays, or to dense urban road networks, which tend to have
multiple sequential bottlenecks and alternative routing opportunities. As we noted
earlier, highways account for a majority of vehicle miles traveled, and there is a large
existing literature on highway bottlenecks, so our setting is an important one for
understanding hypercongestion.



2.2.1   Instrumental Variables


Our first test takes the form of two stage least squares (2SLS) regressions of the
following form,
                      capacityt = α0 + α1 · queue lengtht + εt .                    (1)

The dependent variable in these regressions is highway capacity in 5-minute period
t, measured downstream of the bottleneck. The independent variable of interest


                                           8
is queue length. The coefficient of interest is α1 , which is the change in capacity
associated with a one-unit increase in queue length. We instrument for queue length
using time-of-day. Thus, the 2SLS regression is estimated using the predictable
time-of-day variation in queue length rather than idiosyncratic day-to-day variation.
This is desirable because the time-of-day variation in queue length is mostly driven
by differences in travel demand, while the day-to-day variation is also affected by
weather, road construction, roadway incidents, and other supply shocks.6

Though we are not aware of any previous attempt to estimate a regression of this
form, its basic structure coincides with several previous efforts to model hypercon-
gestion. Small (2015) explains that hypercongestion can be modeled by “postulating
that bottleneck capacity varies inversely with the length of the queue” (p. 115), cit-
ing several previous papers that have followed this approach. For example, Yang and
Huang (1997) numerically solves a model in which capacity decreases exponentially
with the length of the queue. Another example is Fosgerau and Small (2013). In
their model, a bottleneck operates at full capacity for short queues, then drops dis-
continuously to a medium capacity when queue length exceeds a particular threshold,
and then finally drops to zero capacity for very long queues.

One possible rationale for why queue length would affect capacity comes from the
physics of traffic flow and, in particular, how changes in vehicle speed propagate
   6
    Economists have long used instrumental variables in such settings to econometrically separate
demand and supply (see, e.g., Angrist and Krueger, 2001). An alternative to this instrumental
variables strategy would be to exclude observations affected by supply shocks. This ends up being
impractical, however, because many supply shocks are not observed. For example, the California
Department of Transportation’s Performance Measurement System (PeMS) tracks major incidents
but many smaller incidents are unreported.



                                               9
through a queue of vehicles. Since Lighthill and Whitham (1955), transportation
engineers have used “fluid dynamics” and the “method of kinematic waves” to model
the movement of vehicles in a queue. The implication of these models is that longer
queues are associated with lower average speeds, reducing overall capacity relative to
models without the “theory of shock waves” (Mun, 1994, 1999). Our 2SLS regressions
can be viewed as an attempt to measure empirically the quantitative importance of
these physical mechanisms.

When estimating Equation (1) we restrict the sample to include only observations
from periods in which there is a queue. By definition, if there is no queue, then
traffic flows have not reached capacity, and measurements are limited by insufficient
demand rather than maximum capacity. We refer to this condition as “demand
starvation” — the bottleneck could process more vehicles were they available. Thus,
in the regression analyses with queue length as the independent variable we compare
traffic flows between periods with different lengths of non-zero queues, and we refer
to traffic flows during these periods as “capacity”.



2.2.2   Event Study Analyses


Our second test takes the form of a standard event study regression. The event of
interest in our context is the moment in time that the queue forms. These event
study analyses allow us to assess whether there is a sudden drop in highway capacity




                                          10
at the onset of a queue. In particular, we estimate regressions of the form:

                                             16
                                             X
                           traffic flowt =           βk 1[τt = k]t + ωt .                     (2)
                                             k=−16


The dependent variable in these regressions is traffic flow in 5-minute period t, mea-
sured downstream of the bottleneck. The independent variables of interest are a
vector of event-time indicator variables. In particular, we construct a variable τt
defined such that τ = 0 for the exact moment in which the queue forms, τ = −16
for 16 periods (i.e 80 minutes) before the queue forms, τ = 16 for 16 periods (i.e.
80 minutes) after the queue forms, and so on. Our estimates of βk summarize how
traffic flows vary before and after the queue forms. We include no additional control
variables, so although we estimate the regression using least squares, it is equivalent
to taking conditional averages in event time.

This event study approach closely coincides with other models of hypercongestion
that have appeared in the literature. Many studies find evidence of “capacity drop”,
“flow breakdown”, or the “two capacity phenomenon” at bottlenecks.7 This decrease
in capacity could be caused, for example, by vehicles stopping prior to the merge or
failing to efficiently fill gaps in the queue. Many studies take this capacity drop as
given. For example, Hall (2018b) assumes that queues reduce capacity at bottlenecks
by 10%.
   7
    See, e.g., Banks (1990, 1991); Hall and Agyemang-Duah (1991); Persaud et al. (1998); Cassidy
and Bertini (1999); Bertini and Malik (2004); Zhang and Levinson (2004); Chung et al. (2007); Oh
and Yeo (2012). Hall (2018b) reviews this literature carefully, reporting that 16 out of 17 papers
find evidence of a capacity drop, with a median capacity drop of 10%.




                                               11
Unlike the 2SLS regressions, we do not restrict the sample to include only observa-
tions in which there is a queue, as that would omit observations before τ = 0. We
thus refer to the dependent variable in these regressions as traffic flow, rather than
capacity. As we show later, however, the estimates of βk provide some information
about the degree of demand starvation. In our empirical applications we tend not
to see large increases in flow leading up to queue formation, suggesting that flow is
near capacity in the periods leading up to queue formation.

Our two empirical tests are complementary. Whereas the event study analyses focus
on the transition between no queue and queue, the 2SLS regressions compare traffic
flows with different lengths of non-zero queues. Thus the identifying variation used
in the two tests is different, and in fact, completely disjoint. In the former, it is
the mere formation of a queue, not the queue length, that matters for highway
capacity, whereas in the latter, the reduction in capacity comes from the length of
the queue. These are two alternative mechanisms for hypercongestion, but both
imply that as demand for travel goes up, it causes a decrease in the capacity of the
road system.




3     Empirical Application

3.1    Data

Our empirical analyses focus on three study sites. All three sites are in California,
allowing us to use high-quality, comparable data from a single source, the Califor-

                                         12
nia Department of Transportation (Caltrans). In particular our data come from
Caltrans’ statewide network of “loop detectors”, which record information on both
traffic flows and average vehicle speed.8

We selected these three sites based on several criteria. Most importantly, we wanted
sites with a single, clearly identified bottleneck. In all three of our study sites there is
a specific location where traffic slows and the queue forms, followed by a downstream
location where traffic generally returns to full speed. We did not want sites with
multiple bottlenecks, as it becomes difficult to assess the impact of any individual
bottleneck. In addition, we wanted sites with good data coverage. Many promising
sites were discarded because there was an insufficient number of well-functioning loop
detectors nearby.



3.1.1    Westbound SR-24


Our first study site is the westbound direction of California State Route 24 (SR-24)
at the Caldecott Tunnel. SR-24 connects suburban Contra Costa County, to the
east, with the cities of Oakland and San Francisco, to the west. This site is a classic
bottleneck, with the number of lanes decreasing as traffic approaches the tunnel.
This is a site where traffic delays are common; indeed, transportation engineers have
repeatedly studied this exact site (Chin and May, 1991; Chung and Cassidy, 2002;
   8
    Loop detectors are small insulated electric circuits installed in the middle of traffic lanes. Loop
detectors measure the rate at which vehicles pass, e.g. vehicles crossing per five-minute period. In
addition, loop detectors measure average vehicle speed by sensing how long it takes each vehicle to
pass over the detector. These loop detectors are maintained by the California Department of Trans-
portation (Caltrans), and data are made publicly available through the Performance Measurement
System (PeMS) at http://pems.dot.ca.gov/.


                                                  13
Chung et al., 2007). During the study period the tunnel featured two reversible lanes
that operated westbound in the morning and eastbound in the afternoon and evening.
We focus on weekday afternoons and evenings from 2005 to 2010, a period and set of
hours during which the Caldecott Tunnel was operated such that westbound vehicles
merged from four lanes to two as they approached the tunnel.9

Figure 2 shows the study site. Approximately 3,000 feet before the tunnel the number
of lanes merges from four down to two. This is the key feature of our study site and
the location where the vehicle queue typically begins. The figure also indicates using
small circles the locations of loop detectors. We observe a set of two loop detectors
after the merge but before the tunnel, as well as a series of loop detectors upstream of
the merge.10 For westbound travelers there is no reasonable alternative to traversing
the tunnel.11
   9
      Rather than a single wide tunnel, the Caldecott consists of multiple “bores”, each with two
lanes carrying traffic in a single direction. Although the tunnel was expanded to four bores (eight
total lanes) in 2013, we study the period from 2005 to 2010 when the tunnel still had only three
bores and construction had not yet begun on the fourth bore. During this period, the middle bore
operated westward during morning hours, as commuters drove toward Oakland and San Francisco,
and eastward during afternoon and evening hours, as commuters drove toward suburban Contra
Costa County. Afternoon westbound traffic is lighter than eastbound traffic, but with only a
single bore open in the westbound direction, the bottleneck was more than sufficient to generate
significant traffic delays on weekday afternoons. We do not use the eastbound morning bottleneck
in our analysis because it features traffic merging from multiple directions, making it difficult to
measure queue length.
   10
      For the event study analysis, the first upstream detector is approximately 1,000 feet from
the bottleneck. This spacing introduces some delay between the formation of the queue and its
detection. Detectors at other sites — in particular at I-15 — are located closer to their respective
bottlenecks. Reassuringly, the event study analysis generates qualitatively similar findings across
all three sites.
   11
      For visual clarity the figure does not include exits and entrances. One of the significant ad-
vantages of this study site is that there are relatively few exits and entrances nearby. The last
highway entrance prior to the bottleneck is approximately 9,000 feet (1.7 miles) east of the tunnel;
the entrance at Gateway Blvd did not connect to any through roads. Subsequent to our sample
dates, the Gateway Blvd exit was renamed Wilder Rd.



                                                14
3.1.2    Southbound I-15


Our second study site is the southbound direction of Interstate 15 (I-15) northeast of
San Diego. I-15 connects suburban San Diego County, to the north, with the city of
San Diego and I-5, to the south. We focus on afternoon hours at the location where
I-15 crosses I-805, another major north-south highway. As Figure 2 illustrates, I-15
southbound has five lanes prior to crossing I-805. However, while crossing I-805,
I-15 reduces to only two lanes, before widening to three lanes. As we show, this
bottleneck results in frequent queuing during afternoon hours. We focus in particular
on afternoon hours between 2015 and 2018, years during which the relevant loop
detectors were online and functioning reliably.

Of our three study sites, I-15 is the most complicated. As the figure suggests, there
are significant flows both to and from I-805. For visual clarity the figure does not
include all entrances and exits, but there are also entrances and exits at Adams
Avenue, El Cajon Boulevard, and University Avenue. We examined loop detector
data from these entrances and exits, as well as changes in net flows on I-15, and
found that these entrances and exits involve flows that are small compared to the
flows coming on and off of I-805. Nevertheless, it is important to corroborate results
from I-15 with results from the other two sites where there is much less scope for
substitution to alternative routes.12
  12
     One advantage of the I-15 site is that the first upstream detector, At I-805, is located only 300
feet from the bottleneck. In the context of the event study analysis this means that any queue is
detected almost immediately, since even emergency braking from freeway speeds requires up to 200
feet to stop.




                                                 15
3.1.3   Eastbound SR-12


Our third study site is the eastbound direction of California State Route 12 (SR-
12). SR-12 runs through Sonoma, Napa, and Solano Counties, before merging with
Interstate 80 (I-80), at which point drivers continue north toward Sacramento. We
focus on afternoon hours at a location just west of I-80. As Figure 2 illustrates, at
this location SR-12 merges from two lanes down to one lane.13 As we show later, this
merge results in queues that are often very long. This site is a classic bottleneck with
no reasonable alternatives for eastbound drivers. We focus on 2017 and 2018, years
during which the relevant loop detectors were online and functioning reliably.



3.2     Vehicle Flows

Figure 3 plots vehicle flows by hour-of-day for our three study sites. Each data
series describes a different loop detector location. The legend orders detectors in the
direction of traffic flow such that for each site, the last detector in the list corresponds
to the farthest downstream detector (past the bottleneck). The unit of observation
in the underlying data is a five-minute period. Throughout the analysis we average
across lanes at a given detector location. In general, traffic flows and speeds tend to
be highly correlated across lanes, as drivers arbitrage any differences.

Morning and afternoon commuting patterns are visible for all three sites. Total vehi-
cle traffic peaks in the morning at SR-24, but as noted earlier we focus on afternoons
  13
    The first upstream detector, W of Red Top Rd, is located approximately 700 feet from the
bottleneck. This spacing is closer than on SR-24 but further than on I-15.



                                            16
when the middle bore of the Caldecott Tunnel was operated in the opposite direction.
In the afternoons vehicles merge from four lanes to two as they approach the tunnel,
resulting in mean vehicle flows per lane that are approximately twice as high at the
downstream location (Fish Ranch Rd) as compared to upstream locations.

At I-15 and SR-12, total vehicle traffic peaks in the afternoon. As with SR-24, the
downstream detectors (S of I-805 and Red Top Rd respectively) register higher flows
per lane as traffic enters the “neck” of the bottle. With SR-12, the downstream flows
per lane (at Red Top Rd) are approximately twice as high as flows at the upstream
location, reflecting the merge from two lanes to one lane.



3.3     Vehicle Speeds

Figure 4 plots vehicle speeds by hour-of-day for our three study sites. During after-
noon hours there are dramatic decreases in average speeds at all three sites. Speeds
tend to decrease the most at detectors just upstream of the bottleneck. For exam-
ple, on SR-24 the detector immediately upstream of the bottleneck (Gateway Blvd)
exhibits average speeds below 40 miles-per-hour between about 3pm and 6pm. With
I-15 all six detectors experience large decreases in speed during afternoon hours.
Finally, SR-12 has the most severe afternoon decreases in speed, with several up-
stream detectors exhibiting average speeds below 30, and even below 20 miles-per-
hour.

Speeds tend to decrease much less at downstream detectors. On SR-24, for example,
average speeds immediately upstream (Gateway) and downstream (Fish Ranch) track

                                         17
each other closely throughout most of the day. Between 3pm and 6pm, however,
there is a significant divergence; upstream speeds slow to below 20 miles-per-hour,
while downstream speeds remain above 40 miles-per-hour. Similarly on SR-12, the
upstream locations (W of Red Top and E Miners) slow down to below 20 miles-per-
hour, while the downstream location (Red Top Rd) maintains average speeds above
40 miles-per-hour.



3.4    Speed-Flow Curves

Figure 5 plots vehicle speeds against traffic flows for our three study sites. We
constructed these scatterplots using all five-minute observations from the immediate
upstream detector from each site. For the SR-24 site, we plot data from 1pm to
11:55pm, hours during which the tunnel was operated eastbound; for all other sites
we plot all available data. With several years of data for each site, each scatterplot
includes many observations, so we use colors to reflect the density of observations in
each cell.

The basic pattern is similar to the speed-flow curves in Figure 1. With all three sites
there is a large mass of observations at 60 miles-per-hour or faster. Speeds decrease
modestly with flow rates along the top part of the speed-flow curve. But then, as
with Figure 1, there are also large numbers of low-speed, low-flow observations which
make the curve appear to bend backward.

These low-speed, low-flow observations tend to occur during afternoon hours when
there are vehicle queues. Low-speed, low-flow observations may also reflect transient

                                          18
supply shocks, like road construction, lane closures, and stalled vehicles. Speeds
and traffic flows are determined in equilibrium by interactions between demand and
supply. Thus, in general, it does not make sense to interpret this locus of observations
as a supply curve.



3.5     Queue Lengths

We now turn to focus more explicitly on vehicle queues. These patterns of vehicle
speeds and traffic flows imply that there is significant queuing of vehicles occurring
during afternoon hours. With a mild assumption we can use our data to measure
the presence of vehicle queues more directly. In particular, we assume that a queue
is present whenever traffic is moving at under 30 miles-per-hour. This threshold is
arbitrary, but we show later that our results are robust to alternative definitions.
This assumption allows us to both detect when a queue forms each day and to
measure the length of the queue.

An example is helpful. For SR-24, the first upstream detector, Gateway, is 1,690
feet before the bottleneck, and we observe approximately equidistant detectors all
the way to St. Stephens East, which is 15,690 feet (about three miles) away from
the bottleneck. We define a queue as being present if the average speed at Gateway
Blvd is below 30 miles-per-hour. We then measure the length of the queue using
the number of consecutive upstream detectors for which we observe speeds below 30
miles-per-hour.14
  14
   For example, if the measured speed is below 30 miles-per-hour at the first upstream detector
(Gateway), but not at the second (Orinda West), then we conclude that the queue is 1,690 feet in


                                              19
Figure 6 plots mean queue lengths by hour-of-day. These are raw means by hour-of-
day, with queue length coded as zero for periods without queues. During morning
hours, there are almost never queues. During afternoon hours, however, long queues
tend to form at all three study sites. Queues reach maximum length at about 6pm for
all three sites. Lengths vary across sites, but queues can be very long; at SR-12, for
example, the average queue between about 5pm and 6pm exceeds one mile.15



3.6     Estimation Sample

In the instrumental variables analyses we restrict the sample to include only periods
in which a queue has formed. By definition, if there is no queue, then traffic flows
have not reached maximum capacity, and measurements are limited by insufficient
demand rather than maximum capacity.

Conditioning the estimation sample on the presence of a queue is an effective ap-
proach for addressing demand starvation. However, this sample selection criterion
can introduce subtle but meaningful bias into our analysis. Consider periods of low
demand. These periods typically have no queues, and if a queue is present it tends
to be short. But if demand is low, why does a queue form? One possibility is a
negative supply shock, such as poor weather or an accident. When conditioning on
a queue existing, negative supply shocks will thus be more common during periods
length. “Broken” queues (e.g. a case in which traffic moves below 30 miles-per-hour at Gateway,
above 30 miles-per-hour at Orinda West, and below 30 miles-per-hour at Camino Pablo West) are
rare in our estimation sample, and our results are robust to their inclusion or exclusion.
  15
     The online appendix includes additional descriptive statistics about queues. In particular,
Appendix Figure A2 presents histograms of queue length by site by year, and Appendix Figure A5
presents histograms of the time-of-day at which the queue begins each day.


                                              20
of low demand than during periods of high demand, as supply shocks are necessary
for the formation of queues during low demand periods. Thus, the sample selection
criterion itself can generate a spurious positive relationship between capacity and
queue length even if demand is randomly assigned.

To mitigate this bias we focus on periods when demand tends to be sufficient to
generate a queue even in the absence of a negative supply shock. For all three
sites the frequency of queuing peaks on non-holiday weekdays between 4pm and
7pm (see Appendix Figure A3). Accordingly, in our baseline estimation sample we
restrict observations to these weekday hours.16 We also report results in which we
further narrow the focus to 4:30pm to 6:30pm, when the frequency of queuing is even
higher.

For each study site we also report results restricting the sample to include only
between 4:30pm and 6:30pm during summer months. The only supply shock evident
to us that might correlate with time-of-day is lighting conditions. However, during
summer months, which we define as June to August, the sunset generally occurs
after 8pm, well after the 4:30pm and 6:30pm window. Moreover, traffic is much less
likely during summer months to be impacted by adverse weather.17

There is also a related issue that occurs at our I-15 site only. Downstream of the two-
lane bottleneck, I-15 absorbs inflows from I-805 and then traverses an interchange
  16
      The online appendix presents summary statistics. In particular, Appendix Tables A1 and A2
present summary statistics of the complete data set and the 4pm-7pm sample with a queue present,
respectively.
   17
      For example, at the SR-24 study site, total monthly precipitation during summer months never
exceeds 0.1 inches, and fog is rarely present on summer afternoons. At the SR-12 study site, sunset
is never an issue, since drivers are going east.


                                                21
with another highway, SR-94. On certain days queuing forms at these downstream
locations, and the second bottleneck can back up to our study site, restricting traffic
flow. To avoid potential problems, we exclude observations for which downstream av-
erage vehicle speeds (S of I-805) are below 35 miles-per-hour. At our other two sites,
there is no downstream bottleneck, and we impose no such sample restriction.

Finally, before proceeding we note that our descriptive statistics provide an infor-
mal visual version of our instrumental variables test. Figure 6 revealed that queue
lengths vary substantially between 4pm and 7pm. This is visual evidence of a strong
“first-stage” relationship between queue length and time-of-day. In addition, Figure
3 revealed that vehicle flows downstream of the bottleneck are relatively constant
between 4pm and 7pm, and Appendix Figure A4 confirms that this pattern holds
after conditioning on a queue being present. The juxtaposition of Figures 3 and 6
provides evidence against hypercongestion. While queue length varies substantially
between 4pm and 7pm, mean vehicle flows do not. The relatively flat time profile for
traffic flows thus suggests there is no reduced-form relationship between time-of-day
and highway capacity, implying that the instrumental variables estimate is likely to
be close to zero.




                                          22
4     Instrumental Variables

4.1    Baseline Estimates

Table 1 reports our baseline instrumental variables estimates for all three study sites.
As we described earlier with Equation (1), the dependent variable in these regressions
is capacity, measured downstream of the bottleneck in vehicles per five minutes. The
independent variable of interest is queue length, measured in thousands of feet. We
instrument for queue length using a third-order polynomial in time-of-day. Time-of-
day is highly predictive of travel demand, and the instrument F -statistics from the
first-stage regressions are large in all cases, indicating that we do not have a weak
instruments problem.

Across study sites and specifications, there is no evidence of hypercongestion. If
hypercongestion were present, we would expect the estimates of α1 to be negative.
Instead, seven out of nine estimates are positive, and all are nine estimates are
close to zero. For example, for SR-24 in Column (1), each additional 1,000 feet
of queue is associated with a capacity increase of 3.6 vehicles per five minutes per
lane. This is very small compared to the mean capacity per lane (176.2). When
further restricting the sample in Columns (2) and (3), the estimates remain close
to zero. The two negative estimates, both for SR-12, are tiny compared to mean
capacity, in both cases less than 0.5%. Across sites and specifications, the estimates
are sufficiently precise to rule out capacity drops of more than 2% per 1,000 feet of
queue, even at 99% confidence levels.


                                          23
4.2    Additional Specifications

Results are very similar across alternative specifications and robustness checks. When
we estimate the queue length regressions using ordinary least squares, rather than
2SLS, the estimates tend to be negative, but they are extremely close to zero (Ap-
pendix Table A3). This pattern is consistent with queue length being driven by both
demand and supply shocks — supply shocks introduce a spurious negative correlation
between queue length and capacity, which is filtered out in our instrumental vari-
ables analyses. Regardless, the OLS estimates are precise enough to rule out capacity
drops of more than 1% per 1,000 feet of queue across all sites and specifications.

Our results are also robust to using alternative thresholds to define queues. Recall
that in our baseline specification in Table 1 we assume that a queue is present
whenever traffic moves at under 30 miles-per-hour. Appendix Tables A4 and A5
present results using 25 miles-per-hour and 35-miles-per-hour as the threshold for
a queue, respectively. Results with these alternative speed thresholds are nearly
identical to our baseline results. Across study sites and specifications estimates are
always close to zero, and in all cases we can rule out capacity drops of more than
2.5% per 1,000 feet of queue.

Thus across all specifications there is no evidence of hypercongestion. To the con-
trary, longer queues tend to be associated in many cases with slightly higher capacity.
This could be, for example, because the longer queue ensures that there is always
another driver to fill small gaps during the merge or because drivers exert more effort
to merge quickly after waiting in a long queue.


                                          24
5     Event Study Analysis

5.1    Visual Evidence

Figure 7 plots the results of our event study analyses. The horizontal axis is time in
minutes relative to the onset of the queue, normalized so that the longest-duration
afternoon queue begins at time zero on each day. As with the instrumental variable
analyses, we define a queue as being present when upstream traffic is moving at under
30 miles-per-hour. For each weekday in our data, we identify the longest continuous
period of queuing, and then take the first five-minute interval within that period to
mark the onset of the queue. To focus on afternoons we exclude queues that do not
start between 2:15pm and 7:00pm.

The event study analyses reveal no evidence of a decrease in capacity. For all three
sites, capacity is essentially flat throughout, with no discontinuous change at the
moment the queue is formed. Figure 7 also includes 95% confidence intervals, and
these intervals are narrow enough to rule out even modest changes in capacity. To
illustrate this, we included a simulated 10% capacity drop at queue onset in each
panel. The 10% drop was chosen arbitrarily, but it is well within the range of
estimates in the existing literature. The discordance between the two series indicates
that we can rule out a capacity drop of this magnitude, or even considerably smaller
magnitude.




                                         25
5.2    Estimates and Standard Errors

Table 2 reports corresponding estimates and standard errors. As with Figure 7,
these estimates are based on three separate event study regressions, one for each
site. In Column (1) we report the change in capacity between the five minutes prior
to queue formation and the five minutes after queue formation. That is, we calculate
the difference between the last estimated β before queue formation (β−1 ) and the
first estimated β after queue formation (β0 ). Columns (2) and (3) then expand the
comparison to consider 20 and 30 minute symmetric windows, respectively. In these
cases we calculate the difference in the average estimated β coefficients before and
after queue formation, in order to report the implied change in capacity per five
minutes.

Across study sites and specifications the estimates are very close to zero. Consistent
with the visual evidence in Figure 7, Table 2 reveals no evidence of a decrease in
capacity when the queue forms. Positive estimates indicate an increase in capacity.
For example, for SR-24 in Column (1), we find that queue formation is associated
with a capacity increase of 1.2 vehicles per five minutes. This is less than one percent
of mean capacity. Results are similar with alternative windows and for the other sites
— there is a mix of positive and negative estimates, but all are very small relative to
mean capacity. These estimates are less precisely estimated than the instrumental
variables estimates, but for all nine estimates in Table 2 we can rule out a 5% capacity
drop or larger with 99% confidence. If we average the estimates in Column (1) across
the three sites, we can reject a mean capacity drop across sites of 1% or larger.



                                          26
This lack of evidence of a capacity drop stands in contrast to the vast majority of
previous studies. For example, Zhang and Levinson (2004) reach a different con-
clusion examining bottlenecks in Minnesota. They find that the onset of the queue
leads capacity to decrease by between 2% and 11% across sites. Like our study, they
measure capacity downstream of the bottleneck, not within the queue. However, in
their analysis they define the start of the queue as following an interval in which
traffic flow exceeds its long-run average, and both upstream and downstream loca-
tions are uncongested. One concern with this approach is mean reversion, as average
flows will tend to drop following an interval conditioned on having abnormally high
flows.

Appendix Table A6 reports results from alternative event study analyses in which we
estimate the specification used in Table 2 using median regressions. These estimates
address the potential concern that our results are driven by large outliers, in either
the positive or negative directions. Consistent with our baseline event study results,
the median regression estimates are again close to zero, providing no evidence of a
drop in capacity when the queue forms. Five of the nine estimates are positive, and
in all cases we can reject a 5% capacity drop or larger.




                                         27
6     Discussion

6.1    Effect Size Magnitudes

Neither the instrumental variables regressions nor the event study analyses show a
decrease in highway capacity during periods of high demand. To put these results in
context, Figure 8 plots a histogram of all of our estimates. We include all coefficient
estimates from Tables 1 and 2, as well as from alternative analyses in Appendix
Tables A3, A4, A5, and A6 (54 coefficients in total). These estimates summarize the
results from both of our tests of hypercongestion across three sites and a rich variety
of different specifications.

All of our estimates are clustered tightly around zero. To illustrate this fact we have
included in Figure 8 two vertical lines. The righthand vertical line corresponds to
the average observed capacity across all sites and tables — 154 vehicles per lane per
five minutes. The lefthand vertical line corresponds to a hypothetical 10% decrease
in capacity (15.4 vehicles per lane per five minutes). Even the most negative of our
54 estimates fall well short of this 10% threshold, and the vast majority of estimates
are either positive or represent less than a 1% decrease in average capacity.



6.2    Policy Implications

We consider the policy implications of our results in the context of a rich existing
literature that has examined the implications of hypercongestion using variations of



                                          28
the “bottleneck” model. In this model drivers face a tradeoff between time delays
and schedule inflexibility and optimize their departure times accordingly (Vickrey,
1969; Small, 1982; Arnott et al., 1990, 1993, 1994).

Economists have long recognized that traffic congestion represents a negative exter-
nality (Pigou, 1920; Vickrey, 1963, 1969; Newbery, 1990). When a motorist drives
on a congested road, she decreases the average speed of all drivers, imposing an ex-
ternal cost. Our results imply, however, that this externality is not exacerbated by
an additional decrease in capacity. Driving reduces average speeds, but we find no
evidence that the travel supply curve is backward-bending. Thus our results imply
that the marginal damages from driving are lower than would be implied by a supply
curve exhibiting hypercongestion.

It is less clear what our results imply for optimal “Pigouvian” congestion pricing.
Starting from an unregulated equilibrium, marginal damages are clearly lower with-
out hypercongestion. However, at the social optimum there is less driving during
peak times, so marginal damages are lower and typically queueing is avoided al-
together (see, e.g. Mun, 1999; Fosgerau and Small, 2013). Thus whether or not
hypercongestion exists likely has minimal impact on the how taxes are set in the
optimal Pigouvian solution, as there may be no congestion at all.

This intuition is borne out in the existing literature. Arnott et al. (1993), for example,
describes a model with a continuum of identical drivers facing a tradeoff between time
delays and schedule inflexibility. In the optimal Pigouvian solution, drivers pay a
time-varying tax that makes them indifferent between all departure times. This tax



                                           29
depends on drivers’ tastes for arriving early or late, but there is no queueing at the
social optimum, so whether or not hypercongestion exists is irrelevant for setting the
tax. With hypercongestion the welfare gains from optimal congestion pricing are
larger, however, as total social costs are higher in the unregulated equilibrium.

Two recent papers by Jonathan Hall find that introducing driver heterogeneity does
not change this basic intuition (Hall, 2018a,b). For example, Hall (2018a) struc-
turally estimates drivers’ preferences and then solves for optimal congestion pricing
outcomes with different levels of hypercongestion. Counterfactual analyses (e.g. Ta-
ble 5) show that gains from congestion pricing are larger when there is more hyper-
congestion, again because total social costs in the unregulated equilibrium increase
with hypercongestion.




7    Conclusion

The concept of hypercongestion has influenced transportation economics models for
over five decades. Our paper proposes two empirical tests of hypercongestion. Both
tests are novel in the literature but correspond closely with how hypercongestion has
been modeled in previous analytical studies. We apply both tests to high-quality
data from three highway bottlenecks in California. Across tests, study sites, and
specifications, we find no evidence of a reduction in highway capacity during periods
of high demand.

How can this be? To anyone who has been stuck in heavy traffic, it certainly feels


                                          30
as if the capacity of the roadway is being restricted in these moments. We suspect,
however, that this feeling is largely about speed rather than capacity. There is no
question that as more vehicles crowd onto the road, speed decreases. But speed
and capacity are not equivalent. Speed is readily apparent to drivers, but capacity
requires careful measurement.

On highways the feeling of being trapped in heavy traffic often occurs in a queue,
waiting to pass a bottleneck. By definition the capacity per lane must drop when
approaching a bottleneck as the number of lanes decreases. Nevertheless, we find that
the capacity of the bottleneck itself — the rate at which vehicles pass through the
bottleneck — does not drop when the queue first forms nor when the queue grows
in length. No matter how much travel demand increases, the number of vehicles
passing through the bottleneck remains stable.




                                         31
References
Adler, Martin W., Federica Liberini, Antonio Russo, and Jos N. van
 Ommeren, “Road Congestion and Public Transit,” ITEA Conference Working
 Paper, 2017.
Akbar, Prottoy and Gilles Duranton, “Measuring the Cost of Congestion in
 Highly Congested City: Bogotá,” University of Pennsylvania Working Paper,
 2017.
Allen, BL, FL Hall, and MA Gunter, “Another Look at Identifying Speed-Flow
 Relationships on Freeways,” Transportation Research Record, 1985, 1005, 54–64.
Angrist, Joshua D and Alan B Krueger, “Instrumental Variables and the Search
 for Identification: From Supply and Demand to Natural Experiments,” Journal of
 Economic Perspectives, 2001, 15 (4), 69–85.
Arnott, Richard, “A Bathtub Model of Downtown Traffic Congestion,” Journal of
 Urban Economics, 2013, 76, 110–121.
  , Andre De Palma, and Robin Lindsey, “Economics of a Bottleneck,” Journal
  of Urban Economics, 1990, 27 (1), 111–130.
  , , and , “A Structural Model of Peak-Period Congestion: A Traffic Bottle-
  neck with Elastic Demand,” American Economic Review, 1993, pp. 161–179.
  , André De Palma, and Robin Lindsey, “The Welfare Effects of Conges-
  tion Tolls with Heterogeneous Commuters,” Journal of Transport Economics and
  Policy, 1994, pp. 139–161.
Banks, James H, “Flow Processes at a Freeway Bottlenecks,” Transportation Re-
 search Record, 1990, (1287).
  , “Two-Capacity Phenomenon at Freeway Bottlenecks: A Basis for Ramp Meter-
  ing?,” Transportation Research Record, 1991, (1320).
Baum-Snow, Nathaniel, “Did Highways Cause Suburbanization?,” Quarterly
 Journal of Economics, 2007, 122 (2), 775–805.
Bertini, Robert and Shazia Malik, “Observed Dynamic Traffic Features on Free-
 way Section with Merges and Diverges,” Transportation Research Record, 2004,
 (1867), 25–35.




                                      32
Cassidy, Michael J and Jittichai Rudjanakanoknad, “Increasing the Capacity
 of an Isolated Merge by Metering its On-Ramp,” Transportation Research Part B,
 2005, 39 (10), 896–913.
   and Robert L Bertini, “Some Traffic Features at Freeway Bottlenecks,” Trans-
  portation Research Part B, 1999, 33 (1), 25–42.
Chin, Hong C and Adolf D May, “Examination of the Speed-Flow Relationship
 at the Caldecott Tunnel,” Transportation Research Record, 1991, 1320, 75–82.
Chung, Koohong and Michael Cassidy, “Testing Daganzo’s Behavioral Theory
 for Multi-lane Freeway Traffic,” California Partners for Advanced Transit and
 Highways (PATH), 2002.
  , Jittichai Rudjanakanoknad, and Michael J Cassidy, “Relation Between
  Traffic Density and Capacity Drop at Three Freeway Bottlenecks,” Transportation
  Research Part B, 2007, 41 (1), 82–95.
Couture, Victor, Gilles Duranton, and Matthew A Turner, “Speed,” Review
 of Economics and Statistics, 2018, 100 (4), 725–739.
Diakaki, Christina, Markos Papageorgiou, and Tom McLean, “Integrated
 Traffic-Responsive Urban Corridor Control Strategy in Glasgow, Scotland,” Trans-
 portation Research Record, 2000, (1727), 101–111.
Drake, JL and Joseph L Schofer, “A Statistical Analysis of Speed-Density Hy-
 potheses,” Highway Research Record, 1966, 154, 53–87.
Duranton, Gilles and Matthew A Turner, “The Fundamental Law of Road
 Congestion: Evidence from US cities,” American Economic Review, 2011, 101 (6),
 2616–2652.
Fosgerau, Mogens and Kenneth A Small, “Hypercongestion in Downtown
  Metropolis,” Journal of Urban Economics, 2013, 76, 122–134.
Hall, Fred L and Kwaku Agyemang-Duah, “Freeway Capacity Drop and the
 Definition of Capacity,” Transportation Research Record, 1991, (1320).
Hall, Jonathan D., “Can Tolling Help Everyone? Estimating the Aggregate and
 Distributional Consequences of Congestion Pricing,” University of Toronto Work-
 ing Paper, 2018.
  , “Pareto Improvements from Lexus Lanes: The Effects of Pricing a Portion of the
  Lanes on Congested Highways,” Journal of Public Economics, 2018, 158, 113–125.


                                       33
Hanna, Rema, Gabriel Kreindler, and Benjamin A Olken, “Citywide Ef-
 fects of High-Occupancy Vehicle Eestrictions: Evidence from “Three-in-One” in
 Jakarta,” Science, 2017, 357 (6346), 89–93.
Johnson, M Bruce, “On the Economics of Road Congestion,” Econometrica, 1964,
  32 (1, 2), 137.
Keeler, Theodore E and Kenneth A Small, “Optimal Peak-Load Pricing, In-
 vestment, and Service Levels on Urban Expressways,” Journal of Political Econ-
 omy, 1977, 85 (1), 1–25.
Kreindler, Gabriel, “The Welfare Effect of Road Congestion Pricing: Experimen-
 tal Evidence and Equilibrium Implications,” MIT Working paper, 2018.
Lighthill, Michael James and Gerald Beresford Whitham, “On Kinematic
  Waves II. A Theory of Traffic Flow on Long Crowded Roads,” Proceedings of the
  Royal Society of London. Series A. Mathematical and Physical Sciences, 1955, 229
  (1178), 317–345.
Lindsey, C Robin and Erik T Verhoef, “Congestion Modeling,” in “Handbook
  of Transportation Modelling” Elsevier Science 2008.
Lomax, Tim, David Schrank, and Bill Eisele, “Congestion Data for Your City
  — Urban Mobility Information,” 2018.
May, Adolf D, Traffic Flow Fundamentals, Prentice Hall, 1990.
Mun, Se-IL, “Traffic Jams and the Congestion Toll,” Transportation Research Part
 B: Methodological, 1994, 28 (5), 365–375.
Mun, Se-il, “Peak-Load Pricing of a Bottleneck with Traffic Jam,” Journal of Urban
 Economics, 1999, 46 (3), 323–349.
Newbery, David M, “Cost Recovery from Optimally Designed Roads,” Economica,
 1989, 56 (222), 165–185.
  , “Pricing and Congestion: Economic Principles Relevant to Pricing Roads,” Ox-
  ford Review of Economic Policy, 1990, 6 (2), 22–38.
Ni, Daiheng, Traffic Flow Theory: Characteristics, Experimental Methods, and
 Numerical Techniques, Elsevier: Butterworth-Heinemann, 2015.
Oh, Simon and Hwasoo Yeo, “Estimation of Capacity Drop in Highway Merging
 Sections,” Transportation Research Record, 2012, (2286), 111–121.


                                       34
Persaud, Bhagwant, Sam Yagar, and Russel Brownlee, “Exploration of the
 Breakdown Phenomenon in Freeway Traffic,” Transportation Research Record,
 1998, (1634), 64–69.
Pigou, Arthur Cecil, The Economics of Welfare, London: Macmillan, 1920.
Small, Kenneth A, “The Scheduling of Consumer Activities: Work Trips,” Amer-
 ican Economic Review, 1982, 72 (3), 467–479.
  , “The Bottleneck Model: An Assessment and Interpretation,” Economics of
  Transportation, 2015, 4 (1-2), 110–117.
   and Xuehao Chu, “Hypercongestion,” Journal of Transport Economics and
  Policy, 2003, 37 (3), 319–352.
Smaragdis, Emmanouil, Markos Papageorgiou, and Elias Kosmatopoulos,
 “A Flow-Maximizing Adaptive Local Ramp Metering Strategy,” Transportation
 Research Part B: Methodological, 2004, 38 (3), 251–270.
Sugiyama, Yuki, Minoru Fukui, Macoto Kikuchi, Katsuya Hasebe, Ak-
  ihiro Nakayama, Katsuhiro Nishinari, Shin ichi Tadaki, and Satoshi
  Yukawa, “Traffic Jams Without Bottlenecks— Experimental Evidence for the
  Physical Mechanism of the Formation of a Jam,” New Journal of Physics, 2008,
  10 (3), 033001.
Tadaki, Shinichi, Macoto Kikuchi, Minoru Fukui, Akihiro Nakayama,
  Katsuhiro Nishinari, Akihiro Shibata, Yuki Sugiyama, Taturu Yosida,
  and Satoshi Yukawa, “Phase Transition in Traffic Jam Experiment on a Cir-
  cuit,” New Journal of Physics, 2013, 15 (10), 103034.
Transportation Research Board, “Highway Capacity Manual 6th Edition: A
  Guide for Multimodal Mobility Analysis,” 2016.
Transportation Review Board, “Highway Capacity Manual, Sixth Edition,” Na-
  tional Academies of Sciences, Engineering, Medicine: Washington, DC, 2016.
Vickrey, William S, “Pricing in Urban and Suburban Transport,” American Eco-
 nomic Review, 1963, 53 (2), 452–465.
  , “Congestion Theory and Transport Investment,” American Economic Review,
  1969, 59 (2), 251–260.
Walters, Alan A, “The Theory and Measurement of Private and Social Cost of
 Highway Congestion,” Econometrica, 1961, pp. 676–699.


                                     35
Yang, Hai and Hai-Jun Huang, “Analysis of the Time-Varying Pricing of a
 Bottleneck with Elastic Demand Using Optimal Control Theory,” Transportation
 Research Part B: Methodological, 1997, 31 (6), 425–440.
Yang, Jun, Avralt-Od Purevjav, and Shanjun Li, “The Marginal Cost of
 Traffic Congestion and Road Pricing: Evidence from a Natural Experiment in
 Beijing,” Working Paper, 2018.
Zhang, Lei and David Levinson, “Some Properties of Flows at Freeway Bottle-
 necks,” Transportation Research Record, 2004, (1883), 122–131.




                                     36
                                   Figure 1: Speed-Flow Curves




Sources: Transportation Research Board (2016), Drake and Schofer (1966), Keeler and Small (1977), Allen et al.
                       (1985), Newbery (1989), May (1990), Mun (1999), and Ni (2015).
                                                                 Figure 2: Study Sites
                                            A. Westbound SR-24 (Caldecott Tunnel)




                                                              rs




                                                                                              rs
                                     s




                                                                              s
                                  or




                                                              o



                                                                            or


                                                                                           o
                                               s


                                                           ct




                                                                                                                                 s
                                                                                        ct
                               ct


                                            or




                                                                                                                                 r
                                                                          ct
                                                         te




                                                                                                                              to
                                                                                    te
                             te


                                            t




                                                                        te
                                         ec


                                                       de




                                                                                                                             c
                                                                                  de
                          de




                                                                                                        s
                                                                       de




                                                                                                                          te
                                      et




                                                                                                       or




                                                                                                                                                           s
                                                  rW




                                                                                                                        de




                                                                                                                                                        or
                                                                               W
                       rE


                                    rd




                                                                                                     t
                                                                    E




                                                                                                  ec




                                                                                                                                                     ct
                                                                                                                     vd
                                                                 o


                                                                             o
                     D


                                   D


                                                D




                                                                                                   t




                                                                                                                                                   te
                                                               bl


                                                                           bl



                                                                                                de




                                                                                                                    Bl
                  ns


                              ns


                                               s




                                                                                                                                                 de
                                                             Pa


                                                                         Pa
                                            en




                                                                                              W
               he


                            he




                                                                                                                 ay




                                                                                                                                             Rd
                                         ph



                                                           o


                                                                       o
               p


                          ep




                                                                                       da
                                                         in


                                                                       in




                                                                                                               ew
            te




                                         e




                                                                                                                                         h
                        St


                                      St



                                                       m


                                                                 m



                                                                                    rin
          S




                                                                                                                                      nc
                                                                                                             at
                                                    Ca


                                                               Ca
       St


                     St


                                   St




                                                                                                             G
                                                                                  O




                                                                                                                                   Ra
                                                                                                                                sh
                                                                                                                              Fi
                                                                                                                                             Caldecott Tunnel Bore 3

                                         Direction of traffic (westbound)



                                              B. Southbound I-15 (Merge with I-805)
                                                                                          s
                              rs                      ors                             tor
                           o                       ect                       det
                                                                                 ec
                                                                                                       I-8
                                                                                                          05                                                                    05
                        ect                     det                                                                                         05                               I-8
                    det                     d                          ve                       No
                                                                                                   f
                                                                                                                                   t I-
                                                                                                                                        8
                                                                                                                                                                      So
                                                                                                                                                                         f
              Av
                e                        Blv                         yA                     s                                  rs a                               s
          s                      jon                            rsit                    tor                              to                                    tor
       am                      Ca                         ive                    tec                                  tec                                tec
    Ad                      El                          Un                     De                                   De                                 De




       Direction of traﬃc (southbound)                                                Inﬂow from I-805                Outﬂow to I-805




                                              C. Eastbound SR-12 (Lane Reduction)
                                                      d
                                               hR                                                                                            lR
                                                                                                                                                d              d
                                         R anc                                                                                          rai              ail R              Rd
                                      d                d             d                  d                                              T               r
                                 l an           ch  R
                                                                 h R              h  R             o r s                        n e rs             r sT                Top
                              k               n                 c               c                 t                            i                 e                   d
                           Kir             Ly              Ly
                                                              n
                                                                          Ly
                                                                             n
                                                                                            ete
                                                                                                c
                                                                                                           tor
                                                                                                               s           fM               Mi
                                                                                                                                               n                  Re
                        of             of               of             of               e d detec                     Eo                of                     of             cto
                                                                                                                                                                                 r
                    W             W                 E                E              i n                             i                E                      W              ete
               m  i          m i               m  i              m i
                                                                            n tyl           R d                   m              m i                   m  i
                                                                                                                                                                       d d
                                                                                          l
          rs ½          rs ¼             rs ¼              rs ¾         cou            rai               rs ⅒              rs ¼                  rs ½               pR
  t e cto       t e cto          t e cto            te cto        la no      u  r sT            t e cto            t e cto                t ecto               d To
De           De              De                De              So         Sp                De                   De                    De                   Re




                                                 Direction of traﬃc (eastbound)
Notes: Figures approximately to scale.
                                                                Figure 3: Mean Traffic Flow
                                                                   A. Westbound SR-24


                                          150
                                                                                                                 VDS Name
            Vehicles / lane / 5 minutes


                                                                                                                      St Stephens Dr E
                                                                                                                      St Stephens Dr
                                                                                                                      St Stephens Dr W
                                          100
                                                                                                                      Camino Pablo E
                                                                                                                      Camino Pablo W
                                                                                                                      Orinda W
                                           50
                                                                                                                      Gateway Blvd
                                                                                                                      Fish Ranch Rd


                                            0
                                                1am 3am   6am     9am    Noon    3pm     6pm     9pm Midnight



                                                                    B. Southbound I-15
                                          150
            Vehicles / lane / 5 minutes




                                                                                                                     VDS Name
                                                                                                                         Adams Ave
                                          100
                                                                                                                         El Cajon Blvd
                                                                                                                         University Ave
                                                                                                                         N of I-805

                                           50                                                                            At I-805
                                                                                                                         S of I-805




                                            0
                                                1am 3am   6am      9am    Noon     3pm     6pm      9pm   Midnight



                                                                   C. Eastbound SR-12
                                                                                                                VDS Name
                                                                                                                     Kirkland Ranch
            Vehicles / lane / 5 minutes




                                                                                                                     W Lynch Rd
                                          100
                                                                                                                     E Lynch Rd 1
                                                                                                                     E Lynch Rd 2
                                                                                                                     Solano county line
                                                                                                                     Spurs Trail Rd
                                           50
                                                                                                                     E Miners Trail Rd 1
                                                                                                                     E Miners Trail Rd 2
                                                                                                                     W of Red Top Rd
                                                                                                                     Red Top Rd
                                            0

                                                1am 3am   6am    9am     Noon    3pm     6pm     9pm Midnight



Notes: We exclude weekends and holidays.
                     Figure 4: Mean Vehicle Speed (in Miles-Per-Hour)
                                           A. Westbound SR-24

                                                                                     VDS Name
               60                                                                         St Stephens Dr E
                                                                                          St Stephens Dr
                                                                                          St Stephens Dr W
                                                                                          Camino Pablo E
               40
                                                                                          Camino Pablo W
                                                                                          Orinda W
                                                                                          Gateway Blvd
                                                                                          Fish Ranch Rd
               20



                     1am 3am   6am    9am    Noon    3pm     6pm     9pm Midnight



                                            B. Southbound I-15

               70


                                                                                         VDS Name

               60                                                                            Adams Ave
                                                                                             El Cajon Blvd
                                                                                             University Ave

               50                                                                            N of I-805
                                                                                             At I-805
                                                                                             S of I-805
               40




                     1am 3am    6am    9am    Noon     3pm     6pm      9pm   Midnight



                                           C. Eastbound SR-12
                                                                                    VDS Name
               60                                                                        Kirkland Ranch
                                                                                         W Lynch Rd
                                                                                         E Lynch Rd 1
                                                                                         E Lynch Rd 2
               40                                                                        Solano county line
                                                                                         Spurs Trail Rd
                                                                                         E Miners Trail Rd 1
                                                                                         E Miners Trail Rd 2
               20                                                                        W of Red Top Rd
                                                                                         Red Top Rd


                     1am 3am   6am    9am    Noon    3pm     6pm     9pm Midnight



Notes: We exclude weekends and holidays.
                                          Figure 5: Observed Speed–Flow Curves
                                                        A. Westbound SR-24
                             80




                             60                                                                      Number of
                                                                                                     Observations
               Speed (mph)




                                                                                                         1000
                             40
                                                                                                         100

                                                                                                         10

                             20                                                                          1




                              0
                                      0     100               200            300         400
                                                  Flow rate (vehicles per five-min)

                                                         B. Southbound I-15


                             60                                                                      Number of
                                                                                                     Observations
               Speed (mph)




                             40                                                                          1000

                                                                                                         100

                                                                                                         10
                             20
                                                                                                         1




                              0
                                      0     100             200            300         400
                                                  Flow rate (vehicles per five-min)

                                                        C. Eastbound SR-12
                             80




                             60                                                                      Number of
                                                                                                     Observations
               Speed (mph)




                                                                                                         1000
                             40
                                                                                                         100

                                                                                                         10

                             20                                                                          1




                              0
                                  0          50                100               150           200
                                                  Flow rate (vehicles per five-min)

Notes: The x- and y-axes represent traffic flow and mean vehicle speeds, respectively, averaged across all lanes at the
detector immediately upstream of each bottleneck. We exclude weekends and holidays. Colors represent the number
of observations in each cell, as indicated in the legend.
              Figure 6: Queue Length (in Thousands of Feet), Within Day
                                         A. Westbound SR-24


                3




                2




                1




                0

                       1am   3am      6am      9am     Noon     3pm      6pm      9pm    Midnight




                                            B. Southbound I-15


                2




                1




                0

                       1am   3am      6am      9am     Noon     3pm      6pm      9pm    Midnight




                                            C. Eastbound SR-12
                8




                6




                4




                2




                0

                       1am   3am      6am      9am     Noon     3pm      6pm      9pm    Midnight



Notes: We plot for each study site the mean queue length (in thousands of feet) by 5-minute period. We exclude
weekends and holidays. We define a queue as traffic moving under 30 miles-per-hour. Periods without queues are
coded as having a queue of length zero.
                                                                      Figure 7: Traffic Flows by Time of Queue Onset
                                                                                      A. Westbound SR-24

                Downstream flow (vehicles / lane / 5 minutes)
                                                                200




                                                                175




                                                                150




                                                                125




                                                                100

                                                                               -50                        0                         50
                                                                                     Event time (minutes relative to queue start)

                                                                                        B. Southbound I-15
                Downstream flow (vehicles / lane / 5 minutes)




                                                                200




                                                                175




                                                                150




                                                                125




                                                                100

                                                                               -50                        0                         50
                                                                                     Event time (minutes relative to queue start)

                                                                                       C. Eastbound SR-12
                Downstream flow (vehicles / lane / 5 minutes)




                                                                200




                                                                175




                                                                150




                                                                125




                                                                100

                                                                               -50                        0                         50
                                                                                     Event time (minutes relative to queue start)

Notes: These event study figures plot average vehicle flows in the 80 minutes before and after queue formation. Time
is normalized so that the longest-duration afternoon queue begins at time zero on each day. The solid line plots mean
capacity, with the shaded area representing a 95% confidence interval. The dashed line plots what mean capacity
would look like if there were a capacity drop of 10% at queue onset, simulated by a drop from 5% above observed
flows to 5.5% below observed flows at event time zero.
                                                      Figure 8: Distribution of Estimates
                          10% Capacity Decrease                                                                                     Average Capacity




                  .25
                  .2
                  .15
      Frequency
                  .1
                  .05
                  0
                        -30                       0    30                   60                        90           120                 150
                                                             Capacity (vehicles per lane per 5 minutes)

Notes: This figure plots the distribution of all 54 coefficient estimates from Tables 1, 2, A3, A4, A5, and A6. The righthand vertical line corresponds
to the average observed capacity across all sites and aforementioned tables. The lefthand vertical line corresponds to a hypothetical 10% decrease in
capacity.
       Table 1: The Effect of Queue Length on Highway Capacity, 2SLS


                                             (1)                     (2)                     (3)

                                         Weekdays               Weekdays                Weekdays
                                          4-7pm                4:30-6:30pm             4:30-6:30pm
                                                                                        June-Aug


                                                         A. Westbound SR-24


Queue Length                               3.581                   2.017                    2.557
                                          (0.365)                 (0.403)                  (0.545)
Total Observations                        26,159                  19,024                    5,285
Number of Days                              952                     944                      268
Dependent Variable Mean                    176.2                   177.1                    177.8
Queue Length Mean                           3.20                    3.38                     2.97
K-P F-stat                                  84.6                    72.7                     25.2

                                                          B. Southbound I-15


Queue Length                               2.009                   2.467                    0.163
                                          (0.569)                 (0.558)                  (0.503)
Total Observations                         7,718                   6,414                    1,616
Number of Days                              687                     660                      160
Dependent Variable Mean                    149.2                   149.5                    153.6
Queue Length Mean                           3.96                    3.99                     3.67
K-P F-stat                                 30.5                     25.4                     7.31

                                                          C. Eastbound SR-12


Queue Length                               0.102                   -0.156                   -0.681
                                          (0.188)                 (0.275)                  (0.573)
Total Observations                         9,750                    6,803                    1,335
Number of Days                              297                      295                       58
Dependent Variable Mean                    139.2                    139.6                    139.8
Queue Length Mean                           6.77                     7.27                     6.60
K-P F-stat                                 117.0                     75.1                     33.0
Notes: This table reports estimates and standard errors from nine separate regressions, all estimated
using two-stage least squares (2SLS) with a third-order polynomial in time-of-day as the instruments.
The dependent variable in all regressions is highway capacity, measured in vehicles per five minutes per
lane, downstream of the bottleneck. Queue length is measured in thousands of feet. The sample includes
all five-minute periods with a queue. Standard errors are clustered by day-of-sample.
 Table 2: Estimated Change in Highway Capacity at Queue Formation


                                 (1)                       (2)                         (3)
                             Ten Minute               Twenty Minute               Thirty Minute
                              Window                    Window                      Window


                                                  A. Westbound SR-24
                                 1.232                   1.167                          1.240
                                (0.357)                 (0.353)                        (0.366)
In-window mean                   168.5                   168.8                          169.1
Number of days                    706                     706                            706


                                                   B. Southbound I-15
                                 0.759                    0.345                         -1.680
                                (0.433)                  (0.404)                       (0.386)
In-window mean                   142.0                    142.9                          144.2
Number of days                    694                      694                            694


                                                   C. Eastbound SR-12
                                 -1.879                   -2.417                        -2.679
                                (1.090)                  (0.865)                       (0.720)
In-window mean                   133.7                     133.8                         134.4
Number of days                    247                       247                           247

Notes: This table reports nine estimates of the change in highway capacity at queue formation.
These estimates are based on coefficients from three separate event study regressions, one for each
site. The dependent variable in all regressions is traffic flow (in vehicles per five minutes per lane),
which we refer to as capacity because we focus on periods of queue formation when these bottlenecks
operate at close to capacity. In Column (1) we report the change in capacity between the five minutes
before queue formation and the five minutes after queue formation. Columns (2) and (3) expand the
comparison to consider 20 and 30 minute symmetric windows (10 and 15 minutes in each direction),
respectively. Standard errors are clustered by day-of-sample.
                                                                 Online Appendix


                                         Figure A1: Detector Health by Month-of-Sample
                                                                 A. Westbound SR-24
                                  100%


                                                                                                       VDS Name
                                  75%                                                                      St Stephens Dr E
              Percent Reporting


                                                                                                           St Stephens Dr
                                                                                                           St Stephens Dr W
                                  50%                                                                      Camino Pablo E
                                                                                                           Camino Pablo W
                                                                                                           Orinda W
                                  25%                                                                      Gateway Blvd
                                                                                                           Fish Ranch Rd


                                   0%

                                                2006      2007          2008   2009      2010




                                                                 B. Southbound I-15
                                  100%




                                  75%
                                                                                                         VDS Name
              Percent Reporting




                                                                                                              Adams Ave
                                                                                                              El Cajon Blvd
                                  50%                                                                         University Ave
                                                                                                              N of I-805
                                                                                                              At I-805
                                  25%                                                                         S of I-805




                                   0%

                                         2015          2016         2017         2018           2019




                                                                 C. Eastbound SR-12
                                  100%
                                                                                                       VDS Name
                                                                                                          Kirkland Ranch

                                  75%                                                                     W Lynch Rd
              Percent Reporting




                                                                                                          E Lynch Rd 1
                                                                                                          E Lynch Rd 2
                                  50%                                                                     Solano county line
                                                                                                          Spurs Trail Rd
                                                                                                          E Miners Trail Rd 1
                                  25%                                                                     E Miners Trail Rd 2
                                                                                                          W of Red Top Rd
                                                                                                          Red Top Rd
                                   0%

                                     2017                        2018                   2019



Notes: These plots report detector health for detectors in our analysis. Each dot represents one month at one
detector. The y-axis measures the fraction of intervals in the month, including weekends and holidays, for which the
detector reported speed for all lanes. At each site, detector names are ordered from upstream to downstream.
                                                                   Online Appendix


                Figure A2: Queue Length (in Thousands of Feet), Histogram
                                                                  A. Westbound SR-24
                                    2005                   2006               2007                   2008                2009                 2010




                         0.4
               Density




                         0.2




                         0.0
                                5    10 15             5    10 15         5    10 15             5    10 15         5        10 15        5    10 15




                                                                   B. Southbound I-15
                                     2015                         2016                   2017                     2018                    2019


                         0.4



                         0.3
               Density




                         0.2



                         0.1



                         0.0
                                5          10                5       10              5      10                5         10            5        10




                                                                  C. Eastbound SR-12
                                                2017                                     2018                                     2019



                         0.15




                         0.10
               Density




                         0.05




                         0.00
                                0          5     10         15       20   0          5     10         15    20      0         5      10       15     20



Notes: These histograms plot the distribution of queue lengths, for all observations when a queue is present, across
the date ranges at each site (all available days from 1 June 2005 to 30 June 2010 for SR-24, 1 January 2015 to 31
March 2019 for I-15, and 1 January 2017 to 31 March 2019 for SR-12). Queue lengths are measured in thousands of
feet. In each five-minute interval, queue length is calculated by totaling up the distances from each detector reporting
speed less than 30 miles-per-hour to the next downstream detector. Detectors missing speed for more than one lane
do not contribute to queue length.
                                          Online Appendix


                   Figure A3: Percentage of Hours With a Queue Present
                                         A. Westbound SR-24


               75.0%




               50.0%




               25.0%




               0.0%

                         1am   3am      6am      9am      Noon     3pm      6pm      9pm    Midnight



                                          B. Southbound I-15



               40.0%




               20.0%




               0.0%

                         1am   3am      6am      9am      Noon     3pm      6pm      9pm    Midnight



                                          C. Eastbound SR-12
               100%




                75%




                50%




                25%




                 0%

                         1am   3am      6am      9am     Noon      3pm      6pm      9pm    Midnight



Notes: We exclude weekends and holidays. We define a queue as traffic moving under 30 miles-per-hour.
                                                      Online Appendix


        Figure A4: Mean Vehicle Flow on Weekdays When a Queue is Present
                                                      A. Westbound SR-24
                                          180


                                                                                       VDS Name
            Vehicles / lane / 5 minutes


                                                                                           St Stephens Dr E
                                          150
                                                                                           St Stephens Dr
                                                                                           St Stephens Dr W
                                                                                           Camino Pablo E
                                          120
                                                                                           Camino Pablo W
                                                                                           Orinda W
                                                                                           Gateway Blvd
                                           90
                                                                                           Fish Ranch Rd




                                                4pm     5pm                6pm



                                                      B. Southbound I-15
                                          150


                                          140
            Vehicles / lane / 5 minutes




                                                                                         VDS Name
                                          130                                                 Adams Ave
                                                                                              El Cajon Blvd
                                          120                                                 University Ave
                                                                                              N of I-805
                                          110                                                 At I-805
                                                                                              S of I-805
                                          100


                                           90
                                                4pm      5pm                     6pm



                                                      C. Eastbound SR-12
                                                                                       VDS Name
                                                                                          Kirkland Ranch
            Vehicles / lane / 5 minutes




                                          125                                             W Lynch Rd
                                                                                          E Lynch Rd 1
                                                                                          E Lynch Rd 2

                                          100                                             Solano county line
                                                                                          Spurs Trail Rd
                                                                                          E Miners Trail Rd 1
                                                                                          E Miners Trail Rd 2
                                           75
                                                                                          W of Red Top Rd
                                                                                          Red Top Rd


                                                4pm     5pm                6pm



Notes: We exclude weekends and holidays. We define a queue as traffic moving under 30 miles-per-hour.
                                            Online Appendix


         Figure A5: Time-of-Day that the Queue Begins Each Day, Histogram
                                            A. Westbound SR-24
                      0.8




                      0.6
            Density




                      0.4




                      0.2




                      0.0

                                      3pm            4pm               5pm           6pm



                                            B. Southbound I-15

                      0.6




                      0.4
            Density




                      0.2




                      0.0

                              3pm              4pm               5pm               6pm



                                            C. Eastbound SR-12


                      1.0
            Density




                      0.5




                      0.0

                                    3pm            4pm             5pm             6pm



Notes: For each day, we select the longest continuous period of time with a queue, and then we define the start of
the queue as the beginning of that period.
                                          Table A1: Summary Statistics, Complete Sample

 SR-24                                                                                               N       Mean       Std Dev        Min         Max

 Year                                                                                        287,272 2007.51                   1.5 2005   2010
 Queue present                                                                               287,272    0.18                   0.4 0.00   1.00
 Queue length (1000s of feet)                                                                287,272    0.49                   1.4 0.00 15.68
 Capacity downstream of bottleneck (vehicles per 5 min per lane)                             287,272 106.50                   59.0 0.00 204.50
 Speed upstream of bottleneck (mph)                                                          287,106   53.29                  20.4 3.00 80.50
 Speed downstream of bottleneck (mph)                                                        287,272   55.20                   9.8 3.00 75.10


 I-15                                                                                                N       Mean       Std Dev        Min         Max

 Year                                                                                        276,636 2016.67                   1.2 2015   2019
 Queue present                                                                               276,636    0.05                   0.2 0.00   1.00
 Queue length (1000s of feet)                                                                276,636    0.22                   1.1 0.00 12.81
 Capacity downstream of bottleneck (vehicles per 5 min per lane)                             276,636   77.12                  46.1 0.00 189.67
 Speed upstream of bottleneck (mph)                                                          276,611   64.01                  11.2 3.00 76.00
 Speed downstream of bottleneck (mph)                                                        276,636   63.98                   7.4 3.00 78.80
                                                                                                                                                            Online Appendix




 SR-12                                                                                              N       Mean       Std Dev        Min        Max

 Year                                                                                        85,866 2018.19                  0.4 2017   2019
 Queue present                                                                               85,866    0.17                  0.4 0.00   1.00
 Queue length (1000s of feet)                                                                85,866    0.99                  2.6 0.00 19.55
 Capacity downstream of bottleneck (vehicles per 5 min per lane)                             85,866   69.67                 51.7 0.00 210.00
 Speed upstream of bottleneck (mph)                                                          85,864   55.85                 21.7 3.00 79.20
 Speed downstream of bottleneck (mph)                                                        85,866   54.86                 10.7 3.00 75.00
Notes: The sample consists of all five-minute periods with non-missing data. For SR-24, data are from June 1, 2005 to June 30, 2010. For I-15, data
are from January 1, 2015 to March 31, 2019. For SR-12, data are from January 1, 2017 to March 31, 2019. Weekends and holidays are excluded. We
define a queue as present at a detector during a five-minute period if the average speed over that detector falls below 30 miles-per-hour. Speed upstream
of bottleneck is measured at the first upstream detector (Gateway Boulevard, At I-805, and West of Red Top Road, respectively). Speed and capacity
downstream of bottleneck are measured at the first downstream detector (Fish Ranch Road, South of I-805, and Red Top Road, respectively). Speeds and
capacities are averaged across all lanes. Queue length is computed as the sum of non-missing segments between each detector and its downstream neighbor.
For queue length only, we use PeMS-interpolated speeds if up to one lane is missing.
                                        Table A2: Summary Statistics, 4–7pm, with Queue

 SR-24                                                                                              N       Mean       Std Dev        Min         Max

 Year                                                                                         26,159 2007.48                  1.6 2005   2010
 Queue length (1000s of feet)                                                                 26,159    3.20                  2.5 0.00 15.68
 Capacity downstream of bottleneck (vehicles per 5 min per lane)                              26,159 176.20                  12.2 0.00 204.50
 Speed upstream of bottleneck (mph)                                                           26,145   10.73                  5.1 3.00 30.00
 Speed downstream of bottleneck (mph)                                                         26,159   41.71                  4.2 5.85 54.00


 I-15                                                                                               N       Mean       Std Dev         Min         Max

 Year                                                                                         11,246 2016.71                  1.3 2015    2019
 Queue length (1000s of feet)                                                                 11,246    4.55                  2.8 0.00 12.81
 Capacity downstream of bottleneck (vehicles per 5 min per lane)                              11,246 144.71                  13.8 61.67 178.33
 Speed upstream of bottleneck (mph)                                                           11,245   17.80                  4.7 3.60 30.00
 Speed downstream of bottleneck (mph)                                                         11,246   42.97                 12.1 8.50 68.90
                                                                                                                                                           Online Appendix




 SR-12                                                                                            N        Mean      Std Dev         Min        Max

 Year                                                                                         9,750 2018.19                 0.4 2017   2019
 Queue length (1000s of feet)                                                                 9,750    6.77                 3.7 0.00 19.55
 Capacity downstream of bottleneck (vehicles per 5 min per lane)                              9,750 139.15                 13.3 0.00 180.00
 Speed upstream of bottleneck (mph)                                                           9,748    9.16                 2.0 3.20 29.90
 Speed downstream of bottleneck (mph)                                                         9,750   41.88                 6.3 3.00 52.50
Notes: The sample includes all five-minute weekday periods between 4pm and 7pm when a queue is detected at the first upstream detector. For SR-24,
data are from June 1, 2005 to June 30, 2010. For I-15, data are from January 1, 2015 to March 31, 2019. For SR-12, data are from January 1, 2017 to
March 31, 2019. We define a queue as present at a detector during a five-minute period if the average speed over that detector falls below 30 miles-per-
hour. Speed upstream of bottleneck is measured at the first upstream detector (Gateway Boulevard, At I-805, and West of Red Top Road, respectively).
Speed and capacity downstream of bottleneck are measured at the first downstream detector (Fish Ranch Road, South of I-805, and Red Top Road,
respectively). Speeds and capacities are averaged across all lanes. Queue length is computed as the sum of non-missing segments between each detector
and its downstream neighbor. For queue length only, we use PeMS-interpolated speeds if up to one lane is missing.
                                      Online Appendix


      Table A3: The Effect of Queue Length on Highway Capacity, OLS


                                             (1)                    (2)                     (3)

                                        Weekdays                Weekdays               Weekdays
                                         4-7pm                 4:30-6:30pm            4:30-6:30pm
                                                                                       June-Aug


                                                         A. Westbound SR-24


Queue Length                               -0.251                  -0.250                  0.529
                                          (0.153)                 (0.145)                 (0.139)
Total Observations                        26,159                  19,024                   5,285
Number of Days                               952                     944                    268
Dependent Variable Mean                     176.2                   177.1                  177.8
Queue Length Mean                            3.20                    3.38                   2.97

                                                          B. Southbound I-15


Queue Length                               -0.431                  -0.385                  -0.081
                                          (0.115)                 (0.110)                 (0.160)
Total Observations                         7,718                    6,414                  1,616
Number of Days                              687                      660                     160
Dependent Variable Mean                    149.2                    149.5                   153.6
Queue Length Mean                           3.96                     3.99                    3.67

                                                         C. Eastbound SR-12


Queue Length                               -0.105                  -0.060                  0.017
                                          (0.115)                 (0.130)                 (0.439)
Total Observations                         9,750                    6,803                  1,335
Number of Days                              297                      295                     58
Dependent Variable Mean                    139.2                    139.6                  139.8
Queue Length Mean                           6.77                     7.27                   6.60
Notes: This table reports estimates and standard errors from nine separate regressions, all estimated
using ordinary least squares (OLS). The dependent variable in all regressions is highway capacity, mea-
sured in vehicles per five minutes per lane, downstream of the bottleneck. Queue length is measured
in thousands of feet. The sample includes all five-minute periods with a queue. Standard errors are
clustered by day.
                                        Online Appendix


Table A4: Alternative Specification with 25-Mile-Per-Hour Threshold, 2SLS


                                              (1)                      (2)                      (3)

                                          Weekdays                Weekdays                 Weekdays
                                           4-7pm                 4:30-6:30pm              4:30-6:30pm
                                                                                           June-Aug


                                                           A. Westbound SR-24


Queue Length                                 3.636                   2.027                    2.236
                                            (0.387)                 (0.411)                  (0.488)
Total Observations                          25,075                  18,340                    5,035
Number of Days                                934                     924                      261
Dependent Variable Mean                      176.4                   177.2                    178.2
Queue Length Mean                             3.18                    3.35                     2.95
K-P F-stat                                    78.1                    68.7                     24.5

                                                            B. Southbound I-15


Queue Length                                 3.356                   4.137                    0.822
                                            (1.018)                 (1.117)                  (0.754)
Total Observations                           6,802                   5,681                    1,454
Number of Days                                653                     625                      152
Dependent Variable Mean                      149.1                   149.4                    153.6
Queue Length Mean                             3.37                    3.39                     3.21
K-P F-stat                                   18.5                     12.0                     4.41

                                                           C. Eastbound SR-12


Queue Length                                 0.073                   -0.179                   -0.695
                                            (0.195)                 (0.292)                  (0.628)
Total Observations                           9,700                    6,783                    1,330
Number of Days                                297                      295                       58
Dependent Variable Mean                      139.2                    139.6                    139.8
Queue Length Mean                             6.66                     7.14                     6.51
K-P F-stat                                   114.1                     71.1                     31.1
Notes: This table reports results from an alternative specification in which everything is identical to the
specification used for our baseline results in Table 1, except we assume that a queue is present whenever
traffic is moving at under 25 miles-per-hour (rather than 30 miles-per-hour).
                                        Online Appendix


Table A5: Alternative Specification with 35-Mile-Per-Hour Threshold, 2SLS


                                              (1)                      (2)                      (3)

                                          Weekdays                Weekdays                 Weekdays
                                           4-7pm                 4:30-6:30pm              4:30-6:30pm
                                                                                           June-Aug


                                                           A. Westbound SR-24


Queue Length                                 3.492                   1.921                    2.501
                                            (0.341)                 (0.384)                  (0.499)
Total Observations                          27,054                  19,592                    5,455
Number of Days                                973                     965                      276
Dependent Variable Mean                      176.1                   176.9                    177.7
Queue Length Mean                             3.23                    3.42                     3.00
K-P F-stat                                    91.4                    78.2                     27.5

                                                            B. Southbound I-15


Queue Length                                 1.831                   2.184                    -0.142
                                            (0.465)                 (0.490)                  (0.395)
Total Observations                           8,379                   6,932                     1,729
Number of Days                                717                     690                       164
Dependent Variable Mean                      149.3                   149.6                     153.6
Queue Length Mean                             4.59                    4.63                      4.30
K-P F-stat                                   35.4                     25.8                      10.1

                                                           C. Eastbound SR-12


Queue Length                                 0.112                   -0.149                   -0.758
                                            (0.185)                 (0.265)                  (0.601)
Total Observations                           9,796                    6,826                    1,341
Number of Days                                297                      295                       58
Dependent Variable Mean                      139.1                    139.6                    139.8
Queue Length Mean                             6.90                     7.40                     6.72
K-P F-stat                                   119.7                     75.9                     27.6
Notes: This table reports results from an alternative specification in which everything is identical to the
specification used for our baseline results in Table 1, except we assume that a queue is present whenever
traffic is moving at under 35 miles-per-hour (rather than 30 miles-per-hour).
                                       Online Appendix




     Table A6: Alternative Event Study Analyses, Median Regressions


                                    (1)                       (2)                         (3)
                                Ten Minute               Twenty Minute               Thirty Minute
                                 Window                    Window                      Window


                                                     A. Westbound SR-24
                                    1.500                   1.750                          2.000
                                   (0.333)                 (0.287)                        (0.243)
In-window median                     171                    171.5                          171.5
Number of days                       706                     706                            706


                                                      B. Southbound I-15
                                    1.333                    1.500                         -0.333
                                   (0.545)                  (0.475)                       (0.408)
In-window median                     146                     146.3                          147.3
Number of days                       694                      694                            694


                                                     C. Eastbound SR-12
                                    -2.000                  -2.500                         -2.667
                                   (1.233)                 (0.838)                        (0.704)
In-window median                     136                     136                            136
Number of days                       247                     247                            247

Notes: This table reports results from alternative event study analyses in which everything is identical
to the specification used in Table 2, except we use median regressions.
