NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF IDEAS:
ON IDEAS VERSUS INTERESTS IN POLICYMAKING
Sharun Mukand
Dani Rodrik
Working Paper 24467
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24467

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2018

We gratefully acknowledge discussions with and comments of Tim Besley, Sumon Majumdar,
Debraj Ray and Kenneth Shepsle. Raghul Venkatesh provided superb research assistance. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Sharun Mukand and Dani Rodrik. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Political Economy of Ideas: On Ideas Versus Interests in Policymaking
Sharun Mukand and Dani Rodrik
NBER Working Paper No. 24467
March 2018
JEL No. D72,D78
ABSTRACT
We develop a conceptual framework to highlight the role of ideas as a catalyst for policy and
institutional change. We make an explicit distinction between ideas and vested interests and show
how they feed into each other. In doing so the paper integrates the Keynes-Hayek perspective on
the importance of ideas with the currently more fashionable Stigler-Becker (interests only)
approach to political economy. We distinguish between two kinds of ideational politics – the
battle among different worldviews on the efficacy of policy (worldview politics) versus the
politics of victimhood, pride and identity (identity politics). Political entrepreneurs discover
identity and policy ‘memes’ (narratives, cues, framing) that shift beliefs about how the world
works or a person’s belief of who he is (i.e. identity). Our framework identifies a
complementarity between worldview politics and identity politics and illustrates how they may
reinforce each other. In particular, an increase in identity polarization may be associated with a
shift in views about how the world works. Furthermore, an increase in income inequality is likely
to result in a greater incidence of ideational politics. Finally, we show how ideas may not just
constrain, but also ‘bite’ the interests that helped propagate them in the first instance.

Sharun Mukand
Dept. of Economics
University of Warwick
Coventry, CV4 7AL
U.K.
S.Mukand@warwick.ac.uk
Dani Rodrik
John F. Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 J.F. Kennedy Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
dani_rodrik@harvard.edu

1

Introduction

Vested interests representing elites, lobbies, rent-seeking groups, or voters at large are the cornerstone of political economy. By focusing on interests, political economists have shed light on policy
and institutional change and the persistence of inefficient policies in a variety of contexts.1 For
instance, industrial lobbies lobby for tariff protection (Grossman and Helpman, 1994), financial
interests helped push through the repeal of the Glass-Steagall Act (Kwak and Johnson, 2011), and
the threat of expropriation by the masses historically provided elites the incentive to democratize
in some parts of the Western world (Acemoglu and Robinson, 2005). The emphasis on vested
interests provides economists and other social scientists with a powerful conceptual lens with which
to analyse the political determination of policies and institutions.
However, this almost exclusive emphasis on the primacy of interests is puzzling. Arguments
for institutional or policy change that are made in the political marketplace rarely rely on a naked
appeal to economic interests. Instead, political entrepreneurs attempt to persuade the public
to adopt a new policy or institution by convincing them that the world has changed, so as to
make the proposed changes apposite. Alternatively, they may emphasize identities, values or some
overarching normative principles (such as fairness or freedom). In one form or another, ideational
politics seems at least as important as interest-based politics.2
Indeed, the reliance on interests in modern political economy is also of recent vintage. Not
just classical economists such as Ricardo and Marx but also Keynes (1936) and Hayek (1949)
considered ideas to be an important driver of change. Keynes famously observed “it is ideas, not
vested interests, which are dangerous for good or evil”. We do not go as far as him, but merely
observe that both ideas and interests may be important. After all, the role of ideas is central
to many historical accounts of institutional and policy change. These include not only dramatic
examples of institutional transformation such as the prohibition of slavery in the U.S., women’s
rights and the suffragette movement or the collapse of the socialist model the world over, but also
policy changes such as the welfare reform, de-regulation and the Reagan tax cuts in the U.S. and
privatization in Thatcherite Britain.
Accordingly, in this paper we take a first step in providing a minimal conceptual framework to
think about ideas as a distinct vehicle from interests. In our framework, political entrepreneurs use
ideas to catalyse political (and policy) change. We highlight two different channels of “ideational
1
See Stigler (1971) and Becker (1983) for early accounts and Acemoglu (1993) and Persson and Tabellini (2000)
for good surveys.
2
See Rodrik (2014) for an informal treatment of the issues and a variety of illustrations.

politics”. First, ideas shape the electorate’s understanding of how the world works, which in
turn alter its perceptions of the mapping from proposed policies to outcomes. We call political
entrepreneurship geared at altering public perceptions about the underlying state of the world
“worldview politics”. Among many examples of worldview politics are the investments made by
the Koch brothers in libertarian think tanks and research institutes and the role of the financial
sector in convincing not just regulators, but also broader segments of the public that “what is good
for Wall Street is good for America”.3 This brand of ideas is perhaps closest to what Keynes and
Hayek had in mind when talking about the importance of ideas in driving policy.
An equally important force driving political outcomes are ideas about voters’ self-identity –
perceptions about who they are. Individuals have a multiplicity of identities – revolving around
ethnicity, race, religion or nationality – any number of which can be salient at a point in time (Sen
2005). Not only is the salience of these identities changeable, but they can also be constructed by
the deployment of ideas by political actors.4 This is our second type of ideational politics, which we
call “identity politics”. By sending messages about who is a native or an outsider, disseminating
stereotypes about racial and religious minorities, harping on patriotism and national identity, or
framing policy issues in such terms, a political actor can make a particular identity more or less
salient. This can help alter voter behaviour and either catalyse or block policy and institutional
change. This role of ideas is less familiar to economists, though there is a large literature in
political science (Wendt, 1999, Ruggie, 1998 and Anderson, 1976) and sociology (see Cerulo, 1997
for a survey) that examines the construction of identity in a variety of contexts.
We consider a standard political economy model where the prevailing interests of the median
voter (who is low-income) drive policy choice. In this context, a high-income political challenger
faces a difficult task: how to push through a new policy that has distributional effects that hurt the
low-income majority? With the (lower income) majority on his side, the political incumbent cannot
be easily dislodged and the new policy will not get adopted. Under these conditions, one of the
few options that a political entrepreneur (or an allied “political-ideational complex” of think tanks,
pundits and partisan media) has is to try and disseminate ideas that alters either the worldview or
the identity of the voters (or both).
Therefore with the aim of unseating the incumbent, a political entrepreneur allocates resources
3
On the efforts of Koch brothers and other libertarian business leaders, see Mayer (2015). The argument that the
financial sector cognitively captured policymakers’ and elites’ worldviews has been advanced by Kwak and Johnson
(2009) as well as Buiter (2012).
4
Haidt (2012) reports on research from biology suggesting that individuals have a ‘hive switch’ that helps make
identities salient and bind an individual to a particular group.

2

towards the search and discovery of “memes” that catalyse ideational politics.5 A meme is some
combination of cues, narratives, symbols or indeed any choice of communication that is deployed
by the political entrepreneur such that exposure to it either shifts views about how the world works
or makes an identity salient. We conceive of memes as the concrete vehicle that channelises ideas
developed by the politician for the political marketplace.
Consider for example the politics of austerity. According to Skidelsky (2010), one reason why
fiscal austerity and balanced-budgets resonate with the public is that “people think of the government’s finances very much as they think of their own household’s finances. Since every household
knows that it has to balance its books,”, they presume so does the government. Here is how Angela
Merkel deploys the meme in a speech attacking deficit spending:
“The root of the crisis is quite simple. One should simply have asked a Swabian housewife, here in Stuttgart, in Baden-Wurttemberg. She would have provided us with a
short, simple, and entirely correct piece of life-wisdom: that we cannot live beyond our
means. This is the core of the crisis. . . . Then why is the world in this difficult place?
Well, we have too often put our trust in experts that were not really experts... When we
come together now to think about how one should answer these new global questions,
we should put less faith in self-proclaimed experts, and instead follow one principle: the
principle of common sense!” (Merkel, 2008, emphasis added)6
More generally, depending on whether an idea affects voter beliefs about the world or preferences,
we have two corresponding kind of memes. If a meme affects a voter’s belief of how the world works
we label it a “policy meme,” which results in worldview politics. In contrast, a meme that affects a
voter’s sense of who he or she is, is labeled an “identity meme” and triggers identity politics. The
entrepreneur’s decision of whether to focus on searching for an identity or policy meme (or both)
depends on what is politically advantageous.
Consider identity politics first. It has the potential to alter the political status-quo by transforming a low-income voter’s preferences ex post: the median voter may now be willing to vote for a
(rich) political challenger with whom he shares an identity marker such as religion or race. In other
words by making identity salient or, more correctly, raising the salience of one type of identity (religion or race) over another (class) the political entrepreneur drives a wedge between a low-income
individual and the status-quo policy of, say, transfers from the rich to the poor. Therefore, the
identity meme introduces a trade-off between income and identity for the low-income voter where
5

The notion of a meme was introduced by Dawkins (1976) when discussing how some cultural ideas and rituals
spread very easily amongst anyone exposed to it - be it through rhetoric, slogans, speech or gestures.
6
This is drawn quote is from Farrell and Quiggin (2012). We elaborate on this in Section 4.3 where we also discuss
the political history of “common sense”.

3

previously no such trade-off existed. Even though such politics is divisive (it creates a different
minority-majority wedge), it enables the challenger to overthrow the incumbent, by helping cobble
together a sufficient number of low income voters with whom he shares an identity.
A policy meme is similar in some respects, but it works by changing voter perceptions of how
the world works. Here the aim is to persuade the (low-income) voter that adoption of the new
policy is actually in his interest since the state of the world has changed or (equivalently) there are
new policy instruments available. So a policy that (previously) hurt the interests of the median
voter, is no longer perceived to do so. Unlike identity politics, worldview politics is not divisive
and exclusionary - it does not create a new line between insiders and outsiders. But it may be
harder to catalyse unless structural conditions (the state of the economy, levels of unemployment
or inflation) are conducive to new narratives about how the world works.
Our model also allows full-spectrum ideational politics, with both policy and identity memes
being deployed. A possible example of a meme that combines both is Donald Trump’s statement,
“I will build a great, great wall on our southern border, and I will make Mexico pay for that wall”.7
This meme combines elements of a policy response, while also emphasising identity (natives versus
immigrants). Similarly, during the 2006 Venezuelan election Manuel Rosales attempted to unseat
President Chavez by promising to issue a Mi Nigra (i.e. my dark-skinned woman) card that would
directly transfer oil revenues to the poor – combining policy and identity memes in one initiative.8
We will examine the conditions under which the political challenger invests in one or both of these
types of memes.
While simple, the framework makes several contributions. First, we clarify the analytical distinction between ideas and interests and show how ideas can be incorporated in political economy
models. In doing so, we integrate the Keynes-Hayek perspective on the importance of ideas with
the standard (interests only) political economy framework. A frequent contention of social constructivists is that the role of ideas in shaping interests renders formal rational-choice models of
the type that economists and many political scientists work with irrelevant or inappropriate. Our
model shows that there is in fact no incompatibility between constructivist arguments and formal
or rational-choice modeling.
Furthermore, by emphasizing both the similarities and differences between identity and worldview politics, our paper helps bring two large literatures together. The fact that identity may
be politically constructed draws on a large literature in the social sciences, much of it discussed
7
8

This is from his announcement to seek the office of President in the U.S. on June 2015.
See Simon Romero’s article in New York Times November 12, 2006.

4

in Fearon and Laitin (2000). Similarly, the role of political entrepreneurs in shaping worldviews
has been recognized as far back as Lenin(1902), Downs(1957) and recently formalised by Benabou
(2008).9
Second, we show that ideas and interests both matter for policy and institutional change, and
also feed into each other. On the one hand economic interests drive the kind of ideas that politicians
put forward. As Shepsle (1985) put it, ideas can be regarded as “hooks on which politicians hang
their objectives and further their interests.” However, ideas also shape interests. In our model, this
happens because they alter voter preferences ex post and/or shift their worldviews, in both cases
shifting rankings over policy. Indeed, in a two-period extension we illustrate how ideas not only
constraint interests, but can also hurt the very interests that helped shape them. For example,
financial interests propagation of the virtues of austerity and budget balance may have helped
trigger Brexit (see Becker et al, 2017) - the institutional change with possibly the biggest blow
against London’s financial interests in over half a century.
Our third contribution is to emphasize that the practice of ideational politics is broader than
commonly thought - and includes not just a battle among different worldviews about the efficacy of
policy but also a politics of victimhood, pride and identity. We provide a simple way to incorporate,
but also distinguish between these different forms of ideational politics. By emphasising that these
two kinds of politics work through different channels we provide a potential template to explain
the heterogeneity in the nature of ideational politics both across time as well as place.
We may expect that the politician’s resource constraint creates a natural substitutability between the two types of ideational politics. Allocating more resources towards making identity salient
reduces the incentive to change worldviews. However, our model helps identify a complementarity
between the two: either kind of ideational politics increases the return to the other kind.
There are two distinct underlying sources of this ideational complementarity. To see the first,
suppose that a low-income person gets utility from identifying with and sharing an identity with
the high-income identity group (e.g. whites). We call this the “association” effect. In the presence
of this association effect, the utility from belonging to the rich identity group is increasing in this
group’s relative income. So for example, low-income white voters may be willing to support a
policy (e.g. financial deregulation) that benefits the rich, white minority, if its adoption gives them
an indirect bump in utility through association with other (now very) rich white beneficiaries of
this policy. This effect is reinforced by a second source that arises from what we call the “income9
In a sharp polemic, Lenin (1902) emphasized the importance of making workers ‘class conscious’ as a prerequisite
for their engagement in revolutionary activity against capitalist interests.

5

identity tradeoff”. In particular, despite belonging to the majority identity group, some low-income
voters remain immune to the pull of identity that they share with the challenger. This is due to
the income loss from supporting the pro-rich policies of the challenger. However, a successful
policy meme increases the returns to the identity meme, thereby generating complementarity that
ameliorates the income-identity tradeoff. This makes it easier to persuade low-income voters that
there is there is no income downside from supporting the rich challenger.
It may a priori not be obvious why an increase in identity polarization should be associated with
prevalence of more policy memes. We would not expect the fact that voters believe the identity
meme “Obama is a Muslim” in and of itself increases the likelihood that there will also be a
successful policy meme such as the austerity related meme of “living within our means”. However,
once seen in the context of the ideational complementarity between worldview politics and identity
politics, this contemporaneous presence of both identity and policy is better understood. Indeed,
precisely for this reason we should expect to see more ideational politics (of both kinds) in lowincome regions/countries/states-of-the-world than in high-income ones. Indeed this echoes Frank
(2007, pp. 259) who observed that the “poorest county in America” voted Republican and puzzled
at the “tragically inverted form of class consciousness that makes such individuals make common
cause with the assortment of millionaires ... pushing the Republican economic agenda of tax-cuts,
de-regulation, free trade and corporate welfare”.10 Similarly, in light of our results it is interesting to
observe that in many countries over the past decade (as in Russia, Venezuela and Turkey) populist
policy themes were accompanied with a shrill nationalism directed against minorities or foreigners.
It is worth emphasising that this ideational complementarity does not rely on the precise mechanism through which memes persuade voting citizens - whether it is (Bayesian) persuasion or
systematic behavioural biases in information processing of one kind or another. The fact that it
does not rely on a specific micro-founded channel suggests that our result is of broader relevance
than it first appears. In other words, even if local context differs, we should expect to see a correlation across time and space in the joint occurrence of identity and worldview politics. Furthermore,
we should not expect identity and worldview memes to be equally prevalent across all sub-groups of
the population. Typically political entrepreneurs will target the production of these memes towards
the sub-group whose support is electorally critical for the challenger. A prediction of our framework
is that we should observe greatest increase in identity polarisation and support for policy memes
10
This is from a critical review by Larry Bartels of Frank (2007). We should point out that while useful, Bartels’s
critique should be modified in an important respect. In particular, Frank’s argument about the importance of identity
politics driving electoral outcomes can be correct on the margin even if (on average) the poor and the working class
continue to vote with the Democratic Party on the basis of income rather than ‘wedge’ social issues.

6

amongst the majority identity group who belong to the lower and middle income group. We should
not expect those memes to operate as strongly amongst the wealthy who belong to the majority
group or the minority identity group of all incomes.
Finally, our model sheds light on the impact of a rise in inequality on the incidence of ideational
politics. A rise in inequality increases the reward to the rich from successful ideational politics.
The returns from discovering a policy meme that persuades the median voter, for example, that
lower taxes are in the interests of not only the rich, but also the low-income median voter are
much higher. Similarly, an effective identity meme that catalyses identity around issues such as
gay marriage, women’s rights and immigration can also serve as a “wedge” that gives low-income
voters a reason to vote for the high-income party. Furthermore, as noted by Ashok, Kuziemko and
Washington (2015), “despite the large increases in economic inequality since 1970, American survey
respondents exhibit no increase in support for redistribution....demand for income redistribution
in the US has remained flat by some measures and decreased for others.” Our framework suggests
that this may be because the elite along with an allied “political-ideational complex” (including
academics, think tanks and talk-radio) have been successful in disseminating the worldview that
the rise in inequality was an inevitable byproduct of structural changes in the global economy
that necessitated adoption of financial deregulation, low capital income taxes and the embrace of
globalization.
We note a couple of related papers in this connection. Benabou, Ticchi and Vindigni (2015)
examines how political economy concerns affect a government’s incentive to affect the evolution
of religious beliefs and allow scientific progress and growth. Shayo (2009) presents a model where
individuals care about group status and are willing to sacrifice income to vote for identity. Two
equilibria emerge in Shayo’s paper: a high redistribution equilibrium in which class is salient and a
low redistribution equilibrium in which national identity is salient. While the issues that motivate
the present paper are broader, we show, as in these papers, that there is a close relationship between
attitudes towards redistribution and the salience of non-materialistic identities (religion or nation).
Finally, our notion of the role of memes as the vehicle of ideas is related to recent work on the
economics of narratives by Akerlof and Snower (2015), Collier (2016) and Shiller (2017).
The plan of the paper is as follows. In Section 2 we systematically describe the various elements
of our conceptual framework, while Section 3 solves for and describes the equilibrium and presents
important comparative statics. Section 4 discusses various case studies and Section 5 concludes.

7

2

The Framework

We now describe a framework that incorporates a role for both interests and ideas in policymaking.
For simplicity, we consider a standard political economy model with democratic political institutions
where the interests of the median voter (who is poor) drive the incumbent’s choice of policy in favour
of the status-quo. The key innovation of our framework is that political entrepreneurs have the
scope to discover and introduce ideas. These ideas are introduced into the political arena in the
form of memes that that shape both the worldviews and preferences of its citizens. By altering
world views or beliefs of the citizens these ideas have the potential to alter the political equilibrium.
In order to make our point in the most transparent manner we introduce several simplifications. In
particular, our benchmark model is a very simple model of political competition that is restricted
to a single electoral cycle. Furthermore, our benchmark framework does not provide explicit microfoundations to the operation of memes and account for how they alter beliefs and make identity
salient. We relax these assumptions in Section 3 and Appendix B.
We now describe the framework in some detail below.
Policymaking and Beliefs about the World: Ideas can directly affect perceived payoffs associated
with policy choices, by either shifting beliefs about the underlying state or by affecting the menu
of policy options through (for example) devising new instruments of policy. In what follows, we
take the former route and we examine whether political entrepreneurs can shift perceptions of the
underlying state, i.e. alter world view. Accordingly, we assume that policymakers have a choice
between retaining the status-quo policy a0 or adoption of a new policy a1 . However, the payoffs
from either policy depend on the underlying state of the world, which is not known as well as
whether the citizen is rich or poor. The policymaker’s dilemma is that while the rich always benefit
from the adoption of the new policy, the poor do so only in some states of the world.
The adoption of a1 when the state of the world remains S0 has adverse distributional effects in
that the median voter (who is ‘poor’) is worse off with an (expected) income that equals ȳP1 (S0 ).
This income is lower than what he would have earned if he had stuck to his status quo policy a0
since his payoff in either state equals ȳP0 (S0 ) = ȳP0 (S1 ). In contrast, both the rich and the poor are
better off, if the change in the state of the world to S1 , is accompanied by the adoption of the new
policy a1 . Such a policy-state switch results in the the poor earning an income of ȳP1 (S1 ) + g, with
a per capita gain g > 0. The rich benefit from the new policy a1 in all states of the world and earn
1 (S ) + αg = ȳ 1 (S ) + αg where ȳ 1 (S ) ≥ ȳ 1 (S ) and α ≥ 1. So the distributional
an income of ȳR
0
R 1
R 1
R 0

conflict between the rich and the poor arises in state S0 and not S1 .

8

The ex-ante probability that the state of the world is S1 in period t0 , is given by µ0 = P (S1 ).
We assume that the probability that the underlying state is S0 (i.e. 1 − µ0 ) in the period T = 0 is
high enough such that all individuals who are poor prefer the status quo policy a0 .
Preferences, Income and Markers: There are a unit mass of citizens each of whom obtains utility
from his income as well as his identity. Each individual is endowed with a vector of identity
based ‘characteristics’ or ‘markers’ that may affect his payoff - such as ethnicity, religion, race or
nationality. For simplicity, in what follows we allow for all individuals to belong to one such identity
marker that can be either B or W .11
Accordingly, an individual’s payoff in any period is:
vj = yjk + λm θjm

(1)

Here he obtains an ‘identity’ utility θjm from membership to a group with characteristic-markers m,
where m ∈ {B, W }. The magnitude of this identity payoff could be large if identity is salient (i.e.
λm = 1) or small if identity is not salient (i.e. λm = 0). More generally, this identity payoff may
be state-dependent and be either positive (i.e. salient) in some states of the world and negligible in
others.12 Furthermore, even if an individual’s group identity is positive (i.e. salient), its magnitude
may be further affected by group-specific characteristics. So if average income of group W increases
relative to group B, then arguably the identity payoff of an individual who belongs to either group
may be affected.13 Alternatively, this identity payoff may be a lump-sum that is independent of any
perceived features of the group per se. In what follows our preferred interpretation is the former
one, where an individual obtains utility from solidarity with and the relative well-being/income of
others who share their marker.
In addition, an individual j obtains an income yjk = ȳk + τj that is a function of his whether he
belongs to the class k, which can be rich R or poor P , with expected income ȳk , where ȳR > ȳP .
Furthermore, heterogeneity in an individual’s income arises from the realisation of an individual11

While our current formulation assumes a single marker that can divide the population along that one dimension,
in principle we could could endow each individual with a set of M “primitive” characteristics or markers Mi =
{m1i , m2i , ..., mM
i } where these primitive characteristics or markers can be a wide variety of aspects of an individual
that may (or may not) be “active” or politically salient, such as his ethnicity, religion, wealth, language or even his
height or hair colour.
12
This alternative (more standard) formulation of the model would treat this identity payoff as being state dependent. In some states, an individual’s identity is very important and in other states much less so. The political
entrepreneur may get individuals to invest in a particular identity by persuading them that the state of the world
has changed and group identity is important. We discuss this further in Appendix A.
13
For example, an individual who belongs to the W group obtains an identity payoff that is a function of the
relative income of W ’s as compared to B’s, i.e. θjW (ȳW B ), where ȳW B is the relative income of W ’s as compared to
′
′′
B’s and θ ≥ 0, θ ≤ 0.

9

specific random variable τj , with distribution G which is assumed - for simplicity - to be uniform,
i.e. τj ∼ U [− 2φ1k , 2φ1k ] with φk being the density of income group k ∈ {R, P }.14
We assume that a minority fraction nR of the population is rich (R) and the remainder nP are
poor (P), with nP > 1/2. Furthermore, we assume that at the beginning of the first period, identity
is not salient (i.e. (i.e. λm = 0) and an individual’s payoff is driven only by their income. However
we allow for the possibility that an individual’s identity can be made salient, in a subsequent period.
As previously mentioned, we assume that all individuals have this this identity marker B or W ,
with a majority fraction nW of the population having the W marker, where nW > 1/2 > nB .
The Political Structure: The political structure is very simple. There is a low-income political
incumbent in office who faces a political challenger who belongs to the other group - the minority
‘rich’. In addition, we assume that at this stage identity is irrelevant (i.e. not salient), even though
the incumbent has the B marker. Individuals compare their expected payoffs from the incumbent
and the challenger, and vote for the politician under whom their payoff is higher. If elected, this
rich political challenger will adopt his preferred policy a1 in the next (final) period.
Given this political structure, there are only two scenarios under which a political challenger
from the rich group (in a minority) can get elected and enact a1 . The first possibility is that sheer
chance may play a role in enabling his election. In particular, the political incumbent’s relative
1
1
popularity shock δ, where δ ∼ [− 2ψ
, 2ψ
] may affect the electoral fortunes of the challenger.15 The

second possibility, is the one we focus on. Here the political challenger actively tries to get elected
(and enact a1 ) through engaging in “ideational” politics.

2.1

Memes and the Nature of Politics

The political challenger’s difficulty is to transform the political status-quo that favours the incumbent who belongs to the majority poor group (and favours the status-quo policy a0 ). However,
overturning the political status-quo requires the ‘discovery’ of a meme by the political challenger
(or indeed any allied “political-ideational complex” of partisan think tanks, spin doctors, academicpolitical commentariat in the media). As mentioned earlier, we conceive of memes as some combination of cues, narratives, symbols or targeted communication that channelises ideas to voters –
14

Observe that heterogeneity amongst the poor can be built in two (equivalent) ways. The first is what we have
described above, with heterogeneity in initial income driven by the realization of a random variable τj . Alternatively
(and equivalently), we can assume that incomes are binary in that they are either high ȳR (the ‘rich’) or low ȳP (the
‘poor’). However, in this interpretation the heterogeneity in net income arises due to differences in individual-specific
adjustment costs τk such as the cost of worker retraining and inter-sectoral mobility.
15
These distributional assumptions are to facilitate closed form solutions. We further assume that the distributional
‘support’ for δ is not too ‘narrow’ compared to τ .

10

such that exposure to it shifts a voter’s worldview or makes identity salient.
Political entrepreneurs deploy memes and transform an individual’s identity or alter his worldview in a variety of ways.16 For instance, political entrepreneurs may manipulate beliefs about
the world or “prime” voter identity. by the direct exploitation of behavioural biases in voter processing of information.17 Indeed it is well documented that environmental and media “framing”
can “prime” the voter into identifying with a particular social identity and/or buy into a policy
worldview.18 Finally, memes can be deployed to exacerbate and exploit information asymmetries
(Glaeser (2005), Majumdar et al (2014)) or (Bayesian) persuasion (Alonso and Camara, 2015).
Each of the above mechanisms is likely to be of greater or lesser relevance, depending on the
particular local context, underlying structural conditions and institutional realities. Since we are
less interested in the precise mechanism through which a politician shifts voter beliefs and/or gets
them to invest in an identity, we sidestep the issue of providing micro-foundations till Appendix B.
Instead, we develop a minimal framework that has the following elements. First, the ‘receptivity’
of the population to memes from ideational entrepreneurs is likely much higher when structural
conditions make them unhappy with the prevailing status-quo - be it due to a recession, high
unemployment or a history of conflict. Second, the discovery and deployment of any such memes
is likely fraught with uncertainty and requires a combination of skill, knowledge of local context,
resources and luck. Below we describe a simple framework that has these elements.
Consider first the case of an identity meme. Individual attitudes towards a policy are often
mediated through identity. As suggested by Akerlof and Kranton (2000), identities are expressed
as and associated with support for a corresponding set of actions and/or policy choices.19 So a
16
There is a large literature arguing that politicians and the news media can ‘prime’ voters about issues (including
identity) (see DellaVigna and Shapiro(2010) for a survey). For example, in the U.S. context Kinder and Sanders
(1987), Melinda Jackson, (2011) and Mendelberg (2001) provide evidence on priming racial identity. Blouin and
Mukand (2018) provide evidence on how President Kagame successfully managed to use propaganda to ‘erase’ ethnic
identity in Rwanda. Similarly, Wilkinson (2004) discusses how religious identity is primed for electoral purposes in
India.
17
These biases include anticipatory utility (Benabou and Tirole, 2002, 2006), ‘coarse thinking’ (Mullainathan,
Schwartztein and Shleifer (2008)), salience and attention (Genniaoli and Shleifer, 2010) or peer-influence heuristics
(see Levy and Razin, 2016) among others.
18
On framing, Stephen Breyer (1981, pp. 320) recounts how the Kennedy hearings on regulation attempted to
shift public opinion in favour of airline (de)regulation by trying to ensure that the regulatory reform was “seen as
one of ‘lower prices’ and ‘helping the consumer’ (since it) can pick up support, time and effort from many person”.
On priming, see Molden (2014) for a survey. The non-informational change in preferences (due to priming) is
well documented in social psychology. More recently, Dietrich and List (2011) provide axiomatic microfoundations to
underlie mechanisms that show how non-informational priming can change preferences due to a shift in the underlying
‘motivationally salient dimension’.
19
To take one example, Campbell (2002) argues that “ efforts to reform, if not dismantle, U.S. welfare policies
during the 1970s and 1980s were led by politicians who reframed means-tested welfare programs as stipends and
services that were being provided to African Americans and other minorities, but paid for by allegedly exorbitant
taxes on working-class whites. The idea was to frame the issue of welfare reform in such a way as to divide the
working class along racial lines and generate support among white voters for reform (Quadagno 1994).”

11

person who acquires a group identity associated with his caste, ethnicity or religion, will get a payoff
from taking actions (or preferring policies) that are consistent with this identity. For example, if
an individual’s ethnic marker W becomes active, he gets utility from association with the (high
income/status) W group. In this case a poor voter may well support a pro-rich policy a1 , that is
against his economic interest. Therefore, by catalyzing identity, a rich political entrepreneur can
generate political support for a policy amongst the poor, that (on purely income grounds) may
have been lacking otherwise.
In contrast, a policy meme works by persuading voters that the underlying state of the world
has changed to S1 , such that adoption of a1 now benefits both the rich and the poor. In particular,
if prior beliefs in period t = 0 that the state of the world is S1 are given by µ0 , then the policy
meme changes beliefs of the underyling state to µ1 , where µ1 is the effectiveness of the policy meme
and µ1 > µ0 .By altering (especially poor) voter beliefs about the efficacy of a1 , the policy meme is
effective in making policy a1 and the rich political challenger politically competitive.
Learning and Discovery of Memes:
The technology of discovering both identity and policy memes is very similar and is a function of the
underlying structural environment and the effort put in by the political challenger. In particular, a
political challenger who further expends resources e(i, p) successfully “discovers” an identity meme
with probability i and a policy meme with probability p where e(i, p) =

β[ϕI (.)i+ϕP p]2
.
2a

Here ϕI , ϕP

are sufficiently large, such that the arguments for i, p each are bounded by 1. Both memes work
in similar though distinctive ways. An identity meme works by priming an individual to make an
identity investment that changes his preferences, while a policy meme changes his beliefs about the
underlying state of the world.
In both cases the prospect of discovering an appropriate policy meme is going to be a function
of not just the political challenger’s ability a, but also the prevailing structural conditions that may
differ for identity memes (ϕI ) or policy memes (ϕP ). For instance, if a country has had a history
of ethnic or religious conflict then it may be easier for an opportunistic political challenger to make
ethnic (or religious) identity an ‘active’ politically salient characteristic, i.e. the cost ϕI will be
relatively low.
Similarly, in the aftermath of a financial crisis that has resulted in exploding deficits, it may be
easier to persuade voters that austerity is the appropriate policy because of the readily available
meme about the government (like an individual) ‘living within its means’. We should also point
out that if a new policy innovation comes into the horizon (either because of the input of policy
innovators, think-tanks or experimentation by a neighbouring country), then by providing a skein
12

of respectability, it makes it easier for entrepreneurs to ‘market’ this policy.20 We capture either of
these scenarios in the form of ϕP ∈ [0, ϕ̄] being relatively low.
Finally, actions taken by the incumbent in control of government can also make it more difficult
for any political challenger to discover and deploy memes. For instance, this could be achieved by
any measures enacted by the government that curb media freedom (such as libel laws or restrictions
on private media), increase repression as well as engage in counter-propaganda. We model this in
a very simple way by assuming that if the incumbent government incurs a cost c(b), then with
probability b the political challenger’s costs of discovering a meme are higher since β equals β1 and
′′

with probability 1 − b the costs equal the status quo with β0 = 1, where c′ , c > 0 and c(1) is
sufficiently large such that b < 1.
We now describe the timing of decision making where the political challenger (who belongs to
the minority rich group) tries to defeat the incumbent from the majority low-income group, by
discovering either an identity meme, or a policy meme or both.
The Timing of Decision Making:
In period T=0, nature moves and structural conditions ϕI , ϕP are realised that can make it easier
or more difficult for the political challenger to engage in ideational politics. The political incumbent
observes these structural conditions and takes a costly action c(b) with the aim of making it more
difficult for the political challenger to be successful in discovering a meme.
In the first period T = 1 a political challenger is (randomly) chosen from the set of individuals
who are rich (i.e. belong to the rich group R).21 This political challenger observes the realization of
β as well as structural conditions and evaluates how much (if any) resources to allocate to “discover”
(with probability i) an identity meme and/or (with probability p) a policy meme. Depending on
whether an identity and/or policy meme are discovered, there will be a (i) shift in voter preferences
as ethnicity becomes an “active” characteristic that affects individual payoffs, (ii) shift in beliefs
about the likelihood that the underlying state of the world is S1 .
The second period T = 2 begins with the realisation of the political incumbent’s relative popularity shock (e.g. charisma) given by δ, which can be positive or negative and elections take place
with each citizen voting for the candidate who maximises their expected payoffs.
In the last period T = 3, the winner of majority of votes is announced and implements the
20
This corresponds to the Keynes’s (1936) emphasis on the notion that once ideas are generated by ‘academic
scribblers’ (or ‘intellectuals’ in Hayek’s (1949) account) they are ripe for the being exploited by political entrepreneurs.
See Lopez and Leighton (2012) for a good discussion.
21
More generally, the challenger can be chosen from the entire population. Here we directly assume that the
political challenger differs on the only dimension that is salient at the beginning of the first period, namely, income.

13

policy that maximises his or her payoff. Voter payoffs are also realised.

3

Full-Spectrum Ideational Politics: Equilibrium Analysis

In this section we allow the political challenger to engage in full-spectrum ideational politics by
simultaneously investing in the discovery of both identity and policy memes. Given that we allow
for full-spectrum politics, we now describe how to solve for the political challenger’s optimal choice
of i∗ , the probability of discovering an identity meme and p∗ , the probability of discovering a policy
meme as well as the optimal effort allocated by the incumbent c∗ to prevent discovery of memes
that change the political status-quo in the first place.
Being a finite period game, we solve for the equilibrium to the above game backwards. Since
politicians are unable to credibly pre-commit to any particular policy, the political incumbent in the
last period (T = 3) implements his preferred policy. Of course, all citizen-voters in the penultimate
period T = 2, vote for the candidate under under whom the perceive that utility will be highest
in the last period. The voter’s choice amongst candidates is a function of (i) the congruence of
their preferences with those of the challenger versus the incumbent and (ii) the realisation of the
aggregate relative popularity shock δ (i.e. relative charisma) of the incumbent versus the political
challenger. Accordingly, we now describe the key voting decision that takes place in period T = 2.
For simplicity (and without loss of generality), we focus on the sub-game where the rich political
challenger with the W identity marker has successfully generated both identity as well as policy
memes (so identity is salient and beliefs about the underlying state of the world have shifted towards
µ1 ). The case where only an identity meme or a policy meme has been discovered is described
in the Appendix A. He faces a political incumbent who is poor and has the identity B and prefers
the status quo policy a0 . In this case the perceived tradeoff facing an individual who is poor and
whose W identity is salient is given by22
µ1 [(ȳ 1 (S1 )+g)+θ1 (S1 )]+(1−µ1 )[ȳ 1 (S0 )+θ1 (S0 )] ≥ µ1 [ȳ 0 (S1 )+θ0 (S1 )]+(1−µ1 )[ȳ 0 (S0 )+θ0 (S0 )]+τ +δ
The left hand side is the expected payoff in a world where policy a1 is enacted (by the political
challenger if elected). The first term on the left hand side is the income payoff (ȳ 1 (S1 ) + g) and the
identity payoff (θ1 (S1 )) if a1 is adopted and the state of the world (with probability µ1 ) equals S1 .
The second term is the payoff from adoption of policy a1 , if the state of the world remains S0 (this
22

Since the focus of much of our analysis is on the median voter who is poor and W (i.e. P, W ) in what follows we
suppress the P, W notation unless we need to explicitly distinguish with those who are rich R and/or B.

14

occurs with probability 1 − µ1 ). In contrast, the right hand side is the payoff from sticking to the
status quo policy a0 (i.e. if the incumbent remains in power).
We simplify the above expression to obtain the perceived tradeoffs facing a poor individual with
the W marker from voting for the challenger (and the adoption of a1 ) as against voting for the
incumbent (and policy a0 ),


µ1 [g] + (1 − µ1 )ȳ 10 (S0 )] + [θ10 (S0 )] + µ1 [θ10 (S1 ) − θ10 (S0 )] ≥ τj + δ.

(2)

The term in the curly brackets is the worldview effect that arises from the policy meme. This
worldview effect is the expected payoff from adoption of a1 where ȳ 10 (S0 ) = ȳ 1 (S0 ) − ȳ 0 (S0 ) < 0.
The identity meme results in an individual for whom his W identity is salient, obtaining utility
from the adoption of policy a1 (quite irrespective of the underlying state). This higher identity
payoff from adoption of a1 is the identity polarization effect, and is captured in the second term of
the right hand side where θ10 (S0 ) = [θ1 (S0 ) − θ0 (S0 )].
Finally, consider the last term on the left hand side of the inequality. This terms shows that
the policy meme increases the returns to identity polarization. In particular, it is the increase in
the magnitude of the identity polarization effect that accrues to a W individual, due to a change
in beliefs about the state of the world being S1 . For example, this may occur if a poor W person
believes that adoption of policy a1 disproportionately benefits his identity group at the expense of
the B group in state S1 than if the state remained S0 .
We are now in a position to solve for the voting game. However, for this we first need to
calculate the set of voters who will support and vote for the high-income political challenger with
the W identity. To facilitate our analysis, we need to calculate the set of individuals who support
the political incumbent amongst the various sub-groups. First, consider the set of low-income
voters with the W identity where τ captures heterogeneity.23 Accordingly, the set of low income
citizen-voters who vote for the challenger and stand to lose the least amount by doing so. This set
is given by those individuals with adjustment costs τj < τ̄ IP , where we define τ̄ IP as:
τ̄ IP = µ1 .g − (1 − µ1 )ȳ 01 (S0 ) + θ10 (S0 ) + µ1 [θ10 (S1 ) − θ10 (S0 )] − δ.

(3)

This defines the person who is indifferent between the status-quo and the new policy under identity
23

The use of individual adjustment costs τi is a parsimonious way of capturing differences in the support for the
pro-rich policies amongst the poor who share an identity. For example, if these differences in adjustment costs are
higher amongst those poor who work in the agricultural (as against industrial) sector, we should expect higher realised
τ ’s in the agricultural sector.

15

politics. We depict this equation of indifference in Figure 1 that depicts four zones. Zone 1 (Zone 2)
represents parameters for which the policy meme (respectively, identity meme) is powerful enough
to ensure that the indifferent individual will support the political challenger. Zone 3 depicts the
region where both policy and identity memes are needed to ensure that individual supports the
challenger. In contrast, Zone 4 represents the set of parameters for which despite being exposed to
the memes, the individual continues to support the status-quo.

!"#$%&'()*&&&&&&&&&&&&&&&& !
!
&&&&&+,,)-.&

"#$%!&'!(#)*+,!-%-%!.)#$%!
%$/01%/!/022#13!4#1!.&5!

!! ! ! !! ! !! !!!" &

&

!!!
"#$%!:'!#2%1.3*#$!
#4!;#3<!*8%$3*3,!=!
2#)*+,!-%-%/
2#)*+,!-%-%/!

"#$%!6'!78%$3*3,!
9%-%!.)#$%!%$/01%/!!
/022#13!4#1!.&5!

"#$%!>'!/022#13
"#$%!>'!/022#13!
/3.30/?@0#!2#)*+,!.A55!

B1.C$!4#1!*$8*D*80.)!
C*3<!!!!C<#!*/!
*$8*44%1%$3!;%3C%%$!
.A!.$8!.&5!E%@$5!E:FF!!
E/<*43/!80%!3#!
+#-2)%-%$3.1*3,F!
!!!!!!
!!!
/0(1&,#"2&3%)1.(.4&
5"$0#(60.("1&7!!"
! !!! !8&

Figure 1: Memes and Policy Choices: the Four Zones
Now consider the set of high-income citizens with the W identity. Observe that for this subgroup of mass nRW there is a complete congruence of interests with those of the political challenger
and they will be inclined to vote for him. Of course, since the high-income voters are a minority, the
rich challenger needs some of the P, W voters to cobble at least nRW +nP W [1−G(τj )]+nBR [G(τj )] ≥
1/2 of the votes, where G is the distribution function of τ in the P, W population and is assumed
to be uniform.24
This implies that given the heterogeneity in the strength of identity in the population (recollect
that τj is drawn from the uniform distribution G), we have the following:


πcIP = P robδ nRW + nP W G(τ̄ IP ) ≥ 1/2

(4)

1
1
, 2ψ
], to substitute for G(τ̄ IP ) in the preceding
We now use equation (3) and the fact that δ ∼ U [− 2ψ
24

For simplicity, we assume in what follows that the set of individuals who are rich and have the B marker is
negligible in size. This is without loss of generality. Alternatively, we can also obtain the same simple expressions by
assuming that economic payoffs for all rich B’s are high enough to ensure that they vote for a1 .

16

equation, (details are relegated to Appendix A), and arrive at the challenger’s probability of getting
elected when both identity and policy memes are in operation which is given by:
πcIP


1
= + ψ µ1 .g − (1 − µ1 )ȳ 01 (S0 ) + mu1 [θ10 (S1 ) − θ10 (S0 )]
2

1 1
1
10
+θ (S0 ) −
( − nRW ) +
nP W 2
2φP

(5)

Observe that πcIP is increasing in the productivity of the new policy a1 and the degree of potential
polarization. Using a similar logic in Appendix A we derive the probability of the political challenger
overthrowing the incumbent in a world where ideational politics is restricted to the politics of
identity (πcI > 0) or to the case where there is only worldview politics (i.e. πcP > 0).
Using these expressions, we now turn to the political challenger’s optimisation problem at the
beginning of period T = 2:
max[i(1 − p)πcI + p(1 − i)πcP + i.pπcIP + (1 − i)(1 − p)πc0 ]R −
i,p

β[ϕI i + ϕP p]2
2a

(6)

The expected payoff to the political challenger (given by the economic and ego rents R) depends
on the probability of getting elected - that differs on the probability of successfully discovering an
identity meme (i.e. i(1 − p)), policy meme (i.e. p(1 − i)) or both (i.e. ip). As pointed out earlier,
even in the case that there is no ideational politics (this occurs with probability (1 − i)(1 − p)),
there is the possibility (given by πc0 ) that the political challenger gets elected due to having higher
‘charisma’ relative to the incumbent. We should point out that the challenger will allocate resources
towards discovering an identity meme, only if there exists a ‘marker’ (in this case the ethnic marker
B or W ) that satisfies (a)-(c), where (a) the marker is shared by the majority and the challenger
but not the incumbent;(b) an individual with an ‘active’ marker gets utility from supporting policy
a1 and (c) it is technologically feasible to “prime” the characteristic.25
Under the assumption that the passive identity marker satisfies the above conditions, we can
take first order conditions with respect to i and obtain:
(πcI − πc0 )R + p(πcIP + πc0 − π I − π P )R −
25


βϕI  I
ϕ i + ϕP p = 0
a

(7)

If the set of characteristic/markers that satisfies (a)-(c) is an empty set, then allocates no effort to the discovery
of an identity meme. If the set of such markers is greater than one, the challenger chooses the marker that maximises
his payoff.

17

Similarly with respect to p:
(πcP − πc0 )R + i(πcIP + πc0 − π I − π P )R −


βϕP  I
ϕ i + ϕP p = 0
a

(8)

We can use the two preceding equations to solve for the pair (i∗ (β), p∗ (β)) which are presented in
the Appendix.
We now move to the beginning of the game, where the political incumbent chooses how much
resources to allocate with aim of preventing (or making more difficult) for the challenger to engage
in ideational politics that can upset the political status-quo. Accordingly, his optimisation is given
by,
max[bV (β1 ) + (1 − b)V (β0 )]R − c(b)
b

(9)

where V (βk ) = [i∗ (βk )(1 − p∗ (βk ))(1 − πcI ) + p∗ (βk )(1 − i∗ (βk ))(1 − πcP ) + i∗ .p∗ (1 − πcIP ) + (1 −
i∗ (βk ))(1 − p∗ (βk ))(1 − πc0 )] for k ∈ {0, 1}. The preceding equation gives us the expected payoff
to the political incumbent from investing resources that raise the cost of engaging in ideational
politics. The first-order conditions give us the optimal amount of resources spent by the incumbent
in trying to make it difficult for any political challenger from successfully discovering and deploying
a meme. Accordingly, an equilibrium consists of a triple (i∗ , p∗ , b∗ ) where the expressions are given
by (20)-(22). We summarise our results in the following proposition below.
Proposition I: There exists an equilibrium i∗ , p∗ , b∗ given by the expressions (14)-(15), such that
the political incumbent raises the cost of discovering a meme with probability b∗ and the political
challenger invests resources e(i∗ ), e(p∗ ). In this equilibrium there is the discovery with probability:
(i) i∗ (1 − p∗ ) of only an identity meme and we have the politics of identity;
(ii) p∗ (1 − p∗ ) of only a policy meme and there is worldview politics;
(iii) i∗ p∗ of both policy/identity memes and there is full-spectrum ideational politics;
(iv) (1 − πc0 )(1 − p∗ )(1 − i∗ ) of neither identity or policy memes such that “interests rule”.
Proof: See Appendix. ⊙
The search and discovery of memes that are political game-changers is a difficult and uncertain
process. The above proposition depicts how with (a positive probability) different configurations of
ideational politics may arise. For instance, if the social or reputational fixed cost to the politician
for deploying ‘racial’ memes is sufficiently high, we may well have i∗ = 0. In contrast, a history
of racial, caste or religious conflict makes it easier for political entrepreneurs to make the relevant
identity marker salient in some countries (e.g. India or the U.S.) as compared to others (e.g. Brazil
18

or Japan). Similarly in the case of policy memes. As pointed out first by Dornbusch and Edwards
(1990), structural/institutional conditions in Latin America (i.e. small ϕP ) makes it much easier for
political entrepreneurs to discover policy memes that make populist policies attractive electorally.
Of course, even if resources are allocated towards the discovery of identity or policy memes, it is
entirely possible (given the stochastic nature of the discovery process) that neither such meme is
discovered and we remain in a world with class conflict - where interests rule.

3.1

Ideas and Interests: Some Implications

We now examine two aspects of the nature of ideational politics. First, we focus on the issue of
complementarity between the two kinds of ideational politics and explore its implications. Second,
we discuss whether ideas are a handmaiden of interests, or whether it is an independent driver.
3.1.1

Ideational Complementarity

We now analyse whether “identity politics” and “worldview” politics are substitutes or complements. To address this issue, we begin by observing that there is a direct substitutability that
arises from the political challenger’s resource constraint. This effect is straightforward and arises
from the technology of ‘discovering’ memes where allocation effort towards the discovery of an
identity meme means that the entrepreneur has fewer resources available to allocate towards the
discovery of the policy meme. However, there is a more subtle effect that works in the opposite
direction. In particular, we identify conditions under which there exists a natural complementarity
between investment in worldview and identity politics that is illustrated in Figure 2 below. We
!

!

!"#$%$&'&()*#+**
,&-.#/0"&12*
*&,01(&()*4040-*
************!*
6*
"#$%&'()!*-,!

!! !

"#$%&'()!*+,!

!! !

!"#$%$&'&()*#+*,&-.#/0"&12**
*********!#'&.)*3040*
********************5********

Figure 2: Complementarity and Ideational Politics

19

show that the returns to investing in the discovery of an identity (or policy) meme are increasing
in the resources allocated to discovering a policy (or respectively identity) meme. In particular, in
the Appendix we show that di/dp is positive so long as the complementarity between investment
in identity and policy memes was sufficiently strong. This condition is described in the condition
below.
Proposition II:

If [(µ1 − µ0 )[θ10 (S1 ) − θ10 (S0 )] + (1 − 2µ0 )[g + y 01 (S0 )] − 2ϕI ϕP > 0, we have

a sufficient condition for ideational complementarity with di/dp > 0.
It is a priori not clear why the returns to investing in an identity meme should be higher when
the policy meme is more likely to be discovered. So what accounts for the fact that full-spectrum
ideational politics may be more effective than the sum of its two parts - namely, identity and
worldview politics? There are two distinct sources that underpin this complementarity between
worldview politics and the politics of identity. We describe each in turn below.
The complementarity between identity and worldview politics is driven by policy meme induced
changes in the “association” effect - the payoff to a poor W person from sharing an identity with
the higher status (and income) W group. This intuition for this source of complementarity is
easiest to observe when the identity driven utility is driven by (for example) relative group income.
Now suppose that the relative income of the W ’s is higher when the state is perceived to be S1
(and a1 adopted) rather than when the state is S0 (and the status-quo policy a0 retained). This
means that a policy meme, by persuading the voter that the state is S1 , can increase the payoff
from identity to those who belong to the W group. Therefore, in the presence of the “association”
effect on identity, it is optimal for the political entrepreneur to invest more in discovering a policy
meme. So for example, low-income white voters may be willing to support a policy that benefits a
rich minority (e.g. financial deregulation), if its adoption gives them an indirect bump in utility through association with other (now very) rich white beneficiaries of this policy.
This ideational complementarity that is driven by the association effect can be reinforced by an
additional factor. Recollect that if voters perceive that the underlying state is S0 , then the adoption
of policy a1 has a negative impact on the income of the poor. Nevertheless, once identity is made
salient a subset of the poor will support this policy for reasons of loyalty to the identity group,
even though supporting this policy has a negative impact on their income. However, the issue is
whether the poor W voters who are reluctant to support the rich challenger - can be persuaded
to change their position. To see this observe the impact of a policy meme that persuades the
poor citizen that the state has switched to S1 . Such a change in beliefs due to the policy meme,

20

makes adoption of the new policy a1 optimal for all the poor W voters as the negative income
effect of identity disappears. Therefore (in the presence of the policy meme), supporting policy a1
on grounds of identity, is no longer perceived to be costly to the poor. This additional source of
ideational complementarity makes it optimal for the political entrepreneur to invest more in trying
to find a policy meme.
In much of the discussion that follows, as illustrated in Figure 2, the complementarity between
identity and worldview politics plays an important role. Indeed the importance of this ideational
complementarity becomes clear when we discuss the implications of an exogenous increase in (respectively) identity polarization, economic inequality and the effectiveness of the policy meme. This
complementarity has interesting implications, that we discuss below.
Implications:
A. Identity Polarization and Policy Memes:
Greater identity polarization in the political arena is often associated with the prevalence of inconsistent (and even contradictory) ‘beliefs’ amongst segments of the population. For example, false
beliefs such as ‘President Obama is a Muslim’ are prevalent amongst large segments of the population. Similarly, despite the increase in education levels and greater prevalence of information, there
has been a persistence in the prevalence of ideas/memes that denies the fact that global warming
is taking place or that budget balance and fiscal austerity may well be optimal for a country - even
in the midst of a recession. Our framework provides an account of why such policy and identity
memes may well go together.
To see this, we first observe that our framework throws light on whether an exogenous increase
in identity ‘polarization’, can affect the production of policy memes. Equivalently, our framework
also allows us to analyze the impact of a perceived increase in the technological payoff from policy
a1 , given by g. Indeed this is a direct implication of Proposition II above and we highlight it in the
following corollary.
Corollary I: Under conditions that satisfy Proposition II, there will be an increase in the production of policy memes either if there is an increase in identity polarization ([θ10 (S1 ) − θ10 (S0 )])
or an increase in the marginal effectiveness of the policy meme (i.e. [µ1 − µ0 ]).
These results are a direct implication of the presence of complementarity in ideational politics.
Greater identity polarisation has two effects. First, by increasing the payoff from identity, this
polarisation makes it attractive for the rich political challenger to discover such identity memes.
This is because such identity memes help persuade the low income citizen to vote on the basis of

21

their identity, rather than their class interest. Furthermore, through the ideational complementarity
effect (see Proposition II), this higher investment in the discovery of identity memes also gives rise
to a higher production of policy memes.
This is because of the impact of greater identity polarization on the strength of the “association
effect” amongst the subset of the poor that has a W marker. This effect increases in size because
relative income (and status) of the W group goes up under a1 (e.g low taxes or financial deregulation). In other words, the low income W citizen gets more utility from identifying with the W
group in state S1 . Furthermore, this complementarity is further reinforced by the “identity-income
tradeoff effect”. Using a similar argument, we also observe that an increase in productivity in state
S1 results in higher utility for the poor with the marker W from identifying with their group.
B. Economic Inequality and the Full-Spectrum Ideational Politics:
Inequality affects the nature of ideational politics through several channels. To fix ideas, consider
the example of a policy choice between high and low taxation. Suppose that under the status-quo
state S0 the preferred policy of the median voter (who is poor) is the high tax policy a0 while the
preferred policy of the rich is the lower tax policy a1 .
Now consider a technological change that results in an increase in income inequality in both
states of the world. We capture this inequality in the form of higher wages of the rich, i.e. a higher
ȳR . This rise in inequality has two effects on the rich political challenger’s incentives. First, the
direct income benefits to a rich political challenger from adoption of a1 (i.e. lower taxes) are higher
when inequality is higher.26 Therefore, under higher inequality, the rich challenger has a higher
incentive to persuade the poor that the state is S1 (and low taxes are good) by discovering a policy
meme. Further observe that this higher inequality also gives rise to a higher incentive to engage in
identity politics. This is because the rise in inequality disproportionately benefits the identity group
W (at the expense of the B’s), who also constitute most of the rich. This gives rise to an ideational
complementarity that is easiest to illustrate through the “association effect”. In particular, if the
political challenger can get the poor to identify with the rich through their common W identity,
then he makes the increase in inequality more palatable to the poor - since they also get some status
and utility.27 So greater economic inequality not only increases the incentive to engage in politics
26

In particular, the payoff to the rich challenger (captured by the rents R) from being elected goes up with higher
inequality. This is because a rich entrepreneur will implement policy a1 (lower taxes) that boosts his utility and equal
1
1
(1 − µ1 )ȳRW
(S0 ) + µ1 ȳRW
(S1 ) (indeed this follows from di∗ /dR > 0 (see appendix)).
27
It can be argued that the political-ideational complex has played an important role in persuading citizens into
strengthening this ‘association effect’ by buying into a worldview (and/or identity) that makes it easier to justify and
live with the prevailing high inequality. This is consistent with Piketty’s conclusion that (2014, pp. 419) that there
has been a “huge change in the social representation of inequality.” Piketty draws on examples from popular culture

22

of changing worldviews but also introduce identity politics. Together, both these effects increase
the likelihood that with an increase in inequality, there is both greater identity polarization as well
as prevalence of policy memes. Therefore, the effect of inequality it to always (weakly) increase the
likelihood of ideational politics.
Therefore, our analysis suggests that (as a result of the production of identity and policy
memes), there will be greater perceived congruence in the interests of the economic elites and the
masses. Gilens and Page (2014) run a horse race between various models within an integrated
econometric model and find that “nearly total failure of “median voter” and other Majoritarian
Electoral Democracy theories. When the preferences of economic elites and the stands of organized
interest groups are controlled for, the preferences of the average American appear to have only
a minuscule, near-zero, statistically non-significant impact upon public policy.....Furthermore, the
preferences of economic elites (as measured by our proxy, the preferences of “affluent” citizens)
have far more independent impact upon policy change than the preferences of average citizens do.
To be sure, this does not mean that ordinary citizens always lose out; they fairly often get the
policies they favor, but only because those policies happen also to be preferred by the economically
elite citizens who wield the actual influence.”
Our framework suggests that the implications of Gilens and Page are even more pessimistic than
they suggest. In part this is because much of the congruence in preferences between the elite and
the median voter may be the direct results of prior successful attempts by the elite in shaping voter
preferences and attitudes through the production of memes. For instance Gilens (2012) reports
empirical results that suggest that the rich and the poor had similar preferences on not just foreign
policy (where we may expect some agreement), but also on issues that affect the rich and poor very
differently such as the war on drugs, education spending and childcare and family leave.
3.1.2

Ideas versus Interests

We should caution against interpreting our model too narrowly. In particular, it could be argued
that rather than making a case for ideas, we have simply strengthened the argument for interests. After all, it is the interests of the political challenger that drives policy and identity memes.
However, we argue that such an argument downplays the role of ideas in several ways.
First, in the presence of ideational politics, the link between interests and policy outcomes can
be significantly weakened. The power of vested interests to get their way depends not only on their
to argue that they offer a “hymn to a just inequality, based on merit, education and the social utility of elites.” This
is corroborated by Carlson, Dahl and Rooth (2015), who provide empirical evidence that suggests that worldviews
about what is fair, just and meritocratic can be shaped by political entrepreneurs.

23

resources, but also on their ability to craft policy narratives and appeal to identity in appropriate
ways. Money and organization certainly help with the latter set of tasks too. But sometimes
political outsiders can upset these moneyed ‘interests’ through the introduction of memes that shape
popular attitudes and alter the trajectory of history. More fundamentally, one can also consider the
role of ideas in the political elites’ formulation of their interest. Even though our model took those
interests as given, elites’ desired policies are as much a function of their identity and worldview
as is the case for non-elites. Tax reform provides an illustration. As we discuss below, business
elites were against the personal income cuts Reagan advocated, as they worried about the adverse
fiscal implications. Over time, they began to place greater weight on the incentive and supply
effects, and many have turned into enthusiastic advocates of across the board tax cuts. South
Korea’s and Taiwan’s political leaders viewed their objectives largely in military and geopolitical
terms through the late 1950s. This dictated inward-looking economic policies. Once they redefined
their strategy as building strength through exports, economic goals began to loom much larger and
their policies changed dramatically (Rodrik 1995). Any explanation that runs off the importance
of vested interests begs the question of where powerful groups get their ideas about their interest
in the first place.
Second and equally importantly, ideas can have an independent effect in shaping interests. Indeed, in some instances ideas may end up constraining and hurting the very interests that launched
them in the first instance. For example, consider the June 2016 vote to leave the European Union
in the U.K. (‘Brexit’) - the institutional change that in the longer run is likely to be the biggest
blow against London’s financial interests in over half a century (see discussion in d’Ancona, 2016).
Despite the 2008 financial crisis and the recession, these financial ‘interests’ in London were strong
proponents of fiscal austerity. Indeed, these interests played a key role in the dissemination of the
‘budget balance’ meme and the gospel of fiscal austerity - so much so that not just the Tory party,
but also Labour leaning policymakers found it difficult to deviate from this orthodoxy. However,
the actual implementation of fiscal austerity by the government (especially in the post financial
crisis world) arguably set the stage for Brexit. Recent work by Becker et al (2017) suggests that
those households that suffered most from fiscal austerity were likely to have tipped the balance in
favour of Brexit. This was probably because of a combination of the fact that the fiscal austerity
meme had limited the government’s ability to manipulate (on the policy front) in the face of a
recession and made the populace who were suffering from the financial crisis vulnerable to memes
about national identity and ‘taking back control’ with the Brexit vote.
Similarly, the Republican Party (and its wealthy (business) interests) have long found it politi-

24

cally useful to disseminate memes and narratives that made identity salient (e.g. Willie Horton in
1988 or the welfare queen under Reagan). In the aftermath of the financial crisis, the Republican
Party (and business) helped spread the austerity meme that limited the use of fiscal policy and
deficits as a policy tool. The resulting financial austerity, coupled with structural changes due
to globalisation, made the party vulnerable to a takeover by Trump and his nativist policies on
immigration and much else - some of which directly hurt the business “interests” and backers of
the Republican Party.
Two aspects of these examples are worth noting. First, a set of “interests” helped propagate
a meme that helped shape perceptions of the world and/or make identity salient. Second, and
importantly, this initial meme distorted the ability of subsequent policymakers to use their full set
of instruments. Of course, the interest group that helped develop the meme knew that it would
limit later policy flexibility in a way that may hurt their interests in the future. Or that it may alter
structural conditions in such a way so as to generate a political backlash. However, this was either
considered to be a remote possibility (high uncertainty about structural conditions) or discounted
quasi-hyperbolically because of electoral outcomes being also driven by exogenous factors such as
charisma.
We illustrate essential features of these examples through a simple extension of our existing
framework to two electoral cycles. Second, we assume that structural conditions that affect the
production of memes, ϕk (ai (Sj )) are a function of exogenous shocks and also a function of policy
choices. We assume that structural conditions are captured as a random draw each period from
a symmetric distribution with mean ϕ̄k (ai (Sj )) where k ∈ {I, P }. However, this exogenous shock
can be further worsened by having an inefficient policy in place - a financial crisis and recession can
be exacerbated by an inefficient policy-state mismatch. Finally, we allow governments to choose
not just between a0 and a1 (possibly corresponding to high and low taxes, respectively) but also
a populist policy ap that directly hurts the rich but involves an unusually large dead-weight loss.
However, if the identity W is salient, then we assume that adoption of this populist policy ap
provides a large identity based utility. This policy ap can be variously interpreted as secession,
Brexit, restrictions on high skill immigration - all policies that may have adverse distributional
consequences on the rich and are arguably more or less inefficient.
Now consider a specific history at the end of the first electoral cycle: the rich challenger wins an
election by deploying a policy meme that persuades the populace that the state is µ1 and adopts the
policy a1 even though the appropriate policy choice is a0 . This inappropriate policy choice along
with a bad exogenous shock (e.g. financial crisis or recession) lowers the mean cost of searching for

25

identity memes in the second electoral cycle ϕ̄I2 . This lower cost of discovering identity memes opens
a window of opportunity for low income challengers who invests resources in trying to get elected
by making a passive marker salient (e.g. race, language or native/immigrant) that maximises his
chances of winning the elections. With positive probability i∗2 (ϕI (a1 (S0 )) such an identity meme is
discovered and makes identity salient. If this identity is best expressed with the populist policy ap ,
it will get implemented - even if it results in lower utility for all.
In other words, in order to get elected, a low-income challenger may make salient an identity
and implement the associated policy ap even if it is inefficient and directly hurts the minority
rich. Therefore, in the longer run, identity politics may result in the adoption of (for example)
anti-immigrant or anti-free trade policies that are opposed by the rich “interests” that catalysed
identity politics in the first place.

4

The Political Economy of Ideas and Interests: Some Vignettes

There are plenty of case studies that suggest the successful deployment of memes of one kind or
another play a role in the adoption of policies. For example, Campbell (1998) has argued that racial
politics helped change the political fortunes of welfare, taxation and labour market policies in the
U.S. Similarly, Skocpol (1997) has pointed out that policies viewed as complex, poorly framed and
lacking a simple and clear message fail to get adopted. In some instances, policies that stand to
benefit a group do not gain political traction even with the intended demographic because they are
not marketed properly and are viewed as ‘excessively vague, complex and ambiguous’ (see Campbell
(1998) on healthcare). Lau and Redlawsk (2001) suggest voters typically use cognitive shortcuts
to process complicated information. Not surprisingly, this is exploited by political entrepreneurs.
In what follows we provide a few brief case studies of political entrepreneurship in developing and
deploying memes to generate popular support for a policy.

4.1

The Laffer Curve and the Reagan Tax Cuts of 1981

Soon after President Reagan assumed office he promulgated the Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981
(ERTA), the largest tax cut in U.S. history. Looking at the widespread support for these income tax
cuts in subsequent decades (especially amongst the business community), it is tempting to presume
that ERTA always had the backing of business interests. However, a remarkable and relatively
unnoticed aspect of the history of this legislation is that business originally opposed personal income
tax cuts, which stood at the heart of ERTA. In her study of the popular origins of the Reagan

26

tax cut of 1981, Monica Prasad (2012) argues that “the record could not be clearer that business
groups opposed” such tax cuts. She points out that business feared they were an “invitation to a
financial disaster” that would result in exploding deficits and “touch off an inflationary explosion
that would wreck the country and everyone on a fixed income.”
The embrace of tax cuts as a central plank in Republican politics presents a suggestive illustration of the power of ideas and policy memes. The idea was first introduced by a young economist
in a meeting with Republican Party sympathisers who drew the famous Laffer curve on a napkin
in DC where his message was simple - “if you tax somethings, you get less of it, If you subsidize
something, you get more of it. We tax work, growth, investment, savings and productivity, while
subsidizing non-work, consumption and debt”. Arthur Laffer’s argument was a classic policy meme
- simple, catchy and plausible.28 Lower taxes would increase the incentive to work, increase productivity and increase tax revenue. So the policy meme suggested that there was no real trade-off
between lower taxes and higher revenue (i.e. lower deficits). Prasad (2012) details how effective
the tax-cut policy meme was in garnering support from Jude Wanniski of the Wall Street Journal
and Jack Kemp and subsequently (then) Governor Reagan. Jack Kemp and Ronald Reagan had
been interested in cutting taxes. However, it was only when exposed to the simplicity of Laffer’s
argument that Reagan (and Kemp) realised that this was not only a policy that lowered taxes on
the rich, but one also likely to appeal to the (much poorer) median voter.

4.2

Ricardo and the Repeal of the Corn Laws 1846

In 1844 the Tories in England voted 308 against 1 to prevent a repeal of the Corn Laws - tariffs
on the import of corn into Britain. In one of the more dramatic reversals in voting behaviour in
history just two years later, 114 Tories had switched and joined the Whigs and others to repeal
these same Corn Laws. So how did this overnight policy revolution come about? Stigler (1982, pp.
63-64) has emphasized the inevitability of the demise of the Corn Laws, due to sectoral shifts and
the relative rise of the manufacturing. However, this ‘interest’ based view is difficult to square this
with the almost sudden policy reversal.
Instead, more compelling is the view due to Lord Robbins (1963) that “any account...of the
coming of free trade in the United Kingdom which omitted the influence of economic thought and
of economists would be defective and, indeed absurd”. In particular, David Ricardo’s ideas about
comparative advantage and free trade had been influential in changing the worldview of policymak28

Campbell (1998) emphasizes that ‘the Laffer curve became a powerful pedagogical symbol that many supply
siders used when presenting their position.”

27

ers (especially the Conservative Prime Minister, Robert Peel) about the adverse consequences of
high corn tariffs on the real wages of the working class (Lustzig, 1995 and Irwin, 1989). This was
buttressed by the Anti-Corn Law league whose propaganda helped disseminate a wide variety of
ideas that helped bring disparate interests into the movement for repeal. These ideas included the
notion that free trade (and repeal) helped personal morality, religious faith, national wealth and
secure the peace (Schonhardt-Bailey, 2006, p. 30). The most systematic study on the relative roles
of ideas and interests is Schonhardt-Bailey (2006). She argues that Peel’s challenge was how to
persuade members of his own party (who stood to benefit from keeping the Corn Laws in place), to
change their position. She argued that Peel effectively managed to “nationalize the interest” such
that his MPs chose to vote for the common good rather than more narrowly vote for the interests
of their (agricultural) constituents.

4.3

The Great Recession of 2008: Austerity Economics and Keynesian Policies

The financial crisis of 2008 and its aftermath provide good examples of how politicians exploit the
‘availability’ and ‘representativeness’ heuristic in their choice of memes (Kahneman and Tversky,
1974).29
Conservative political entrepreneurs repeatedly invoked the fear associated with ‘living beyond
one’s means’ or ‘spending money that we don’t have’. Some variant of this narrative was repeatedly
deployed in the U.S., Germany and the United Kingdom. For example, then U.S. House Minority
Leader John Boehner claimed that “American families are tightening their belt. But they don’t
see the government tightening its belt.” Indeed this meme was so powerful that even President
Obama found it hard to resist, saying “Families across the country are tightening their belts and
making tough decisions. The Federal government should do the same”.30 Similarly, in the United
Kingdom, the Conservative government used a multiplicity of narratives to ensure that there was
support for implementing austerity. Initially the argument made by David Cameron was that “the
country was living beyond its means” and deficit cutting and austerity were required to “clean up
the mess left by Labour”. Just as President Obama was unable to pull away from the persuasive
power of the meme, the Labour’s Shadow Chancellor Alistair Darling could not think of an effective
way to argue against austerity. Indeed, he reportedly said that “Whatever our message, it’s got to
strike a chord with millions of ordinary people as being realistic and credible. People know there
29

In particular, Kahneman and Tversky (1974) argue that individual decision makers assess ‘probability of an event
by the ease with which instances and associations can be brought to mind’ - i.e. the “availability heuristic”. Similarly,
when making “judgements we represent the problem automatically via the functioning of attention, perception, and
memory, and our decisions are subsequently distorted by such representation” (Shleifer and Genniaoli, 2010).
30
Both these are from Krugman’s column in the New York Times of Jan 28, 2010.

28

is a deficit. They know it needs to come down. If we deny that, frankly people will not listen to
you” (quoted by Skidelsky, 2010). It is arguably a combination of Kahneman and Tversky’s (1974)
‘availability’ and ‘representativeness’ heuristics that makes this policy narrative so compelling. As
Skidelsky (2010) points out:
“people think of the government’s finances very much as they think of their own household’s finances. Every household knows that it has to balance its books. If it is spending
more than it’s earning, it either has to earn more or spend less. Spending less means
saving more. ...Households also know that a lot of their spending is ‘wasteful’ on things
they can do without. And they assume the same is true of governments. Ordinary
people, I suspect, think of the government as a huge household, which is currently
spending much more than it is earning. Its collateral - the national economy - has
shrunk in value. So it has to ... make provision for repaying its debt out of its surplus,
just like the millions of smaller households in the land.
Indeed, Angela Merkel’s invocation of the Swabian housewife in Germany makes this quite explicit,
as did David Cameron’s claim that ‘government deficit is just like credit card debt’.31

5

Concluding Comments

We end with some brief comments on the implications of our analysis for empirical research on
political economy that takes both ideas and interests on board.
Since ideas and interests are both endogenous, it is difficult tell them apart empirically. This is a
problem that plagues much of the case-based political economy literature highlighting the role of one
versus the other. This literature typically does not specify how an interest-based argument would be
distinguished from an ideas-based one, leaving the conclusions open to alternative interpretations.32
31
This routine invocation of an analogy to household budget was also labeled as ‘commonsensical’. As pointed
in a historical treatment of the ‘Common Sense’ by Sophia Rosenfeld (2012), this is especially true in a country
with an anti-elitist and populist strain such as the U.S.. where the use of “common sense” as a political weapon
to undermine institutions and policies put forth by experts that were possibly counterintuitive and complex. The
Reagan Revolution was described by the President himself a period when there was a “rediscovery of our values and
common sense”. Indeed President Reagan saw that government could be “operated efficiently by using the same
common sense practiced in our everyday life, in our homes, in businesses and private affairs”. See also Blyth (2013)
on the history of austerity as an idea.
32
For example, Calomiris and Haber (2014) argue that the financial crisis of 2008-2009 was the product of an
alliance of interests between big banks and community groups. The former wanted lax regulation while the latter
wanted cheap housing credit for low-income groups. As such, the argument seems to be about vested interests.
But one is left wondering why community groups such as ACORN bought into a worldview that favored leveraging
poor households with excessive amounts of debt that they might not be able to service down the line. Conversely,
ideas-based accounts of Germany’s advocacy of austerity policies in the euro zone (e.g. Blyth 2013) downplay the
structural role of Germany as a creditor nation with little economic slack – leaving the country with much to gain
and little to lose from such policies.

29

If a lobby pushes a particular policy, is that because they have a vested interest in that policy or
because of ideational forces that shaped their understanding of where their interests lie?
Even though we did not carry out systematic empirical analysis in this paper, our framework
does suggest a way that an empirical distinction can be drawn between ideas and interests. We can
say that any behavior that is predictable on the basis of preference characteristics or worldviews
that are salient ex ante can be attributed to “interests”. Behavior that is the result of ex post
shifts in preferences or worldviews, brought about by memes and narratives, can be attributed in
turn to ideational politics. This is consistent both with constructivists’ take on how ideas shape
preferences and worldviews and with standard political economy models, which draw tight links
between behavior and agents’ ex ante identifiable characteristics (such as occupation, industry,
income group, or pre-existing ideological preferences over inflation/unemployment, etc.).
Our analytical wedge between ideas and interests relies on this distinction between ex-ante
versus ex-post salience of identities and worldviews. Interests are determined by identities and
worldviews that are salient ex ante. Ideas possibly intervene to transform these ex post. A broader
implication of our framework, therefore, is that today’s ideas become tomorrow’s interests. In the
very short run, it is all about interests. In the long run, it is all ideas.

References
Acemogu, D., Robinson, J. A. (2005). Economic origins of dictatorship and democracy. Cambridge
University Press..
Akerlof, G.A. and Snower, D.J., 2016. Bread and bullets. Journal of Economic Behavior Organization, 126, pp.58-71.
Ashok, V., Kuziemko, I., Washington, E. (2015). Support for Redistribution in an Age of Rising
Inequality: New stylized facts and some tentative explanations. Princeton University Working
Paper
Akerlof, George A., and Rachel E. Kranton (2000) “Economics and identity.” Quarterly journal of
Economics, 715-753.
Bartels, Larry (2005), “Homer Simpson Gets a Tax Cut: Inequality and Public Policy in the
American Mind”, Perspectives on Politics, 3(01), 15-31.
Bartels, L. M. (2006). What’s the Matter with What’s the Matter with Kansas?. Quarterly Journal
of Political Science, 1(2), 201-226.
Becker, G.S., 1983. A theory of competition among pressure groups for political influence. The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, pp.371-400.
Benabou, R. (2008). “Ideology”. Journal of the European Economic Association, 6(2013), 321-352.
Benabou, R., Ticchi, D., Vindigni, A. (2015). Religion and innovation (No. w21052). National
Bureau of Economic Research.
Benjamin, D. J., Choi, J. J., Strickland, A. J. (2010). Social Identity and Preferences. The
American economic review, 100(4), 1913.

30

Blouin, Arthur Sharun W. Mukand. (2018). Erasing Ethnicity? Propaganda, Nation Building
and Identity in Rwanda. The Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming.
Buiter, W. H. (2012). The role of central banks in financial stability: how has it changed?.
Blyth, M. (2013). Austerity: the history of a dangerous idea. Oxford University Press.
Blouin, Arthur and S. Mukand (2015). “Bridging the (Ethnic) Divide? Nation Building and
Identity in Rwanda”. Working Paper
Bordalo, P., K. Coffman, Geniaolli, N. and A. Shleifer (2015) Stereotypes, Quarterly Journal of
Economics
Calomiris, C.W. and Haber, S.H., 2014. Fragile by design: the political origins of banking crises
and scarce credit. Princeton University Press.
Campbell, J. L. (1998). Institutional analysis and the role of ideas in political economy. Theory
and society, 27(3), 377-409.
Campbell, J. L. (2002). Ideas, politics, and public policy. Annual review of sociology, 21-38.
Carlsson, Magnus, Gordon Dahl and Rooth (2015), “Do Politicians Change Public Attitudes”,
NBER Working Paper 21062
Cerulo, K. A. (1997). Identity construction: New issues, new directions. Annual review of Sociology,
385-409.
Collier, P., 2016. The cultural foundations of economic failure: A conceptual toolkit. Journal of
Economic Behavior Organization, 126, pp.5-24.
Dawkins, R. (2006). The selfish gene (No. 199). Oxford university press.
DellaVigna, S. and Gentzkow, M., 2010. Persuasion: Empirical Evidence. Annual Review of
Economics, 2(1), pp.643-669.
De Marzo, P. and Vayanos, D., Jeffrey Zwiebel (2003)“Persuasion Bias. Social Influence and
Unidimensional Opinions?”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, August, pp.909-67.
Dietrich, F. and List, C. (2011). “A model of non-informational preference change”. Journal of
theoretical politics, 23(2), 145-164.
Farrell, H., Quiggin, J. (2012). Consensus, dissensus and economic Ideas: the rise and fall of
Keynesianism during the economic crisis. Working paper
Fearon, J. D., Laitin, D. D. (2000). Violence and the social construction of ethnic identity.
International organization, 54(04), 845-877.
Frank, T. (2007). What’s the matter with Kansas?: how conservatives won the heart of America.
Macmillan.
Gennaioli, N., Shleifer, A. (2010). What Comes to Mind?. The Quarterly journal of economics,
125(4), 1399-1433.
Irwin, D. A. (1989). Political economy and Peel’s repeal of the Corn Laws. Economics and Politics,
1(1), 41-59.
Gilens, M. (2012). Affluence and influence: Economic inequality and political power in America.
Princeton University Press.
Gilens, M., Page, B. I. (2014). “Testing theories of American politics: Elites, interest groups, and
average citizens”. Perspectives on Politics, 12(03), 564-581.
Glaeser, E. L. (2005). “The political economy of hatred”. The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
45-86.
Haidt, J. (2012). The righteous mind: Why good people are divided by politics and religion. Vintage.
Hayek, F.A., (1949). “The intellectuals and socialism”. The University of Chicago Law Review,
16(3), pp.417-433.
Iyengar, S. and Kinder, D. R. (2010). News that matters: Television and American opinion.
University of Chicago Press.

31

Jackson, M. S. (2011). “Priming the sleeping giant: The dynamics of Latino political identity and
vote choice”. Political Psychology, 32(4), 691-716.
Keynes, J. M. (2006). General theory of employment, interest and money. Atlantic Publishers
Dist.
Johnson, S., Kwak, J. (2011). 13 bankers: The Wall Street takeover and the next financial meltdown. Vintage Books USA.
Jain, S., Majumdar, S., and Mukand, S. W. (2014). “Walk the line: Conflict, state capacity and
the political dynamics of reform”. Journal of Development Economics, 111, 150-166.
Kahneman, D. and Amos Tversky (1974). Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases.
Science, 185(4157), 1124-1131..
Lenin, V. I. (1902). What is to be done?, available online at
https://www.marxists.org/archive/lenin/works/download/what-itd.pdf.
Levy, Gilat and Ronny Razin (2015), “Perceptions of Correlation, Communication and Ambiguity”.
LSE Working Paper
Lopez, E. and Leighton, W., 2012. Madmen, intellectuals, and academic scribblers: The economic
engine of political change. Stanford University Press.
Lusztig, M. (1995). Solving Peel’s puzzle: repeal of the Corn Laws and institutional preservation.
Comparative Politics, 393-408.
Mayer, Jane (2015), Dark Money: The Hidden History of the Billionaires Behind the Rise of the
Radical Right, Doubleday, New York
Mendelberg, T. (2001). The race card: Campaign strategy, implicit messages, and the norm of
equality. Princeton University Press.
Molden, D.C. (2014). Understanding Priming Effects in Social Psychology: What is “Social Priming” and How does it Occur?. Social Cognition, 32(Supplement), pp.1-11.
Mullainathan, Sendhil, Andrei Shleifer, and Joshua Schwartzstein. (2008), “Coarse Thinking and
Persuasion.? Quarterly Journal of Economics 123(2): 577-619
Persson, T. and G.Tabellini (2000) Political Economics, Cambridge: MIT Press.
Piketty, T. (2014). Capital in the 21st Century. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Prasad, M. (2012). “The Popular Origins of Neoliberalism in the Reagan Tax Cut of 1981”. Journal
of Policy History, 24(03), 351-383.
Quadagno, J. (1996). The color of welfare: How racism undermined the war on poverty. Oxford
University Press.
Rodrik, Dani (1995), “Getting Interventions Right: How South Korea and Taiwan Grew Rich,?
Economic Policy 20
Rodrik, D. (2014). “When Ideas Trump Interests: Preferences, Worldviews, and Policy Innovations”. The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 28(1), 189-208.
Robbins, L. (1963). On the Relations between Politics and Economics (pp. 3-23). Palgrave
Macmillan UK.
Rosenfeld, S. A. (2011). Common Sense. Harvard University Press.
Ruggie, J. G. (1998). What makes the world hang together? Neo-utilitarianism and the social
constructivist challenge. International organization, 52(04), 855-885.
Schonhardt-Bailey, C. (2006). From the corn laws to free trade: interests, ideas, and institutions
in historical perspective. MIT Press.
Sen, Amartya (2005). Identity and Violence: The Illusion of Destiny, W.W. Norton, New York.
Sethi, R., and Yildiz, M. (2012). “Public disagreement”. American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 4(3), 57-95.
Shayo, M. (2009). A model of social identity with an application to political economy: Nation,
class, and redistribution. American Political Science Review, 103(02), 147-174.
32

Shepsle (1985), ”Comment of Why the Regulators Chose to Deregulate,” in Roger Noll (ed.),
Regulatory Policy and the Social Sciences (Berkeley: University of California Press): 231-39.
Shiller, R.J., 2017. Narrative economics. American Economic Review, 107(4), pp.967-1004.
Skidelsky, Robert (2010), “Austerity versus Stimulus”, mimeo.
Skocpol, T. (1997). Boomerang: Health care reform and the turn against government. WW Norton
Company.
Stigler, G. J. (1971). “The theory of economic regulation”. The Bell journal of economics and
management science, 3-21.
Stigler, G. J. (1982). The economists and the problem of monopoly. The American Economic
Review, 72(2), 1-11.
Turner, John C (1985) “Social categorization and the self-concept: A social cognitive theory of
group behavior.” Advances in group processes: Theory and research 2 : 77-122.
Wendt, A. (1999). Social theory of international politics. Cambridge University Press.
Wilkinson, S. I. (2006). Votes and violence: Electoral competition and ethnic riots in India. Cambridge University Press.

33

Appendix A
In the tables below, the payoffs in the square brackets, correspond to Appendix B.
Table 1: Payoff from Policy Meme
(to low income or poor citizen (P ) from policy ai and state Sj )
State/Policy

a1

a0

y ij (Sk )

State S1 (prob. µ1 )

y 1 (S1 )[= 1 + g]

y 0 (S1 )[= 1]

y 10 (S1 )[= g]

State S0 (prob. (1 − µ1 ))

y 1 (S0 )[= 1 − g]

y 0 (S0 )[= 1]

y 10 (S0 )[= −g]

Table 2: Payoff from Identity Meme
(to low income citizen (P ) with W marker from policy ai and state Sj )
State/Policy

a1

a0

y ij (Sk )

S1 (prob. µ0 )

y 1 (S1 ) + θ1 (S1 )[= 1 + g + θ]

y 0 (S1 ) + θ0 (S1 )[= 1]

y 10 (S1 )[= g + θ]

S0 (prob. (1 − µ0 ))

y 1 (S0 ) + θ1 (S0 )[= 1 − g]

y 0 (S0 ) + θ0 (S0 )[= 1]

y 10 (S0 )[= −g]

Table 3: Payoff from Identity and Policy Meme
(to low income citizen (P ) with W marker from policy ai and state Sj )
State/Policy

a1

a0

y ij (Sk )

S1 (prob. µ1 )

y 1 (S1 ) + θ1 (S1 )[= 1 + g + θ]

y 0 (S1 ) + θ0 (S1 )[= 1]

y 10 (S1 )[= g + θ]

S0 (prob. (1 − µ1 ))

y 1 (S0 ) + θ1 (S0 )[= 1 − g]

y 0 (S0 ) + θ0 (S0 )[= 1]

y 10 (S0 )[= −g]

Proof of Proposition 1:
Here we proceed in several steps. First, we need to derive expressions for π I , π P as well as illustrating
how we arrived at the expression for π IP that is shown in the main body of the paper. We then
show that there exists a solution (i∗ , p∗ ) to the pair of equations given by (7) and (8) in the relevant
range (i.e. i∗ , p∗ ∈ [0, 1)).
Derivation of π I : Once identity is made salient, following equation (1), an individual j’s payoff
from policy a1 (LHS of inequality below) is greater than the payoff from the payoff from sticking
to the status-quo policy a0 (the RHS below) if:




µ0 y 10 (S1 ) + (1 − µ0 )y 10 (S0 ) + µ0 θ10 (S1 ) − θ10 (S0 ) + θ10 (S0 ) ≥ τp + δ
(10)
34

The set of ‘poor’ individuals who vote for the challenger follows from the above equation and is
given by τj < τ̄ I where τ̄ I is the defined by the poor individual who is indifferent
between the two



policies under identity politics, where τ̄ I = µ0 y 10 (S1 ) + (1 − µ0 )y 10 (S0 ) +µ0 θ10 (S1 ) − θ10 (S0 ) +
θ10 (S0 ) − δ.
In particular, for the challenger to get elected he needs to collect at least nRW + nP W [1 −
G(τj )] + nBR [G(τj )] ≥ 1/2, where G is the distribution function of τ in the P, W population and is
assumed to be uniform.
This implies that given the heterogeneity in the strength of identity in the population (recollect
that τi is drawn from the uniform distribution G with support [− 2φ1P , 2φ1P ]), we have the following:


πcI = P robδ nRW + nP W G(τ̄ I ) ≥ 1/2

We now use equation τ̄ I to substitute for G(τ̄ I ) in the preceding equation, substitute for δ ∼
1
1
U [− 2ψ
, 2ψ
] to obtain:





1
π = + ψ µ0 y 10 (S1 ) + (1 − µ0 )y 10 (S0 ) + µ0 θ10 (S1 ) − θ10 (S0 )
2

1 1
1
+θ10 (S0 ) −
( − nRW ) +
nP W 2
2φP W
I

(11)

Derivation of π P and π 0 :
His payoff from voting for the rich challenger (who adopts a1 ) is greater than the payoff from voting
for the poor incumbent (who retains status-quo a0 ) if the following is true:
µ1 [y 1 (S1 ) + g] + (1 − mu1 )y 1 (S0 ) ≥ µ1 [y 0 (S1 )] + (1 − µ1 )y 0 (S0 ) + τ + δ

(12)

The term on the left hand side of the inequality equals the payoff if policy a1 is implemented and
the individual believes that the state S1 with probability µ1 . The term on the right hand side of
the inequality is the expected payoff from sticking to the status-quo a0 . On further simplifying and
rearranging, we obtain
µ1 [g] + (1 − µ1 )y 10 (S0 ) ≥ τ + δ
(13)
The term on the left hand side of the inequality equals the payoff if policy a1 is implemented
and the individual believes that the state S1 with probability µ1 . The term on the right hand side
of the inequality is the expected payoff from sticking to the status-quo a0 .
Using a similar logic as earlier, the total votes for the challenger if a successful policy meme had
been discovered would be given by: nR + nP G(τ̄ P ). As previously, we can calculate the probability
of a political challenger who discovers a policy meme is successful in winning elections as given by:


1
1
1
1
P
01
( − nR ) +
(14)
πc = + ψ µ1 g − (1 − µ1 )y (S0 ) −
2
nP φ P 2
2φP
Observe that dπcP /dg > 0 and the absence of distributional effects is reflected in the fact that
(unlike the case with identity politics) π P > 1/2.
Similarly, we can derive π 0 . Only way that the challenger can win is if his popularity shock δ
works sufficiently in his favour to ensure that it is greater than the income loss.
µ0 y 1 (S0 ) + (1 − µ0 )y 1 (S1 ) ≥ µ0 y 0 (S0 ) + (1 − µ0 )y 0 (S1 ) + δ + τ

35

Rearranging we obtain,
µ0 y 10 (S0 ) + (1 − µ0 )y 10 (S1 ) ≥ δ + τ.
Following the same steps as earlier, this gives rise to


1
1
1
1
0
01
π = + ψ (1 − µ0 )g − µ0 y (S0 ) −
( − nR ) +
2
nP φ P 2
2φP

(15)

Derivation of Equation i∗ , p∗ :

πcIP =


1
+ ψ µ1 .g − (1 − µ1 )ȳ 01 (S0 ) + mu1 [θ10 (S1 ) − θ10 (S0 )]
2

1
1 1
10
( − nRW ) +
+θ (S0 ) −
nP W 2
2φP

IP

IP

c
Observe that dπdgc > 0 and dπ
10 > 0. Also note that changes in g indirectly may affect the
dθw
degree of identity polarization since the relative status between the two groups may change as a
function of the changes in income (i.e. ȳP10W (S1 ) is a function of g and output).
Having solved for π I , π P , π IP , we can substitute these expressions into the political challenger’s
optimisation (given by (6)) and obtain first order conditions given by (7) and (8). On solving (7)
and (8) simultaneously we obtain (where z = a/βi ):

z(πcP − πc0 )R[z(π IP + π 0 − π I − π P )R − ϕI ϕP ] + (ϕP )2 z(πcI − πc0 )R
(ϕI ϕP )2 − [z(π IP + π 0 − π I − π P )R − ϕI ϕP ]2
 I 2 P

(ϕ ) (π − π 0 ) + (π I − π 0 )[z(π IP − π 0 − π I − π P )R − ϕI ϕP ]
p∗ = zR
.
(ϕI ϕP )2 − [z(π IP − π 0 − π I − π P )R − ϕI ϕP ]2
i∗ =

(16)

(17)

Recollect that z = a/βi where i ∈ {0, 1}. Now observe that since z is decreasing in β, we have the
numerator decreasing and denominator increasing in β. Therefore, i∗ , p∗ are both decreasing in β.
We further point out that while there exists a i∗ , p∗ that solves the above equations, we need further
condition to ensure that i∗ , p∗ ∈ [0, 1). These conditions are described in the proof of Proposition
2. Finally, given that c(b) is continuous, we can solve for b∗ by examining the first order conditions
for the political incumbent.
Proof of Proposition 2: For complementarity, we need to impose conditions such that not only
does i∗ , p∗ exist, but that di/dp > 0 as in Figure 2. Accordingly, (i) we evaluate (7) (LHS below)
and (8)(the RHS below) when p = 0. This gives rise to:
2[π I − πc ]R(ai ap )2
≤
[ϕI ]2

[π P − πc0 ]R
ϕI ϕ P
2a2

− (π IP + πc0 − π I − π P )R

On simplifying we obtain:
ϕI ϕP ≤ (ϕI )2

π P − πc0
+ 2(π IP + πc0 − π I − π P )Ra2
π I − πc0

This inequality is satisfied and RHS>LHS for a variety of parameters (including ai , ap , π IP sufficiently large as well as ϕI → 0).

36

Observe that equations (7) and (8) are linear in i and p. Differentiating (7) we obtain:
di
a(π IP + πc0 − π I − π P )R ϕP
=
− I
dp
[ϕI ]2
ϕ

(18)

Similarly differentiating (8) we obtain
(ϕP )2
di
=
.
dp
a(π IP + πc0 − π I − π P )R − ϕI ϕP

(19)

Further comparing slopes from (18) and (19) we observe the slope of (18) is steeper than the slope
of (19) (and positive) if the following inequality holds:
aR IP
[π + πc0 − π I − π P ] > ϕI ϕP
2

(20)

This is true for [π IP + πc0 − π I − π P ] being positive and a, R being sufficiently large. Observe that:
[π IP + πc0 − π I − π P ] = (µ1 − µ0 )[θ10 (S1 ) − θ10 (S0 )] + (1 − 2µ0 )[g + y 01 (S0 )]

(21)

This implies that if (i) the ideational complementarity and/or the (ii) the ‘income-identity tradeoff’
effect (i.e. income loss to the poor from a1 ) and a, R was sufficiently large we would expect an
increase in i∗ to be complementary to an increase in p∗ . Substituting (5), (11), (14), (15) into (20)
gives us the condition for ideational complementarity described in Proposition 2.
Given the differences in intercepts and the differences in slopes, the two curves will intersect in
the positive (i, p) quadrant. However, for existence we need an additional step that ensures that
∃i∗ , p∗ ≤ 1. A sufficient condition for this is if parameters satisfy the following two conditions: (i)
at p = 1, we want i∗ (from (7))> i∗ (from (8)) and (ii) at p = 1 we also have i∗ (from (8)) ≤ 1. If
both these conditions are satisfied, we will have demonstrated the existence of i∗ , p∗ .
The first of these conditions is satisfied if the following inequality holds (for p = 1):
ϕP
2a2 (π P − π 0 )R − (ϕP )2
2a2
I
0
IP
0
I
P
.
[(π
−
π
)R
+
(π
+
π
−
π
−
π
)]
−
>
c
(ϕI )2
ϕI
ϕi ϕP − [π IP + πc0 − π I − π P ]R2a2
Observe that the LHS is increasing (and the RHS is decreasing) in [π IP + πc0 − π I − π P ]R. Further
observe that RHS < 0 for π P → π 0 .
For (ii) above, we need the following inequality to be true:
2Ra2 (π P − π I ) − (ϕP )2 ≤ ϕI ϕP − [π IP + πc0 − π I − π P ]R2a2 .
On simplifying this equals:
2Ra2 [π IP − π I ] ≤ ϕI ϕP + (ϕP )2
⊙

37

Appendix B: Microfoundations for Policy and Identity Memes
In this appendix we relax a key assumption of our benchmark model. In particular, we provide
micro-foundations for both identity and policy memes and throw light on the question of how is it
that these memes can alter beliefs of the populace. As a first step, we observe that we can interpret
an individual’s preferences as being state-dependent on not only the income dimension but also the
identity dimension. It is quite standard to assume that individuals may get a higher income payoff
in some states of the world than in others. Using a similar logic we argue that in some states of
the world, an individual receives more utility from their membership to an identity group than in
others. We allow for the possibility that this makes identity salient and gives rise to an incentive
for individuals to invest in their group identity. In this appendix we sketch a version of our model
that shows how both memes work - essentially by changing beliefs that individuals have about the
underlying state of the world (be it income or an identity related state). We elaborate on this
below.
As discussed in the text, there are several channels through which the memes can alter beliefs about the state of world and/or get individuals to invest in their (otherwise passive) group
identity.33 Rather than privilege a particular channel we take a different more direct route over
here. In particular, we sidestep the issue of how this information manipulation is carried out by
the entrepreneur. Instead, we assume that the discovery of (for example) a policy meme ‘blocks’
information that a citizen receives about the underlying state of the world.
Accordingly, we assume that policy ai is state-dependent where the relevant states are Sj ,
where i, j ∈ {0, 1}. However, we now allow for preferences regarding identity be a function of the
underlying state also. In particular, we allow group identity to be much more important in state SH
and much less (or of negligible) importance when the state is SL . Of course, it is entirely possible
that the policy relevant states S0 (or S1 ) are correlated with or even perfectly coincide with the
states of the world that determine the magnitude of the identity payoff. However, for the purpose
of the appendix we treat the policy and identity relevant states as uncorrelated. The payoffs in
what follows corresponds to the numbers in the square brackets of Tables 1-3 in Appendix A above.
For simplicity, we assume that priors about both the policy and identity relevant states are such
that P (S0 ) = P (SL ) = µ.
We assume that each individual obtains a correlated reliable (but imprecise) private signal about
the underlying policy relevant state s0 or a signal sL about the corresponding identity relevant
state. The reliability of these correlated private signals equals P (s0 |S0 ) = q = P (sL |SL ). When the
political challenger allocates effort (i, p), he blocks the signal s0 with probability p and the signal
sL with probability i. Therefore, if the voter does not receive the signal about the underlying state,
he updates using Bayes rule and obtains the following:
P (S1 |no signal s0 ) = µp = µ1 =

(1 − µ)
[p + (1 − p)(1 − q)]µ + (1 − µ)

(22)

Similarly, on not receiving the signal sL we have
P (SH |no signal sL ) = µi =

(1 − µ)
[i + (1 − i)(1 − q)]µ + (1 − µ)

33

(23)

These channels include the role manipulating the media and information by the political entrepreneur by exploiting behavioural biases arising from framing (Breyer, 1981), anticipatory utility (Benabou and Tirole, 2002), coarse
thinking (Mullainathan et al, 2008), salience and attention (Genniaolli and Shleifer, 2010), correlated neglect and
peer influence heuristics (Levy and Razin (2014), Enke and Zimmerman (2017)) or Bayesian persuasion (Alonso and
Camara).

38

These two expressions give us the voter’s posterior in the case the memes are discovered and manage
to shift a voter’s information set by blocking information that the voter may have received. In the
case of the policy or identity meme, this results in an updated posterior about the likely success
of adopting the new policy or the likelihood that investing in group identity is likely to provide a
payoff.
We now follow our earlier derivation of the probability of the political challenger winning
the election (depending on whether an identity, or policy or both memes have been discovered
π I , π P , π IP or none π 0 . Therefore, the payoff from electing the rich challenger with the W marker
is greater than electing the incumbent so long as the following inequality holds,
µP [(1 + g) + µi θ] + (1 − µp )[(1 − g) + µi θ] ≥ 1 + τj + δ
Rearranging, we get the set of voters with τ ’s such that they will vote for the political challenger
is given by
τj ≤ g[2µP − 1] + µi θ − δ] ≡ τ̄ IP
We can use similar mechanics to derive expressions for π I , π P and π 0 . Given these probabilities of
getting elected under different circumstances, the challenger’s problem is
max[i(1 − p)πcI + p(1 − i)πcP + i.pπcIP + (1 − i)(1 − p)πc0 ]R −
i,p

[ϕI i + ϕP p]2
2

Taking first order conditions with respect to i (and for simplicity take ϕI = 1 and ϕP = c) we
obtain:
[pπ IP + ip

∂π IP
∂π I
+ (1 − p)π I + i(1 − p)
− pπ P − (1 − p)π 0 ]R − (i + cp) = 0
∂i
∂i

Here we observe that,
∂π IP
∂π I
∂µi
=
= ψθ
∂i
∂i
∂i
Using the above expression, substituting and simplifying we obtain,


nR
nRW − nB
iqµ
i
i
−
) R = i + cp.
µ ) + ψ(
ψθµ (1 −
(1 − µ)
2nP W φP
2nP φP

(24)

Similarly, we can take first order conditions with respect to p and obtain,
[iπ IP + ip

∂π P
∂π IP
+ (1 − i)π P + p(1 − i)
− iπ I − (1 − i)π 0 ]R − c(i + cp) = 0
∂i
∂p

Once again observing that
∂π IP
∂π P
∂µp
=
= 2ψθ
∂p
∂p
∂p
Furthermore, observe that

∂µP
(µP )2
= (−)
qµ
∂p
(1 − µ)

Once again we use the preceding two expressions to simplify and substitute in the first order

39

condition with respect to p to obtain,

2gψ (µp − µ) −


pqµ
p 2
(µ ) R = c(i + cp)
(1 − µ)

(25)

Substituting for (i + cp) from (22) into (23) and rearranging, we obtain






nRW − nB
nR
pqµ p 2
iqµµi
p
i
+
−
(µ ) = 0 (26)
− 2g (µ − µ) −
Z(i, p) ≡ c θµ 1 −
(1 − µ)
2nP W φp
2nP φP
1−µ
Now we can use the above expression to obtain
di
= (−)
dp

∂Z(i,p)
∂p
∂Z(i,p)
∂i

= (−)

Observe that di/dp > 0 iff both qµ < 1 and

4g(µp )2 qµ
(1−µ)

h

1−

h
i )2 qµ
1−
− 2cθ(µ
(1−µ)

iqµµi
1−µ

< 1.

40

pqµµp
1−µ

iqµµi
1−µ

i

i
(27)

