NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FOREIGN EXCHANGE INTERVENTION REDUX
Roberto Chang
Working Paper 24463
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24463

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2018

Prepared for the 2017 Central Bank of Chile Annual Conference. I am indebted to José De
Gregorio and Paolo Cavallino for insightful discussions. I also thank Guillermo Calvo, Luis
Felipe Céspedes and seminar participants at Rutgers, ITAM Banco de Mexico, and the Di Tella
IEF Workshop for useful comments and suggestions. Of course, any errors or shortcomings are
solely mine. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Roberto Chang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Foreign Exchange Intervention Redux
Roberto Chang
NBER Working Paper No. 24463
March 2018
JEL No. E58,F33,F41
ABSTRACT
Received wisdom posits that sterilized foreign exchange intervention can be effective by altering
the currency composition of assets held by the public. This paper proposes an alternative channel:
sterilized intervention may (or may not) have real effects because it changes the net credit
position of the central bank vis a vis financial intermediaries, thereby affecting external debt
limits. This argument is developed in the context of an open economy model with domestic banks
subject to occasionally binding collateral constraints. Intervention has real effects if and only if it
occurs when the constraints bind; at such times, a sterilized sale of official reserves relaxes the
constraints by reducing the central bank's debt to domestic banks, freeing resources for the latter
to increase the supply of credit to domestic agents. The analysis yields several noteworthy
implications for intervention policy, official reserves accumulation, and the interaction between
intervention and monetary policy.

Roberto Chang
Rutgers University
Department of Economics
75 Hamilton Street
New Brunswick, NJ 08901
and NBER
chang@econ.rutgers.edu

1

Introduction

Arguably, no issue in International Macroeconomics exhibits more dissonance between academic
research and policy practice than foreign exchange intervention. The dominant view from
academia is that sterilized foreign exchange (FX) intervention has a tiny, if any, impact on
real variables, which makes it virtually useless as an independent macroeconomic policy tool.
Indeed, a large body of empirical literature has struggled to …nd a consistent link between
FX intervention and macroeconomic aggregates, including exchange rates.1 From a theory
perspective, this is hardly surprising, especially since modern dynamic macroeconomic models
often predict that FX intervention should be irrelevant (Backus and Kehoe 1989).
Policymakers, on the other hand, have ignored the prescriptions from research and have
intervened, frequently and intensely, in the foreign exchange market. FX intervention has
become prominent and noticeable following the global …nancial crisis in advanced economies,
while in emerging ones FX intervention was the norm already before the crisis, and even in
countries committed to in‡ation targeting. Interestingly, central bankers reportedly believe
that FX intervention is e¤ective as a policy tool, and that it has been used successfully.2
The purpose of this paper is to develop a recent perspective on FX intervention which,
among other advantages, can help reconciling the contrasting views of academics and policy
makers. Following Céspedes, Chang, and Velasco (2017), I adopt the view that FX intervention
can and should be seen as a speci…c instance of the so called "unconventional" central bank
policies reviewed, for example, in Gertler and Kiyotaki (2010). This view strongly indicates
that a useful analysis of FX intervention requires a framework that allows for …nancial frictions
and institutions, for otherwise unconventional policies turn out to be irrelevant (as in Wallace
1981 or, as already mentioned, Backus and Kehoe 1989).
Accordingly, I analyze FX intervention in an extension of Chang and Velasco’s (2017) model
1
For instance, citing Obstfeld (1982) and Sarno and Taylor (2001), Taylor (2014, p. 369) writes: "the
evidence is often weak and a source of ongoing controversy". A more recent survey of the empirical literature
is Menho¤ (2013).
2
See Chutasripanish and Yetman (2015). Also, Adler and Tovar (2011).

2

of a small open economy. In that economy, …nancial intermediaries or banks borrow from the
world market and, in turn, extend credit to domestic households or the government, subject
to an external debt limit. The model is intended to be standard and as simple as possible to
help exposition, so as to isolate two features that turn out to be central. The …rst one is the
speci…cation of sterilized intervention. Sterilized FX interventions are operations in which the
central bank buys (or sells) o¢ cial reserves of foreign exchange, and at the same time it sells
(or buys) an o¤setting amount of securities, such as "sterilization bonds". This implies that
the central bank issues sterilization bonds, or more generally reduces its net credit position,
when it purchases reserves, and cancels the bonds when it sells reserves.
The second aspect of our model is that domestic banks face an external debt limit that may
or may not bind in equilibrium. This is key because, as I show, FX intervention has no impact
on macroeconomic aggregates if it occurs when that limit does not bind. Conversely, as I also
show, FX intervention does a¤ect equilibrium real outcomes if it takes place at times of binding
…nancial constraints.
More precisely, sterilized FX intervention can a¤ect equilibrium because the associated
sterilization operations relax or tighten …nancial constraints. When the central bank sells
foreign exchange, sterilization means that the central bank retires sterilization bonds (or, more
generally, increases its net credit position vis a vis domestic banks). If …nancial constraints do
not bind, domestic banks accommodate this change by simply borrowing less from the world
market, and equilibrium is left undisrupted. But when …nancial constraints do bind, the fall
in the central bank’s demand for credit associated with sterilization frees resources for banks,
allowing them to increase the supply of loans to the domestic private sector. The result is that
loan interest rates fall, and aggregate demand expands.
This view of the mechanism through which sterilized FX intervention works di¤ers sharply
from alternative ones, and in particular from those of currently dominant portfolio balance
models. Such models assume that domestic currency bonds and foreign currency bonds are
imperfect substitutes and, as a result, uncovered interest parity holds up to a risk premium

3

that depends on the ratio of domestic currency bonds to foreign currency bonds in the hands of
the public. Sterilized FX intervention a¤ects that ratio and hence, the risk premium, which in
turn requires macroeconomic adjustments. In contrast, the mechanism proposed in this paper
does not rely on imperfect asset substitutability nor on di¤erences in currency denomination. In
fact, and in order to stress the point, I show that FX intervention can be an e¤ective policy tool
(when …nancial constraints bind) under perfect asset substitutability and even if the economy
is "…nancially dollarized".
As a signi…cant additional payo¤, our exploration of the model highlights a close link between
sterilized intervention and the cost-bene…t analysis of o¢ cial reserves accumulation. Under the
natural assumption that the central bank cannot issue foreign currency, maintaining a large
stock of foreign exchange enhances the ability of the central bank to stimulate the economy,
by selling reserves, when …nancial constraints become binding. This is obviously bene…cial and
intuitive. But in this model there is also a cost of holding reserves, namely, that larger reserves
also imply larger outstanding quantities of sterilization bonds, the …nancing of which may place
banks closer to their credit limits, making them more vulnerable to adverse exogenous shocks. A
main trade-o¤ the emerges: large amounts of o¢ cial reserves allow the central bank to respond
more e¤ectively, via FX intervention, when …nancial constraints are hit, at the cost of those
constraints being hit more frequently.
Our analysis yields several lessons for FX intervention rules and their relation to conventional
monetary policy. Notably, a policy of selling reserves when the exchange rate is weak and buying
them when the exchange rate is strong can relax …nancial constraints when they bind, but also
leads to intervention when the constraints do not bind, which can be counterproductive. A
policy of intervention based on credit spreads is superior, as it is only activated when …nancial
constraints bind. Also, the question of whether sterilized FX intervention can be an independent
policy tool and complement conventional monetary policy has an a¢ rmative answer in our
model. But the fact that …nancial constraints bind only occasionally is crucial and means,
in particular, that one must go beyond the analysis of linear models or linear approximations

4

around the steady state.
Finally, our approach yields several other appealing insights. Speci…cally, it is consistent
with the empirical di¢ culty to …nd signi…cant macroeconomic e¤ects of FX intervention in the
data, since intervention has real impact only at times of binding constraints, which may be
infrequent. It also indicates how intervention can be welfare improving. And it sheds light on
the role of the so called quasi …scal de…cits that central banks derive from intervention.
This paper builds on and contributes to a large literature on FX intervention. For useful
surveys, see Sarno and Taylor (2001), Menko¤ (2013), Adler and Tovar (2011), and Ostry,
Ghosh, and Chamon (2016). Until the powerful critique by Backus and Kehoe (1989), the
literature was dominated by models derived from the optimal portfolio choices of investors that
viewed domestic currency assets and foreign currency assets as imperfect substitutes. Recently
the portfolio balance approach has experienced a revival, led by Benes, Berg, Portillo, and
Vavra (2015), and followed by Vargas, González and Rodriguez (2013), Montoro and Ortiz
(2016), and Cavallino (2017).
The newer portfolio balance models are similar to ours in that FX intervention can have
real e¤ects because of the interaction of sterilization operations with …nancial frictions. They
di¤er substantially along some important details, however. For example, Benes et al. (2015)
and Vargas et al. (2013) impose that banks pay portfolio management costs similar to those
in Edwards and Vegh (1997). They make assumptions about those costs that make domestic
currency bonds and foreign currency bonds imperfect substitutes for the banks, which leads to
the same kind of uncovered interest parity condition cum risk premium that was the hallmark
of the older portfolio balance approach. This indicates that, while the newer models have been
successful in providing satisfactory theoretical underpinnings to the portfolio balance approach,
they still have to be reconciled with the same evidence as older models. In comparison, in the
model of this paper, …nancial frictions only bite sometimes and not others, which makes a signi…cant di¤erence in the results. For one thing, under the assumption that …nancial constraints
are not binding in the steady state, our model implies that FX intervention is irrelevant for

5

shocks that are not large enough to drive the economy to the …nancially constrained region.
As already noted, this aspect of the model consistent with the scarcity of empirical evidence of
nontrivial e¤ects of sterilized intervention on macro variables.
Section 2 of this paper presents the model that serves as the basis for our discussion. A
baseline version of the model assumes complete price ‡exibility and …nancial dollarization. In
that baseline version, Section 3 discusses FX intervention and reserves accumulation. Nominal
price rigidities and, hence, a nontrivial role for monetary policy are introduced in Section 4.
That section examines the interaction between monetary policy and FX intervention. Section
5 shows how the assumption of …nancial dollarization can be relaxed, with only minor changes
in our arguments. Section 6 concludes. An Appendix collects some peripheral technical derivations.

2

A Model of FX Intervention and Reserves Accumulation

To convey our ideas regarding intervention policy, I extend the model of Chang and Velasco
(2017) to a stochastic setting, emphasizing the mechanics of sterilized intervention and how
intervention policy interacts with …nancial constraints that bind only occasionally. This section
develops a baseline version of the model that, in order to focus on the essentials, imposes
very restrictive assumptions: it assumes perfectly ‡exible prices (implying that conventional
monetary policy has no bite) and complete …nancial dollarization (i.e. that all …nancial assets
are denominated in foreign currency). These assumptions not only simplify the analysis but
also underscore that the mechanism by which FX intervention works does not depend on the
currency denomination of assets or the interaction with other monetary policy tools. Of course,
realistic models might require allowing for nominal price rigidities, powerful monetary policy,
and di¤erences in the currency denomination of assets. But these can be added at relatively
little extra cost later, as shown in sections 4 and 5.
6

2.1

Commodities and Production

We consider an in…nitely lived, small open economy. In each period there are two internationally
traded goods, home and foreign. The price of the foreign good in terms of a world currency
(called "dollar") is …xed at one.
The home good is the usual Dixit-Stiglitz aggregate of varieties, with elasticity of substitution . Each variety is produced by one of a continuum of monopolistically competitive …rms
indexed by i in [0; 1]: In period t, …rm i produces variety i via yit = Anit ; where nit denotes
labor input, and A a productivity term kept constant for ease of exposition. Firms take wages
as given, and hence nominal marginal cost in period t is common to all, given by:

M Ct = Wt =A

(1)

where Wt is the nominal wage, that is, the wage expressed in terms of a domestic currency
("peso" hereon).
For now, we assume ‡exible prices, meaning that in every period all …rms set the peso price
for their produce after observing that period’s exogenous shocks. All varieties then carry the
same price in equilibrium, given by the usual markup rule:

Pht =

1

1

M Ct

(2)

Pht is also the price of the domestic home aggregate good. That aggregate is sold at home
and abroad. The foreign part of demand is given simply by a function xet of its relative price,
the real exchange rate:
Et
Pht

et

with Et denoting the nominal exchange rate (pesos per dollar), and x and

positive parameters.

Home demand for the domestic aggregate good is derived from the demand for …nal consumption. The latter is denoted by ct and assumed to be a Cobb Douglas function of the

7

domestic composite good and foreign goods. The Law of One Price is assumed, implying that
the peso price of foreign goods is given by Et : Then the price of …nal consumption (the CPI) is
Pt = Ph;t Et1

where

is a parameter between zero and one.

The implied demand for the home aggregate is cht =

et1

ct , and therefore the market

home output clears if
(1

)

yt = et

2.2

ct + xet ;

(3)

Banks

There is a large number of domestic …nancial intermediaries, or banks, which borrow from the
rest of the world and lend to either households or the government, subject to …nancial frictions.
A representative bank starts a period t with an amount of capital or net worth of kt dollars.
This amount is, as we will see, raised from domestic households in exchange for a share of the
bank’s next period pro…ts. Given kt ; the bank borrows dt dollars from foreigners, at a gross
interest rate of Rt

0; which the bank takes as given.

Because of …nancial frictions, external borrowing is restricted by a collateral constraint

dt

where

kt

is a constant. As noted in the literature, this kind of constraint can be rationalized in

various ways.

3

The resources raised by the bank …nance loans to the domestic private sector, lt ; or the
3

For example, one may assume that, after raising dt ; the banker can "abscond" with the funds at a cost of
times equity. Knowing this, lenders will not extend more credit than kt :
This being said, the exact form of the collateral constraint may or may not have signi…cant impact on the
analysis. For example, one might consider an alternative speci…cation such as dt
(kt + bt ); on the basis that
domestic banks government bonds could be pledge government bonds as collateral to foreigners. It is not hard
to see that our analysis below remains qualitatively the same if < 1: But there may be important quantitative
di¤erences. (Thanks to José De Gregorio for this observation.)

8

purchase of bonds issued from the central bank, bt : Private loans and central bank bonds are
perfect substitutes and carry the same interest rate, %t , between periods t and t + 1.
Observe that, for now, loans and bonds, and the interest rate, are all assumed to be denominated in dollars. This case of …nancial dollarization may be realistic for some countries
and not for others; however, it is the simplest assumption to start with. More importantly, it
emphasizes that the basic mechanism by which FX intervention works in our setting does not
rely on di¤erences in currency denomination. Once that mechanism is laid out, section 5 turns
to its interaction with peso denominated loans and bonds.
The typical bank’s balance sheet therefore requires that:

bt + lt = kt + dt :

and the bank’s pro…ts are given by

t+1

= (1 + %t )(lt + bt )

Rt dt ;

Under our maintained assumptions, pro…ts are realized in period t + 1 but they are known
as of period t: The bank’s problem, therefore, is simply to choose bt ; dt ; and lt to maximize

t+1

subject to the collateral constraint.
The solution is simple. Combining the preceding two equations, pro…ts can be written as

t+1

= Rt kt + (1 + %t

Rt )(lt + bt )

i.e. pro…ts are a sum of a "normal " return on equity plus an excess return on domestic credit.
Hence, if 1 + %t = Rt ; there are no supranormal returns, and the bank’s optimal policy is
indeterminate as long as bt + lt = kt + dt and dt

kt : If 1 + %t > Rt ; on the other hand,

the bank lends as much as it can. The collateral constraint then binds, so that dt = kt ; and
bt + lt = (1 + )kt :

9

Finally, the return to equity is denoted by (1 + ! t )Rt
t+1

kt

2.3

= Rt + (1 + %t

Rt )(1 + )

t+1 =kt ,

and given by:

(1 + ! t )Rt

Central Bank, Intervention, and Reserves Accumulation

The essence of sterilized FX intervention is that, whenever a central bank sells or buys foreign
exchange, it also buys or sells a matching amount of securities. This can be implemented in
many di¤erent ways, and the menu of alternatives depends in practice on institutional aspects
of each economy, such as the kind of securities that are involved in sterilization. But again, and
as emphasized in the literature, the de…ning aspect of sterilized intervention is that it involves
a simultaneous change in o¢ cial reserves and the net credit position of the central bank.
Accordingly, in what follows we assume that sterilized FX intervention means that the
central bank buys or sells o¢ cial reserves (dollars) and, at the same time, issues or retires a
corresponding quantity of its own bonds (which therefore might be referred to as sterilization
bonds). While highly stylized, this assumption is the same as in the recent papers of Benes et al.
(2015) and Vargas et al. (2013). It also corresponds closely to actual practice in some countries.
For example, Vargas et al. (2013) discuss the Colombian experience en some detail, and how
the practice of FX intervention led Colombia’s government to issue sterilization bonds. The
same speci…cation is incorporated into modern textbooks such as Feenstra and Taylor (2014).
In our model, as will become apparent, FX intervention can a¤ect equilibria when and only
when the matching sterilizing operation relaxes or tightens the external credit constraint. This
argument, stressed in Céspedes, Chang, and Velasco (2017), di¤ers from older ones, in particular with the traditional portfolio balance view. That view started from the assumption that
sterilization operations involved securities denominated in domestic currency, and therefore FX
intervention must change the ratio of foreign currency assets to domestic currency assets in
private hands. If, in addition, securities denominated in di¤erent currencies were imperfect
substitutes, restoring equilibrium required a change in relative rates of return. Such an ar10

gument is obviously not applicable to our model, as we have assumed that all securities are
denominated in dollars and are perfect substitutes. But this is only to emphasize that the
mechanism by which FX intervention works is not a portfolio balance one.
Note that we assume that sterilization bonds are held solely by domestic agents, banks
in this case. This assumption is natural and realistic, and no di¤erent from what is usually
imposed in the literature. But it is a crucial part of our argument. If the central bank could
freely sell sterilization bonds to the rest of the world, then the economy as a whole would
e¤ectively face no external collateral constraint. The key aspect of our assumptions is that
sterilization bonds add to the economy’s overall external debt, which has a limit. One can
presumably adapt our analysis to alternative scenarios as long as they imply that sterilization
bonds interact with …nancial frictions.
As mentioned, central bank bonds are assumed to yield the same interest rate as private
loans, %t : Reserves, on the other hand, are assumed to be invested abroad, at the external
interest rate Rt : In this setup, the central bank makes operational losses (the so-called quasi…scal
de…cit) if 1 + %t > Rt : For the time being we assume that such losses, if any, are …nanced via
a lump sum tax on households; one implication is that the net worth of the central bank is
constant, and normalized here to zero for convenience. These assumptions are prevalent in the
literature, but it should be noted that they are not trivial either for the theory or in practice.
Further research is clearly warranted on this issue; I o¤er further thoughts in the closing section.
Our maintained assumptions now ensure that, if ft denotes the central bank’s international
reserves, the central bank’s balance sheet is simply given by ft = bt ; and that the central bank’s
quasi…scal de…cit in period t is given by

Tt = (1 + %t

1

Rt 1 )bt

1

Hence there is a tight link between foreign exchange intervention and the amount of central
bank bonds: selling foreign exchange reserves is a fall in ft ; which then amounts to a reduction

11

in bt ; conversely, accumulating reserves leads to an increase in bt :
Finally, it seems natural to assume that the central bank cannot issue international currency.
In this setting, this requires imposing that o¢ cial central bank reserves have a lower bound,
which we assume to be zero: ft = bt

2.4

0:

Households

The economy has a representative household with preferences that depend on consumption and
P
t
labor e¤ort, and given by the expected value of 1
U (ct ; nt ); with
t=0
U (c; n) =

where

and

c1
1

1+

n1+

positive parameters.4

In each period t, the household decides how much to consume and to work, how much to
borrow from domestic banks, and much much equity to send to the banks. The period’s budget
constraint, expressed in dollars, is:

et ct + kt

lt = (1 + ! t 1 )Rt 1 kt

1

(1 + %t 1 )lt

1

+ et wt nt + vt + zt

Tt ,

where wt = Wt =Pt is the real wage, vt denotes (dollar) pro…ts from domestic …rms and banks,
and Tt denotes to the lump sum taxes needed to …nance the central bank’s quasi…scal de…cit.
Finally, zt is an exogenous endowment of foreign goods (dollars), which can be thought of as
income earned from the ownership of a natural resource, as oil or commodities. The LHS
gathers the value of the household’s expenditure in consumption and new equity purchases,
minus new bank loans. The RHS includes the return on equity, minus the repayment of bank
loans, plus income net of taxes.
Finally, we follow Chang and Velasco (2017) in assuming that there is an exogenous limit,
4

And as usual, if

= 1; u(c) = log(c):

12

referred to as the domestic equity constraint, to how much bank equity the household can hold:
e
k

kt

with e
k > 0 is some constant. The equity constraint re‡ects, presumably, some domestic distortions that we do not model here.

The household’s optimal plan is straightforward. Optimal labor supply is given by

w t ct

= nt

(4)

Assuming that the household borrows a positive amount, which will be the case in equilibrium, the usual Euler condition must hold:

ct

= Et ct+1 Rt+1

where we have de…ned the consumption interest rate by

Rt+1 = (1 + %t )

et+1
et

(5)

Finally, the equity constraint binds in period t if and only if the return on equity, (1+! t )Rt ;
exceeds the cost of domestic loans, 1 + %t : As the reader can check, in equilibrium this will be
case if and only if 1+%t > Rt : But this means that the equity constraint and the bank’s external
debt constraint must bind under exactly the same circumstances. This simpli…es the analysis
considerably, since it allows us to impose, without loss of generality, that kt = k~ always, and
that the constraint dt

k~ binds if 1 + %t > Rt and is slack if 1 + %t = Rt :

13

2.5

Equilibrium

We assume that parameter values are such that …nancial frictions do not bind in the non
stochastic steady state. As is well known, in order to be able to apply approximation techniques
around that steady state, some additional assumptions must be imposed to ensure stationarity
(Schmitt Grohe and Uribe 2017). Here we assume that the external cost of credit, Rt , is given
by the world interest rate, denoted by R and taken as exogenous and constant (for simplicity),
plus a spread term that depends on the amount of bank credit lt = kt + dt
Rt = R + ~ (elt
= R + ~ (e(dt

l

bt :

1)
d) (bt b)

1)

where l; d and b are the steady state values of domestic loans, external, debt and reserves,
respectively, and ~ is an elasticity coe¢ cient.
Two brief comments on the above speci…cation are warranted. First, that the Rt

R

spread increases with domestic loans implies that it increases with the economy’s external debt
net of reserves. This seems defensible: in fact, the (negative of the) quantity dt

bt corresponds

to measures of international liquidity emphasized in Chang and Velasco (2000) and elsewhere.
Second, we assume that l is given exogenously. This di¤ers somewhat from the literature, which
usually imposes an exogenous d: This is because we want to allow for FX intervention policies
for the management of reserves and central bank debt, with implications for the steady state
value of reserves b: It will become apparent that the assumption of an exogenously given l yields
a cleaner analysis than an exogenous d. Since whether taking l or d as exogenous is arbitrary
and only needed for technical reasons, we stick with exogenous l:
Under ‡exible prices, one can combine the optimal markup rule (2) and the labor supply
condition (4) to arrive at the equilibrium aggregate supply condition:

et

(1

)

ct

= (1

14

1

) yt =A1+

In turn, the external resource constraint can be written as

(1

)et ct

1

[zt + {et

] = dt

Rt (dt

bt

1

bt 1 )

(6)

which says that the trade de…cit in period t must be …nanced by increasing external debt or
reducing central bank debt, i.e., selling international reserves. As emphasized by Chang and
Velasco (2017), this constraint is a key aspect of the model, given that the collateral constraints
require

dt =

k~

if 1 + %t > Rt

k~

if 1 + %t = Rt

It may aid intuition to express the external resource constraint (6) as

T Dt + rt (dt

bt 1 ) = (dt

1

dt 1 ) +

t

where we have de…ned the trade de…cit T Dt as the LHS of (6), rt = Rt
interest on the external debt, and

t

=

(bt

bt 1 ) = f t

1

1 as the net rate of

ft as the size of foreign exchange

sales of the central bank in period t: Thus written, the LHS is the current account de…cit, the
sum of the trade de…cit and the service of the net foreign debt. The preceding equation then
emphasizes that a current account de…cit is …nanced either via additional foreign debt or via
sales of o¢ cial reserves; the latter imply a fall in the quantity of sterilization bonds. It also
stresses that, if reserves cannot be negative,

t

ft 1 ; i.e. foreign exchange operations in each

period are limited by the inherited level of reserves.
Finally, if the collateral constraints bind so that dt = dt =
t

rt (dt

1

~ we have that T Dt =
k,

bt 1 ): This says that, in the absence of foreign exchange intervention, the trade

de…cit is predetermined. One implication, noted in Chang and Velasco (2017), is that adverse
shocks must be fully o¤set within the period by a fall in absorption (consumption) or real

15

exchange depreciation. In particular, if there is a temporary fall in exogenous exports zt ; consumption smoothing would require an increase in external borrowing, which is not feasible.
Some consumption smoothing, on the other hand, can be achieved by an increase in

t;

that

is, a sale of reserves. In this sense, foreign exchange intervention can relax binding …nancial
constraints,as we will explore.
Equilibrium is pinned down once we specify a rule for the evolution of bt , that is, a foreign
exchange intervention policy. An analysis of alternative policies provided next.

3

Reserves Accumulation and Intervention

The …rst subsection discusses a crucial property of the model: that sterilized intervention can
have real e¤ects if and only if it relaxes binding …nancial constraints. A second subsection
examines the implications of various intervention rules in a calibrated version of the model. In
addition of illustrating how the model works under frequently observed policy rules, the exercise
helps identifying additional aspects of the model and policy implications.5

3.1

General Considerations

As in Céspedes, Chang, and Velasco (2017), sterilized intervention is irrelevant in our model
unless it occurs at times of binding collateral constraints (or make …nancial frictions bind if
they would have not). For a more precise statement, …x any equilibrium, which we will denote
with carets. As the interested reader can check, the equilibrium conditions6 can be written so
that d^t and ^bt appear only in three of them. The …rst one is the collateral constraint, which
5

For a more analytically oriented discussion of the transmission mechanisms in this kind of model, the
interested reader is referred to Chang and Velasco (2017).
6
For notational simplicity, this paper follows the convention that the "t" subscripts index date event pairs,
that is, ct denotes consumption at t conditional on the whole history of exogenous shocks up to that point. With
that understanding, our discussion, particularly in this section, applies without change to stochastic models. An
alternative notation would have been to write something like ct = c(st ); and so on for each variable, where st is
the history of shocks up to t: I see little gain here, however, in using the more precise but also more cumbersome
notation.

16

can be rewritten as:
^lt = (1 + )k~

^bt if 1 + %^ > R
t
t

^lt

^bt

(1 + )k~

if 1 + %^t = Rt

The second one is the bank’s balance sheet, which requires:
d^t = ^bt + ^lt

k~

The third one is the FX intervention rule. We allow the central bank to set bt as any function
of past, present, or future expected values of any variables in the model, as long as the rule
pins down an equilibrium implying a well de…ned process for o¢ cial reserves, f^b0 ; ^b1 ; :::g:7
Now consider any di¤erent policy rule that (possibly in conjunction with the original equilibrium) implies an alternative process for reserves, fb00 ; b01 ; :::g , that coincides with f^b0 ; ^b1 ; :::g
at all times except at some given date t: If the collateral constraint did not bind at t in the
original equilibrium, and does not bind under the new policy (i.e. ^lt

(1 + )k~

the policy leaves the original equilibrium unchanged, except that d0t = b0t + ^lt

b0t ), then
~ i.e. that
k,

there is a change in external debt that exactly o¤sets the change in reserves. This is of course
feasible, since the collateral constraint does not bind in equilibrium, and it is also intuitive: if
the central bank sells reserves, the supply of stabilization bonds increases by the amount of the
sale. Domestic banks can …nance the increased holdings of bonds by borrowing abroad, without
disrupting the domestic supply of loans, as long as their credit limit is slack.
Conversely, to a¤ect equilibria, a change in intervention policy must involve a change in bt
at some t in which either the collateral constraint binds or a nonbinding constraint becomes
binding under the new policy. It also becomes apparent that, when collateral constraints
7

More precisely, the policy rule together with the rest of the model implies an equilibrium in which the
stochastic process for reserves is f^b0 ; ^b1 ; :::g:

17

bind, the central bank can stimulate the economy by selling foreign exchange. By doing so, it
redeems central bank bonds, making room for domestic banks to increase credit to households.
In this sense, and as emphasized by Céspedes, Chang, and Velasco (2017), sterilized intervention
"works" because the sterilizing operation relaxes the external collateral constraint.8
The alert reader might recognize that the propositions just stated are extensions of those in
Backus and Kehoe (1989). For a large class of models, Backus and Kehoe identi…ed conditions
under which sterilized intervention would not a¤ect equilibria. But they also allowed for the
possibility that sterilized intervention might not be irrelevant if those conditions were not met.
Our analysis proceeds further, by asking what are the implications of intervention when they
can matter.9
Intuitively, the economy bene…ts if the central bank sells foreign exchange reserves when
…nancial constraints bind. This provides a rationale for the accumulation of o¢ cial reserves
if, as we have assumed, foreign exchange reserves cannot be negative. In other words, our
analysis of intervention has implications for the discussion of observed reserves accumulation
in emerging economies and elsewhere.
One such implication relates to the costs of accumulating reserves. Why would the central
bank not accumulate a very large amount of foreign exchange in normal times, so as to be ready
to act if …nancial constraints suddenly bind? In our model, reserves accumulation involves two
kinds of costs. The …rst one has been recognized in the literature: to …nance the accumulation
of reserves, the central bank borrows from domestic banks with an interest cost that adds to
the quasi…scal de…cit. In our model, however, in normal times (i.e. when …nancial constraints
8

The mechanism through which intervention works is similar to that in Benes et al. (2015) and Vargas et
el. (2013). Those papers assume a …nancial transaction technology that implies that a reduction of the supply
of sterilization bonds, associated with a sale of o¢ cial reserves, must induce domestic banks to also decrease
the supply of loans to households, resulting in an increase in the interest cost of domestic loans. Note that one
consequence is that central bank FX sales must always be contractionary in those models. In the model here, in
contrast, central bank FX sales either leave the supply of loans unchanged (if …nancial constraints do not bind)
or increase it (if they do). And, crucially, the circumstances under which FX purchases stimulate domestic
credit are exactly those in which the economy is credit constrained.
9
In contrast, Backus and Kehoe stopped their analysis after stating that, when intervention can matter, its
real e¤ects depend on accompanying assumptions about …scal policy. Here we make progress by making speci…c
assumptions on the quasi …scal de…cit.

18

do not bind), the interest cost is fully o¤set by the interest earned on reserves. A second source
of costs is new, to my knowledge, and potentially more signi…cant: the accumulation of central
bank reserves induces domestic banks to increase their own external debt and, hence, place
themselves nearer to their foreign credit limit. It then becomes more likely that, in response to
adverse shocks, the limit becomes binding.
So our model features a novel trade-o¤ in reserves accumulation: larger o¢ cial FX reserves
are necessary for the central bank to be ready to stimulate the economy at times of binding
…nancial constraints; but the …nancing of those reserves induces domestic banks to increase
international borrowing, making the economy less resilient to shocks. Exploring the implications
of such a trade-o¤ is beyond the scope of the present paper, but should be a fruitful avenue for
future research.

3.2

Numerical Illustrations

To illustrate our main ideas, this subsection develops a calibrated version of the model. I
stress that the objective of this subsection is to expand and clarify our discussion, rather than
empirical realism. Hence we choose some parameter values on the basis of just simplicity and
convenience.
Details of the calibration are given in the Appendix; here we only mention salient aspects. A
period is a quarter. In steady state, the world interest rate is four percent per year. The steady
state values of y; e; and c are all one, and the trade surplus to GDP ratio is one percent. In
the absence of foreign exchange intervention, an implication is a steady state debt to (annual)
GDP ratio of twenty …ve percent, which accords well with usual values in the literature (e.g.
Schmitt Grohe-Uribe 2017).
~ For our discussion, I set
The …nal important aspect of the calibration is the debt limit k:
it at a very stringent value, so that in steady state the economy is not …nancially constrained,
but close to being so. This is because my purpose is to illustrate the workings of the model,
with emphasis on the role of …nancial constraints.
19

Having calibrated the model, …nding numerical solutions requires nonlinear procedures. For
the experiments reported here, I solved the model via the remarkably useful Occbin procedures
developed by Guerrieri and Iacovello (2015). Occbin adapts Dynare to approximate our model
regarded as having di¤erent regimes, given by times of binding and nonbinding constraints. In
response to exogenous shocks, the transition between regimes is endogenous and part of the
computation. See Guerrieri and Iacovello (2015) for details, as well as commentary on the
accuracy of the resulting approximations.
To obtain a feel for the model in the absence of foreign exchange intervention. Figure 110
displays impulse responses to a purely temporary fall in the exogenous endowment z; one can
think of this shock as a fall in the world price of an export commodity. The broken (green) lines
give the impulse responses in the absence of …nancial constraints. In that case, as clear from
the …gure, a purely temporary fall in z would be accommodated primarily by borrowing from
the rest of the world. This would allow the economy to spread the cost over time, smoothing
the response of consumption. The exchange rate would depreciate, re‡ecting the fall in the
derived demand for nontradables, but only by a small amount. Finally, the interest rate on
loans (%t ) would essentially remain the same (it increases minimally only because the increase
in the debt raises the spread Rt

R through the debt elastic mechanism, which is negligible).

With occasionally binding …nancial constraints, the impulse responses are given by solid
(blue) lines. External debt increases to the credit limit, which binds for thirteen periods. The
binding constraint implies that, in response to the fall in z, consumption contracts substantially
more than without the constraint. As households would like to borrow more, the consumption
based interest rate Rt+1 must increase. For this to happen, there is a large increase in the loan
interest rate %t , as shown in the …gure. Note that the size of this increase is enhanced by the
behavior of the exchange rate, since there is a real depreciation on impact (re‡ecting the fall
in the demand for nontradables), and a subsequent appreciation that reduces the consumption
based interest rate (see (5)).
10

All …gures are found at the end of the paper.

20

Hence the model implies that binding …nancial constraints amplify the real impact of adverse
external shocks. It bears stressing that the assumption in Figure 1 is that the fall in z is large
enough so that the debt constraint becomes binding. If it does not, the impulse responses just
coincide with the ones without …nancial constraints (in the …gure, the solid and dashed lines
would have coincided if the fall in z had been small enough).
Figure 2 shows the …rst one thousand periods of a typical simulation. The …gure illustrates
~ combines with the
two aspects of the calibration. First, the value of the debt limit, given by k;
stochastic process for exogenous shocks to give the frequency with which …nancial constraints
bind. For the …gure, I assume i.i.d. shocks with standard deviation of one percent. Then k~
is set so that the collateral constraint binds about one fourth of the time. This may be too
frequent for realism, but again my purpose here is to illustrate the workings of the model.
Second, the …gure emphasizes that times of binding constraints are also times of high volatility in consumption, the real exchange rate, and interest spreads.
We turn to the impact of intervention policy. To start, assume that intervention is simply
given by an exogenous autorregresive process with a zero lower bound:

bt = M axf0; (1

b )b

+

b bt 1

+ "bt g

where "bt is an i.i.d. process, which could be interpreted as an unanticipated central bank
purchase of reserves. Here, b is the steady state stock of reserves. For ease of exposition,
we assume that 0 < b < (1 + )k~

l; that is, that in the steady state foreign reserves are

strictly positive and the external constraint does not bind. (Note that we have not provided
any rationale for this policy rule. Instead, we study its implications hoping to obtain insight
about the way intervention may or may not work.)
Under the above assumption on b; and intuitively, small FX operations (i.e. values of "bt of
small absolute value) do not a¤ect real equilibria, and there are matched one for one by changes
in dt : To preserve space we omit the (boring) impulse responses.

21

With su¢ ciently large "bt , the implications are asymmetric. A large negative "bt amounts to
a large sale of o¢ cial reserves. But reserves are bounded below by zero, so the central bank runs
out of reserves. This is the only real consequence in the model, however: the fall of reserves is
completely o¤set by a decrease in external debt, leaving domestic credit untouched.
In contrast, a su¢ ciently large unanticipated purchase of reserves (positive "bt ) brings the
economy to the …nancially constrained region. Figure 3 depicts the implications. As in the
previous …gures, the dashed green lines depict impulse responses to a positive "bt in the absence
of …nancial constraints. In this case, as shown in the …gure, the accumulation of reserves would
be exactly matched by an increase in the external debt of the banks, with no other real e¤ect.
In contrast, the solid blue lines are the responses taking into account …nancial constraints. The
central bank intervention requires an increase in the amount of stabilization bonds, leading
domestic banks to borrow abroad up to the credit limit. In this case, the economy remains
…nancially constrained for two periods. Because of the credit limit, loans to domestic households
must fall, which explains the fall in consumption, the increase in the loan interest rate, and
the real exchange rate depreciation. Finally, the real depreciation is responsible for the output
increase on impact. In short, the large purchase of FX reserves leads to the exhaustion of
external credit and a domestic credit crunch.
This discussion illustrates the main trade-o¤ associated with the average level of reserves
b: A low b raises the possibility that the central bank runs out of reserves. A high b, on the
other hand, requires external credit and uses up some of the country’s credit limit, making the
economy more likely to fall into the …nancially constrained region in response to exogenous
shocks.11
To illustrate further, Figure 4 shows how the response of external debt to an unanticipated
purchase of reserves depends on the average value of reserves b: The dashed line corresponds to
a lower average level of reserves (lower b) than the solid line. In each case, the …gure shows the
11
This argument is reminiscent of that of Alfaro and Kanczuk (2006) in the context of sovereign debt. In
their model, increased o¢ cial reserve levels may reduce the amount of sovereign debt that is sustainable. The
mechanisms in that paper, however, are quite di¤erent to ours, and they do not bear on the issue of FX
intervention.

22

response of debt relative to its steady state value, which depends on b (since d = l

b): The

purchase of reserves is of the same magnitude and results in the external constraint binding in
both cases. However, as shown, with lower b; external debt can expand by more before hitting
the credit limit. In addition, the economy exits the constrained region faster than with higher
b:
The above considerations help understanding the implications of intervention rules that
respond to endogenous variables, such as exchange rates. Consider, for instance, an intervention
rule of the form:
bt = M axf0; (1
Assuming

e

b )b

+

b bt 1

e (et

e)g

(7)

0; the rule has the central bank buying foreign exchange when the exchange

rate is stronger than its steady state value, and selling it when the exchange rate is abnormally
weak. The size of the response is given by the coe¢ cient

e:

By now, it should be apparent how the policy can aid stabilization in the face of adverse
shocks that make …nancial constraints bind. For the policy prescribes that, in such events, the
central bank sell reserves in response to the real depreciation. The resulting fall in the quantity
of stabilization bonds frees domestic banks to extend additional credit to households, who helps
them smooth consumption. This is depicted in Figure 5. In the …gure, the dashed green lines
are impulse responses to a fall in z assuming that the FX intervention rule does not respond
to the exchange rate (

e

= 0) . In fact, there is no FX intervention at all in that case, even if

the shock is assumed to be large enough that the economy hits the credit constraint, as in the
…gure. Domestic credit increases, but not enough to satisfy the increased demand for credit.
Consumption then falls, the exchange rate depreciates, and the interest rate on loans goes up.
The solid blue lines assume that

e

> 0. Now the policy rule prescribes a sale of reserves,

since the fall in z leads to real depreciation. As it does so, the central bank retires stabilization
bonds, freeing resources for domestic banks to increase loans to households. The …gure shows
that the fall in consumption is then less acute, and the adjustments in the real exchange rate
and interest rates less sharp.
23

We see, therefore, that an FX intervention rule of the form (7) can stimulate the economy
when …nancial constraints become binding. This is bene…cial insofar as domestic residents
would be willing, at those times, to borrow more than they can, at the external rate of interest.
Rules of this kind, however, also have pitfalls. In particular, they prescribes intervention in
response to exchange rate movements even when …nancial constraints do not bind. In our model
as we have seen, this is best ine¤ective and, at worst, it can be detrimental.
To see this, suppose that …nancial constraints do not bind, and the economy is hit by an
unanticipated increase in z. The economy can then a¤ord more consumption, which could be
bene…cial, at least in principle. The intervention rule introduces a concern, however: since
the exchange rate must appreciate, the central bank will accumulate reserves, according to the
rule.12 If the accumulation of reserves is small, the economy remains …nancially unconstrained,
although sterilization brings the economy closer to its credit limit, making it more vulnerable to
subsequent adverse shocks, as we have seen. More damagingly, if the increase in reserves is large
enough, the …nancial constraint become binding. In order to accommodate the sterilization
bonds of the central bank, domestic banks must then reduce loans to households. In other
words, foreign exchange purchases in response to real appreciation can end up crowding private
credit out.
This is depicted in Figure 6. As before, dashed lines are impulse responses when there are
no …nancial constraints. An unanticipated increase in z induces the representative household to
consume more and borrow less. Given the increase in consumption demand, the exchange rate
appreciates. Following the intervention rule (7), the central bank then buys foreign exchange.
In the …gure, the increase in the quantity of sterilization bonds more than compensates for the
fall in the private demand for credit, and external debt increases. In the absence of …nancial
constraints, increased external borrowing does not a¤ect the cost of domestic loans.
In the presence of …nancial constraints, however, the FX intervention rule makes the economy
hit the external constraint, which remains binding for several periods. To …nance the increased
12

Note that this aspect of the model is consistent with evidence (e.g. Chinn 2017) that reserves accumulation
is associated with a larger current account balance.

24

supply central bank sterilization bonds, domestic credit falls by more than in the absence of
…nancial constraints. This means that domestic consumption must fall relative to the …nancially
unconstrained case; this is accomplished via an increase in the interest rate on domestic loans,
as shown in the …gure (solid blue lines). The weaker response of consumption also explains why
the exchange rate appreciates by less than in the unconstrained case. Hence the FX intervention
policy looks like it succeeds at stabilizing the exchange rate. But this is the case only because
it generates a credit crunch.
The disadvantage of a FX intervention rule that responds to the exchange rate is, therefore,
that it prescribes intervention even when not justi…ed by binding …nancial constraints. This
suggests a superior strategy: intervention should occur in response to interest rate spreads. A
suitable rule might be:

bt = M axf0; (1
with

%

b )b

+

b bt 1

% (1

+ %t

Rt )g

(8)

0 giving the elasticity of central bank sales to widening spreads. Under this rule, that

the central bank sells foreign exchange, relaxing …nancial constraints, when the loan interest
rate increases above the cost of international credit. This means that FX sales occur when
…nancial constraints bind. When …nancial constraints do not bind, however, the spread is zero
in our model, so that no intervention is called for (over and above what is required to bring the
level of reserves back to its steady state value b).
Responses to a fall in z with the above rule are given in Figure 7. The fall in z raises the
households’ demand for credit, which banks attempt to meet by borrowing abroad. As the
credit limit is hit, the spread of the domestic loan rate over the foreign interest rate widens.
The intervention rule then implies that the central bank sells reserves. The associate reduction
in stabilization bonds then allows banks to expand domestic further. This helps stabilizing
credit spreads, consumption, output, and the exchange rate.
The responses in Figure 7 are similar in shape to the ones in Figure 6, and the intuition
is also very close. The main di¤erence is variable to which FX intervention reacts to (the
25

exchange rate in Figure 6, credit spreads in Figure 7). But this di¤erence is crucial: when
…nancial constraints do not bind, there is active FX intervention with the exchange rate-based
policy, but none with the spreads-based policy.
This subsection indicates that the analysis of sterilized intervention should pay close attention to the interplay between intervention, o¢ cial reserves, and occasionally binding …nancial
constraints. Such a focus promises to deliver useful insights and potentially valuable lessons for
policy. We have seen, for example, that an intervention rule that responds to the exchange rate
can be improved upon by a rule that reacts to credit spreads. Further study of the properties
and consequences of intervention rules should prove fruitful for future research.

4

Nominal Rigidities and Monetary Policy

As claimed earlier, our analysis of sterilized intervention is easily amended to study its interaction with conventional monetary policy. To show how, in this section I drop the assumption
of nominal price ‡exibility, and instead adopt the well known Calvo pricing protocol. Because
this speci…cation is well known, I only give a brief description here, and refer interested readers
to Gali (2015) for details.
In any given period, an individual producer can set a new price for her product only with
some probability (1

) < 1: Because producers cannot set prices every period, they do not set

the static optimal markup when they can, and equation (2) is dropped. Instead, producers able
to change prices choose them so that the markup over marginal cost is optimal, on average, for
the random interval of time until they can change prices again. As shown in Gali (2015), to a
…rst order approximation, domestic in‡ation, denoted by

ht

= log Pht

log Pht 1 ; is then given

by
ht

= Et

h;t+1

+ (log mct

where mct = M Ct =Pht denotes marginal cost in terms of domestic goods,

26

(9)

)
= log(1

1

) is its

steady state value (in logs), and the coe¢ cient

=

(1

is given by
)

(1

)

Domestic in‡ation now depends on current and future real marginal costs. In turn, real
marginal costs in our model are determined by technology, as given by (1), and optimal labor
supply (4):

mct =

(Wt =A)
= et1
Pht

ct yt =A1+

(10)

Solving the model now requires one more equation, which is given by a monetary policy rule.
Our model is cashless but, as discussed by Woodford (2003), this is not an issue if monetary
policy is given by an appropriate interest rate rule of the Taylor type. As advocated by Romer
(2000), here we assume that the central bank sets policy in order to steer the expected real
interest rate:
it

Et Rt+1 = Et (1 + %t )

et+1
et

Then we posit a rule of the Taylor type, such as:

it = log Rt +

t

+ umt

(11)

To get a sense of the implications, Figure 8 displays impulse responses to a contractionary monetary shock (positive umt ), assumed to be large enough to place the economy in the
…nancially constrained region. The dashed green lines assume no …nancial constraints, while
the solid blue lines take binding constraints into account. In both cases, the shock directly
raises the expected consumption based interest rate (by assumption), and therefore consumption growth. In response, consumption must fall on impact.13 Households attempt to cushion
the blow by borrowing from domestic banks. Domestic loans (not shown) then increase in both
13

Note that, for this experiment I assumed that that the coe¢ cient of risk aversion is 2. This is because,
under log utility, there is no impact on the level of debt.

27

cases; but this mechanism is limited if there are …nancial constraints. As the …gure shows,
the external credit constraint is reached on impact: if there had been no constraints (dashed
lines), consumption would fall less and external debt would increase more than in the presence
of constraints (solid lines). To ration credit in the case of binding constraints, the interest rate
on domestic loans, 1 + %t ; rises above and over the world interest rate.
This exercise emphasizes that not only monetary policy is powerful in this model, but also
that binding …nancial constraints can exacerbate the impact of monetary shocks on domestic
demand. One may note, on the other hand, that the exchange rate appreciates, but binding
…nancial constraints reduce the extent of the appreciation. As a consequence, domestic in‡ation
and output fall by less and that the policy rate increases than more than in the absence
of …nancial constraints. The intuition is that, when there are no …nancial constraints, the
loan rate %t is pinned down by the external rate Rt ; so that a given raise in the expected
rate it is accomplished solely via an increase in the expected depreciation rate. In contrast,
when …nancial constraints bind, the raise in it is accomplished partly with an increase in the
interest rate spread, requiring a comparatively smaller increase in expected depreciation, and
consequently a smaller appreciation on impact.
We might now ask about the role of sterilized foreign exchange intervention. Our …rst
observation is that, as in the model with ‡exible prices, intervention does not have real e¤ects if
it occurs at times of nonbinding constraints. The argument is virtually the same as in subsection
3.1, except that the relevant system of equilibrium equations excludes (2) and includes (9), (10),
and (11). The intuition is unaltered: if the collateral constraint does not bind at t; any change
in bt (which leaves the constraint still not binding) is o¤set one for one by a change in dt ;
without any impact on equilibrium.
A notable implication is that, independently of monetary policy, intervention policy does not
a¤ect real allocations for shocks that are small enough so as not to make …nancial constraints
bind. This is clear under intervention rules such as (7) or (8). If intervention is triggered by
abnormally high credit spreads, as with (8), there is no intervention at all as long as constraints

28

do not bind. With an intervention rule that responds to the exchange rate, as with (7), shocks
that do not result in binding …nancial constraints do trigger sales or purchases of reserves, but
ones that are fully accommodated by changes in external debt dt ; with no other real impact.
For large enough shocks, …nancial constraints bind and, as we have stressed, FX intervention
does have real e¤ects. In that kind of situation, intervention can complement conventional
monetary policy. To illustrate, Figure 9 displays responses to a fall in z, assuming a Taylor
rule like (11). In the …gure, the dashed green lines depicts responses when there is no active
intervention, while the solid blue lines give responses when intervention responds to spreads.
The …gure also assumes that, whether there is active intervention or not, …nancial constraints
are present and become binding under the shock.
The …gure shows that, without an active intervention response, the shock would raise the
domestic demand for private loans. Banks would then borrow abroad up to the credit limit,
and the loan interest rate would increase to ration credit. Consumption demand would fall,
leading to a real exchange rate depreciation. The depreciation would imply an increase in the
foreign demand for domestic output and an overall output increase. As a consequence, domestic
in‡ation would increase. Then the Taylor rule would prescribe an increase in the policy interest
rate.
With an intervention rule as (8), the increase in spreads prompts the central bank to sell
reserves. As discussed, the corresponding fall in sterilization bonds allows for domestic loans to
increase by more than in the absence of intervention. For this calibration, the intervention rule
has negligible e¤ects on the impact response of consumption, although it implies a smoother
transition back to the steady state. More notably, the active intervention rule moderates the
exchange rate depreciation, and hence the increases in output and domestic in‡ation.
Clearly, one could expand further on the speci…cs of this analysis and the consequences
of di¤erent combinations of monetary rules and intervention policy. This is outside my main
purpose here, however, which is to emphasize that our perspective on sterilized intervention
can straightforwardly be combined with standard monetary policy analysis.

29

This being said, one notable and general lesson from our discussion is that, in the presence of
…nancial frictions, the question of whether sterilized intervention can be an independent policy
instrument has an unambiguously positive answer. But the answer di¤ers substantially from
others o¤ered in the recent literature. Sterilized intervention is ine¤ective locally: it cannot
bene…t for shocks small enough that …nancial constraints do not bind. On the other hand,
intervention can help when the constraints bind, and in that case it works by alleviating the
external credit limit.
In short, nonlinearities are essential, and proper analysis of intervention requires going
beyond current approaches that restrict attention to local approximations around the steady
state.

5

The Role of Financial Dollarization

To this point we have assumed that the economy is "…nancially dollarized", in that all …nancial
instruments are denominated in dollars. This is partly because some actual economies are
…nancially dollarized, and partly to emphasize that our basic arguments do not depend on
currency mismatches or debt denomination. Often, however, some securities are denominated
in domestic currency (pesos) along with others that are foreign currency (dollar) denominated.
In this section I show how to modify our model to allow for peso securities and argue that,
while some additional e¤ects are introduced, our line of reasoning remains largely untouched.
Assume now that domestic loans and central bank bonds are denominated in pesos, paying
a gross interest rate Rtn between periods t and t + 1. What is crucial is that Rtn is determined in
period t : the arguments of previous sections obviously apply if return on peso securities were
indexed to, say, the dollar. Under our new assumption, the dollar return on loans and bonds
between t and t + 1 depends on the realized rate of depreciation, and is given by

d
Rt+1
= Rtn

30

Et
Et+1

d
Observe the notation: the subscript on Rt+1
emphasizes that it is a random variable that

becomes known only at t + 1:
Because the dollar rate of return on domestic loans is unknown as of period t, we need
to amend our analysis of the decision problems of domestic agents. To simplify things, we
just assume from now on that domestic banks belong to households, which provide banks with
~ Then the typical bank’s problem is to maximize the discounted expected value of
equity k:
dollar pro…ts:
Et Mt+1

t+1

where
t+1

d
= Rt+1
(lt + bt )

R t dt

subject to bt + lt = k~ + dt and the collateral constraint dt

~ where Mt+1 is the household’s
k;

discount factor for dollar payo¤s, which we derive shortly.
The …rst order conditions to this problem imply that the collateral constraints now can be
written as:

dt =

k~

d
if Et Mt+1 (Rt+1

Rt ) > 0

k~

d
if Et Mt+1 (Rt+1

Rt ) = 0

Note that these conditions are very similar to the ones we derived earlier, in the case of
…nancial dollarization.
The analysis of the central bank is the same as before, observing only that the quasi…scal
de…cit in period t is now given by

Tt = (Rtd

Rt 1 )bt

1

and hence it depends on the realized rate of depreciation.
Lastly, the household’s problem is solved just as before, but now we need to take into
31

d
account that the dollar interest rate on loans taken at t is Rt+1
instead of 1 + %t ; and hence it

is uncertain as of period t: The Euler condition for loans then becomes:

ct

d
= Et ct+1 Rt+1

et+1
et

or
d
1 = Et Mt+1 Rt+1

which identi…es the dollar discount factor as:

Mt+1 =

ct+1
ct

et+1
et

d
The expected consumption-based real rate is Et Rt+1

et+1
et

: With these modi…cations, we

can retrace the analysis above, without signi…cant change.
To illustrate, Figure 10 presents impulse responses to a fall in z: The …gure assumes a
d
Taylor rule of the form (11), and an intervention rule similar to (8) but with Et Rt+1

Rt as the

relevant spread. In the absence of …nancial constraints (dashed green lines), the shock would be
accommodated by increased household borrowing, and an increase in the banks’external debt,
without noticeable impact on real variables or in‡ation. Given the policy rules, the central
bank does not change the policy interest rate nor intervenes in the foreign exchange market.
The shock is assumed to be large enough for external debt to hit the credit limit, however.
As discussed before, adjustment then entails a larger fall in consumption, which requires an
increase in the real interest rate. This is accomplished via a relatively large devaluation and,
in this model, an increase in the nominal peso interest rate on loans. The monetary policy rate
increases in response to rising in‡ation, and reserves fall because the intervention rule prescribes
foreign exchange sales as credit spreads widen.
No major di¤erences between this case and the one of the previous section emerge. In other
words, assuming that domestic securities are denominated in pesos or dollars does not appear

32

to have but a minor e¤ect. In this model, the denomination of domestic securities only results
in some unanticipated transfers between households and banks, which have little impact on
equilibrium.
This being said, it must be noted also the presence of peso securities might result in currency
mismatches interacting with credit constraints, resulting in potentially much more signi…cant
balance sheet e¤ects. Such e¤ects could presumably be added to our model. For instance, one
might assume that the equity constraint is denominated in pesos, implying that et kt
than kt

k~ rather

~ Then a real depreciation would cause a reduction in bank equity, tightening the
k:

debt limit. A plausible conjecture is that sterilized intervention might have a larger role in this
context, but exploring this issue is outside the scope of the present paper.

6

Final Remarks

This paper has proposed an alternative perspective on the way sterilized foreign exchange
intervention works, and developed several implications for theory and policy. As stressed in the
introduction, this perspective can help reconcile theory and practice in compelling, intuitive
ways.
As for the theory, we have seen that occasionally binding …nancial constraints imply that
sterilized intervention can have real e¤ects, but only at some speci…c times, if it relaxes the
…nancial constraints when they bind. This result is quite consistent with standard theory, but
it implies that sterilized intervention is not always irrelevant. And in fact, our analysis suggests
that intervention can be powerful when it matters the most.
Our analysis also suggests that sterilized intervention may be irrelevant much, or even
most, of the time. In this sense, it is no surprise that empirical evidence for signi…cant e¤ects
of intervention has been elusive. Future empirical research should examine whether the impact
of intervention depends on the incidence of …nancial constraints.
More generally, our analysis stresses that the impact of sterilized intervention may depend

33

on the degree of …nancial frictions as well as the nature of …nancial institutions. This suggests
that, empirically, the e¤ectiveness of intervention should di¤er across countries, according to
their degree of …nancial development.
As stressed in Céspedes, Chang, and Velasco (2017), the model in this paper suggests
that it may be bene…cial to sell reserves in response to an excessive depreciation, if "excessive
depreciation" is to be understood as depreciation at times of binding constraints. On the other
hand, there is no gain in …ghting exchange rate appreciation over and beyond replenishing
o¢ cial reserves for the central bank to be ready to deal with future adverse shocks. In this
sense, our analysis does not o¤er a justi…cation of observed episodes of reserves accumulation
that appear to be motivated by competitiveness reasons. Presumably one could extend our
model in such a direction, but that extension is outside the scope of this paper.
For exposition, we made some very speci…c assumptions. One of them was that the central
bank used its own sterilization bonds in sterilization operations. A little thought should convince the reader that this assumption is much less restrictive than it appears. For instance,
suppose that, to sterilize purchases of o¢ cial reserves, the central bank sells government debt
instead of its own debt. The impact of this operation would be exactly the same as the one in
this paper, assuming that government debt has to be absorbed by domestic banks. In fact, a
useful way to look at this alternative may be to think of the "central bank" of our model as a
consolidated entity encompassing the central bank plus the …scal authority.
A second assumption worthy of additional comment is that sterilization bonds are held exclusively by domestic banks. This implies that intervention can have real e¤ects by relaxing
or tightening the external credit limit of the banks. But the assumption may appear unrealistic, especially in cases where central bank can sell debt to foreigners. It should not be too
hard, however, to relax the assumption in realistic ways while preserving the essence of our
analysis. For example, as in Montoro and Ortiz (2016) or Cavallino (2017), one might posit
foreign investors that specialize in trading domestic securities, including stabilization bonds.
If those investors are themselves constrained by some kind of market segmentation, …nancial

34

imperfection, or credit limit, their presence and intermediation activities may not su¢ ce for
domestic agents to have unrestricted access to international credit. Assuming that the …nancial
frictions are such that access is interrupted occasionally, sterilized intervention is likely to have
real e¤ects similar to the ones we have discussed, and for essentially the same reasons.
Finally, we had to commit to particular assumptions on the central bank quasi…scal de…cit.
If those assumptions were to be dropped, one would have to supply further detail about how the
quasi…scal de…cit is …nanced and, further, what determines the evolution and management of
the central bank’s net worth. These are not trivial issues, but best left for future research. Let
us only remark that this question is related to the more general claim that unconventional policy
may matter if there are frictions in the links between the central bank and …scal authorities.
See, for example, Benigno and Nistico 2015).
This paper focused on the transmission mechanism behind intervention, and suggested ways
in which intervention may be bene…cial in terms of welfare. But it did not attempt to characterize welfare maximizing policy, which is a promising avenue for future study.
A related question is that of optimal reserves management. Our discussion has identi…ed
a novel trade-o¤ in accumulating reserves: larger reserves place the central bank in a better
position to deal with suddenly binding …nancial constraints; but …nancing the stock of reserves
may imply that the constraints bind more often. This indicates that the analysis of optimal
reserves may involve this trade-o¤ and combine insights from the recent macroprudential policy
literature with the perspective on intervention discussed here.

35

Appendix
Here we provide details on the calibration used for the examples and illustrations. I assume
that there is a steady state in which the external constraint does not bind. (It should be noted
that this assumes that FX intervention policy is consistent with such a steady state.)
We denote steady state values with overbars. Then, 1 + % = R (which here denotes the
steady state value of both Rt and Rt ) because …nancial constraints do not bind. The Euler
condition then requires that R = 1; as usual.
The steady state values of y; c; and e must satisfy:

(1

)e

c

[z + {e
1= (1

where r = R

y =

e(1

1

r (d

] =

1=") = e(1

)

)

c + xe
b)

y c =A1+

1

For calibration, I impose that the steady value of e be one, and that the trade balance
surplus be one percent of output (it is common to impose balanced trade in the steady state,
but Schmitt Grohe and Uribe 2017 argue in favor or a surplus of two percent of GDP; as a
compromise, I impose one percent). Now, from the de…nition of trade surplus, this requires:

[z + {]
= z+y

(1

)c

c

= 0:01y

the second equality following from market clearing (y = c + {)
Optimal labor supply reduces to

= c y =A1+

36

where
1

= 1=(1

)

I choose parameters so that y = c = 1 as well. For the market clearing condition to be
satis…ed, this will require { = 1

A=

: Also, for optimal output,

(1=1+ )

=

(1

1

1=1+

)

and
z = 0:01
Finally, for the country budget constraint to hold, we need that

0:01 = z = r (d

This restricts (d

b)

b): The usual assumption is that b = 0; if so, d = z=r : If we assume

r = 0:01;then d = 1: (Note that this is the ratio of debt to quarterly output. So, it corresponds
to 0:25 in terms of the usual debt/annual GDP ratio, and so it is in the ballpark. )

37

References
[1] Adler, Gustavo, and Camilo Tovar. 2011. Foreign Exchange Intervention: A Shield Against
Appreciation Winds? IMF Working Paper 11/165
[2] Backus, David, and Patrick Kehoe. 1989. On the Denomination of Government Debt: A
Critique of the Portfolio Balance Approach. Journal of Monetary Economics, 23(3), 359-76
[3] Benigno, Pierpaolo, and Nisticò, Salvatore, 2015. "Non-Neutrality of Open-Market Operations," CEPR Discussion Papers 10594, C.E.P.R. Discussion Papers.
[4] Benes,Jaromir, Andrew Berg, Rafael Portillo, and David Vavra, 2015, Modeling Sterilized
Interventions and Balance Sheet E¤ects of Monetary Policy in a New-Keynesian Framework, Open Economies Review, 26(1), 81-108.
[5] Cavallino, Paolo. 2017. "Capital Flows and Foreign Exchange Intervention." Working
Paper, IMF.
[6] Céspedes, Luis Felipe, Roberto Chang, and Andrés Velasco. 2017. Financial Intermediation, Exchange Rates, and Unconventional Policies in an Open Economy. Journal of
International Economics, 108, S76-S86.
[7] Chang, Roberto, and Andrés Velasco. 2017. Financial Frictions and Unconventional Monetary Policy in Emerging Economies. IMF Economic Review, 65, 1 154-191
[8] Chinn, Menzie, 2017, "The Once and Future Global Imbalances? Interpreting the PostCrisis Record," prepared for the Kansas Fed Jackson Hole Conference.
[9] Chutasripanish, Nuttathum, and James Yetman. 2015. Foreign Exchange Intervention:
Strategies and E¤ectiveness. BIS Working Paper 499
[10] Edwards, Sebastian, and Carlos Vegh, 1997, Banks and Macroeconomic Disturbances Under Predetermined Exchange Rates, Journal of Monetary Economics, 40, 239-278
38

[11] Garcia, Marcio, 2016, Can Sterilized FX Purchases Under In‡ation Targeting Be Expansionary?, Working Paper, PUC Rio.
[12] Gertler, Mark, and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki, 2010, “Financial Intermediation and Credit Policy
in Business Cycle Analysis,” In: Handbook of Monetary Economics 3A, Benjamin Friedman and Michael Woodford (editors), Elsevier
[13] Guerrieri, Luca and Iacoviello, Matteo, 2015. OccBin: A Toolkit for Solving Dynamic
Models with Occasionally Binding Constraints Easily. Journal of Monetary Economics 70,
22-38.
[14] Menkho¤, Lukas, 2013, Foreign Exchange Intervention in Emerging Markets: A Survey of
Empirical Studies, The World Economy, 36 (9), 1187-1208
[15] Montoro, Carlos, and Marco Ortiz. 2016. "Foreign Exchange Intervention and Monetary
Policy Design: A Market Microstructure Analysis. " Working Paper 2016-008, Central
Reserve Bank of Peru
[16] Ostry, Jonathan, Atish Ghosh, and Marcos Chamon, 2016. "Two Targets, Two Instruments: Monetary and Exchange Rate Policies in Emerging Market Economies". Journal
of International Money and Finance, 60, 172-96.
[17] Romer, David, 2000. "Keynesian Macroeconomics without the LM Curve," Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 14, 149-169.
[18] Sarno, Lucio, and Mark Taylor, 2001, O¢ cial Intervention in the Foreign Exchange Markey:
Is it E¤ective and, if so, How Does It Work? , Journal of Economic Literature 39(3), 839-68
[19] Schmitt Grohe, Stephanie, and Martin Uribe, 2017, Open Economy Macroeconomics, Princeton University Press
[20] Vargas, Hernando, Andrés González, and Diego Rodriguez, 2013, Foreign Exchange Intervention in Colombia, Borradores de Economía 757, Central Bank of Colombia
39

-3

5

-3

Ex ternal D ebt

x 10

0

C ons umption

x 10

-0.2

4.5

-0.4
4
-0.6
3.5
-0.8
3
-1
2.5

2

-1.2

0

5

10

15

-3

1.6

20

25

30

35

-1.4

40

5

10

-4

Ex c hange R ate

x 10

0

8

15

20

25

30

35

40

30

35

40

Interes t R ate on Loans

x 10

7

1.4

6
1.2
5
1

4

0.8

3
2

0.6

1
0.4
0
0.2
0

-1
0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

-2

40

0

5

10

Figure 1: Responses to a Fall in z

40

15

20

25

-3

Ex te r n a l D e b t
0 .0 2

6

0 .0 1 5

C o n s u mp tio n

x 10

4

0 .0 1
2
0 .0 0 5
0
0
-2
-0 .0 0 5
-4

- 0 .0 1

-0 .0 1 5

0

200

-3

8

400

600

800

-6

1000

200

-3

R e a l Ex c h a n g e R a te

x 10

0

3

400

600

800

1000

800

1000

In te r e s t R a te o n L o a n s

x 10

2
6
1
4

0
-1

2

-2
0

-3
-4

-2

-5
-4
-6
-6

0

200

400

600

800

-7

1000

0

200

Figure 2: A Simulation

41

400

600

-3

FX R es erv es
0.01

10

Ex ternal D ebt

x 10

8

0.008

6
0.006
4
0.004
2
0.002
0

0

0

5

10

15

20

-2

25

0

5

10

C ons umption

15

20

25

15

20

25

15

20

25

Interes t R ate on Loans

0.01

0.03
0.02

0.005

0.01
0
0
-0.005

-0.01

-0.01

0

5

10

15

20

-0.02

25

0

5

10

-3

Ex c hange R ate
0.015

4

0.01

Output

x 10

2

0.005
0
0
-2

-0.005
-0.01

0

5

10

15

20

-4

25

0

5

10

Figure 3: An Excessive Purchase of Reserves

4

x 10

-3

3

2

1

0

-1

-2

0

5

10

15

20

25

Figure 4: Vulnerability and the Level of Reserves
42

-3

-3

FX R e s e r v e s

x 10

0

D o me s tic C r e d it

x 10
3.5
3

-0 .5

2.5
2

-1

1.5
1

-1 .5

0.5
-2

0

5

10

15

20

0

25

5

10

C o n s u mp tio n

15

20

In te r e s t R a te o n L o a n s

0

0 .0 2

-0 .0 0 2

0 .0 1 5

-0 .0 0 4
0 .0 1
-0 .0 0 6
0 .0 0 5

-0 .0 0 8
- 0 .0 1

0

5

10

15

20

0

25

0

5

10

-3

Ex c h a n g e R a te
0 .0 1 5

5

15

20

25

15

20

25

O u tp u t

x 10

4
0 .0 1
3
2
0 .0 0 5
1
0

0

5

10

15

20

0

25

0

5

10

Figure 5: Exchange Rate Based FX Intervention

43

FX R e s e r v e s

Ex te r n a l D e b t

0.3

0 .1 5
0.1

0.2

0 .0 5
0.1
0
0

-0 .1

- 0 .0 5

0

5

-3

4

10

15

-0 .1

20

0

-4

C o n s u mp tio n

x 10

5

15

3.5

10

15

20

15

20

15

20

In te r e s t R a te o n L o a n s

x 10

10

3
5
2.5
0

2
1.5

0

5

-3

-1 .5

10

15

-5

20

0

5

Ex c h a n g e R a te

x 10

10

C red it
- 0 .0 6

-2
- 0 .0 7
-2 .5
-3

- 0 .0 8

-3 .5
- 0 .0 9
-4
-4 .5

0

5

10

15

-0 .1

20

0

5

10

Figure 6: Pitfalls of Exchange Rate Based FX Intervention

44

-4

-3

F X R es erv es

x 10

D o m e s t ic C r e d it

x 10

5

2

0

1

-5

-10

0
0

5

10

-3

15

20

25

2

x 10

4

6

8

-3

C o n s u m p t io n

x 10

0

10

12

14

16

18

20

22

24

I nt eres t R at e on Loans

10

-1
5
-2
0
-3

-4

-5
0

5

10

-3

15

20

25

0

5

10

-3

E x c hange R ate

x 10
6

15

20

25

15

20

25

O utput

x 10
2

1.5
4
1
2
0.5

0

0
0

5

10

15

20

25

0

5

10

Figure 7: Intervention to Stabilize Credit Spreads

Monetary Shock

Policy Rate

0.2

0.04

0.1

0.02

0

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

0

20

0

2

4

6

8

Consumption

10

12

14

16

18

20

12

14

16

18

20

12

14

16

18

20

12

14

16

18

20

External Debt

0
0.02
-0.02

0.01

-0.04

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

0

20

0

2

4

6

Interest Rate on Loans

8

10

Exchange Rate

0.015

0.2

0.01
0
0.005
0

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

-0.2

20

0

2

4

6

Output

8

10

Domestic Inflation

0.1

0
-0.02

0
-0.04
-0.1

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

-0.06

20

0

2

4

6

8

10

Figure 8: A Contractionary Monetary Policy Shock

45

-3

-3

R es erv es

x 10

1

10

0

5

-1

0

-2

0

5
-3

15

-5

20

0

5

10

-3

C o n s u mp tio n

x 10

0

10

Po lic y R ate

x 10

15

20

D o me s tic C r e d it

x 10
3

-2
2
-4

-6

1

0

5

10

15

0

20

2

4

6

In te r e s t R a te o n L o a n s

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

Ex c h a n g e R a te

0 .0 3

0 .0 3

0 .0 2
0 .0 2
0 .0 1
0 .0 1
0
- 0 .0 1

0

5

10

15

0

20

0 .0 2

6

0 .0 1 5

4

0 .0 1

2

0 .0 0 5

0

0

-2

0

5

10

0

5
-3

O u tp u t

15

20

x 10

0

10

5

10

Figure 9: FX Intervention and Monetary Policy

46

15

20

15

20

D omes tic Infla tio n

-3

R es erv es
0 .0 2

2

0

1.5

- 0 .0 2

1

- 0 .0 4

0.5

- 0 .0 6

0

5

10

15

0

20

Po lic y R ate

x 10

0

5

C o n s u mp tio n

10

15

20

15

20

15

20

15

20

Ex te r n a l D e b t

0
-0 .0 0 2

0 .0 4

-0 .0 0 4

0 .0 3

-0 .0 0 6

0 .0 2

-0 .0 0 8

0 .0 1

- 0 .0 1

0

5
-3

3

10

15

0

20

0

0 .0 1 5

0 .0 1

1

0 .0 0 5

0

5
-3

6

10

15

0

20

x 10

10

2

0

5

10

5
-4

5

0

0

O u tp u t

4

0

10
Ex c h a n g e R a te

2

0

5

Pe s o In te r e s t R a te o n L o a n s

x 10

15

-5

20

x 10

0

10
D omes tic Infla tio n

5

10

Figure 10: A Fall in z with peso securities

47

