NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FACTOR PRICES AND WELFARE
UNDER INTEGRATED CAPITAL MARKETS

Carol L. Osler

Working Paper No. 2447

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue

Cambridge, MA 02138
November 1987

The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in International
Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2447
November 1987

Factor Prices and Welfare Under Integrated Capital Markets

ABSTRACT

This

paper considers the effect on factor prices and welfare of trade between economies

whose production is characterized by nation-specific technological uncertainty. The
analysis is carried out using a two-country Diamond overlapping-generations model in
which technological uncertainty is reflected in factor prices, and 'equities' refer to claims
on the returns to capital. \Ve find that trade in capital is complementary to trade in
commodities, in the sense that adding free trade in capital to the spectrum of permitted

economic activities will cause significant changes in wages, output, and capital returns.
Furthermore, for countries which are identical, or not very different, factor prices move in

parallel when free trade in capital is introduced. Specifically, as we show in the text,

capital returns fall, while wages rise, in both countries. These results are based on the
portfolio diversification permitted by international capital market integration: the reduction

of portfolio risk associated with portfolio diversification induces adjustments in savings

behavior which, in turn, change factor prices.
In the realm of normative economics we find that, upon the introduction of free trade in
capital, the associated changes in portfolio risk and factor returns have welfare effects
entirely distinct from those conventionally associated with open markets for goods.
Furthermore, the net effect on consumer welfare of a shift to free trade in equities is more
likely to be positive than previously thought.

Carol L. Osler
Tuck School and
National Bureau of Economic Research
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambaridge, MA 02138

3

FACTOR PRICES AND WELFARE UNDER
INTEGRATED CAPITAL MARKETS
Carol L. Osler*
This paper considers the effect on factor prices and welfare of trade between economies

whose production is characterized by nation-specific technological uncertainty. We find
that trade in capital is complementary to trade in commodities, in contrast to the common

view, motivated by the Hecksher-Ohlin model, of factor and goods trade as substitutes.
That is, we find that adding free trade in capital to the spectrum of permitted economic

activities, including trade in goods, will cause significant changes in wages, output, and
capital returns. This complementarity is based on the portfolio diversification pennitted by
international capital market integration: the reduction of portfolio risk associated with

portfolio diversification induces adjustments in savings behavior which, in turn, change
factor prices. The coniplementarity is entirely distinct from the form of complenientarity

discussed in recent papers by Markusen and Svensson (Markusen 1983; Svensson 1984;
Markusen and Svensson 1985). They find that adding trade in factors to trade in goods
enhances the correlation between superior technology and exports in countries which

produce multiple goods, while in our analysis both countries produce the same good.
When countries shift from autarchy to free trade in goods and capital, factor-prices can

move in parallel: specifically, as we show in the text, capital returns could fall, while

*This represents a portion of my thesis research. I am indebted to my advisors, Wil]iarn
Bran son, Gene Grossman, and Peter Kenen, for their suggestions and support.

4

wages rise, in both countries. This contradicts all previous results in this area, including a
very closely related conclusion of Kareken and Wallace (1975), who find that factor
returns under open capital markets will lie between their values under portfolio autarchy.
Our result relies on another salient feature of our model: the endogeneity of capital and its

relationship to savings. In consequence, the result can be viewed as a long-run aspect of
an economic shift which has only previously been analyzed over time horizons in which the

world capital supply is fixed.
In the realm of normative economics we find that upon the introduction of free trade in
capital the associated changes in portfolio risk and factor returns have welfare effects

entirely distinct from those conventionally associated with open markets for goods, and that
the resulting equilibrium could be either Pareto superior or inferior to the autarchic

equilibrium. This contradicts the finding of Kareken and Wallace (1975) that a shift from
portfolio autarchy to integrated capital markets will not under any circumstances lead to a

Pareto superior equilibrium, and is consistent with the finding of Grossman (1984) that
"some movement of factors is not necessarily better than none". Whether integrated capital
markets enhance or compromise steady-state welfare depends upon (i) the direction and

magnitude of the response of savings to changes in portfolio risk, and (ii) the position of
the economies on the factor-price frontier relative to some welfare-maximizing optimum.

In Part ll.A we introduce technological uncertainty into the Diamond (1965)

overlapping-generations model. Following the example of Buiter (1981) we consider a
two-country treatment of this model, where both countries produce the same good, in Part

II.B. In Part III we discuss the effects on factor prices of a shift to free trade in goods and
capital. Part IV goes on to consider the welfare effects of such a shift, and in Part V we
conclude.

5

PART II: THE MODEL

II.A. Autarchy
We will begin this section by explaining the production side of one overlapping-

generations economy, follow that with a discussion of consumer behavior, and finish with
a description of the steady-state equilibrium under autarchy.

Production
Output of each firm, where firms are indexed by i, is generated from inputs of labor
and capital according to the stochastic production function

Q=F(K,L)+a1K
where a is an i.i.d. random variable distributed over the interval [-d,dl, 0 <d < 1, with
mean zero and variance a2.1 Assuming that F(K,L) is linear-homogeneous, we can reexpress production in terms of per-worker output, q = Q/L, and the capital-labor ratio, k =

K/L:

q=f(k)÷ak

2

The exogenously determined labor force is fully employed in each period, as is the

endogenously determined stock of capital. Factor markets are assumed to be perfectly

competitive, in consequence of which we can aggregate firms output and express total
output in terms of total capital and labor:

Q = F(K,L)

÷ aK = Lq = L[f(k) + ak].

Another implication of perfect competition in the factor markets is that labor and capital will

always be paid their marginal product: wages will be w =f(k) - kJ'(k), and the actual
return to capital will be =f(k) + a, with expectation r =f(k).

6

Consumption
During any period t a new generation of individuals is born which is ii percent larger
than the previous generation. Each member of this new generation, who will live for two
periods, works during period t earning the prevailing wage, w1, consumes some (proper)

fraction of his income, and invests the rest. The members of the older generation living in
period t do not work, and consume their interest-augmented savings. Denoting per-worker
savings of the young as s, we can see that per-worker output available for consumption in
period t,f(k1) + cc/c1 + k1, will be exhausted by consumption of the young, w1 - SI,

investment by the young, s1, and per-worker consumption of the old, (1 + r1 +

where

s11/(l+n). It is convenient to imagine that savings is used to purchase equities

from firm managers, who in turn employ the income derived from equity sales as capital.
The equities are denominated in terms of the single good and their stochastic return is
identical to the return per unit of capital employed.
All individuals have the same utility function: U(c1) + 13V(c2), where 6
and p is the rate of time preference, so 0 < f3

=

1. We assume that U( ) is twice

continuously differentiable, with U,> 0, U" <0. To simplify the mathematics of
uncertainty, we specify the following functional form for V():

V(c) =
and assume further that y= 1/2.

The value of s1, which determines generation t's entire (expected) lifetime consumption

profile, is chosen by them to solve
Max E1{U(w1 - s1) + /3V[s1(1 + r1÷1 + a1÷1)J}
S

7

taking w1, r1÷1 and the distribution of a1÷1 as given. The first-order condition for this

problem implies:

U'(v1-s1)= E{V'(l+ri+i÷at÷i)}
The consumers' desired level of savings will be detennined implicitly as a function of

w1, r1÷1, and the system parameters a2, /3, and y s = s(w,r,a2,/3,. There is one
property of consumer behavior which should be noted in this context: a rise in the
riskiness of equity returns will cause consumers to desire to reduce their savings. This
unambiguously negative response of savings to a2 is driven by the assumption that
o < y< 1. That is, 0 < y< 1 ensures that the income' effect of the change in the variance
of returns -- the increase in savings required to achieve the same level of expected future

utility -- is dominated by a "substitution' effect -- we can think of da2 > 0 as an increase in
the relative price of future expected utility, which could induce "substitution" away from it.
With the utility function of this paper, substitution effects will dominate for interest rate and

the variance of future consumption, or not at all (Sandrno 1970). (This and other
properties of this model are analyzed in greater detail in Osler (1987b).)

The empirical evidence regarding the size of yis mixed, so we assume 0 < y <

1

because it brings the model of this paper into consistency with those of its forebearers,

such as Buiter (1981), Blanchard (1985), and Kole (1985), where Sr> 0 is assumed. It is
usually not difficult to ascertain how the results presented here would differ if income

effects dominated substitution effects.

8

Ten iporary Equilibriwn
Three equilibrium conditions characterize the economy in each period:

U'(w1-s)= E{V'(1+r1+i+a1÷i)}
r1÷1 = E{f'(k1) + at+i}

iv =f(k,)

f'[s/(1+n)I

- kf'(k1).

The first two of these conditions comprise a system in the two endogenous variables s

and r1÷1, which could be re-expressed as = s(w1,r1i;a2,, and r1l = r(s1). We know
that Sr( ) > 0 and r'1÷1( ) <0, so the assumption that these two functions intersect is

sufficient to ensure an unique equilibrium, the location of which depends on w1, 2

Ø,

and

y Henceforth we will discuss optimum savings only at its economy-wide equilibrium

value, (w1;a2,,).
Steady-State Equilibrium

This model will have no "steady state" in the normal sense, because it is stochastic: in

r

particular, the path of the actual return to equities, = ÷ a, is necessarily uncertain. The
paths of w1, k1, and r1 can be determined with certainty, however, if we know the initial

value of one of them. The fact thatf(k) is strictly increasing and twice continuously
differentiable ensures that we can find functions k(w) and r(w), the latter of which is
commonly known as the "factor-price frontier". A first-order difference equation in capital
can be generated by using the familiar relations

k = wi)/(1+n),

(la)

w1 = f(k1) - kf'(k1),

(ib)

since together these imply:
—
—

f(k1)-kf'(k1)]
—
(H-n)

(2)

9

where the dependence of1 on a2, /3, and yhas been suppressed. Equation (2) allows us
to trace the behavior of k1 from some initial period through time indefinitely. The steady

state of this system is a value k* such that k+1 = k1. We can be sure that such a fixed point

exists, since k(w) is bounded and continuous (LaSalle, 1976). It is also unique.3

ll.B Two-Country Equilibrium
Suppose now that there is a 'home" country and a 'foreign" country, both of which
produce the same good, and which freely trade both output and equities. (Unless
otherwise specified, the word "domestic" will refer to the home country, while foreign
values of endogenous and exogenous variables will be denoted by a superscript A.)

Production
Each country has an underlying production function of the same type that we have

assumed in earlier chapters. Denote foreign production technology as:
Q = F(K,L) +

aK.

The random productivity shocks, a at home and abroad, have mean zero, variances

a2 and 2, respectively, and correlation coefficient i, which we assume is unequal to
unity.

Consumption
Consumers must still choose a savings level, but now they must also choose the

allocation of their savings between the assets of both countries. Savers will invest in
"equities" which are denominated in terms of the output of the country from which they are

purchased, and have stochastic returns corresponding identically to that country's return to

capital. "k' will represent the share of domestic savings invested in home equities, and the

10

share of foreign savings invested in domestic equities will be "i'. Choice of irwill
contribute to determining the realized value, expected value, and variance of individuals'

returns to savings as follows:

=1 +

R t1

E{R+1} =

+ (1—7r1)(1÷1 + t÷1)'

+

+ JrTt+i + (1—n1)÷1

1

Var(R+i) = ,ro2 + (1—ir1)2& +

(3a)

(3b)

,

21r(1-Jr)dö7j

.

(3c)

The optimization problem facing domestic residents,

Max U(w,-s) +
s,

r

has first-order conditions

U' =

and

E(V')(r+i -

PE(V'R÷i}

(4a)

= E{V'(a—a1)

(4b)

The interpretation of equation (4a), which describes consumers' optimal savings level,

was discussed in Section I1.A. Equation (4b) describes equilibrium portfolio shares. As
equations (3b) and (3c) illustrate, a change in irj will affect expected retirement utility

through R1÷1 and Var(R÷1). Equilibrium condition (4b) states that at the margin, the
change in expected utility from these two factors should be equal and opposite.

Temporary Equilibrium
Ten conditions that characterize the temporary equilibrium: the four consumers' first-

order conditions, corresponding to St. 2rt,

t, and

the four factor-market clearing

conditions, corresponding to Wt, r1÷1, i, and F1; and the definition of domestic and
foreign capital stocks:

k

_____

—
—

1

+

'

(1-7r1)s1-1-(1-?1)1
k±1 =
1 +

,

11

[

The capital account, per domestic worker, equals capital inflow minus capital outflow:
- (1 -1)s]

-

(){- -

(1

-

1)s1

]

The current account is the negative of the capital account, and the trade balance is the

difference between the current account and net capital service inflow, or:

tb =

— () C (+a)(1-1 1)s1 - (r1+a1)1i).

The balance of payments will automatically be in equilibrium whenever consumers

satisfy their budget constraints.

Steady-State Equilibrium

The long-run steady-state values of k and will be the solutions to the following
system of nonlinear equations:

k(w,) =

(w )

+
1

+ n

+
- [1*(.)]s*(.)1+n
—

where
*

*_*

*__*

* __*

* __*

w = f[k(w ,w )] - k(w ,w )f[k(w ,w )]
___*

w

—.

—..

* __*

f{k(w ,w )] - k(w ,w )f[k(w ,w )]

and the arguments in s*(.) and ,r*(.)

are w, ,

r*, *, a2, 2,

and n.

Since w and

i

are bounded, this system has a nonempty set of fixed points (LaS alle 1976). For the case

of symmetric countries, we will assume that the solution w =

is one of these fixed

12

points, and in fact is the unique fixed point. The condition for local stability of the system

0 < 1 - m7rS

is:

ii(1-r) < 1,

where

'fl =/k =
and In is defined accordingly. We will assume that in, In 1, which ensures that this

stability condition is satisfied.
The steady-state capital account and trade balance will appear as follows:

- (l,r)s*)

=

rb* =

+

-

-

+

-

PART III: EFFECTS ON FACTOR PRICES OF A SHIFT TO FREE

TRADE

IV.A. Identical Countries
We will begin our analysis of this economic system at the steady-state equilibrium

corresponding to symmetry countries: /3= $, a2 = 2, etc. Factor prices will be the
same everywhere, implying equal domestic and foreign capital stocks. Savings will also be
equal in the two countries, and all portfolios will be evenly divided between home and

foreign equities. With so much symmetry, the fact that the (expected) value of each
constituent element of the balance of payments will be zero can be proven with a simple

13

glance at the expressions which describe them. Since individuals hold diversified porfolios
both countries will be both importers and exporters of equities, though there will be no net
capital flows.
In the transition from autarchy to free trade, there will be an immediate and permanent

switch to perfect diversification of portfolios, followed by an extended rise in wages and

savings To see this more clearly, let us trace the events of a transition which takes place in

period t. In order to reduce portfolio risk, members of generation t diversify their
portfolios. Having achieved that lower risk, consumers increase their savings, raising
period t+ is capital stock and wages, and reducing equity returns, relative to their values in
the autarchic steady state. \Vith higher disposable income, generation r+1 will save even

more than generation t, which in turn will raise the wages of generation t+2. In this way
each country's wages will continue to rise, and equity returns to decline, converging

eventually on new steady-state values. Thus we have shown:
Proposition 1: For identical countries, wages rise, equity returns fall, and the variance
of second-period conswnption declines in both countries upon a shift from autarchy to free

trade in goods and equities.
If identical countries were only allowed to trade in commodities, there would be no
motivation for trade and no change whatsoever from the autarchy equilibrium. This result
shows that in the presence of uncertainty, trade in factors is "complementary" to trade in

goods, in the sense that it has effects on the equilibrium entirely distinct from the effects of
allowing trade in goods. This "complernentarity" between trade in goods and trade in

factors is quite distinct from that discussed by Markusen and Svensson (1985), who find

14

that the correlation between technological superiority and exports increases when trade in

factors is allowed in addition to trade in goods. Their analysis is concerned with the effects
of factor trade when countries produce multiple goods under conditions of certainty, while
we inquire about the effects of factor trade when both countries produce a single good

under uncertainty.
In Buiter's original two-country treatment of the overlapping-generations model, the
equilibrium for identical economies is unchanged by a shift out of portfolio autarchy

(1981). Our result contrasts sharply with his, yet it is driven by two of the model's most
general properties: the desire to diversify portfolios across countries, and the response of
savings to portfolio risk.4 The endogeneity of capital is also important, since redistributing
fixed national capital stocks across countries would cause factor prices to move in opposite

directions, or not at all. However, endogeneity of capital is more of a necessary condition
than a sufficient one, since wages in both countries will not change at all if random
productivity shocks in the two countries are perfectly correlated.

III.B. Asymmetric Countries
In this section we will use some of our earlier analysis to show that factor prices could
move in parallel upon the opening of financial markets even if countries differ.
Suppose for specificity that the domestic level of relative risk aversion exceeds the

foreign level, of 5> y As shown in Osler (1987b), under autarchy the returns to equities
will be higher for the home country than for the foreign country, since domestic consumers

will tend to save less. Once they are allowed to invest internationally, consumers will
divide their portfolios equally between domestic and foreign equities, equalizing factor

15

returns. If savings were not responsive to changes in risk, then domestic returns would
fall while foreign returns rose. However, with the reduction in portofolio riskiness will
cause savings to rise, tending to reduce returns in both countries. This savings effect,
while enlarging the decline of domestic equity returns, causes the direction of change of

foreign equity returns to be uncertain. The general priniciple here, which applies to
changes in all system parameters, is that the saviigs effect will dominate, and returns will

move in parallel, if countries are sufficiently similar to begin with. This 'similarity" can be
quantified: for instance in the case of differences in rate of time preference, foreign equity

returns will decline, as well as domestic returns, so long as T -SA > (T - ST)!2.
That equity returns or wages could actually move in parallel upon a shift from autarchy
to trade is a result unfamiliar to the international trade literature, whether we consider trade

in goods, in capital, or both. In the standard models of free trade in goods, factor prices
will move in opposite directions, if they move at all. Included here would be the RicardoViner model with capital supplies specific to each traded good, and of course the Hecksher-

Ohlin model (Dixit and Norman 1980). Models allowing free trade in capital as well as
goods have also required factor payments to move in opposite directions, whether or not
uncertainty was considered, and whether or not they allowed the aggregate supply of

capital to vary. Examples are: Grossman and Razin (1984, 1985), who assume a fixed
total capital stock but incorporate uncertainty, and Buiter (1981) whose model has no

uncertainty but allows the aggregate capital stock to vary endogenously. An especially
interesting example is Kareken and Wallace's (1975) paper in which they analyze an

overlapping-generations model with fixed endowments of land. The land is combined with
labor in each country to produce two goods, both of which can be traded. Their paper is

16

interesting because the authors compare explicitly the equilibrium with only goods trade to

the equilibrium with international purchases of both goods and land. They conclude that if
land returns differ across countries in the more restricted equilibrium, then under "laissezfaire" land returns will be equalized across countries at a rate between the two that prevailed

without land trade.
Why is it interesting that factor prices might move in a parallel fashion when capital

trade opens up? Because currently such trade is growing in leaps and bounds (Crabbe
1987). International portfolio diversification is surging world-wide as its benefits have
become dramatically less costly to achieve and equally dramatically more apparent over

recent years. (See for example, Levy and Sarnat 1970; Solnik 1974a; Kohlhagen 1983)
The effects of such a change in investment patterns should be of interest to all involved.

Workers, for example, will want to know what might happen to their wages. Investors
will be especially keen to know if this must imply a rise in expected returns in markets with

relatively low ones, such as Germany: if so, they might experience capital gains during the

transition, rather than losses.

PART IV: WELFARE EFFECTS OF A SHIFT TO FREE TRADE

In this section we continue our analysis of a shift to free trade for identical economies,

focusing on changes in individual welfare. We begin by expressing this change in welfare
analytically. The measure of consumer welfare we use is:

= Max

U(w-s) + J3E(V(sRi)}

17

Taking the parameters of the system as given, we can think of consumer welfare as

determined by three elements: portfolio variance, expected portfolio returns, and wages
The effects of each factor on welfare can be expressed as follows:

dW

1ai)

--

2 EJE{V} < 0

Var(R)

=f3sE{V}>0,

-—-=U >0.

A logical expression for appreciating the welfare effects of a change from autarchy (A) to

free trade (T) is the following:
diV1 =

Ps2)[Var(RJ)

- Var(RA)] +

siV'}(RT÷l - R) + U' (w- w,).

Our next step is to consider in detail the changes in portfolio vaiiance, portfolio returns,

and wages. The change in portfolio variance can be divided into two parts, one due to the
imperfect correlation of returns across countries, the other due to the divergence between
domestic and foreign equity variances:

VarRT) - VarRA) =

2r(l-ira2(p-l) + (l2r2(&o2)

For identical economies, oniy the first of these terms is unequal to zero, and it is negative.

(Time subscripts can be dropped because the independence of optimal portfolio shares from
income implies that portfolio variances will be the same during all periods subsequent to the

change in policy.)
The change in expected portfolio returns has two parts, the first due to the change in
domestic equity returns, the second due to differences between returns across countries
under trade:
RTr÷1 - RA = (rTt÷1 - rA) + (l-2rT)(Tf÷1 - rr÷1).

With identical economies, only the first of these need be considered.

18

Though a change in wages is straightforward, it is useful to think of it in two parts,
one related to a movement along the factor-price frontier, and one associated with the fact

that, before the steady state is reached, the wages received by a generation, say generation
t, will not correspond along the factor-price frontier to the equity returns they expect to

receive: w =f(kt) - kf'(k)

w(r1÷1) =f(k1÷1)

-kg÷if(kt÷i). Thus

aw
WTt-WA = -—(rT÷1-rA)+-—(rT-rTZ÷1)
We can now re-express the welfare change for identical economies as follows:

dW =

$s2) 1) - k,[U' - (l+n)E{ V'}](rT+l -

where k E.hv/tr,

and we

rA)

U'kA{rT- rT+11

evaluate U', E{V'), etc. at the initial, autarchic, steady state.

The first term on the right, which measures the welfare change due to reduced portfolio

variances, applies to all generations born after the policy shift. This effect is
unambiguously positive, since diversification reduces the portfolio variance of all
generations subsequent to the policy transition.
The second term, which also affects all generations, tells us the welfare effect of

movement along the factor-price frontier. This effect could be positive or negative,
depending on the initial location of the economy relative to some theoretical welfare-

maximizing equilibrium. In the present model, as in most growth models, the effect will be
positive so long as autarchy equity returns exceed their optimal value, r*. This follows

19

directly from the conditions describing r,

E{V'}(r-n)=-E{V'a) >

0

and from the consumers' first-order condition for s , which together imply that U' -J3(1÷n)EjV'} > 0 if and only if r> r*.5 Some authors rule out the possibility of such an

equilibrium, arguing that rational agents would not allow such inefficiencies to persist,
while others point out that it is not always possible for rational agents to arrange

otherwise.6 The assumption that r > r* can be interpreted in terms of intertemporal
efficiency since, if r were below its theoretical optimum, one generation could consume
more in both periods of its life and still leave subsequent generations better off, so long as

an appropriate arrangement for intergenerational transfers were in place. \Ve will adopt
the assumption of intertemporal efficiency throughout the text in order to avoid listing

explicitly the consequences of r < r* as well as of r> r*.
The third effect, relevant only to generations alive before the steady state is reached, is
negative, since expected equity returns will be declining during the transition.
Considered together, the three welfare effects of a shift from autarchy to trade imply the
following:

Proposition 2: For identical countries which are interteinporally efficient and for which

<1, the shift from autarchy to free trade in goods and equities will cause an
unambiguous improvement in steady-state welfare. The welfare of intermediate

generations may either rise or fall. Thus, free trade in goods and equities may be Pareto
superior to autarchy, but it may also reduce welfare.

20

Whether trade in factors, in addition to trade in goods, can affect welfare has been a
concern of trade theorists for generations. Earlier trade models concluded that trade in

factors was often redundant when trade in goods is availlable. For example, in the
standard Hecksher-Ohlin model, identical countries are unaffected by the introduction of
either capital goods trade or capital trade, and introducing trade in capital affects welfare

only if countries are so distinct that they end up specializing in production (Mundell 1957).

In a more recent analysis Grossman concludes that "some movement of factors is not
necessarily better than none" (1984), which is consistent in spirit with out own result,
though motivated entirely differently. In his model, equilibria are static and there is no
uncertainty: the welfare loss due to trade in factors is associated with changes in the terms

of trade, since each country produces multiple goods. In our model, the welfare change is
associated with portfolio diversification and with the savings and income responses it
generates.
A closer analogy to our model is found in Kareken and Wallace's (1975) analysis of an

overlapping-generations version of the Hecksher-Ohlin model. They fmd that "the laissezfaire [free trade in goods and capital, steady-state] equilibrium allocation is not Pareto
superior to the portfolio autarchy allocation" (page 71), in direct contradiction to our result.

The same conclusion holds concerning this model without uncertainty, if the two countries
are symmetrical. As ever, it is the possibilities of portfolio diversification that lead our
model to have unfamiliar results.
Finance theorists have been aware for years that integrating capital markets brings
benefits in terms of reduced portfolio variances, though their perspective has been entirely

21

absent from the standard international trade literature (Solnick 1974b). Our contribution is
to asses the long-run implications of such risk reduction on savings behavior, factor

returns, and welfare.

PART V: CONCLUSIONS

In this paper we have analyzed a two-country Diamond overlapping generations model

with uncertainty. The distinguishing feature of this model is the importance of portfolio
diversification, which in turn relies on the imperfect correlation between equity returns in

the two countries. The reduction in portfolio variance associated with international
diversification is the driving force between both of our main results: factor returns under
free trade need not lie between their autarchy values; and (ii) the net effect on consumer
welfare of a shift to free trade in equities is more likely to be positive than previously

thought.

22

NOTES

1: The requirement that 0 <d < 1 ensures that members of the older generation will always
consume a positive amount. Since we have assumed r 0, their retirement resources of (1
+ r + a)s will be positive whenever a 1.
2: The choice of functional form for the production function deserves some comment. It is
more common to analyze a linear homogenous function multiplied by a stochastic term with
unit mean: Q = aF(K,L). Examples include Batra 1975; Mayer 1976; Baron and
Forsythe 1979; Helpman and Razin 1978a and b; Grossman and Razin 1984, 1985. In
this case the variance of the return to capital is (f)2a2, implying that any change in perworker capital stock affects not only the return to capital but also its variance. Since this is
a complication with which this thesis is not concerned, our alternative formulation was
adopted. Another advantage of the additive form is that it mimics reality more closely than
the model with multiplicative uncertainty, since in actuality the return to capital does absorb
most of the variance in output. The risk-sharing arrangements responsible for this
asymmetry between labor and capital, which are the focus of the implicit contracts
literature, (Bailey 1974) are not readily incorporated into this particular model.

3: The uniqueness of the equilibrium can be ascertained by noting that k'(w) > 0 and
<0 everywhere.
k"(w) > 0 (where k(w) = w1(k)), while ? > 0,
4: Proposition 1 holds as stated for the levels of risk aversion assumed in this thesis -- y
and 5< 1. If we were instead to assume 1 <yand then wages would both fail.

5: The "golden rule' of traditional models, r* =n (Samuelson 1958), is motivated by the
fact that r = n maximizes total steady-state consumption,f(k) -nk. In the stochastic model,
setting r = n likewise maximizes steady-state consumption. However, in the newer model,
a rise in k increases the variance of consumption as well its expected value, so that atf' = n
the costs from of marginal unit of capital exceed the benefits. In consequence, under
uncertainty the optimal level of expected equity returns exceeds the rate of population
growth by a margin which is positively related to the variability of those returns.
6: Overlapping-generations models which could be "inefficient" in the steady state have
been discussed by Diamond (1965) as well as Blanchard (1985).

REFERENCES

Bailey, Martin N.,1974, Wages and employment under uncertain demand, Review of
Economic Studies 42,37-50.
Baron, David P. and Robert Forsythe 1979, Models of the firm and international trade
under uncertainty, American Economic Review 69, 565-574.
Batra, RN., 1975, Production uncertainty and the Hecksher-Ohlin theorem, Review of

Economic Studies 42,259-268.

Blanchard, Olivier, 1985, Debt, deficits, and finite horizons, Journal of Political Economy
93, 223-247.
Buiter, Willem H., 1981, Time preference and international lending and borrowing in an
overlapping-generations model, Journal of Political Economy 89.

Crabbe, Matthew, 1987, U.S. pension funds follow the boat, Euromoney, 9 1-95.
Diamond, P., 1965, National debt in a neoclassical growth model, American Economic
Review 55, 1126-1150.
Dixit, Avinash K., and Victor Norman, 1980, Theory of international trade,--Cambridge
University Press.

Frenkel, Jacob and Assaf Razin, 1984, Fiscal policies, debt, and international economic
interdependence, in: NBER Working Paper no. 1266.

Grossman, Gene M., 1984, The gains from international factor movements, Journal of
International Economics 17, 73-83.

Grossman, Gene M., and Assaf Razin, 1984, International capital movements under
uncertainty, Journal of Political Economy 92, 2a86-306.
, 1985, The pattern of trade in a Ricardian model with country-specific uncertainty,
International Economic Review 26, 193-202.

Helpmann, Elhanan, and Assaf Razin, 1978, Uncertainty and international trade in the
presence of stock markets, Review of Economic Studies 45, 239-250.
, 1975b, A theory of international trade under uncertainty, in: Academic Press, New
York.

Kareken J. and N. Wallace, 1975, Portfolio autarchy: A welfare analysis, Journal of
International Economics 7, 19-43.
Kohlhagen, Steven W., 1983, Overlapping national investment portfolios: Evidence and
implications of international integration of secondary markets for financial assets,
Research in International Business and Finance 3, Hawkdins and Levich, Eds. (JAI
Press Inc.).

Kole, Linda S., Expansionary fiscal policy and international interdependence, presented at
a conference on International Aspects of Fiscal Policies, sponsored by the National
Bureau of Economic Research in Cambridge, Massachusetts, December 13-14, 1985.

LaSalle, J.P., 1976, The stability of dynamical systems, (J.W. Arrowsmith Ltd.,
Bristol); Levy, Haim and Marshall Sarnat, 1970, International diversification of
investment portfolios, American Economic Review 60, 668-675.

Markusen, James R., and Lars E.O. Svensson, 1985, Trade in goods and factors with
international differences in technology, International Economic Review 26, 175-192.
Markusen, James R., 1983, Factor movements and commodity trade as complements,
Journal of International Economics 13, 341-356.

Mayer, Wolfgang, 1976, The Rybczinski, Stolper-Samuelson, and factor-price
equalization theorems under price uncertainty 66,797-808.
Mundell, Robert A., 1957, International trade and factor mobility, American Economic
Review 47, 32 1-335.
Osler, Carol L., 1987a, International trade and investment in an overlapping-generations
model with uncertainty, in: Ph.D. thesis, Princeton University.
, 1987b, Portfolio diversification and factor prices in an overlapping-generations
model with uncertainty, in: working paper.

Persson, Torsten, 1985, Deficits and intergenerational welfare in open economics, Journal
of International Economics 19, 67-84.
Samuelson, Paul A., 1958, An exact consumption-loan model of interest with or without
the social contrivance of money, Journal of Political Economy 66, 467-4 82.
Sandmo, A., 1970, The effect of uncertainty on saving decisions, Review of Economic
Studies, 353-360.
Solnick, Bruno, 1974a, An equilibrium model of the international capital market, Journal
of Economic Theory 8, 500-524.

Svensson, Lars E.O., 1984, Factor trade and goods trade, Journal of International
Economics 16, 365-378.

