                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 FINANCIAL DEVELOPMENT, GROWTH, AND CRISIS:
                            IS THERE A TRADE-OFF?

                                      Norman Loayza
                                       Amine Ouazad
                                      Romain Rancière

                                     Working Paper 24474
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w24474


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    April 2018




This paper has been prepared as a chapter for the forthcoming Handbook of Finance and
Development, edited by Thorsten Beck and Ross Levine (Edward Elgar Publishing). We are
grateful to the editors for their valuable advice The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Norman Loayza, Amine Ouazad, and Romain Rancière. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Financial Development, Growth, and Crisis: Is There a Trade-Off?
Norman Loayza, Amine Ouazad, and Romain Rancière
NBER Working Paper No. 24474
April 2018
JEL No. G01,G21,O0,O4

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper reviews the evolving literature that links financial development, financial crises, and
economic growth in the past 20 years. The initial disconnect—with one literature focusing on the
effect of financial deepening on long-run growth and another studying its impact on volatility and
crisis—has given way to a more nuanced approach that analyzes the two phenomena in an
integrated framework. The main finding of this literature is that financial deepening leads to a
trade-off between higher economic growth and higher crisis risk; and its main conclusion is that,
for at least middle-income countries, the positive growth effects outweigh the negative crisis risk
impact. This balanced view has been revisited recently for advanced economies, where an
emerging and controversial literature supports the notion of "too much finance," suggesting that
there might be a threshold beyond which financial depth becomes detrimental for economic
growth by crowding out other productive activities and misallocating resources. Nevertheless, the
growth/crisis trade-off is alive and strong for a large share of the world economy. Recognizing
the intrinsic trade-offs of financial development can provide a useful framework to design
policies targeting financial deepening, diversity, and inclusion. In particular, acknowledging the
trade-offs can highlight the need for complementary policies to mitigate the risks, from financial
macroprudential policies to monetary policy frameworks that monitor the growth of credit and
asset prices.

Norman Loayza                                    Romain Rancière
The World Bank                                   Department of Economics
1818 H St., NW                                   University of Southern California
Washington, DC 20433                             Los Angeles, CA 90097
nloayza@worldbank.org                            and NBER
                                                 ranciere@usc.edu
Amine Ouazad
HEC Montreal
3000, Chemin de la Cote Sainte Catherine
H3T 2A7, Montreal, QC
Canada
amine.ouazad@hec.ca
1. Introduction and Background

Finance is the fuel of economic growth. Yet, the same fuel, when excessive and triggered by a
shock of flame, can engender an economic crisis. For decades, the economics literature studied
these two effects separately, building independently massive cases in favor of and against
financial activity. Since the mid-2000s, however, the economics literature recognized that the
positive and negative aspects of finance should be considered jointly. This innovation has
prompted an exploration of the trade-offs involved in various aspects of financial development,
such as depth, inclusion, composition, and variety. Likewise, it has induced a new type of policy
debate regarding monetary and financial affairs, a debate that takes into account the trade-offs
intrinsic in financial development (see, for instance, World Bank (2013)) 1. And from this debate,
a diversity of policy reforms has been implemented across the world, from financial
macroprudential policies to monetary policy frameworks that monitor credit and asset price
growth.

The level of financial development is the degree to which financial instruments, markets, and
intermediaries ameliorate the effects of information, enforcement, and transactions costs by
providing broad categories of financial services to the economy: (i) producing ex ante
information about possible investments, (ii) monitoring investments and exerting corporate
governance, (iii) trading, diversification, and management of risk, (iv) mobilizing and pooling
savings, and (v) facilitating the exchange of goods and services. Each of these financial
functions may influence savings and investment decisions and hence economic growth (Levine,
2005).

Financial development is, therefore, a rather general term, and the literature has often used
more concrete concepts and measurements to characterize it. One of the most commonly used
is the concept of financial depth, which denotes the extent of credit, financial capital, and
financial products in the economy. In turn, the most popular empirical proxy for measuring
financial depth is the ratio of credit extended by commercial banks to the private sector over


1
 For applied discussions, see also, Loayza et al. (2007), Cull, Demirguc-Kunt, and Lyman (2012), Borio (2014), Cihak,
Mare, and Melecky (2016), and Han and Melecky (2017).

                                                         2
GDP (Levine, Loayza and Beck, 2000). There are other dimensions of financial development –
value, quality, diversity, efficiency, and inclusiveness—and corresponding empirical proxies that
can be relevant to evaluate the contribution of finance to the economy. Some of the recently
used proxies include the value added of the financial sector (Philippon, 2010), the share of
employment in the financial sector (Cecchetti and Kharroubi, 2015), and the wages and wage
premia in the financial industry (Philippon and Resheff, 2012). These additional measures might
be particularly relevant to discuss the allocation or misallocation of factors between the
financial sector and the rest of the economy and to test some model-based hypotheses.

The first objective of this paper is to review the literature that considers the trade-offs and the
sometimes opposite effects of financial deepening. The second objective of the paper is go
beyond aggregate growth outcomes and consider the effect of financial depth, volatility, and
crises on other socio-economic outcomes such as segregation and inequality.

Before we embark on these objectives, let us examine briefly the literatures that consider, on
the one hand, the link between finance and growth and, on the other hand, the link between
finance and crisis.

The evidence suggests that there is a strong and robust long-run relationship between financial
and economic development. Moreover, there is sufficient evidence that financial development
causes economic growth. King and Levine (1993) has proven to be a seminal paper in this line of
research, prompting dozens of related studies in the following 25 years. Levine (1997) gives an
early account of this burgeoning literature, providing also a conceptual framework to
understand the connection between finance and growth comprehensively. Almost a decade
later, Levine (2005) reviews critically the theoretical and empirical literature, proposing in turn
an agenda of research that includes understanding the heterogeneous effects of finance on
growth in different contexts.

Although the long-run relationship between finance and growth has been broadly accepted,
there have been two main areas of controversy.2 The first one deals with the direction of


2
 A minority of papers has found weak or insufficient evidence that financial development causes economic growth.
See Harris (1997), Ram (1998), Singh (1997), and Favara (2003).

                                                      3
causality, and the second concerns the homogeneity of the impact in various countries,
contexts, and levels of development.

On the causality issue, Levine, Loayza, and Beck (2000) provide strong, though not
uncontroversial, evidence that financial depth generates larger economic growth. Working with
a panel of cross-country and time observations, the paper uses both external instruments (legal
origin) and internal instruments (past observations of explanatory variables) to isolate the
exogenous impact of financial depth on growth, finding it to be statistically and robustly
positive. Beck, Levine, and Loayza (2000) and Benhabib and Spiegel (2000) go one step further
and find that the mechanism through which finance improves growth is mainly through its
positive effect on total factor productivity. Moreover, Bekaert, Harvey, and Lundbladl (2005),
among others, establish that financial liberalization policies lead to long-run growth,
presumably by incentivizing financial deepening .

Studies using primarily cross-country or longitudinal panel data mainly test the causality
direction from finance to growth, confirming in most cases its significance. On the other hand,
papers using more intensively the time-series dimension of the data (whether for a single
country or for many), test the causality in both directions. Although specific results vary, they
tend to find that causality may run in both directions. See, for example, Berthelemy and
Varoudakis (1996), Luintel and Khan (1999), Shan, Morris, and Sun (2001), Khalifa Al-Yousif
(2002), Calderon and Liu (2003), and Ghirmay (2004). 3

The second area of controversy has been the homogeneity of the growth effect of financial
deepening. Although the original papers did not pretend to measure other than average effects
and considered non-linearities through a log-linear regression specification, they have been
criticized for advocating a one-size-fits-all approach. A large literature has emerged trying to
understand how the effect of financial deepening varies according to the level of economic
development, the level of financial development, and other country characteristics. See, for
example, Arestis and Demetriades (1999), Deidda and Fattouh (2002), Rousseau and Wachtel
(2002), Rioja and Valev (2004a, 2004b), Aghion, Howitt, and Mayer-Foulkes (2005), Demirguc-

3
 A few papers, however, reject bi-directionality, favoring causality from finance to growth. See Christopoulous and
Tsionas (2004), Liang and Teng (2006), and Ang and McKibbin (2007).

                                                        4
Kunt, Feyen, and Levine (2011), Arcand, Berkes, and Panizza (2011), and Barajas, Chami, and
Yousefi (2016). Pasali (2013) provides a comprehensive review of this strand of this literature.
The paper finds little consensus on whether more economically advanced countries benefit
more from financial deepening than developing countries do; however, it does find an
emerging consensus that the benefits of financial deepening may decrease for large levels and
large accelerations of financial depth, posing the possibility of “too much finance.”

While much of the empirical evidence uses cross-country data at the national scale, several
studies have also shown a strong relationship between finance and growth at the local and firm
levels. They have also concerned themselves with issues of causality and homogeneity. See, for
example, Jayaratne and Strahan (1996), Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2004), and Kendall
(2012). A key paper in this vein is Rajan and Zingales (1998), which, using firm-level data, finds
evidence that industrial sectors that require greater levels of external finance grow faster in
countries with more developed financial markets. This documents one mechanism through
which financial development can positively affect growth: a reduction in the cost of external
finance to firms.4 Similarly, Demirguc-Kunt and Maksimovic (1998) show that firms in countries
with developed financial institutions and efficient legal systems obtain more external financing
than firms in countries with less-developed institutions. Beck, Demirguc-Kunt and Maksimovic
(2005) assess the impact of financial, legal, and corruption problems on firms’ growth rates. It
finds that smaller firms are more constrained by these problems but also benefit the most from
financial and institutional development. Finally, Love (2001) shows that financial development
diminishes financing constraints by reducing information asymmetries and contracting
imperfections.

Turning now to the crisis literature, it must be said that it is at least as rich and diverse as the
growth literature. Here, we only review the main messages from studies that have focused on
the connection between financial deepening and economic crisis. The first finding is that rapid
acceleration of bank credit, sovereign debt, and equity prices are robust predictors of the
occurrence and intensity of financial crisis. See, for example, Kaminsky and Reinhart (1999) and

4
 Khan (2001) develops a theory of financial development that is based on the costs associated with the provision
of finance, consistent with the evidence of Rajan and Zingales (1998).

                                                       5
Jordá, Schularick, and Taylor (2011). The second, related finding is that this rapid acceleration in
volumes and prices of financial assets is part of a boom-bust cycle, with the financial bust
producing the negative effects on the real economy. Dell’Arrica et al. (2016), for instance, finds
that one out of three credit booms is followed by a crisis, and that the longer is a boom, the
most likely it ends in a crisis. See, in addition, Higgings and Osler (1997), Allen and Gale (1999,
2000), Reinhart and Rogoff (2008), Allen et al. (2011), and Schularick and Taylor (2012). The
third finding is that this boom-bust phenomenon can be fueled and aggravated in an
international economy context, with the bust connected to the “sudden-stop” of capital flows.
See, for instance, Dornbusch, Goldfajn, and Valdes (1995), Calvo (1998), Chang and Velasco
(2001), and Aguiar and Gopinath (2007). The link between financial liberalization and increased
instability has also been the subject of much debate, which is extensively discussed in Stiglitz
(2000).

While the evidence suggests that both financial institutions and financial markets influence
economic growth and crisis, there is a branch of the literature dedicated to determining
whether a bank-based system or market-based system is better for growth and stability. See
Levine and Zervos (1998), Levine (2002), Beck (2012), and Haiss, Juvan and Mahlberg (2016).
This work is summarized in Beck (2012), which concludes that there is little evidence that either
financial structure is uniformly better. This ambiguity is reflected in the findings of recent
papers. For instance, Gambacorta, Yang, and Tsatsaronis (2014) conclude that the services
provided by banks are particularly beneficial for less developed countries and that while
healthy banks are able to cushion shocks during normal downturns, this shock-absorbing
capacity is impaired during financial crises. On the other hand, Langfield and Pagano (2016),
focusing on advanced economies and taking into account the 2007-2008 crisis, document that
an increase in the size of the banking system relative to equity and private bond markets is
associated with lower growth and more systemic risk.

The insight that there may be a darker side to finance is derived from two, often interrelated
aspects: first, the possibility that some features of finance may be wasteful and crowd out
productive activity; and second, the realization that certain characteristics of financial
development may make the economy more vulnerable to crisis. This insight features

                                                 6
prominently in recent papers, such as Gabaix and Landier (2007), Beck (2012), Beck et al. (2012),
Beck, Degryse, and Kneer (2014), Law and Singh (2014), Cecchetti and Kharroubi (2015),
Caldera-Sanchez and Gorri (2016), Eden (2016), and Beck et al. (2016).. Importantly, it is at the
heart of the literature that has attempted a link between financial development, growth, and
crisis that started in the mid-2000s, with Tornell, Westermann, and Martínez (2003), Loayza and
Ranciere (2006), and Ranciere, Tornell, and Westermann (2006).

The next sections of this paper assess the benefits and drawbacks of financial development in
terms of growth and stability. In section 2, we document a large literature that has developed
an integrated approach to study the effects of financial development on growth and crises, and
that has established the presence of a higher growth-higher crisis risk trade-off, in particular for
middle-income countries. In section 3, we review a more recent literature that focuses on
advanced economies and suggests the possibility that pushing financial development beyond
some level can be detrimental for growth and expose countries to severe crisis risk. In section 4,
we explore the distributional effects of financial development, recognizing that an exclusive
focus on aggregate growth outcomes runs the risk of masking important within-country
distributional effects of financial development and crises. To illustrate such effects, we analyze
the boom-bust credit cycle experienced by the US economy during 2000-2010, considering
outcomes such as segregation and wealth distribution. Section 5 concludes, outlining some
avenues for future research.

2. The Integrated Approach: A Trade-Off between Higher Growth and Higher Crisis Risk

The apparent paradox between the long run growth view which emphasizes the contribution of
financial development to growth (Levine, Loayza and Beck, 2000), and the early warning signals
literature view which stresses credit growth as the most powerful predictor of financial crises
(Schularick and Taylor, 2012) calls for an integrated approach. The central hypothesis is the
existence of a trade-off associated with the dual effect of policies fostering financial
development, potentially leading to both higher growth and higher crisis risk. An integrated
framework should enable us to understand under what conditions contrasting effects are
triggered and to quantify the net effect of financial development.

                                                 7
Loayza and Ranciere (2006) and Ranciere, Tornell, and Westerman (2006) provide the first
econometric models that allowed to estimate such dual effects. In the context of a panel error-
correction model estimated by the Pooled Mean Group estimator (Pesaran, Shin, and Smith,
1999), Loayza and Ranciere (2006) show that a positive long-run relationship between financial
depth and economic growth could co-exist with heterogeneous, country-specific, short-run
effects that are, on average, negative. This suggests that along a long-run path in which finance
and growth are positively related there might be short-run fluctuations in which (excessive)
credit growth is associated, on average, with output contractions.            An analysis of the
distribution of the estimated short-run coefficients reveals that crisis-prone countries are about
twice more likely to experience a negative relationship. Crisis-related volatility is not, however,
the only reason for this short-run negative dynamic: a fair share of lending booms end up in soft
landing with a protracted output contraction but without experiencing a full-blown crisis, as
pointed out by Gourinchas et al. (2001).

Ranciere, Tornell and Westerman (2006) provide the first direct test of the dual effects of
financial liberalization in an integrated framework, using the treatment effect model developed
by Heckman (1978). The model combines a growth equation that includes a dummy for
financial liberalization and a dummy for financial crises with a crisis equation that endogenizes
the probability of a crisis. The probability of a financial crisis depends on a range of crisis
predictors including the dummy for financial liberalization. In a first step, the crisis model is
estimated using a standard probit model as in the Early Warning Signals literature. In a second
step, the growth equation is estimated augmented by the hazard rate derived from the probit
model to capture the endogeneity of crisis risk. In this two-equation model, financial
liberalization has a dual effect on growth: a direct effect which reflects the impact of financial
liberalization on growth in tranquil times, and an indirect effect which accounts for the
expected cost of crisis. Formally, we obtain:

      E(Growth Gains From FL)=E (Growth Effect of FL | No Crisis)
                              +E(Crisis Costs)∗[Pr(Crisis | FL) − Pr(Crisis | No FL)]

where FL is a dummy for financial liberalization.


                                                8
The results based on a sample of 60 middle-income countries between 1960 and 2000 indicate
that the direct growth effect (the growth gain conditional on no crisis) is positive with a point
estimate of about one percentage point per year, while the indirect effect ranges between 0.25
and 0.3 percentage point per year, depending on the financial liberalization index used.
Therefore, the overall net growth effect is positive at about 0.7-0.75 percentage points. To
understand this result, keep in mind that while crises entail very large output costs -- typically
an output contraction of about 10 percentage points -- they remain rare events even after
financial liberalization --financial liberalization typically raises the annual probability of crisis
from 2 to 4 percentage points.5

While the hypothesis of a trade-off between instability and growth sounds reasonable by
analogy with the risk-return trade-off for financial returns, it still requires a framework to be
fully understood in a macroeconomic context. Ranciere, Tornell, and Westerman (2008) and
Ranciere and Tornell (2016) provide such framework. The basic idea is that risk-taking is a way
to alleviate contract enforceability problems that severely constrain credit and investment in
growth-enhancing activities. With imperfect enforceability of contracts, lenders must limit the
leverage undertaken by investors in order to curb their incentives to divert borrowed funds.
When risk-taking allows entrepreneurs to reduce the effective cost of capital, it also reduces
their incentives to divert funds and allows them to attain greater leverage and investment.
Higher leverage for entrepreneurs comes at a cost of default in bad times and therefore the
leverage gains enjoyed by entrepreneurs should be large enough for such risky strategy to arise
in equilibrium. This is the crisis/growth trade-off at the microeconomic level.

An important question is how the micro-level incentives for risk-taking, generate systemic risk-
taking at the macroeconomic level. First, the presence of systemic bailout guarantees provides
incentives to both entrepreneurs and lenders to coordinate in risk taking, a phenomenon
labeled by Farhi and Tirole (2012) as collective moral hazard. 6 Second, risk-taking should


5
  Razin and Rubinstein (2006) use a similar approach to look at the effects of the exchange rate regime and capital
flows on growth and crisis risk and find similar results.
6
  While systemic bailout guarantees are useful to understand how risk-taking is taken collectively (Farhi and Tirole,
2012), other market imperfections, such as limited liability, can also reduce the effective cost of funds and provide
incentives for risk taking even in the absence of bailouts.

                                                         9
generate a feedback loop between credit leverage, prices, and firm profitability that results in
multiple equilibria with a solvent "tranquil-times" equilibrium and a crisis equilibrium. In an
open economy, such feedback loop arises, for instance, when risk-taking takes the form of a
currency mismatch between the denomination of debt liabilities and that of revenues. In the
good (tranquil-times) equilibrium, lenders anticipate entrepreneurs to be solvent, and so
provide enough credit so that the demand for non-tradables is sufficiently high, ensuring
entrepreneurs to be indeed solvent. In the crisis equilibrium, lenders anticipate default, credit
constraints become tighter, and the price of non-tradeables collapses (i.e. a real-exchange rate
depreciation). In this case, a currency mismatch results in a balance sheet crisis where
entrepreneurs default (Krugman, 1999).

The framework of Ranciere, Tornell, and Westerman (2008) and Ranciere and Tornell (2016)
produces two types of growth trajectories: a safe growth path, which is characterized by low
credit, low leverage, and low growth but no crisis risk; and a risky growth path, which is
characterized by boom-bust cycles. Under financial repression only the safe growth path exists,
while under financial liberalization both the safe and the risky growth paths can arise.

For which countries can we expect the growth gains to outweigh the crisis costs when they shift
from safe growth to risky growth? Ranciere, Tornell, and Westerman (2008) find that they are
typically the countries with an intermediate degree of contract enforcement, a group that
largely consists of middle-income countries. For countries with a very low degree of contract
enforcement, risk-taking allows only for limited leverage gains; growth gains are therefore
modest and do not outweigh crisis costs. For countries with a high degree of contract
enforceability, credit constraints are much less severe and therefore the growth gains of
relaxing them are more limited.

A key element for risky financial development to pay off despite the higher risk of a crisis is that
relaxing credit constraints for the most constrained firms or sectors generates positive
externalities for the rest of the economy. Varela (2016) provides evidence of such externality in
the case of financial liberalization in Hungary by comparing the productivity of domestic firms
and that of multinational firms. Following the 2001 liberalization, domestic firms were able to
access more credit and to upgrade their technology, and multi-national firms reacted by also
                                                10
increasing their productivity-enhancing investments. As a result, competition increased and the
economy became more efficient. Levchenko, Ranciere, and Thoenig (2009) provide industry-
level evidence that financial liberalization favors entry and lead to a reduction of the markups.
To sum up, technology upgrading (Varela, 2016), a reduction of bottlenecks through more
abundant and cheaper production of key inputs for the rest of the economy (Ranciere, Tornell,
and Vamvakidis, 2011; and Ranciere and Tornell, 2016), or a reduction in markups (Levchenko,
Ranciere, and Thoenig, 2009), are the typical channels through which higher access to credit
and the associated relaxation of borrowing constraints foster growth and compensate for the
increased crisis risk.

A related empirical question is about how to best measure the macroeconomic volatility
associated with crisis risk. A boom-bust cycle is generally characterized by a protracted and
gradual credit boom that ends in a sudden and abrupt crisis when credit collapses. Such
asymmetric fluctuations can, arguably, be better captured by the skewness of credit growth,
which measures the degree of asymmetry of a distribution, rather than by its variance.7 Using
skewness allows disentangling the incidence of rare crises from more high frequency and
symmetric volatility driven, for example, by pro-cyclical fiscal policy (Kaminsky, Reinhart and
Vegh, 2004). Using a sample of 83 countries over the period 1960-2000, Ranciere, Tornell, and
Westerman (2008) finds that the skewness of credit growth is associated with higher long-run
growth, especially so for countries with a medium capacity of contract enforceability. The
positive effect of the skewness of credit growth on GDP growth –indicating that countries
experiencing boom-bust cycles grow on average more rapidly than countries with more stable
credit conditions—co-exists, however, with the result that the variance of credit growth
reduces economic growth, a result consistent with those in Ramey and Ramey (1995) and
Hnatkovska and Loayza (2005), Kharroubi (2007), and Imbs (2007).

How do financial sector policies compare with other pro-growth reforms in creating a trade-off
between more growth and more exposure to crisis? Caldera-Sanchez and Gorri (2016) and
Caldera-Sanchez et al. (2016) revisit empirically this possible trade-off by considering a range of

7
  In other terms, the distribution of credit growth is skewed by the incidence of rare but severe crisis, which can be
interpreted as the realization of an abnormal downside risk.

                                                         11
reform policies for a sample of 100 countries over the period 1970-2014. They use a
methodology similar to that of Ranciere, Tornell, and Westermann (2006) combining a growth
equation and a crisis equation. They find that the trade-off higher growth - high crisis risk only
applies to financial market liberalization policies. Product market reforms do not have any
significant impact on crisis risk while trade reforms and strong active labor market programs
can simultaneously increase growth and reduce the risk of crisis.

Caldera-Sanchez et al. (2016) also find that it is domestic private credit and international private
debt flows that are the main driver of crisis risk. This result does not mean, however, that
switching to policies favoring equity financing will necessarily ameliorate the trade-off. Debt
finance provides some disciplinary mechanism in normal times even if, as a non-contingent
liability, it simultaneously increases tail risk. Caldera-Sanchez et al. (2016) also finds that a
higher quality of institutions improves the trade-off associated with financial reforms, with
growth gains more likely to outweigh crisis costs.

Most results on the trade-off higher growth/ higher volatility and crisis risk have been obtained
with aggregate data and may suffer from the usual pitfalls associated with cross-country growth
regression (endogeneity and simultaneity biases). There are, however, a number of papers that
tackle the same issue using sector-level data and exploiting (plausibly) exogenous cross-sectoral
variation, such as sectoral difference in financial dependence (Rajan and Zingales, 1998).
Levechenko, Ranciere, and Thoenig (2008) using a panel of 28 sectors in 60 countries for the
period 1970-2014, finds that financial liberalization increases simultaneously growth and
volatlity. Interestingly, the growth effects are likely to be transitory while the volatility effects
tend to be permanent. A welfare analysis a la lucas (1987) suggests, however, that because the
growth effects are large enough –leading to a permanent increase in the level of output-- there
are positive net welfare gains despite the increase in growth volatility being permanent.
Manganelli and Popov (2015) finds that a large share of such increased volatility corresponds to
sectoral reallocation that can also increase long-run growth by reducing misallocation. Popov
(2014) finds that the effect of financial liberalization on the skewness of credit growth can also
be observed at the sector-level.



                                                 12
To sum up, the empirical evidence points towards the existence of a trade-off of higher growth
and higher crisis risk associated with liberalization policies that foster domestic financial
development and international financial openness. The trade-off seems to be mostly relevant
for liberalizing middle income countries. These are countries whose institutions are typically
strong enough so that they can benefit from financial liberalization in tranquil times, but weak
enough so that the severity of borrowing constraints makes it worthwhile for them to take on
crisis risk to boost leverage, investment, and growth.

3. "Too Much Finance" or “Trade-Off No More”?

The crisis of 2007-2008 has re-opened the debate on whether there is an optimal degree of
financial depth; or, in other terms, whether beyond some level of financial depth there is "too
much finance" so that there are no more positive benefits in terms of growth and investment
but still significant costs in terms of financial fragility and macroeconomic stability. A more
drastic version of the "too much finance" hypothesis implies that certain types of financial
activity might generate social welfare losses even in tranquil times and result in a misallocation
of resources in the economy.

Theoretically, what are the minimal conditions under which a deepening of financial
liberalization can lead to a reduction in welfare? Ranciere and Tornell (2011 and 2016) suggest
that a simple change in the menu of assets, such as the introduction of derivatives contracts on
top of debt and equity contracts, can be enough to overturn the result that systemic risk-taking
is growth and welfare-enhancing. In the presence of systemic bailout guarantees, the use of
derivatives (such as a “catastrophe bond” or CAT) induces borrowers to shift a greater fraction
of their liabilities into the crisis state in which bailouts are triggered. In such an environment,
the disciplinary effect of a standard debt contract (whereby the borrower/investor should
generate returns in excess of the lending rate in normal times and be exposed to losses if the
risk materializes) breaks down. When this happens, projects with negative net present value
are funded and the generosity of expected bailouts matters more than repayment incentives in
determining leverage.



                                                13
Ranciere and Tornell (2011) argue that the mechanism described above was at play in the run-
up to the 2007-2008 financial crisis (see also Cochrane, 2010). Prior to the crisis, many
households obtained mortgages they could not repay unless real estate prices would keep
increasing, allowing them to continuously refinance at low interest rates. When real estate
prices stopped rising in 2006, households’ liabilities increased sharply as they lost the ability to
refinance at low (“teaser”) interest rates or with interest-only loans. A large share of such price-
sensitive borrowers then underwent mortgage defaults and foreclosures. By facing different
interest rates in normal and crisis times, these borrowers were de facto having derivatives-like
payoff structures, which induced them to shift liabilities to the crisis and bailout states. The
same applies to the financial institutions that packaged these loans into mortgage-backed
securities (MBS) and collateralized debt obligations (CDO), and to those who insured them with
Credit Default Swaps.

Let us now turn to the empirics on how “too much finance” may affect the trade-off between
higher growth and higher crisis risk. Specifically, do the growth effects vanish at high levels of
financial depth, or is it that the volatility and crisis effects become so large that they more than
offset the growth effect? Arcand, Berkes, and Panizza (2015) explore both hypotheses and
conclude that only the former is not rejected by the data. Beyond a ratio of private credit to
GDP of 100 percentage points, the growth effects of financial deepening are no longer
significant. There is no evidence, however, that a high ratio of credit to GDP by itself is
associated with higher macroeconomic volatility. This latter result is consistent with the notion
that rapid growth of credit rather than high level of financial development increases crisis risk
(Schularick and Taylor, 2012).

The findings of Arcand et al. (2013) leave open the question on whether the interaction
between high level of financial depth and some other economic trends can be the source of
financial fragility and crisis risk. Kumhof, Ranciere, and Winant (2015) explore the role of
income inequality as such source. Both the period prior to the great depression and the period
prior to the great recession in the US have witnessed a rapid increase in household credit, a
rapid increase in income inequality, and, ultimately, a deep financial crisis. A potential
explanation is that the widening of income inequality generates large savings at the top of the

                                                14
income distribution that are, in part, recycled in the form of loans to households in the bottom
part of the income distribution (who are using them to mitigate the effect of their relative fall in
income). As a result, the bottom income group becomes increasingly indebted, which creates a
risk for financial stability. Kumhof, Ranciere, and Winant (2015) find that quantitatively the
increase in income inequality between 1983 and 2007 --where the top 5% share of the income
distribution increased from 24 to 34 percent—explains more than two-thirds of the increase
from 60 to 140 percentage points in the debt to income ratio of the bottom 95 percent of the
income distribution. They argue that the financial innovations observed in that period, such as
the emergence of a new securitization chain for subprime mortgages, were partly an
endogenous response of the financial system to changes in the income distribution. A feedback
loop between finance and income inequality can also occur: Philippon and Resheff (2012), for
instance, finds that about 15 percent of the increase in income inequality in the US since 1970
can be traced to the rapid growth in earnings in the financial sector.

A recent literature has focused in explaining the source of the vanishing growth effects of
financial depth, a fact first highlighted by Rousseau and Wachtel (2011). Following Beck et al.
(2012), Arcand, Berkes, and Panizza (2015) studies whether the difference in the effect of
household credit vs. firm credit could explain such vanishing effect. It finds evidence that firm
credit is more growth conducive than household credit, and, therefore, the vanishing effect can
be related to excessive household credit and, especially, mortgage loans.             Furthermore,
Chakraborty et al. (2018) document empirically that household credit tends to crowd-out firms’
credit, and especially so for firms that are more capital constrained. Relatedly, Mian, Sufi, and
Verner (2017) show that an increase in household debt relative to GDP tends to predict lower
GDP growth and higher unemployment in the medium run.

The empirical evidence on the vanishing effect of finance on growth forces us to clarify the
underlying theoretical hypotheses. As discussed in Levchenko, Ranciere, and Thoenig (2009),
there are three competing hypotheses. The first is that finance only accelerates convergence to
a given steady state, whose level depends only on technology. The second is that finance
increases the GDP growth rate indefinitely, as it would be the case in AK growth models where
finance enables an increase in the investment rate (see Obstfeld, 1994 and Bencivenga and

                                                15
Smith, 1991). The third, intermediate hypothesis is that finance allows the economy to reach a
higher steady state and by so doing boosts growth in the transition process. A conclusion of the
"too much finance" literature is to rule out the second hypothesis. Distinguishing between the
first and last hypotheses is empirically more challenging. The results by Aghion and Mayer-
Foulk (2005) and Arcand, Berkes, and Panizza (2015) seem to support the first, accelerating
convergence view. Using industry-level data, Levchenko, Ranciere and Thoenig (2009) provide
more support to the third hypothesis, by showing that finance has a strong effect of reducing
industry mark-ups and has therefore the potential to lift the economy towards a higher (less
distorted) steady state.

Another explanation for the vanishing effect is the view that certain financial activities crowd
out more productive ones and result in a misallocation of talent in the economy that is
detrimental to growth. Cecchetti and Kharroubi (2012) shows that the non-monoticity in the
relationship between finance and growth is particularly strong when financial sector
employment is used as a proxy for financial depth. Cecchetti and Kharroubi (2015) proposes a
model to understand the source of the negative relationship between the rate of growth of the
financial sector and productivity growth at high levels of financial development. The model is
centered on two externalities, an investment externality through which finance favors projects
with high collateral even when they are less productive, and a labor externality by which the
financial sector attracts skilled labor and grows at the expense of the real economy. Using a
cross-country panel of industry-level data, the paper finds supportive evidence for the two
externalities.

What role do financial regulation and supervision play in controlling the risk that financial
deepening results in misallocation of resources and talent? Philippon and Resheff (2012) find a
tight link between the wage premium commanded by the financial industry and an index of
financial deregulation. By 2006, the excess wage premium in the financial industry was about
50% in absolute terms and between 20% and 30% in certainty-equivalent terms. The premium
for CEOs in the financial sector was about 250% compared to CEOs elsewhere. Interestingly
only one-fifth of this premium could be related to the size of assets under management, a
standard explanation for the rise in CEOs pay (Gabaix and Landier, 2008). A fraction of the rest

                                              16
can be due to innovation in the financial sector but might also be related to risk-taking behavior,
facilitated by deregulation such as the 1999 repeal of the Glass-Steagall Act. Philippon and
Resheff (2013) finds cross-country evidence on the positive link between the share of the
finance industry, wage premia in the financial sector, and measures of financial deregulations.
Philippon and Resheff (2012) also suggest that wage premia in the financial sector render more
difficult the enforcement of financial regulations, since such activities require similar skills as
those sought after in the private financial sectors but command salaries that are constrained by
the public sector pay scale.

From a policy perspective, how shall we deal with "too much finance"? Tightening financial
regulation should be balanced to prevent misallocation and abuse while also keeping the
incentives for innovation. Ranciere and Tornell (2011 and 2016) discuss how regulation should
be designed in an environment where systemic bailouts during crises exist. If these bailouts
cannot be eliminated, risk takers should also bear the consequences of their losses. Special
attention must be paid to the regulation of derivatives that give the option to shift losses to the
crisis state. This implies, for example, putting Credit Default Swaps on an organized exchange,
with marginal calls ensuring that risks are adequately provisioned. Better financial supervision
can also have an impact on wage premium and generate a larger flow of talent towards other
sectors.

Apart from improvements in financial regulation and supervision, taxation can be used to avoid
excessive finance. Philippon (2010) proposes a theoretical framework which discusses how the
financial sector and the non-financial sector (or, in schematic terms, financiers vs.
entrepreneurs) should be taxed or subsidized as a function of the externalities they bring on the
rest of the economy. The issue is complex since entrepreneurs face borrowing constraints and,
therefore, require the service of financiers to invest efficiently. A key result is that when
education and investment are properly subsidized to account for the innovation externalities,
the financial sector should be taxed in exactly the same way as the non-financial sector.

The recent literature on the theme of “too much finance” has been primarily focused on the
vanishing growth effects of financial deepening beyond a certain level of depth. Less evidence is
provided on its effect on financial stability and crisis risk even if the crisis of 2007-2008 suggests
                                                 17
that unfettered financial liberalization and the proliferation of new financial instrument
increases crisis risk.   This creates the possibility that financial deepening without proper
regulation can be harmful for both growth and stability. Therefore, from a policy perspective,
the challenge is to find the kind of financial regulation and supervision that can, first, minimize
the trade-off between higher growth and higher risk, and second, generate positive effects on
growth and stability by expanding the quality of financial services from a social standpoint.

4. Beyond Aggregate Outcomes: Distributional Impacts of the U.S. Credit Boom and Bust

An extensive literature in the economics of education and in labor economics has documented
the potentially positive welfare effects of relaxing borrowing constraints. For instance, Brown,

Scholz, and Seshadri (2011) suggest that financial aid leads to an increase in educational
attainment for borrowing-constrained families. The findings in Levine, Levkov, and Rubinstein
(2008) imply that an increase in banking competition leads to an increase in credit supply and a
decline in labor market discrimination. In standard consumer theory, borrowing constraints
prevent consumption smoothing and produce a greater dependence on current income than
predicted by intertemporal welfare optimization theories (such as the permanent income
hypothesis).

However, a recent and rather controversial literature suggests that financial deepening in the
form of a greater supply of credit or of a greater diversity of financial products might have
ambiguous distributional and welfare impacts, depending on how social welfare is measured.
Three reasons are cited to postulate this ambiguity. First, general equilibrium effects distort
price distributions. Indeed economy-wide increases in credit supply could affect the distribution
of prices of products and assets in a way that may offset the partial equilibrium positive welfare
impacts for a substantial fraction of households. Second, there is evidence that social
preferences are present in locational choices (Krysan and Farley, 2002), consumption decisions
(Bertrand and Morse, 2016), and educational production functions (Sacerdote, 2011). With
such externalities, an unconstrained market equilibrium could be less efficient than a
constrained market equilibrium. Third, the expansion of the supply of credit towards less


                                                18
creditworthy or towards more risky products can lead to large and potentially suboptimal
welfare losses during downturns.

Ouazad and Rancière (2016a) use transaction-level micro data to estimate the empirical
relevance of the first mechanism, that is, general equilibrium effects. The paper puts forward a
novel general equilibrium model of a metropolitan area to estimate the impact of the
relaxation of lending standards on the distribution of housing prices. The model introduces
endogenous borrowing constraints in a locational choice model, where heterogeneous
households choose location across block groups based on the variation of local amenities. The
paper introduces borrowing constraints by noting that the households’ choice set is constrained
by mortgage originators’ lending standards. Conditional on their choice set, households choose
across locations based on a comparison of the bundle of local amenities and housing prices. The
probability of a given choice set is determined by the product of the probabilities of approval of
a mortgage application. Hence demand for a neighborhood is the weighted average of
demands conditional on the choice set:

                                                      P(C | x, z)              Demand( j | x, z, C)
    Demand( j | x, z) =    ∑C⊂{1, 2,..., J }          !#"#    $              ⋅ !## #"###         $    (1)
                                               Probability of Choice Set C      conditional demand


where j indexes neighborhoods {1, 2, ..., J}, x is the vector of household characteristics, and z
the vector of all neighborhood amenities. The probability of a choice set C is a product of the
probabilities of approval of mortgage applications:

           P(C | x, z ) = Π j∈C P(Approval in j| x,z ) ⋅ Π j∉C [1 − P(Approval in j| x,z )] (2)

In turn, approval probabilities are driven by mortgage originators’ standards. Explicitly
endogenizing the choice set presents the unique advantage of allowing an analysis of the
impact of changes in lending standards on each neighborhood demand.

In turn, preserving the equilibrium of the city requires an adjustment of housing prices in
response to the rise in neighborhood demand. Changes in lending standards thus produce a
shift at each quantile of the housing price distribution. As the marginal impact of a relaxation of
lending standards depends on household characteristics (e.g., race and income), housing price

                                                         19
shifts vary across quantiles regardless of whether lending standards depend on neighborhood
characteristics. Estimates based on micro data of the San Francisco Bay area for 2000-2006
suggest that the relaxation of lending standards led to a compression of the price distribution:
housing prices rose more for the lower quantiles than for the higher quantiles of the housing
price distribution. Such compression of the price distribution is consistent with a gentrification
of lower-priced neighborhoods as the number of mixed Black-White neighborhoods is declining
both in general equilibrium simulations and in observed data.

Price responses to increases in lending supply typically occur in markets with low supply
elasticities. While markets for consumer goods exhibit high elasticity, housing supply and the
provision of higher education services can exhibit low elasticity and thus experience large and
heterogeneous price responses. While Saiz's (2010) estimates suggest a large variance of
housing supply across metropolitan areas, Ouazad and Rancière (2016a) finds substantially
smaller neighborhood-level supply elasticities for the metropolitan area of San Francisco. Thus,
changes in the distribution of housing prices may be greater than what would be predicted
using standard metro-level estimates. Ouazad and Rancière's (2016a) estimates of supply
elasticities using 30m by 30m satellite data also display a positive correlation between supply
elasticities and the distance to the central business district, a potential evidence of the
importance of within-city distribution of elasticities in driving changes in wealth inequalities.
Elasticities of the provision of higher education services are also likely far from the perfectly
elastic benchmark. Heckman, Lochner, and Taber (1999) makes the point that general
equilibrium endogenous responses to tuition subsidies can offset the estimated partial
equilibrium effects and calls for a revision of microeconomic studies that do not estimate price
responses. Recent developments in the use of micro data now enable a microeconomic analysis
of such general equilibrium effects. Overall, as in Ouazad and Rancière (2016a), financial
deepening and the rise of credit are unlikely to yield uniformly positive welfare impacts, even
before the onset of a credit downturn.

Another driver of financial development's welfare and distributional consequences is the
presence of social spillovers, peer effects, or social externalities. Krysan and Farley (2002) use
the multi-city study of urban inequality in Atlanta, Boston, Detroit, and Los Angeles to show

                                               20
that African-American households prefer diverse neighborhoods with about half African-
American residents while White households prefer neighborhoods with greater fractions of
White neighbors. With such preferences, market equilibrium in urban location choice models as
in Schelling (1971) and Benabou (1996) is perfectly segregated. This is in stark contrast with
market equilibrium in labor economics, where Becker (1957) predicts that competition leads to
lower discrimination. Moreover, such perfect segregation at market equilibrium in a city with
no credit market imperfection can be inefficient. The inefficiency of segregation or of diversity
depends crucially on two key parameters: (i) whether low- and high-human capital households’
welfare is equally affected by their peers in neighborhoods and schools, and (ii) whether the
marginal impact of peers is concave in the fraction of high-human capital peers.

To make this clear, consider a stylized two-neighborhood city as in Benabou (1996), with two
types of households, with high- and low human capital, h ∈ {hA, hB}, hA>hB. The city has a fixed
density 1 of housing, and neighborhoods 1 and 2 have the same size 1/2. The total density of
households of human capital h = hA is n∈[0, 1] in the city, and x∈[0,1] in neighborhood 1. The
welfare of an individual with human capital h and a fraction x of high-human capital neighbors
is a function w(h, x). The welfare of a neighborhood is thus:

                                   W ( x) = x ⋅ w(hA , x) + (1 − x) ⋅ w(hB , x)           (3)

The city's social optimum is reached at the maximum of W (x) + W (n − x/2). The city's optimum
will be to segregate individuals if such total welfare is a convex function of x. Crucially, the
optimality of segregation thus depends on two empirically measurable parameters: (i) whether
high human capital individuals' welfare benefits more from high-human capital peers than low-
human capital individuals, and (ii) whether welfare is a concave function of peers' human
capital.

                             2[∂∂wx (hA , x) − ∂∂wx (hB , x)]          x ⋅ ∂∂xw2 (hA , x) + (1 − x) ⋅ ∂∂xw2 (hB , x)
                                                                           2                       2


           W ʹʹ( x) =        $!!!#!!!"                               + $!       !!!!#!!!!!" (4)
                        differential impact of peers on welfare         concavity of peer effects in welfare

There is evidence in some dimensions that more segregated metropolises have lower average
welfare, and that low-human capital individuals benefit more from their peers than high-human


                                                                21
capital individuals. Estimates of peer effects in schools and neighborhoods suggest that low
ability peers are more affected by their peers than high ability peers (Sacerdote, 2011). Card
and Rothstein (2007) find that higher segregation arguably causes a higher Black-White test
score gap.

A city where high human capital households are constrained in their ability to borrow could
lead to higher average welfare, e.g. a third-best allocation with greater welfare than at market
equilibrium. Controversially, relaxing borrowing constraints may lead to greater segregation
and lower welfare, even absent a credit bust.

Ouazad and Rancière (2016b) estimate the impact of the relaxation of lending standards during
the housing boom of 2000-2006 on changes in racial segregation across neighborhoods within
metro areas. The paper first estimates such impact for the 935 metropolitan and micropolitan
statistical areas of the United States. At the metropolitan area level, a common measure of
racial segregation is the set of exposure indices. For instance, the exposure of Blacks to Whites
is the average fraction of White individuals in the neighborhood of an average Black resident.
Despite declines in overall racial segregation, the exposure of Blacks to Whites declined
between the 2000 and the 2010 censuses.

The paper’s first metro-level analysis correlates changes in exposure with changes in credit
standards:

              ΔExposure j , 2010 − 2000 = ΔCredit j , 2010 − 2000 ⋅ β + x j γ + Metro j + ε j   (5)

where ∆Creditj,2010−2000 is a measure of the change in lending standards for metropolitan area j,
xj is a set of controls, including controls for demographic changes, and Metroj is a metro-area
fixed effect. Two key measures of lending standards, the change in approval rate and the
change in the loan-to-income ratio, experience significant changes between 2000 and 2006: the
loan-to-income ratio of mortgage originations increases by 0.4, and the approval rate for
mortgage applications increases by 13 percentage points. As changes in credit conditions
typically reflect both shifts in the demand for credit as well as shifts in the supply of credit,
identification of the causal impact β requires an exogenous source of credit supply shifts. Banks'
liquidity level in the early 1990s is a significant predictor of the rise in leverage and approval

                                                       22
rates between 2000 and 2006. Specifically, banks that were liquidity constrained or that had a
less securitizable portfolio of assets in the early 1990s benefited more from the securitization
boom of the early 2000s. Such boom was arguably triggered by the Federal Housing Enterprises
Financial Safety and Soundness Act of 1992, by preferential treatment to banks holding
mortgage-backed securities backed by the Government Sponsored Enterprises.

While early 1990s bank liquidity and asset securitizability is a significant predictor of 2000-2006
changes in lending standards, there is little empirical evidence of its correlation with observable
demand shifters or with observable drivers of racial segregation. Results suggest an
economically significant impact of credit supply shifts on the exposure of Blacks to Whites:
without the credit supply shock, Black households would have had between 2.3 and 5.2
percentage points more White neighbors in 2010.

    Figure 1: Inflows into Census Tracts, by Percentage of Black Population in Tract

 Stars next to a point indicate the significance of the F test that the coefficient for high
 liquidity metropolitan areas and the coefficient for low liquidity metropolitan areas are
 identical. One star for 10% significance, two stars for 5% significance, three stars for 1
 percent. Standard errors clustered by state. mB: minority black tract, fraction of Black
 population below 10%. Mixed: Mixed tract, fraction of Black population between 10
 and 60%. MB: Mostly Black population tract, fraction of Black population above 60%.




                                                23
A second approach delves into metro areas' structure and estimates White, Black, Hispanic, and
Asian inflows and outflows from neighborhoods based on (i) their initial composition, and (ii)
credit supply shifts during the 2000-2006 boom. In that sense, the key question is whether
credit supply facilitates or enables Schelling (1971)-like tipping shifts in neighborhood
demographics. Figure 1 from Ouazad and Rancière (2016a) plots the coefficients of a regression
of census tract-level white population changes as a fraction of initial population, on a set of
dummies for quantiles of the initial fraction of Black population in 2000. The red line is the
regression for metropolitan areas with high increase in approval rates as predicted by the
instrument described above and the blue dotted line is for metropolitan areas with a low
predicted increase in approval rate.

A first observation from this graph is that there is tipping as in Card, Mas, and Rothstein (2008):
there are outflows of White households from neighborhoods with more than 10-15% Black
residents; there are inflows of white households into other neighborhoods. More importantly,
the tipping behavior is stronger in metropolitan areas with a greater credit supply increase, as
the difference between the blue dotted line and the red line is statistically significant. Thus,
Figure 1 provides neighborhood-level evidence that the relaxation of borrowing constraints
may strengthen racial segregation. In other words, the expansion of credit supply may not be ‘a
tide that lifts all boats’, as the credit boom may have led to adverse welfare consequences even
prior to the credit bust.

The distributional impacts of the credit bust are well established. During the four-year period
between the beginning of the Great Recession in 2007 and 2011, more than half of all families
lost more than 25% of their wealth (Danziger, Pfeiffer, Danziger, and Schoeni, 2013). While
wealth declined at all percentiles of the distribution, the largest relative wealth losses were
experienced by households already at the bottom of the wealth distribution, thus further
widening the wealth dispersion. Danziger et al. (2013) documents that the median wealth of
households in the bottom quintile fell up to 2011 to reach 26% of its 2003 level, while the
median wealth held by the top quintile fell to 81% of its 2003 level.


                                                24
The Great Recession led to a widening of racial wealth gaps and a reversal of the relative gains
of minority households of the late 1990s. The White-Black wealth ratio declined from a value of
12 in 1984 to 7 in 1995, reaching a historic low of 6 in 1998. The Hispanic-White wealth ratio
experienced a more modest decline during the same period, from 8 to 7. The Great Recession
led to more than a doubling of this wealth ratio for Blacks, and an increase of 30% for Hispanics.
In 2013, the median White household's net worth was 13 times that of the median Black
household and 10 times that of the median Hispanic household (Kochhar & Fry 2014).

A decomposition of wealth changes sheds light on the drivers of widening inequalities. Changes
in net wealth NWit are driven by shifts in asset prices, weighed by asset holdings in bonds,
stocks, and housing, as well as changes in debt liabilities.

                     NWit = p stocks , t ⋅ S i , t + pbonds , t ⋅ Bi , t + phou sin g , t ⋅ H i , t − rt ⋅ Di , t

with Si,t stock holdings, Bi,t bond holdings, Hi,t real estate ownership, Di,t household debt, and p
and r the corresponding prices. Both stock prices pstocks,t and house prices phousing,t experienced
sharp drops. The S&P 500 index lost 17% of its value between January 2006 and January 2010.
The Case Shiller national house price index (resp. 20-city house price index) dropped 19% (resp.
28%). The sharpest drop in total household net worth (−19%) happened between 2007 and
2008. Both housing (−15.5%) and non-housing wealth (−22.7%) declined, with housing at about
half of households' net worth.

The average decline in housing wealth masks considerable heterogeneity across space, racial
and ethnic groups, and initial income levels. The heterogeneity is reflected in differences both
in the households' portfolio composition and in the distribution of price drops. The spatial
heterogeneity in housing wealth losses was partly driven by housing supply constraints, with
stronger increases during the boom and declines during the bust in the least elastic
metropolitan areas (Glaeser, Gyourko, and Saiz 2008); recent evidence also points towards land
hoarding as a mechanism pushing house price volatility upwards in metropolitan areas with
elastic housing supply.

Within metropolitan areas, the adverse effects of the decline in housing wealth are most
strongly felt in specific neighborhoods rather than spread more or less evenly across space. This

                                                                25
spatial segregation of negative welfare impacts is driven by at least two mechanisms: first,
foreclosed homes increase the supply of housing in the neighborhood, thus lowering the price
of nearby properties (Hartley, 2014). Second, homeowners are less likely to invest in the
maintenance and upkeep of foreclosed homes, leading to externalities on neighboring
properties (Gerardi, Rosenblatt, Willen, and Yao, 2015). Further, careful empirical analysis has
identified economically significant impacts of vacancies on crime in the vicinity of foreclosed
properties (Cui and Walsh, 2015). Foreclosure externalities reinforce a dynamic of interacting
segregation and inequality.

Housing-related wealth losses were also more acute among low-income and minority
borrowers. Such losses are in great part explained by the highest fraction of minority
households using high-cost mortgage loans, even controlling for credit score and other
measures of creditworthiness (Bayer, Ferreira, and Ross 2016). This descriptive fact is the
consequence of both an adverse match of lenders to borrowers, and a worse treatment of
minority borrowers by lenders with similar characteristics but a different race or ethnicity. The
larger losses of minority households are compounded by the greater share of housing wealth in
minority households' net position, even as minority households typically held smaller equity in
their housing investments.

An overall assessment of the net distributional impact of the boom and the bust remains
beyond the scope of this paper. Nevertheless, an assessment of descriptive statistics on (i) the
wealth distribution, (ii) homeownership, housing equity, and household leverage, and (iii)
segregation, can shed light on the net welfare impacts of the 2000-2010 credit boom and bust
cycle.

First, the wealth share of the top 1% wealth holders rose from 32% to 40% during this period.
Second, while the homeownership rate is almost identical in 2000 and in 2010 at 67.1%, the
Black homeownership rate declined by 1.8 percentage points, from 47.4% to 45.6%, the
Hispanic homeownership rate increased by 3 percentage points, from 45.7% to 48.5%, and the
White homeownership rate increased by 1.1 percentage points, from 73.4% to 74.5%. Third,
while overall urban racial segregation declined through a greater exposure of Whites, Blacks,
and Asians to Hispanics, Blacks exposure to Whites remained virtually constant. In 2000 as in
                                               26
2010, the average Black resident lives in a neighborhood (census tract) that is 35% White,
substantially below the national share of Whites in U.S. population, which stood at 72.4% in
2010.

5. Concluding Remarks

The literature on financial development, financial crises, and economic growth has considerably
evolved in the last 20 years. The initial disconnect, with one literature focusing on the role of
financial depth on long-run growth and another studying its impact on volatility and crisis, has
given way to a more nuanced literature that analyzes the two phenomena in an integrated
framework. The main finding of this literature is the existence of a trade-off between higher
growth and higher crisis risk and the conclusion that, for at least middle-income countries, the
positive growth effects outweigh the negative crisis risk impact.

This balanced view has been revisited recently, especially for advanced economies. A number of
findings support the notion of "too much finance," suggesting that there might be a threshold
beyond which financial depth becomes detrimental to growth even in tranquil times, by
crowding out other productive activities and misallocating resources within and across
economies. While these results are important and must be considered in the design of financial
regulation in advanced countries, we should not forget that the trade-off is alive and strong for
a large share of the world economy, providing a useful framework to assess the impact of
policies targeting financial deepening, diversity, and inclusion (World Bank, 2013).

The discussion on the existence of a growth/risk trade-off is also relevant when we look at
within-country distributional impacts of financial deepening and financial crises. For instance,
U.S. policy makers, who pushed in the 1990s for a large expansion of credit to less creditworthy
borrowers, believed that it could bring a host of socio-economic benefits, especially for the
poor and minorities. The evidence shows, first, that these policies did not sufficiently account
for the trade-off inherent in financial deepening and inclusion: without proper financial
regulation and supervision, the expansion of household mortgage credit led to a massive
financial crisis. More controversially, there is some evidence that these financial liberalization
policies in the U.S. have had, through general equilibrium effects, adverse effects on the

                                               27
dynamics of segregation during the credit boom and a widening of wealth gaps during the bust
and its aftermath.

What is the likely direction of future research? First, it will consider a larger heterogeneity of
agents and impacts of financial deepening. Recent advances in both the static and dynamic
modeling of household consumption decisions are pushing the frontier in the analysis of the
distributional impacts of credit supply. The progress has been twofold: (i) dynamic and static
models that feature rich household heterogeneity in preferences, consumption patterns, and
price responses have been introduced (Bajari, Chan, Krueger, and Miller, 2013, Landvoigt,
Piazzesi, and Schneider, 2015, and Ouazad and Rancière 2017), and (ii) newly available
household panel data, particularly in the context of real estate tax and deeds files, has enabled
the estimation of such dynamics using the most recent developments in the econometrics of
discrete choice panels (Kuminoff, Smith, Timmins, 2013, and Baltagi and Bresson, 2017). Key
topics in future contributions include the interaction of credit constraints, lenders’ and
households’ beliefs, and life-cycle dynamics. The challenge will be to relate these heterogenous
effects and complex interactions to macroeconomic outcomes regarding economic growth and
crisis risk.

Second, from an applied perspective, new research will likely be directed at evaluating and
proposing a fresh set of financial policies. Unlike the Great Depression, the Great Recession was
immediately followed by massive bailouts and unconventional monetary policies. Some
specialists have argued that these policy responses contributed to making the consequences of
the recession less severe than those of the great depression. Looking forward, however, these
large bailouts have created a dangerous precedent, that is, a potential source of moral hazard
that could strongly affect the outcome of the tradeoff between higher growth and higher crisis
risk. Research on financial regulation should consider policy design in a world where the
commitment not to bailout is not time consistent. Freixas and Rochet (2013), Ranciere, Tornell
(2016) are early examples of this growing research agenda. More generally, however, policy
relevant research should be addressed at evaluating and proposing a set of measures that
realistically balances the growth and crisis effects, as well as the innovation and risk potential,
inherent in financial development.

                                                28
29
                                       References
Acemoglu, Daron, and Fabrizio Zilibotti. "Was Prometheus unbound by chance? Risk,
diversification, and growth." Journal of political economy 105, no. 4 (1997): 709-751.
Adasme, Osvaldo, Giovanni Majnoni, and Myriam Uribe. 2006. “Access and Risk: Friends or
Foes? Lessons from Chile.” Policy Research Working Paper 4003, World Bank, Washington, DC.
Aghion, Philippe, George-Marios Angeletos, Abhijit Banerjee and Kalina Manova. 2010.
"Volatility and growth: Credit constraints and the composition of investment". Journal of
Monetary Economics, 57 (3): 246-265. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jmoneco.2010.02.005.
Aghion, Philippe, Peter Howitt, David Mayer-Foulkes. 2005. “The effect of financial
development on convergence: Theory and evidence”. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 323–351.
Aguiar, Mark, and Gita Gopinath. 2007. "Emerging market business cycles: The cycle is the
trend." Journal of political Economy 115 (1): 69-102.
Akinlo, Anthony Enisan, and Tajudeen Egbetunde. 2010. "Financial development and economic
growth: The experience of 10 sub-Saharan African countries revisited." The Review of Finance
and Banking, 2(1).
Allen, Franklin, Thorsten Beck, Elena Carletti, Philip R. Lane, Dirk Schoenmaker and Wolf
Wagner. 2011. Cross-border banking in Europe: implications for financial stability and
macroeconomic policies. CEPR, 2011.
Allen, Franklin and Douglas Gale. 1999. "Bubbles, crises, and policy." Oxford Review of
Economic Policy 15 (3): 9-18. doi: 10.1093/oxrep/15.3.9
Allen, Franklin and Douglas Gale. 2000. "Bubbles and crises." The Economic Journal 110 (460):
236–55. doi:10.1111/1468-0297.00499.
Ang, James B. 2008. "A survey of recent developments in the literature of finance and growth."
Journal of economic Surveys 22 (3): 536-576.
Ang, James B. 2009. "Financial development and the FDI–growth nexus: the Malaysian
experience". Applied Economics, 41 (13): 1595-1601.
Ang, James B., and Warwick J. McKibbin. 2007. “Financial Liberalization, Financial Sector
Development and Growth: Evidence from Malaysia.” Journal of Development Economics 84 (1):
215–33. doi:10.1016/j.jdeveco.2006.11.006.
Antonakakis, Nikolas and Harald Badinger. 2016. "Economic growth, volatility, and cross-
country spillovers: New evidence for the G7 countries". Economic Modelling, 52, Part B: 352-
365. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.econmod.2015.08.035.
Arcand, Jean-Louis and Berkes, Enrico and Panizza, Ugo. 2015. "Too Much Finance?" Journal of
Economic Growth 20 (2): 105-148. doi:10.1007/s10887-015-9115-2
Arestis, Philip, and Panicos Demetriades. 1997. “Financial Development and Economic Growth:
Assessing the Evidence.” The Economic Journal 107 (442): 783–99.


                                             30
Badinger, Harald. 2010. "Output volatility and economic growth". Economics Letters 106 (1):
15-18, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.econlet.2009.09.012.
Bajari, Patrick, et al. "A dynamic model of housing demand: Estimation and policy
implications." International Economic Review 54.2 (2013): 409-442.
Baltagi, Badi H., and Georges Bresson. "Modelling Housing Using Multi-Dimensional Panel
Data." The Econometrics of Multi-Dimensional Panels. Springer, Cham, 2017. 349-376.
Barajas, Adolfo, Ralph Chami, and Seyed Reza Yousefi. 2016. "The Finance and Growth Nexus
Re-Examined: Do All Countries Benefit Equally?" Journal of Banking and Financial Economics 1
(5): 5-38.
Barro, Robert J. 2001. "Economic growth in East Asia before and after the financial crisis" (No.
w8330). National Bureau of Economic Research.
Bayer, P., Ferreira, F. & Ross, S. L. (2016), What drives racial and ethnic differences in high cost
mortgages? the role of high risk lenders, Technical report, National Bureau of Economic
Research.
Beck, Roland, Georgios Georgiadis, Roland Straub. 2014. The finance and growth nexus
revisited, Economics Letters 124 (3): 382-385. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.econlet.2014.06.024.
Beck, Thorsten, Buyukkarabacak Berrak , Rioja Felix, and Neven Valev, 2012 "Who Gets the
Credit? And Does It Matter? Household vs Firm Lending accross Countries," B.E. Journal of
Macroeconomics: Contributions 12, May 2012.
Beck, Thorsten, Hans Degryse, and Christiane Kneer. 2014. "Is more finance better?
Disentangling intermediation and size effects of financial systems." Journal of Financial Stability
10: 50-64. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jfs.2013.03.005.
Thorsten Beck & Asli Demirgüç-Kunt & Vojislav Maksimovic, 2005. "Financial and Legal
Constraints to Growth: Does Firm Size Matter?," Journal of Finance, American Finance
Association, vol. 60(1), pages 137-177, 02.
Beck, Thorsten, Mattias Lundberg, and Giovanni Majnoni. 2006. “Financial Intermediary
Development and Growth Volatility: Do Intermediaries Dampen or Magnify Shocks?” Journal of
International Money and Finance 25 (7): 1146–67. doi:10.1016/j.jimonfin.2006.08.004.
Beck, Thorsten, Ross Levine, and Norman Loayza. 2000. “Finance and the Sources of Growth.”
Special Issue on International Corporate Governance 58 (1–2): 261–300. doi:10.1016/S0304-
405X(00)00072-6.
Beck, Thorsten, Buyukkarabacak Berrak , Rioja Felix, and Neven Valev, 2012 "Who Gets the
Credit? And Does It Matter? Household vs Firm Lending accross Countries," B.E. Journal of
Macroeconomics: Contributions 12, May 2012.
Beck, Thorsten, Tao Chen, Chen Lin, and Frank M. Song. 2016. "Financial innovation: The bright
and     the     dark    sides"    Journal    of   Banking     &     Finance     72:    28-51.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jbankfin.2016.06.012.



                                                31
Beck, Thorsten. 2012. "The Role of Finance in Economic Development: Benefits, Risks, and
Politics". Oxford Handbooks Online 2012-11-21. Oxford University Press. Date of access 21 Mar.
2017.
http://www.oxfordhandbooks.com/view/10.1093/oxfordhb/9780195391176.001.0001/oxfordh
b-9780195391176-e-7.
Beck, Thorsten. Bank competition and financial stability: friends or foes? No. 4656. The World
Bank, 2008.
Becker, G. S. (1957), The economics of discrimination, University of Chicago press.
Bekaert, Geert, Campbell R. Harvey, and Christian Lundbladl. 2005. "Does financial liberalization
spur      growth?"      Journal      of     Financial    Economics       77      (1):       3-55.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2004.05.007.
Benabou, R. (1996), `Equity and efficiency in human capital investment: the local connection',
The Review of Economic Studies 63(2), 237 264.
Bencivenga, Valerie R. and Bruce D. Smith, 1991, "Financial Intermediation and Endogenous
Growth", The Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 58, No. 2, pp. 195-209
Benhabib, Jess and Mark M. Spiegel. 2000. "The role of financial development in growth and
investment." Journal of Economic Growth 5: 341. doi:10.1023/A:1026599402490
Berthelemy, Jean-Claude and Aristomene Varoudakis. 1996. "Economic Growth, Convergence
Clubs, and the Role of Financial Development". Oxford Economic Papers 48 (2): 300-328.
http://EconPapers.repec.org/RePEc:oup:oxecpp:v:48:y:1996:i:2:p:300-328.
Bertrand, M. & Morse, A. (2016), `Trickle-down consumption', Review of Economics and
Statistics 98(5), 863 879.
Bloom, Nicholas, Max Floetotto, Nir Jaimovich, Itay Saporta-Eksten, and Stephen J. Terry. 2012.
"Really uncertain business cycles". No. w18245. National Bureau of Economic Research.
Bloom, Nicholas. 2009. "The Impact of Uncertainty Shocks". Econometrica, 77: 623–685.
doi:10.3982/ECTA6248
Borio, Claudio, and Piti Disyatat. 2011. “Global Imbalances and the Financial Crisis: Link or No
Link?” Bank for International Settlements. http://EconPapers.repec.org/RePEc:bis:biswps:346.
Borio, Claudio, Craig Furfine, and Philip Lowe. 2001. “Procyclicality of the Financial System and
Financial Stability: Issues and Policy Options.”
Borio, Claudio. 2014. "The financial cycle and macroeconomics: What have we learnt?" Journal
of Banking & Finance 45: 182-198. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jbankfin.2013.07.031.
Brown, M., Scholz, J. K. & Seshadri, A. (2011), `A new test of borrowing constraints for
education', The Review of Economic Studies p. rdr032.
Brüeckner, Markus, and Francisco Carneiro. 2015. "The effects of volatility, fiscal policy
cyclicality and financial development on growth: evidence for the Eastern Caribbean." Policy
Research Working Paper No.7507. The World Bank: Washington DC.


                                               32
Brunnermeier, Markus K., Thomas M. Eisenbach, and Yuliy Sannikov. 2013. “Macroeconomics
with Financial Frictions: A Survey” in Daron Acemoglu, Manuel Arellano and Eddie Dekel (eds.),
Advances in Economics and Econometrics, Tenth World Congress of the Econometric Society,
Vol. II: Applied Economics, Cambridge University Press, New York, pp. 4-94.
Caldera-Sanchez, Aida and Filippo Gorri, (2016) "Can reforms promoting growth increase
financial fragility?" OECD WP 1340.
Caldera-Sanchez, Aida and Filippo Gorri, (2016) "Can reforms promoting growth increase
financial fragility?" OECD WP 1340
Caldera-Sanchez, De Serre, Alain, Filippo Gorri, Mikkel Hermansen, and Oliver Röhn 2016, "
Strengthening economic resilience: Insights from the post-1970 record of severe recessions and
financial crises", OECD Economic Paper 20
Calderón, César, and Lin Liu. 2003. “The Direction of Causality between Financial Development
and Economic Growth.” Journal of Development Economics 72 (1): 321–34. doi:10.1016/S0304-
3878(03)00079-8.
Calvo, Guillermo. 1998. "Capital Flows and Capital Market Crises: The Simple Economics of
Sudden Stops." Journal of Applied Economics 1 (1): 35-54
Card, D., Mas, A. & Rothstein, J. (2008), `Tipping and the dynamics of segregation', The
Quarterly Journal of Economics 123(1), 177 218.
Card, D. & Rothstein, J. (2007), `Racial segregation and the black white test score gap', Journal
of Public Economics 91(11), 2158 2184.
Cecchetti, Stephen G. and Kharroubi, Enisse. 2015. "Why Does Financial Sector Growth Crowd
Out Real Economic Growth?". CEPR Discussion Paper No. DP10642. Available at SSRN:
https://ssrn.com/abstract=2615882
Cecchetti, Stephen G., Marion Kohler, and Christian Upper. 2009. "Financial crises and
economic activity," Proceedings - Economic Policy Symposium - Jackson Hole, Federal Reserve
Bank of Kansas City, pp. 89-135.
Chakraborty, Indraneel and Goldstein, Itay and MacKinlay, Andrew. 2018 « Housing Price
Booms and Crowding-Out Effects in Bank Lending. » Review of Financial Studies, Forthcoming.
Chang, Roberto and Andres Velasco. 2001. "A Model of Financial Crises in Emerging Markets."
The         Quarterly      Journal       of      Economics           116        (2):489-517.
https://doi.org/10.1162/00335530151144087
Christopoulos, Dimitris K, and Efthymios G Tsionas. 2004. “Financial Development and
Economic Growth: Evidence from Panel Unit Root and Cointegration Tests.” Journal of
Development Economics 73 (1): 55–74. doi:10.1016/j.jdeveco.2003.03.002.
Claessens, Stijn, Giovanni Dell’Ariccia, Deniz Igan, and Luc Laeven. 2010. "Cross-country
experiences and policy implications from the global financial crisis." Econ Policy 2010; 25 (62):
267-293. doi: 10.1111/j.1468-0327.2010.00244.



                                               33
Claessens, Stijn, Hui Tong, and Shang-Jin Wei. 2012. "From the financial crisis to the real
economy: Using firm-level data to identify transmission channels." Journal of International
Economics 88(2): 375-387. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jinteco.2012.02.015.
Claessens, Stijn, M. Ayhan Kose, and Marco E. Terrones. 2012. "How do business and financial
cycles    interact?"    Journal     of   International  Economics    87    (1):   178-190.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jinteco.2011.11.008.
Cochrane, John. 2010. “Lessons from the Financial Crisis.” Regulation. Winter 2009-10: 34-37.
http://blogs.unwe.bg/vyotzov/files/2013/03/Lessons-from-the-financial-crisis.pdf
Cournede, Boris and Denk, Oliver and Hoeller, Peter, Finance and Inclusive Growth (June 1,
2015).     OECD    Economic     Policy     Paper,    No.    14.     Available  at    SSRN:
https://ssrn.com/abstract=2649801 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2649801
Cournède, Boris and Oliver Denk. 2015. “Finance and economic growth in OECD and G20
countries”. OECD Economics Department Working Papers No. 1223. OECD Publishing, Paris.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/5js04v8z0m38-en
Cui, L. & Walsh, R. (2015), `Foreclosure, vacancy and crime', Journal of Urban Economics 87, 72
84.
Cull, Robert, Asli Demirgüç-Kunt, and Timothy Lyman. 2012. “Financial Inclusion and Stability:
What           Does         Research        Show?”         The          World          Bank.
http://EconPapers.repec.org/RePEc:wbk:wboper:9443.
Danziger, S., Pfeiffer, F. T., Danziger, S. & Schoeni, R. F. (2013), `Wealth disparities before and
after the great recession', The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science
650(1), 98 123.
Deidda, Luca, and Bassam Fattouh. 2002. “Non-Linearity between Finance and Growth.”
Economics Letters 74 (3): 339–45. doi:10.1016/S0165-1765(01)00571-7.
Dell’Ariccia, Giovanni, Deniz Igan & Luc Laeven & Hui Tong, 2016. "Credit booms and
macrofinancial stability," Economic Policy, CEPR;CES;MSH, vol. 31(86), pages 299-355.
Demetriades, Panicos O. and Khaled A. Hussein. 1996. Does financial development cause
economic growth? Time-series evidence from 16 countries, Journal of Development Economics,
Volume 51, Issue 2, December 1996, Pages 387-411, ISSN 0304-3878,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0304-3878(96)00421-X.
(http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S030438789600421X)
Demirgüç-Kunt, Asli and Enrica Detragiache. 1997. "The Determinants of Banking Crises in
Developing and Developed Countries," IMF Staff Papers, 45: 81–109.
Demirgüç-Kunt, Asli and Feyen and Levine. 2011. "The Evolving Importance of Banks and
Securities Markets." Policy Research Working Paper No.5805. The World Bank: Washington DC.
Demirgüç-Kunt, Asli and Maksimovic. 1998. "Law, Finance and Firm Growth." The Journal of
Finance 53 (6): 2107-2137.



                                                34
Dornbusch, Rudiger, Ilan Goldfajn, and Rodrigo O. Valdés. 1995. "Currency Crises and Collapses".
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 26 (2):219-293.
Drezner, Z. & Farnum, N. (1993), `A generalized binomial distribution', Communications in
Statistics-Theory and Methods 22(11), 3051 3063.
Eden, Maya. 2016. “Excessive Financing Costs in a Representative Agent Framework.” American
Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 8(2): 215-237.
Eschenbach, F, Francois, J. 2002. 'Financial Sector Competition, Services Trade, and Growth'.
London,           Centre            for          Economic           Policy          Research.
http://www.cepr.org/active/publications/discussion_papers/dp.php?dpno=3573
Farhi, Emmanuel and Jean Tirole. 2012. "Collective Moral Hazard, Maturity Mismatch, and
Systemic Bailouts." American Economic Review, 102(1): 60-93.
Favara, Giovanni. 2003. "An Empirical Reassessment of the Relationship Between Finance and
Growth".      IMF   Working    Paper     No.   03/123:     1-47.    Available  at    SSRN:
https://ssrn.com/abstract=879199
Forbes, Kristin, and Michael Klein. 2015. "Pick Your Poison: The Choices and Consequences of
Policy Responses to Crises." IMF Econ Rev 63: 197. doi:10.1057/imfer.2015.2
Fountas, Stilianos and Menelaos Karanasos. 2008. "Are economic growth and the variability of
the business cycle related? Evidence from five European countries". International Economic
Journal, 22 (4): 445-459, DOI: 10.1080/10168730802497478
Xavier Freixas & Jean-Charles Rochet, 2013. "Taming Systemically Important Financial
Institutions," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Blackwell Publishing, vol. 45, pages 37-58,
08.
Gabaix, Xavier, and Augustin Landier, 2008. "Why has CEO Pay Increased So Much?" The
Quarterly Journal of Economics 123(1): 49-100.
Gambacorta, L., Yang, J. and Tsatsaronis, K., 2014. Financial structure and growth1. BIS
Quarterly Review, p.21.
Garretsen, H., Lensink, R. and Sterken, E. .2004. Growth, financial development, societal norms
and legal institutions. Journal of International Financial Markets, Institutions and Money 14:
165–183.
Gerardi, K., Rosenblatt, E., Willen, P. S. & Yao, V. (2015), `Foreclosure externalities: New
evidence', Journal of Urban Economics 87, 42 56.
Gertler, Mark, and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki. 2010. “Financial Intermediation and Credit Policy in
Business Cycle Analysis,” in Handbook of Monetary Economics, ed. by B. M. Friedman, and M.
Woodford, vol. 3, chap. 11, pp. 547–599. Elsevier
Ghirmay, Teame. 2004. "Financial Development and Economic Growth in Sub-Saharan African
Countries: Evidence from Time Series Analysis." African Development Review, 16: 415–432.
doi:10.1111/j.1017-6772.2004.00098.


                                              35
Glaeser, E. L., Gyourko, J. & Saiz, A. (2008), `Housing supply and housing bubbles', Journal of
urban Economics 64(2), 198 217.
Gourinchas Pierre-Olivier, & Rodrigo Valdes & Oscar Landerretche, 2001. "Lending Booms: Latin
America and the World," ECONOMIA, vol. 0(Spring 20), pages 47-100, January
Graff Michael, and Alexander Karmann. 2006. "What Determines the Finance-growth Nexus?
Empirical Evidence for Threshold Models". Journal of Economics, 87 (2): 127-157.
Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, Luigi Zingales 2004. "Does Local Financial Development Matter?" Q
J Econ 119 (3): 929-969. doi: 10.1162/0033553041502162
Haiss, Peter, Hannes Juvan, and Bernhard Mahlberg. 2016. "The Impact of Financial Crises on
the Finance–Growth Relationship: A European Perspective". Economic Notes, 45: 423–444.
doi:10.1111/ecno.12067
Han, Rui; Melecky, Martin. 2013. Financial inclusion for financial stability: access to bank
deposits and the growth of deposits in the Global Financial Crisis. Policy Research working
paper;        no.        WPS        6577.       Washington,       DC:        World        Bank.
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/850681468325448388/Financial-inclusion-for-
financial-stability-access-to-bank-deposits-and-the-growth-of-deposits-in-the-Global-Financial-
Crisis
Harris, Richard D.F. 1997. "Stock markets and development: A re-assessment". European
Economic Review 41 (1): 139-146. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0014-2921(96)00021-9.
Hartley, D. (2014), `The effect of foreclosures on nearby housing prices: Supply or dis- amenity?',
Regional Science and Urban Economics 49, 108 117.
Hassan, M. Kabir, Benito Sanchez, and Jung-Suk Yu. 2011. “Financial Development and
Economic Growth: New Evidence from Panel Data.” The Quarterly Review of Economics and
Finance 51 (1): 88–104. doi:10.1016/j.qref.2010.09.001.
Heckman, J. J., Lochner, L. & Taber, C. (1999), General equilibrium cost bene t analysis of
education and tax policies, Technical report, National bureau of economic research.
Higgins, Matthew, and Carol Osler. 1997. "Asset market hangovers and economic growth: the
OECD during 1984-93". Oxf Rev Econ Policy 1997; 13 (3): 110-134. doi: 10.1093/oxrep/13.3.110
Hnatkovska, Viktoria, and Norman Loayza. 2005. "Volatility and Growth”. In: Managing
Economic Volatility and Crises: A Practitioner’s Guide. Ed. by J. Aizenman and B. Pinto.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp.65–100.
James J. Heckman, 1978, "Dummy Endogenous Variables in a Simultaneous Equation System"
Econometrica, Vol. 46, No. 4 (July, 1978), pp. 931-959
Jayaratne and Strahan. 1995. "The Finance-Growth Nexus: Evidence from Bank Branch
Deregulation." Federal Reserve Bank of New York Research Paper No. 9513.
Imbs, Jean. 2007. "Growth and volatility", Journal of Monetary Economics 54 (7): 1848-1862,
ISSN 0304-3932, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jmoneco.2006.08.001.


                                               36
Jordà, Òscar, Moritz Schularick, and Alan M. Taylor. 2011. "Financial crises, credit booms, and
external imbalances: 140 years of lessons." IMF Economic Review 59, no. 2 (2011): 340-378.
Kaminsky, Graciela L. and Carmen M. Reinhart. 1999. "The Twin Crises: The Causes of Banking
and Balance-of-Payments Problems." American Economic Review 89(3): 473-500.
Kaminsky, Graciela L. , Carmen M. Reinhart, and Carlos A. Végh. 2004 « When It Rains, It Pours:
Procyclical Capital Flows and Macroeconomic Policies » NBER Macroeconomics Annual 19:, 11-
53
Kendall, Jake. "Local financial development and growth." 2012. Journal of Banking & Finance 36
(5):1548-1562. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jbankfin.2012.01.001.
Khalifa Al-Yousif, Yousif. 2002. “Financial Development and Economic Growth: Another Look at
the Evidence from Developing Countries.” Review of Financial Economics 11 (2): 131–50.
doi:10.1016/S1058-3300(02)00039-3.
Khan, Aubhik. 2001. “Financial Development and Economic Growth.” Macroeconomic Dynamics
5 (3): 413–33.
Kharroubi, Enisse. 2007. "Crises, Volatility, and Growth". World Bank Econ Rev, 21 (3): 439-460.
doi: 10.1093/wber/lhm015
King, Robert G. and Ross Levine. 1993. "Finance and Growth: Schumpeter Might Be Right." The
Quarterly Journal of Economics 108 (3):717-737.
Kochhar, R. & Fry, R. (2014), `Wealth inequality has widened along racial, ethnic lines since end
of great recession', Pew Research Center 12.
Koren, Miklós, and Silvana Tenreyro. 2007. "Volatility and Development". The Quarterly Journal
of Economics 2007; 122 (1): 243-287. doi: 10.1162/qjec.122.1.243
Krysan, M. & Farley, R. (2002), `The residential preferences of blacks: Do they explain persistent
segregation?', Social Forces 80(3), 937 980.
Kumhof, Michael, Romain Rancière and Pablo Winant. 2015. "Inequality, Leverage, and
Crises." American Economic Review, 105(3): 1217-45.
Kuminoff, Nicolai V., V. Kerry Smith, and Christopher Timmins. "The new economics of
equilibrium sorting and policy evaluation using housing markets." Journal of Economic
Literature 51.4 (2013): 1007-1062.
Krugman, Paul. 1999. “Balance Sheets, the Transfer Problem, and Financial Crises.”
International Tax and Public Finance, 6(4): 459–472.
Landvoigt, Tim, Monika Piazzesi, and Martin Schneider. "The Housing Market (s) of San
Diego." The American Economic Review 105.4 (2015): 1371.
Langfield, S, and M Pagano (2016), “Bank bias in Europe: Effects on systemic risk and growth”,
Economic Policy, 31(85): 51-106.
Law, Siong Hook and Nirvikar Singh. 2014. "Does too much finance harm economic growth?"
Journal of Banking & Finance 41: 36-44. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jbankfin.2013.12.020.

                                               37
Leahy, Michael, Sebastian Schich, Gert Wehinger, Florian Pelgrin, and Thorsteinn Thorgeirsson.
2001. “Contributions of Financial Systems to Growth in OECD Countries”. OECD Economics
Department        Working      Papers,    No.       280,      OECD       Publishing,     Paris.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/888167575648
Levine, Ross. 1997. "Financial development and economic growth: Views and agenda." Journal
of Economic Literature 35: 688-726.
Levine, Ross. 2002. "Bank-based or market-based financial systems: Which is better?" Journal of
Financial Intermediation 11(4): 398-428.
Levine, Ross. 2005. Chapter 12 Finance and Growth: Theory and Evidence, In: Philippe Aghion
and Steven N. Durlauf, Editor(s), Handbook of Economic Growth, Elsevier, Volume 1, Part A:
865-934. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S1574-0684(05)01012-9.
Levine, Ross, Norman Loayza, Thorsten Beck. 2000. Financial intermediation and growth:
Causality and causes, Journal of Monetary Economics, Volume 46, Issue 1, August 2000, Pages
31-77,       ISSN        0304-3932,        http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0304-3932(00)00017-9.
(http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0304393200000179)
Levine, Ross, and Sara Zervos. 1998. "Stock markets, banks, and economic growth." The
American Economic Review 88(3): 537-558.
Levine, R., Levkov, A. & Rubinstein, Y. (2008), Racial discrimination and competition, Technical
report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Liang, Qi, and Jian-Zhou Teng. 2006. “Financial Development and Economic Growth: Evidence
from China.” China Economic Review 17 (4): 395–411. doi:10.1016/j.chieco.2005.09.003.
Loayza, Norman V. and Claudio Raddatz. 2007. "The Structural Determinants of External
Vulnerability". World Bank Econ Rev 2007; 21 (3): 359-387. doi: 10.1093/wber/lhm018
Loayza, Norman V., and Romain Rancière. "Financial Development, Financial Fragility, and
Growth." Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 38, no. 4 (2006): 1051-076.
http://www.jstor.org/stable/3838993.
Loayza, Norman V., and Romain Rancière. 2006. "Financial Development, Financial Fragility, and
Growth."    Journal    of    Money,     Credit    and     Banking  38     (4):     1051-076.
http://www.jstor.org/stable/3838993.
Loayza, Norman V., Romain Rancière, Luis Servén, and Jaume Ventura. 2007. “Macroeconomic
Volatility and Welfare in Developing Countries: An Introduction.” The World Bank Economic
Review 21 (3): 343–57. doi:10.1093/wber/lhm017.
Levchenko, Andrei A. & Rancière, Romain & Thoenig, Mathias, 2009. "Growth and risk at the
industry level: The real effects of financial liberalization," Journal of Development Economics,
Elsevier, vol. 89(2), pages 210-222, July.
Lucas, Robert E., Jr. (1987). Models of Business Cycles. Oxford: Blackwell.
Love, Inessa. 2003. "Financial development and financing constraints: International evidence
from the structural investment model." Review of Financial Studies 16 (3): 765-791.

                                                38
Luintel, Kul B., and Mosahid Khan. 1999. “A Quantitative Reassessment of the Finance–growth
Nexus: Evidence from a Multivariate VAR.” Journal of Development Economics 60 (2): 381–405.
doi:10.1016/S0304-3878(99)00045-0.
Obstfeld, Maurice, 1994, "Risk-Taking, Global Diversification, and Growth." The American
Economic Review, Vol. 84, No. 5. pp. 1310-1329
Ouazad, Amine, and Romain Rancière, 2016. "Credit Standards and Segregation," The Review of
Economics and Statistics, vol. 98(5), pages 880-896.
Macovei, Mihai. 2009. "Growth and economic crises in Turkey: leaving behind a turbulent
past?" (No. 386). Directorate General Economic and Financial Affairs (DG ECFIN), European
Commission.
McCaig, Brian, and Thanasis Stengos. 2005. “Financial Intermediation and Growth: Some
Robustness Results.” Economics Letters 88 (3): 306–12. doi:10.1016/j.econlet.2004.12.031.
McFadden, D. L. (1984), `Econometric analysis of qualitative response models', Handbook of
econometrics 2, 1395 1457.
Mian, Atif, Amir Sufi, and Emil Verner, 2017. "Household Debt and Business Cycles Worldwide,"
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol 132(4), pages 1755-1817
Morgan, Peter, and Victor Pontines. 2014. “Financial Stability and Financial Inclusion.” Asian
Development Bank Institute. https://ideas.repec.org/p/ris/adbiwp/0488.html.
Obstfeld, Maurice. 2009. "International Finance and Growth in Developing Countries: What
Have We Learned?" NBER Working Paper Series: 14691.
Odedokun, M.O. 1996. “Alternative Econometric Approaches for Analysing the Role of the
Financial Sector in Economic Growth: Time-Series Evidence from LDCs.” Journal of Development
Economics 50 (1): 119–46. doi:10.1016/0304-3878(96)00006-5.
Ouazad, A. & Rancière, R. (2016a), City equilibrium with borrowing constraints: General
equilibrium effects, Technical report, USC-INET Research Paper.
Ouazad, A. & Rancière, R. (2016b), `Credit standards and segregation', Review of Economics and
Statistics 98(5), 880 896.
Manganelli, Simone & Popov, Alexander, 2015. "Financial development, sectoral reallocation,
and volatility: International evidence," Journal of International Economics, Elsevier, vol. 96(2),
pages 323-337.
Pasali, Selahattin Selsah. 2013. "Where is the cheese? Synthesizing a giant literature on causes
and consequences of financial sector development." Policy Research working paper; no. WPS
6655. Washington, DC: World Bank.
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/730041468152101741/Where-is-the-cheese-
synthesizing-a-giant-literature-on-causes-and-consequences-of-financial-sector-development
Pesaran, M. Hashem & Smith, Ron, 1995. "Estimating long-run relationships from dynamic
heterogeneous panels," Journal of Econometrics, Elsevier, vol. 68(1), pages 79-113, July.


                                               39
Philippon, T., (2010), “Financiers versus Engineers: Should the Financial Sector be Taxed or
Subsidized?”, American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2(3), 158-182.
Philippon, Thomas and Ariell Reshef. 2013. "An international look at the growth of modern
finance." The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 27(2): 73-96.
Philippon, T. and A. Reshef, (2012) “Wages and Human Capital in the U.S. Finance Industry:
1909-2006”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(4), 1551-1609.
Popov, Alexander, " Credit Constraints, Equity Market Liberalization, and Growth Rate
Asymmetry" Journal of Development Economics, 107(1), pp. 202–214, March 2014
Rajan, Raghuram G., and Luigi Zingales. 1998. "Financial Dependence and Growth." The
American Economic Review 88 (3): 559-86. http://www.jstor.org/stable/116849.
Ram, Rati. 1999. “Financial Development and Economic Growth: Additional Evidence.” The
Journal of Development Studies 35 (4): 164–74. doi:10.1080/00220389908422585.
Ramey, Garey & Ramey, Valerie A, 1995. "Cross-Country Evidence on the Link between
Volatility and Growth," American Economic Review, American Economic Association, vol. 85(5),
pages 1138-1151, December.
Ranciere, Romain, Aaron Tornell, and Frank Westermann. 2006. "Decomposing the effects of
financial liberalization: Crises vs. growth". Journal of Banking & Finance, 30 (12): 3331-3348.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jbankfin.2006.05.019.
Ranciere, Romain, A Tornell, F Westermann, 2008, "Systemic crises and growth", Quarterly
Journal of Economics 123 (1), 359-406,
Ranciere Romain & Aaron Tornell, 2011. "Was the U.S. Crisis a Financial Black-Hole?" IMF
Economic Review, Palgrave Macmillan;International Monetary Fund, vol. 59(2), pages 271-305,
June.
Ranciere Romain & Aaron Tornell & Athanasios Vamvakidis, 2010. "Currency mismatch,
systemic risk and growth in emerging Europe," Economic Policy, CEPR; CES; MSH, vol. 25, pages
597-658, October.
Rancière, Romain and Aaron Tornell. 2016. "Financial Liberalization, Debt Mismatch, Allocative
Efficiency, and Growth." American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 8(2): 1-44.
Reinhart, Carmen M. and Kenneth S. Rogoff. 2008. "Is the 2007 US Sub-Prime Financial Crisis So
Different? An International Historical Comparison." The American Economic Review, 98(2), 339-
344. Retrieved from http://www.jstor.org/stable/29730044
Razin Assaf & Yona Rubinstein, 2006. "Evaluation of currency regimes: the unique role of
sudden stops," Economic Policy, CEPR; CES; MSH, vol. 21(45), pages 119-152, 01.
Reinhart, Carmen M., and Kenneth S. Rogoff. This time is different: Eight centuries of financial
folly. Princeton University Press, 2009.
Reinhart, Carmen M. and Kenneth S. Rogoff. 2008. "Is the 2007 US Sub-Prime Financial Crisis So
Different? An International Historical Comparison." The American Economic Review 98(2), 339-
344. http://www.jstor.org/stable/29730044.
                                              40
Rioja, Felix, and Neven Valev. 2004. “Finance and the sources of growth at various stages of
economic development”. Economic Inquiry 42, 27–40
Rioja, Felix, and Neven Valev. 2004. “Does One Size Fit All?: A Reexamination of the Finance and
Growth Relationship.” Journal of Development Economics 74 (2): 429–47.
doi:10.1016/j.jdeveco.2003.06.006.
Rodriguez, Cesar M. 2014. "Financial development, fiscal policy and volatility: Their effects on
growth". The Journal of International Trade & Economic Development, 23(2): 223-266.
Romer, Christina D., and David H. Romer. 2015. "New evidence on the impact of financial crises
in advanced countries". No. w21021. National Bureau of Economic Research.
Rose, Andrew K. and Mark M. Spiegel. 2011. Cross-country causes and consequences of the
crisis: An update, European Economic Review, Volume 55, Issue 3, April 2011, Pages 309-324,
ISSN 0014-2921, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.euroecorev.2010.12.006.
Rousseau, Peter L., and Paul Wachtel. 2002. “Inflation thresholds and the finance-growth
nexus”. Journal of International Money and Finance, 21 (6): 777-793.
Rousseau, Peter L., and Paul Wachtel. 2011. "What is happening to the impact of financial
deepening on economic growth?" Economic Inquiry, 49: 276–288. doi:10.1111/j.1465-
7295.2009.00197.x
Sacerdote, B. (2011), Handbook of the Economics of Education, Vol. 3, Elsevier, 249-277 Peer
Effects in Education: How Might They Work, How Big Are They and How Much Do We Know
Thus Far?
Saiz, A. (2010), `The geographic determinants of housing supply', The Quarterly Journal of
Economics 125(3), 1253 1296.
Schelling, T. C. (1971), `Dynamic models of segregation', Journal of mathematical sociology 1(2),
143 186.
Schularick, Moritz, and Alan M. Taylor. 2012. "Credit booms gone bust: monetary policy,
leverage cycles, and financial crises, 1870–2008". The American Economic Review, 102(2),
pp.1029-1061.
Shan, Jordan Z., Alan G. Morris, and Fiona Sun. 2001. “Financial Development and Economic
Growth: An Egg-and-Chicken Problem?” Review of International Economics 9 (3): 443–54.
doi:10.1111/1467-9396.00291.
Singh, Ajit. 1997. "Financial Liberalisation, Stockmarkets and Economic Development." The
Economic Journal 107: 771-182.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. "Capital market liberalization, economic growth, and instability." World
Development 28 (6): 1075-1086.
Taylor, Alan M. 2012. The great leveraging (No. w18290). National Bureau of Economic
Research.
Tornell, Aaron and Westermann, Frank. 2005. Boom-Bust Cycles and Financial Liberalization, vol.
1, 1 ed., The MIT Press, http://EconPapers.repec.org/RePEc:mtp:titles:0262201593.
                                               41
Tornell, Aaron, Frank Westermann, and Lorenza Martinez. 2003. "Liberalization, growth, and
financial crises: Lessons from Mexico and the developing world." Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity (2): 1-112.
Tornell, Aaron, Frank Westermann, and Lorenza Martinez. 2004. "The positive link between
financial liberalization, growth and crises" (No. w10293). National Bureau of Economic Research.
Varela, Liliana, 2016, "Reallocation, Competition and Productivity: Evidence from a Financial
Liberalization Episode" mimeo
Yilmazkuday, Hakan. 2011. Thresholds in the Finance-Growth Nexus: A Cross-Country Analysis.
World Bank Econ Rev 25 (2): 278-295. doi: 10.1093/wber/lhr011
World Bank. 2013. World Development Report 2014: Risk and Opportunity—Managing Risk for
Development. Washington, DC. https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/16092
License: CC BY 3.0 IGO.”




                                              42
