NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MEASURING EX-ANTE WELFARE IN INSURANCE MARKETS
Nathaniel Hendren
Working Paper 24470
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24470

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2018, Revised October 2019

I am very grateful to Raj Chetty, David Cutler, Liran Einav, Amy Finkelstein, Ben Handel, Pat
Kline, Tim Layton, Mark Shepard, Mike Whinston, seminar participants at the NBER Summer
Institute and University of Texas, along with five anonymous referees and the editor, Adam
Sziedl, for helpful comments and discussions. I also thank Kate Musen for helpful research
assistance. Support from the National Science Foundation CAREER Grant is gratefully
acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Nathaniel Hendren. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Measuring Ex-Ante Welfare in Insurance Markets
Nathaniel Hendren
NBER Working Paper No. 24470
March 2018, Revised October 2019
JEL No. H0,I11,I3
ABSTRACT
The willingness to pay for insurance captures the value of insurance against only the risk that
remains when choices are observed. This paper develops tools to measure the ex-ante expected
utility impact of insurance subsidies and mandates when choices are observed after some
insurable information is revealed. The approach retains the transparency of using reduced-form
willingness to pay and cost curves, but it adds one additional sufficient statistic: the difference in
marginal utilities between insured and uninsured. I provide an approach to estimate this statistic
that uses only reduced-form willingness to pay and cost curves, combined with either a measure
of risk aversion. I compare the approach to structural approaches that require fully specifying the
choice environment and information sets of individuals. I apply the approach using existing
willingness to pay and cost curve estimates from the low-income health insurance exchange in
Massachusetts. Ex-ante optimal insurance prices are roughly 30% lower than prices that
maximize market surplus. While mandates would increase deadweight loss, the results suggest
they would actually increase ex-ante expected utility.

Nathaniel Hendren
Harvard University
Department of Economics
Littauer Center Room 235
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
nhendren@gmail.com

Measuring Ex-Ante Welfare in Insurance Markets
Nathaniel Hendren∗
October, 2019

Abstract
The willingness to pay for insurance captures the value of insurance against only
the risk that remains when choices are observed. This paper develops tools to measure
the ex-ante expected utility impact of insurance subsidies and mandates when choices
are observed after some insurable information is revealed. The approach retains the
transparency of using reduced-form willingness to pay and cost curves, but it adds one
additional sufficient statistic: the difference in marginal utilities between insured and
uninsured. I provide an approach to estimate this statistic that uses only reduced-form
willingness to pay and cost curves, combined with either a measure of risk aversion. I
compare the approach to structural approaches that require fully specifying the choice
environment and information sets of individuals. I apply the approach using existing
willingness to pay and cost curve estimates from the low-income health insurance exchange in Massachusetts. Ex-ante optimal insurance prices are roughly 30% lower than
prices that maximize market surplus. While mandates would increase deadweight loss,
the results suggest they would actually increase ex-ante expected utility.

1

Introduction

Revealed preference theory is often used as a tool for measuring the welfare impact of government policies. Many recent applications use price variation to estimate the willingness
to pay for insurance (Einav et al. (2010); Hackmann et al. (2015); Finkelstein et al. (2019);
Panhans (2018)). Comparing willingness to pay to the costs individuals impose on insurers
provides a measure of market surplus. This surplus potentially provides guidance on optimal
∗

Harvard University, nhendren@fas.harvard.edu. I am very grateful to Raj Chetty, David Cutler, Liran
Einav, Amy Finkelstein, Ben Handel, Pat Kline, Tim Layton, Mark Shepard, Mike Whinston, seminar
participants at the NBER Summer Institute and University of Texas, along with five anonymous referees and
the editor, Adam Sziedl, for helpful comments and discussions. I also thank Kate Musen for helpful research
assistance. Support from the National Science Foundation CAREER Grant is gratefully acknowledged.

1

insurance subsidies and mandates (Feldman and Dowd (1982)). If individuals are not willing
to pay the costs they impose on the insurer, then greater subsidies or mandates will lower
market surplus. From this perspective, subsidies and mandates would reduce welfare and be
socially undesirable.
Measures of willingness to pay are generally a gold standard input into welfare analysis.
But, in insurance settings they can be misleading. Insurance obtains its value by insuring
the realization of risk. Often, individuals make insurance choices after learning some information about their risk. It is well-known that this can lead to adverse selection. What is less
appreciated is that observed willingness to pay will not capture value of insuring against this
learned information.1 As a result, welfare conclusions based on market surplus can vary with
the information that individuals have when the economist happens to observes choices. Policies that maximize observed market surplus will not generally maximize canonical measures
of expected utility.
To see this, consider the decision to buy health insurance coverage for next year. Suppose
some people have learned they need to undergo a costly medical procedure next year. Their
willingness to pay will include the value of covering this known cost plus the value of insuring
other future unknown costs. Market surplus - defined as the difference between willingness
to pay and costs - will equal the value of insuring their unknown costs. But, it will not
include any insurance value from covering the known costly medical procedure. This risk
has already been realized when willingness to pay is observed.
Now, consider an economist seeking to measure the welfare impact of extending health
insurance coverage next year to everyone through a mandate or large subsidy. The market
surplus or deadweight loss generated from the policy will depend on how much people have
learned about their health costs at the time the economist happened to measure willingness
to pay. Existing literature (and introspection) suggests that individuals know more about
expected costs and events in the near future (e.g. Finkelstein et al. (2005); Hendren (2013,
2017); Cabral (2017)). If willingness to pay had been measured earlier, market surplus
could be larger because it would include the value of insuring against the costly medical
procedure. This occurs even though the economic allocation generated by a mandate does not
vary depending on when the economist measures willingness to pay. In contrast, traditional
notions of the expected utility impact of a mandate would not depend on when the economist
happens to measure willingness to pay. Expected utility provides a consistent framework for
identifying optimal insurance policies that depends on economic allocations.
The goal of this paper is to enable researchers to evaluate the impact of insurance market
1

This idea is related to Hirshleifer (1971), who shows that individuals may wish to insure against the
realization of information.

2

policies on expected utility, where the expectation is taken prior to when insurance choices
are made. Traditional methods to estimating ex-ante expected utility would estimate a
structural model. Among other things, the model would specify what individuals know
when choosing whether to buy an insurance plan. It would then be estimated using observed
insurance choices along with data on the realized utility-relevant outcomes, such as health
and consumption.2 Intuitively, if one has a structural model and knows what information
has been realized when individuals choose their insurance policies, one can infer the value of
insuring the risk that has been revealed before making those choices. But, in practice it is
especially difficult to observe individuals’ information sets when they make choices. This is
especially true in insurance markets that suffer from adverse selection driven by asymmetric
information.
This paper develops a new approach to measure the expected utility impact of insurance
market policies. The approach does not require specifying structural assumptions about
individuals’ information sets at the time of choice, nor does it require specifying a utility
function or observing the distribution of utility-relevant outcomes in the economy. Instead,
I exploit the information contained in reduced-form willingness to pay and cost curves as
outlined by Einav et al. (2010). In this environment, I characterize the minimal additional
sufficient statistics required to measure the expected utility of subsidies and mandates.
The first main result of the paper shows that one can measure ex-ante expected utility
using one additional sufficient statistic: the difference in marginal utilities of income for
those who do versus do not buy insurance. This measures how much individuals wish to
move money to the state of the world in which they buy insurance. In the example above,
it reflects the desire to insure the costly medical procedure. These individuals have a higher
demand for insurance, and have a higher marginal utility of income.
In general, it is difficult to observe or measure differences in marginal utilities of income
between those who do versus do not purchase insurance. The second result of the paper
addresses this by providing a benchmark estimation method that uses only the reduced-form
willingness to pay and cost curves combined with a measure of risk aversion. This additional
risk aversion parameter can be assumed, or it can be inferred from the observed markup
individuals are willing to pay for insurance, combined with the extent to which insurance
reduces the variance in out of pocket expenditures.
This second main result follows two steps. First, building on the literature on optimal
unemployment insurance (Baily (1978); Chetty (2006)), I use measures of consumption differences between insured and uninsured, combined with risk aversion, to measure differences
in marginal utilities. Second, because consumption is seldom observed, I provide conditions
2

For example, see Handel et al. (2015) or Section IV of Einav et al. (2016).

3

under which one can exploit the information in the reduced-form willingness to pay curve
for insurance instead of consumption.
I apply the framework to study the optimal subsidies and mandates for low-income health
insurance in Massachusetts. Finkelstein et al. (2019) use price discontinuities as a function
of income to estimate willingness to pay and cost curves for those with incomes near 150%
of the federal poverty level (FPL). Their results show that an unsubsidized private insurance
market would unravel.3 Without subsidies, the market would not exist. I use the approach
to ask what types of insurance subsidies or mandates individuals would want in the MA
health insurance exchange if they had been asked prior to learning anything about whether
they would actually be in the MA health insurance exchange and eligible for the subsidies
in question. In this sense, it evaluates subsidies and mandates using an ex-ante notion of
welfare that is both ex-ante expected utility and ex-post utilitarian social welfare.4
I use the framework to provide guidance on both budget neutral and non-budget neutral
policies in this environment. Budget neutral policies ask whether the government should
provide additional subsidies financed by increased prices/penalties for those not purchasing
insurance – this is the canonical set of policies studied in Einav et al. (2010). To set the
stage, traditional market surplus is maximized when insurance premiums are $1,581 and 41%
of those eligible for insurance choose to purchase. In contrast, I find that a 30% lower price
of $1,117 with 54% of the market insured maximizes ex-ante welfare. Those who are induced
to purchase insurance from by lowering prices from $1,581 to $1,117 are not willing to pay
the cost they impose on the insurance company. However, from behind a veil of ignorance
they value the ability to purchase insurance at lower prices if they end up having a high
demand for insurance.
One can also evaluate the welfare impact of a full insurance mandate (with sufficiently
large penalties to generate full coverage). Such a policy would lower market surplus by $45 –
on average, those in the economy are not willing to pay the cost they impose on the insurance
company. However, from behind a veil of ignorance individuals would be willing to pay $169
to have a full insurance mandate. Indeed, the willingness to pay for a mandate remains
positive for a wide range of plausible risk aversion parameters (e.g. with coefficients of
relative risk aversion above 1.7). This illustrates how an ex-ante welfare perspective can lead
to dramatically different normative conclusions about the desirability of commonly debated
3

This unraveling is due to a combination of adverse selection and uncompensated care externalities.
This welfare perspective provides a natural benchmark as it does not make a normative distinction
between redistribution and insurance (e.g. Harsanyi (1978)). However, the approach does not require a
utilitarian perspective, nor does it require measuring expected utility behind a complete veil of ignorance.
One can conduct the analysis conditional on any observable subgroup, X = x (e.g. old vs. young, male
vs. female, with vs. without chronic health conditions, etc.). Doing so requires willingness to pay and cost
curves for each subgroup.
4

4

insurance policies.
In practice, insurance subsidies in Massachusetts (as in many cases) were not paid by
penalties targeting the uninsured in the market; rather they were paid by general government
revenue and taxpayers more generally. To capture this, I estimate the marginal value of public
funds (MVPF) of additional insurance subsidies. the MVPF for an additional insurance
subsidy is the individual’s willingness to pay for it divided by its net cost to the government
(Hendren (2016)). Comparisons of MVPFs across policies correspond to statements about the
value of redistributing across different subpopulations. For example, comparing the MVPF
of insurance subsidies to low-income tax credits allows one to ask whether individuals at
150% would prefer additional insurance subsidies or prefer a tax subsidy.
The results suggest that when prices are set so that 30% of the market has insurance,
individuals are willing to pay roughly 1.2 times the marginal cost they impose on the insurer
to lower insurance prices. This implies an MVPF of 1.2, which is similar to the range of
MVPF estimates for tax credits to low-income populations studied in Hendren and SprungKeyser (2019), which are around 0.9-1.3. However, those benefiting from the insurance
subsidies have a higher marginal utility of income than those benefiting from a tax cut.
From behind the veil of ignorance, the results suggest that individuals would be willing to
pay 1.8 times the cost they impose on the insurer to lower insurance prices. Put differently,
individuals would prefer from behind a veil of ignorance to spend money lowering insurance
prices for those at 150% of FPL instead of providing them with a tax cut. In short, the
ability to distinguish between ex-ante expected utility and market surplus provides different
guidance on important questions of optimal insurance market policies.
Traditional approaches to measuring ex-ante expected utility would estimate a structural
model. This would involve fully specifying not only a utility function but also the information set of individuals at the time they make insurance choices. The economic primitives
estimated from the model would then provide an ex-ante measure of welfare. In contrast, the
sufficient statistics approach developed here does not require researchers to know the exact
utility function, nor does it require knowledge of individuals’ information sets when they
make insurance choices. Information sets can be particularly tough to specify in settings of
adverse selection where even insurers have trouble worrying about the unobserved knowledge
of the applicant pool. In addition, the approach developed here can be implemented using
aggregate data from insurers or governments on the cost and fraction of the market purchasing insurance at different prices, as opposed to requiring observations on individual-level
data that would be required to estimate the structural model.
To further understand the relationship to the structural approach, I develop a fully specified structural model with moral hazard and adverse selection that can fully match the
5

reduced form willingness to pay and cost curves in the Finkelstein et al. (2019) environment.
The model builds upon the approach in Handel et al. (2015) but augments it with a moral
hazard structure developed in Einav et al. (2013a). I use the model to verify that the approach developed here recovers the true ex-ante welfare quite well. However, the benchmark
implementation relies on two key assumptions that may be violated in some applications.
I use the structural environment to understand the impact of violating these assumptions,
and validate proposed modifications to my approach that help recover ex-ante welfare when
the key assumptions are violated.
First, using the demand curve to proxy for differences in consumption requires that there
are no differences in liquidity or income between the insured and uninsured. While this is
perhaps a natural assumption in the context subsidies to a given income level (i.e. 150%
FPL in MA), it is quite restrictive in many other settings where income differences may be
a key driver of willingness to pay for insurance. In these cases, I show that one can recover
ex-ante welfare using my approach if one can observe the average consumption of the insured
and uninsured in the market.
Second, the benchmark implementation requires that individuals have common coefficients of relative risk aversion. However, previous literature has highlighted a role of preference heterogeneity as an important driver of insurance demand. In this case, I show that
the ideal measure of risk aversion is the “ex-ante” risk aversion that governs the markup that
individuals would be willing to pay from behind a veil of ignorance for a product that helps
lower their insurance prices. I show that the common structural models with preference
heterogeneity raise the potential concern that the “ex-ante” risk aversion coefficient might
differ from the average risk aversion of individuals expressed over coverage choices in the
market. This means that, in practice, researchers will want to study the robustness of the
results to a range of risk aversion parameters with the knowledge that the ideal risk aversion
is the one that governs the hypothetical ex-ante willingness to pay for a financial product
that helps reduce the price of insurance.
The ideas developed in this paper readily extend to other settings where individuals
measure the value of insurance using principles of revealed preference. For example, often
behavioral responses such as labor supply changes are used to measure the value of social
insurance. The more individuals are willing to adjust their labor supply to become eligible for
insurance, the more they value the insurance (e.g. Keane and Moffitt (1998); Gallen (2014);
Dague (2014)). Such an approach captures the value of insurance against only the risk that
is revealed after they adjust their behavior.5 Similarly, other papers infer willingness to
5

Indeed, Gallen (2014) shows many individuals who respond have particularly costly health conditions.
The measure of willingness to pay in Gallen (2014) will miss the value of insurance against those health

6

pay for social insurance from changes in consumption around a shock (e.g. Gruber (1997);
Meyer and Mok (2013)). When information is revealed over time, the consumption change
may vary depending on the time horizon used (Hendren (2017)). In the extreme, there
may be no change around the event (e.g. smooth consumption around onset of disability or
retirement). Consumption should change when information about the event is revealed, not
when the event occurs. The methods in this paper can be applied to conceptualize which
consumption difference is most appropriate for the desired notion of expected utility.
The rest of this paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides a stylized example that
develops the intuition for the approach. Section 3 provides the general modeling framework
and introduces the application from from Finkelstein et al. (2019), who study health insurance subsidies for low-income adults in Massachusetts. Section 4 uses the model to define
notions of ex-ante welfare and provides the general result that the ex-ante willingness to
pay for insurance requires the difference in marginal utilities between insured and uninsured.
Section 5 provides a benchmark method to estimate this difference in marginal utilities using
willingness to pay and cost curves combined with a measure of risk aversion. Section 6 implements this approach using the estimates from MA. Section 7 develops a structural model
and assesses the extent to which the proposed approach matches the structural notions of
ex-ante welfare. Section 8 uses the model to assess the potential impact of violations of the
implementation assumptions outlined in Section 5. Section 9 concludes.

2

Stylized Example

I begin with a stylized example to illustrate the distinction between market surplus and exante expected utility and to summarize the paper’s main results. Suppose individuals have
$30 dollars but face a risk of losing $m dollars, where m is uniformly distributed between 0
and 10. Let DEx−ante denote the willingness to pay or “demand” for a full insurance contract
that is measured prior to individuals learning anything about their particular realization of
m. This solves

(1)
u 30 − DEx−ante = E [u (30 − m)]
R 10
1
where E [u (30 − m)] = 10
u (30 − m) dm is the expected utility if uninsured.
0
Suppose individuals have a utility function with a constant coefficient of relative risk
1
aversion of 3 (i.e. u (c) = 1−σ
c1−σ and σ = 3). This implies individuals are willing to pay
DEx−ante = 5.50 for an insurance policy that fully compensates for their loss. The cost this
policy would be E [m] = 5. Full insurance generates a market surplus of $0.50.
conditions.

7

Figure 1: Example Willingness to Pay and Cost Curves
B. After Information Revealed

10

10

A. Before Information Revealed

6

* 1

45617

$

$

6

"#$%#&'$&()*%(&$+)#,$+#)-.#/-$')01-&

8

8

! "#$%&'( ) * "#$%&'( + , - ) ./0.

* 1

2

2

4

4

! 1

0

.2

.4
.6
Fraction Insured

.8

1 2" ) .

0

0

1 2" ) 3

0

1

! 1

.2

.4
.6
Fraction Insured

.8

1

Figure 1A draws the demand and cost curves that would be revealed through random
variation in prices in this environment, as formalized in Einav et al. (2010). The horizontal
axis enumerates the population in descending order of their willingness to pay for insurance,
indexed by s ∈ [0, 1]. The vertical axis reflects prices, costs, and willingness to pay in the
market. Each individual is willing to pay $5.50 for insurance, reflected in the horizontal
demand curve of D (s) = $5.50. In addition, each person imposes an expected cost of $5
on the insurance company, which generates a flat cost curve of C (s) = $5. If a competitive
market were to open up in this setting, one would expect everyone to purchase insurance
at a price of $5, depicted by the vertical line at sCE = 1. This allocation would generate
W Ex−Ante = $0.50 of welfare, as reflected by the market surplus defined as the integral
between demand and cost curve.
What happens if individuals learn about their costs before they choose whether to purchase insurance? For simplicity, consider the extreme case that individuals have fully learned
their cost, m. Willingness to pay will equal individuals’ known costs, D (s) = m (s). Those
who learn they will lose $10 will be willing to pay $10 for “insurance” against their loss; individuals who learn they will lose $0 will be willing to pay nothing. The uniform distribution
of risks generates a linear demand curve falling from $10 at s = 0 to $0 at s = 1. The cost
imposed on the insurer by the type s, C (s), will equal their willingness to pay of D (s), as
shown in Figure 1B.
If an insurer were to try to sell insurance, they would need to set prices to cover the
average cost of those who purchase insurance. Let AC (s) = E [C (S) |S ≤ s] denote the

8

average cost of those with willingness to pay above D (s) .6 This average cost lies everywhere
above the demand curve. Since no one is willing to pay the pooled cost of those with higher
willingness to pay, the market would fully unravel. The unique competitive equilibrium
would involve no one obtaining any insurance, sCE = 0.
What is the welfare cost of this market unraveling? From a market surplus perspective,
there is no welfare loss. There are no valuable foregone trades that can take place at the time
insurance choices are made. This reflects an extreme case of a more general phenomenon
identified in Hirshleifer (1971). The market demand curve does not capture the value of
insurance against the portion of risk that has already been realized at the time insurance
choices are made. This means that policies that maximize market surplus may not maximize
expected utility if one measures expected utility prior to when all information about m is
revealed to the individuals.
How can one recover measures of ex-ante welfare? The traditional approach to measuring
DEx−Ante and the value of other insurance market policies would require the econometrician
to specify economic primitives, such as a utility function and an assumption about individuals’ information sets at the time of choice. It would then also involve measuring the
distribution of outcomes that enter the utility function, such as consumption, and use this
information to infer the ex-ante value of insurance from the model. Intuitively, if one knows
the utility function, u, and the cross-sectional distribution of consumption (30 − m in the
example above), then one can use this information to compute DEx−Ante in equation (1).
For recent implementations of this approach, see Handel et al. (2015), Section IV of Einav
et al. (2016), or Finkelstein et al. (2016).
The goal of this paper is to measure the expected utility impact of insurance market
policies, such as optimal subsidies and mandates, without knowledge of the full distribution
of structural primitives in the economy (e.g. utilities, outcomes, and beliefs). Rather, the
paper builds on the reduced form framework that uses price variation to identify demand
and cost curves in the economy.
The core idea can be seen in the following example of a budget-neutral expansion of
the market. To expand the size of the insurance market in a budget neutral way, one
needs to subsidize insurance purchase and tax those who do not purchase insurance. These
transfers between insured and uninsured do not affect market surplus. The market surplus
from expanding the size of the insurance market from s to s + ds is given by D (s) − C (s).
However, from an ex-ante perspective, these transfers affect welfare if the marginal utility of
income is different for the insured versus uninsured.
6

Throughout, we will let S denote the random variable corresponding to different types and s denote a
number corresponding to the size of the insurance market.

9

The first main result shows that if individuals had been asked their willingness to pay to
have a large insurance market prior to learning their risk type, they would have been willing
to pay not just D (s) but an additional amount EA (s), where
EA (s) = s (1 − s) (−D′ (s))

E [uc |Ins] − E [uc |U nins]
E [uc ]

(2)

The first term, −s (1 − s) D′ (s) characterizes the size of the transfer from uninsured to inc |U nins]
,
sured when expanding the size of the insurance market. The second term, E[uc |Ins]−E[u
E[uc ]
captures the value of this transfer using the difference in the marginal utilities of income between the insured and uninsured. If the insured have higher (lower) marginal utilities of
income, then expanding the size of the insurance market by lowering the prices paid by the
insured has ex-ante value beyond what is captured in traditional measures of market surplus.
Constructing EA (s) in equation (2) requires knowledge of the difference in marginal
utilities between insured and uninsured. Such differences are not directly observed. The
second main result of the paper shows that if consumption levels are the only determinant
of marginal utilities (as would be the case in canonical models of insurance like the model
here or in more general models with additive separable utility over consumption), then one
can approximate difference in marginal utilities using the difference in consumption between
insured and uninsured, multiplied by a coefficient of risk aversion. However consumption is
rarely observed in practice. Therefore, in a final step I show that if there are not systematic
differences in income or liquidity between insured and uninsured, then one can actually proxy
consumption differences using the demand curve. In the end, this yields conditions under
which the difference in marginal utilities can be written as
E [uc |Ins] − E [uc |U nins]
≈ γ (D (s) − E [D (S) |S ≥ s])
E [uc ]

(3)

where D (s) − E [D (S) |S ≥ s] is the difference in willingness to pay between the average
′′
is the coefficient of absouninsured individual and the marginal insured type and γ = −u
u′
lute risk aversion. It is important to note that the assumptions needed to generate equation
(3) are restrictive and stated formally in Section 5. Most notably, they require no income
or liquidity differences between insured and uninsured and they assume no preference heterogeneity. While these assumptions are certainly not without loss of generality, the key
advantage of this formula is that it provides a benchmark implementation to measure exante expected utility with only the addition of a risk aversion coefficient. Section 8 provides
a practical discussion of violations of these assumptions and what types of additional data
or parameters can be useful in those cases to recover ex-ante welfare.
10

8

10

Figure 2: Recovering Ex-Ante Willingness to Pay

6

* "#$%&'( 1 ) * 1 < ,4617

$

,4 ./0 ) /0 8 /0 8 3. 8
) ./;0

4

, * "#$%&'( 617 + 5617 ) ./0.

9
8 :/0
:0

! 1

0

2

* 1

0

.2

.4
.6
Fraction Insured

.8

1

To illustrate how the formula for EA (s) recovers ex-ante welfare, Figure 2 calculates
EA (s) for all values of s ∈ [0, 1] using equations (2) and (3). The coefficient of risk aversion of
3
, where 25 is the average consumption
3 implies a coefficient of absolute risk aversion of γ = 25
in the economy. At each value of s, DEx−Ante (s) measures the impact on ex-ante expected
utility of expanding the size of the insurance market from s to s + ds. For example, when
50% of the market is insured, the formula suggests that individuals are willing to pay an
additional $0.75 to expand the insurance market relative to what is revealed through the
observed demand curve. The integral from s = 0 to s = 1 measures the ex-ante willingness
to pay to fully insure the market (relative to having no one insured):
D

Ex−Ante

=

Z

1

DEx−Ante (s) = 5.50
0

Numerically integrating ex-ante demand curve in Figure 2 yields approximately $5.50, which
equals the integral under the demand curve in Figure 1A. The ex-ante demand curve recovers

11

the willingness to pay individuals would have for everyone to be insured (s = 1) if they were
asked this willingness to pay prior to learning m.
The model in this section is highly stylized. There is no moral hazard, no preference
heterogeneity, and the model assumed all information about costs, m, was revealed at the
time of making the insurance decision. The next three sections extend these derivations
to capture more realistic features of insurance markets encountered in common empirical
applications and applies them to the study of health insurance subsidies to low-income adults
in Massachusetts. The main result of Section 4 will be to show that equation (2) continues
to be the key additional sufficient statistic required to construct the ex-ante willingness to
pay for insurance. Section 5 will then establish conditions under which one can approximate
this difference using the demand and cost curves combined with a measure of risk aversion,
as in equation (3) above.

3

General Model

3.1

Setup

Individuals face evolving risk over their lives that is captured by the realization of a state
variable, θt , that is realized in each period t. The realization of this state variable potentially
impacts all aspects of an individual’s life, including their level of utility, their marginal utility
of consumption or medical spending, their income, etc. Realized utility in period t is denoted
ut (c, m; θt ), where c is non-medical consumption and m is medical consumption.7
For a sequence or realizations {θt }t and choices {ct (θt ) , mt (θt )}t , an individual’s realized
P
utility over a lifetime that is given by t≥0 ut (ct (θt ) , mt (θt ) ; θt ). At any time t, individuals
with state variable θt have beliefs about future states of the world that generate an expectation E [◦|θt ].8 The expected future utility of an individual from the perspective of what

P
they know at time t is given by E
t′ ≥t ut′ (ct′ (θt′ ) , mt′ (θt′ ) ; θt′ ) |θt . Let t = 0 denote the
time prior to any individuals learning that they differ from other individuals. This “ex-ante”
This allows for but do not require standard discounting, e.g. ut (c, m; θt ) = β t ũ (c, m; θt ). Note also
that θt is not assumed to be uni-dimensional – it captures all elements of risk that are experienced by the
individual at time t, such as income, shocks, health shocks, the quality of one’s friends, the extent to which
one likes their job, and their satisfaction with referee comments about the generality of a model, etc. And,
it includes individual’s information known at time t about the future evolution of these risks.
8
The assumption that θt captures all aspects of an individuals’ knowledge at time t is without loss of
generality because θt is not assumed to be uni-dimensional.
7

12

expected utility of individuals in the economy is given by
E

"

X
t≥0

#

ut (ct , mt ; θt ) =

X

E [ut (ct , mt ; θt )]

t≥0

where E is taken with respect to the unconditional distribution of all possible realizations of
sequences of {θt }t in all periods. This is also equivalent to the utilitarian measure of social
welfare (as shown in Harsanyi (1978)).
In each period t, individuals observe their realization of θt , which determines their utility
function and net incomes in period t, yt (θt ). They then choose ct (θt ) and mt (θt ) subject
to a budget constraint that depends upon whether they have purchased insurance to help
cover their medical expenses, m. Insured individuals have an out of pocket cost9 of x (mν )
for gross medical spending of mν , leading to the budget constraint in period t = ν for the
insured of
(4)
cν + x (mν ) + pI ≤ yν (θν ) + τ.
and
cν + mν + pU ≤ yν (θν ) + τ

(5)

for the uninsured. The values pI and pU are the prices paid by the insured and uninsured,
respectively.10 The final term, τ , is a (hypothetical) transfer paid to individuals in the
insurance market (i.e. θν ∈ Θν ). This term that will be used below to define formal measures
of willingness to pay. The choice of c and m depend upon whether the individual has chosen

to be insured. I denote the choices of the insured and uninsured by cIt (θt ) , mIt (θt ) t and
 U
ct (θt ) , mUt (θt ) t , respectively.11
For simplicity, the model does not explicitly allow a borrowing/savings decision, or other
forms of insurance that individuals might own. But, these can be captured in the model
by considering net income, y (θt ), to be an endogenous choice made by individuals. To
first order, the envelope theorem implies that changes in savings in response to changes in
insurance subsidies will not affect their willingness to pay for those subsidies (Chetty (2006)).
9

The model focuses on a health insurance contract that pays for medical spending, m. But, the results
in Section 4 hold for a more general model in which the insurance contract pays an amount that depends on
the state of the world, θν , x (m; θν ) . This would allow the model to nest unemployment insurance settings
where the contract pays out conditional on the state of the world. I leave a deeper analysis of this case for
future work.
10
I assume that the prices pU and pI are paid in period t = ν to allow the model to naturally nest a
purely static environment, such as thee environment in Einav et al. (2010). But, the model can readily be
generalized to allow prices to be paid in other periods, such as t = µ.
11
These choices may also depend upon pI and pU even conditional upon insurance purchase (e.g. through
income effects). For brevity, this dependence is not included in the notation but is captured where applicable
in the analysis, most notably in the construction of the derivative of the average cost curve below.

13

Therefore, the welfare conclusions derived in Section 4 will continue to hold if one were to
allow y to be an endogenous choice. However, differential savings between the insured and
uninsured would affect the implementation provided in Section 5, and I discuss how data
on consumption can be preferred in settings where such differential savings/borrowing is
important.
WTP for Insurance At some time t = µ (where µ ≤ ν), individuals with θµ ∈ Θµ have
the opportunity to purchase insurance for the contract in period ν. In the example below,
this notation will correspond to a focus on the 2011 subsidy schedule for those with incomes
at 150% FPL in the Massachusetts health insurance exchange (i.e. v = 2011 and µ is the
open enrollment period for the 2011 market in the fall of 2010). 12
Individuals evaluate their decision to purchase insurance using their information set at
time t = µ, which means they evaluate utility using E [◦|θµ ]. Let d (pU ; θµ ) denote the
individual’s marginal willingness to pay to be insured relative to uninsured. This solves:
h 

i
h 



i
E u yν (θν ) − mU (θν ) − pU , mU (θν ) ; θν |θµ = E u yν (θν ) − x mI (θν ) − d (pU , θµ ) + pU , mIt (θν ) ; θν |θµ

(6)

which equates expected utility if uninsured (paying a price pU ) to the utility of the insured
(paying a price d (pU , θµ ) + pU ). All individuals with pI − pU ≤ d (pU , θµ ) will choose to
purchase insurance, whereas those with d (pU , θµ ) < pI − pU will choose to remain uninsured
and pay pU .
For all individuals with θµ ∈ Θµ , let Q (d (pU , θµ )) denote the quantile corresponding to
a given level of willingness to pay, d (pU , θµ ). Let S (θµ ) denote the share of the market that
would purchase insurance if prices were set so that the type θµ is indifferent to purchasing
insurance.13 And, let D (pU , s) denote the relative price required for a fraction s of the
market to purchase insurance. This solves:
D (pU , S (θµ )) = d (pU , θµ )

∀θµ ∈ Θµ

Throughout, I refer to D (pU , s) as the “demand curve” or “willingness to pay curve”. When
viewed as a function of s, D (pU , s) corresponds to the curve in Einav et al. (2010) that would
be revealed through random variation in prices, pI and pU . In practice, many empirical
applications (e.g. Einav et al. (2010), Handel et al. (2015) Finkelstein et al. (2019)) impose
12
Focusing on a single period insurance contract differs from the focus in Handel et al. (2015), who consider
the welfare impact of reclassification risk, which results from repeated interaction in a market over time.
13
Formally, this solves S (θµ ) = 1 − Q (d (pU , θµ )), where Q (d (pU , θµ )) denote the quantile corresponding
to a given level of willingness to pay, d (pU , θµ ).

14

the empirical assumption that D (pU , s) does not depend on pU . This can be micro-founded
by assuming a CARA utility function.
Cost of Insured Population The average cost cost imposed on the insurer when a fraction s of the market owns insurance is given by



AC (s) = E mIν (θν ) − x mIν (θν ) |S (θµ ) ≤ s

(7)

so that sAC (s) is the total cost of insuring a fraction s of the market.14 I assume individuals
in the economy have rational expectations and that the realizations of mIν (θν ) are idiosyncratic. This means that the realized distributions of mIν (θν ) correspond to the cross-sectional
distributions in the economy.15
The marginal cost curve is the derivative of total cost:16 ,
C (s) =

d
sAC (s)
ds

Market Clearing and the Government Budget Let the functions pI (s) and pU (s)
denote the prices of insurance and remaining uninsured when a fraction s of the market owns
insurance. By definition, these prices must be consistent with the definition of willingness
to pay,
(8)
D (pU (s) , s) = pI (s) − pU (s)
Lastly, let G (s) denote the total cost (net of premiums collected) to the insurer of insuring
a fraction s of the market by setting prices pI (s) and pU (s):
G (s) = sAC (s) − [spI (s) + (1 − s) pU (s)]
| {z }
|
{z
}
Cost of Insured

(9)

Premiums Collected

G (s) captures the net resource expenditures (e.g. government subsidies) for this health
insurance market.
14

The expectation conditioning on S (θµ ) is taken with respect to all θµ ∈ Θµ , as S (◦) is not defined
outside of the set of individuals in the market.
15
In contrast to structural approaches, I do not require that the econometrician knows the individual’s
information set, θµ , or the subjective belief distribution that generates E [◦|θµ ].
16
Imposing the assumption that price changes do not affect m, Einav et al. (2010) show that this can be
represented as the difference between expenditures and out-of-pocket spending for the marginal purchasers
of insurance:



C (s) = E mIν (θν ) − x mIν (θν ) |S (θµ ) = s

15

3.2

Setting: Health Insurance Subsidies for Low-Income Adults

This section maps the model environment onto the health insurance marketplace for lowincome adults in Massachusetts’ subsidized insurance exchange, Commonwealth Care. The
Massachusetts health reform of 2006 set up insurance exchanges, mandates, and health
insurance exchange. This design of this insurance market later became a model for the
Affordable Care Act. See Finkelstein et al. (2019) for a detailed discussion of this health
insurance exchange.
Using administrative data from Massachusetts, Finkelstein et al. (2019) exploit discontinuities in the subsidy schedule to estimate willingness to pay and costs for low-income adults
in the exchange. I focus on the baseline estimates from Finkelstein et al. (2019), which use
the empirical discontinuities in 2011 to measure the willingness to pay, D (s), and cost curve,
C (s), for those with incomes at 150% FPL.1718 In the language of the model in Section 3, the
set of people eligible for the market, Θµ , corresponds to individuals with incomes at 150%
FPL during the open enrollment period (t = µ) in the fall of 2010.19 As is common in the
empirical literature, their empirical model implies that the marginal willingness to pay for
insurance does not depend on pU . As noted above, this can be micro-founded in the model
by assuming CARA utility, as will be done in the structural framework offered in Section
7. Therefore, when referring to the empirical demand curves in the Finkelstein et al. (2019)
setting, I will often simply refer to these as D (s) instead of D (pU , s).
Figure 3 presents the results for D (s) and C (s) plotted as a function of s. The patterns
reveal that those with the highest willingness to pay (low values of s) are willing to pay more
than their marginal cost for insurance, D (s) > C (s). But those with the lowest willingness
to pay are willing to pay less than the cost the cost of their insurance. The model captures
D (s) < C (s) by allowing part of the cost to be driven by the presence of moral hazard –
part of the increase in cost from insurance is not valued by the individual because they do
not have to pay for it.20
If a private market were to try to sell this insurance without government subsidies, Finkelstein et al. (2019) show that their estimates imply that this market would fully unravel so
that no one obtains insurance. Unraveling is the result of both adverse selection and uncompensated care externalities. Uncompensated care externalities arise because the total cost
17

150% FPL corresponds to roughly $16K in income for an individual with no children.
Relative to the numbers presented in Finkelstein et al. (2019), these curves are scaled by a factor of 12
to translate the monthly premiums and costs into annual figures.
19
Formally, they are individuals at 150% FPL in the fall of 2010 who reside in Massachusetts and who do
not have access to employer-provided health insurance.
20
In contrast, this feature is not captured in the stylized model of Section 2 or in other previous models
studying reclassification risk and notions of ex-ante expected utility (e.g. Handel et al. (2015); Einav et al.
(2016))
18

16

to a private insurer would not only include the average resource cost of those insured, C (s),
but also the cost of care that would have otherwise been provided through uncompensated
care programs. Because private insurance would have to pay these additional costs, it causes
the average cost faced by the private insurer to lie everywhere above the demand curve.

1000

567-0)
2000

3000

Figure 3: Willingness to Pay and Cost for Health Insurance for
Adults with Incomes at 150% of Federal Poverty Line in MA

!2&3

0

42&3

0

.2

.4

.6

.8

1

8)09':#/$;/&()-1

Definition of “Ex-ante” The goal of the rest of the paper is to address normative questions such as: what is the welfare cost of this unraveling? Should the government raise
penalties pU to finance lower insurance prices, pI ? What is the rationale for the government
to further subsidize insurance prices, pI ? Are these subsidies to those earning near 150%
FPL a more (or less) efficient method of redistribution than tax credits, such as the earned
income tax credit?
The aim is to answer these questions by measuring individuals expected utilities that are
evaluated prior to deciding whether to purchase insurance in the fall of 2010. This means that
17

one can think of the approach as measuring expected utility behind a full “veil of ignorance”
(e.g. prior to birth). For example, at birth one could conceptually ask individuals what
subsidies they would like for insurance if they find themselves in the MA health insurance
exchange in the fall of 2010 with incomes at 150% and deciding whether to purchase insurance
for 2011? But, it is also equivalent to consider the same question at later points in an
individuals’ life as long as they have not yet learned anything about their 2011 health risk.
Formally, they can’t know anything about θν or θµ .21 This means that one can think of the
approach as measuring utility at birth or using a more traditional “veil of ignorance”. But,
one can also use a later frame of reference as long as they have no knowledge about their
particular risk realizations in the market.
The next section provides a general characterization of ex-ante measures of welfare that
answer these questions. The subsequent section 5 provides a method of implementing these
measures. Section 6 discusses the results for the MA health insurance context.

4
4.1

Measuring Ex-Ante Welfare
Budget Neutral Policies: “Ex-Ante” Demand Curve

I consider two classes of policies: Budget neutral and non-budget neutral policies. Budget
neutral policies involve reductions in the price of insurance, pI , financed by increases in the
price/penalty of being uninsured, pU . In a world where prices cover costs, pI (s) and pU (s)
satisfy two equations:
D (pU (s) , s) = pI (s) − pU (s)
G (s) = 0
Traditional market surplus would evaluate the welfare impact of these policies using
market surplus, D (pU , s) − C (s). The optimal size of the insurance market would equate
demand to cost. Here, I use the modeling environment in Section 3 to measure the ex-ante
welfare impact of such policies.
For any prices, pI and pU , and transfers, τ (θt ), let vt (pI , pU , τ (θt ) ; θt ) be the realized
utility of individual in period t:
vt (pI , pU , τ (θt ) ; θt ) = u (ct (θt ) , mt (θt ) ; θt )
21

Formally, suppose there exists a period t < µ such that individuals do not know anything about their
particular realization of θµ or θν . Then, for any function f (θν ) of θν , it will necessarily be the case that
E [f (θν ) |θµ ∈ Θµ , θt′ ] = E [f (θν ) |θµ ∈ Θµ ]. Hence, the expected utility for those in the market is not
dependent on θt .

18

where the chosen allocations of ct (θt ) and mt (θt ) depend upon the prices, pI and pU , and
transfers, τ (θt ).22 The ex-ante expected utility of having prices pI and pU , along with
transfers τ is given by:
V (pI , pU , τ ) = E

"

X
t′ ≥0

vt′ (pI , pU , τ ; θt )

#

(10)

Let W (s) denote the willingness to pay to have a fraction s of the market insured.
Formally, I define this as the amount of income individuals would be willing to take in the
uninsured world that equates their expected utility to its level if the fraction s is insured.
This solves:
(11)
V (pI (s) , pU (s) , 0) = V (∞, 0, W (s))
where the LHS is the ex-ante expected utility of prices pI (s) and pU (s) and the RHS is the
expected utility of simply giving a transfer in the world where everyone is insured.
The function W (s) measures the ex-ante welfare impact of changes to prices of insurance
in the market. Equation (11) shows that the size of the market that maximizes W (s) is the
size of the market maximizes expected utility, V (pI (s) , pU (s) , 0).
Sufficient Statistic Representation of W (s) In general, measuring W (s) requires
knowledge of the full underlying structural model embedded in equation (11). Traditional
approaches to measuring W (s) would follow a structural approach that specifies a utility
function, u, budget constraints in all periods, beliefs about future outcomes, and one would
estimate the model using data on observed data on c and m, combined with sufficient data
variation to estimate all model components. In particular, one needs to separately estimate
both utility and beliefs, which is often quite difficult and rests on assumptions that the
econometrician perfectly observes individuals’ information sets.
In contrast, the approach developed here is to characterize the sufficient statistics required
for measuring W (s). I exploit the envelope theorem to fully characterize the derivative of
W (s) at each s, which can then be used to assess the welfare impact of changes in the size
of the insurance market. In particular, differentiating equation (11) with respect to s yields

′

W (s) ∗

!

∂V ∞, 0, S EA (s)
∂τ

=
=

22



d X
vt (pI (s) , pU (s) , 0; θt )
E
ds
t≥0




∂uν ! ′
∂uν ! ′
−pI (s) + 1 {S (θµ ) < s}
−pU (s) |θν ∈ Θν
E 1 {S (θµ ) ≥ s}
∂cν
∂cν

They also depend implicitly on whether individuals chose insurance at those prices.

19

(12)

(13)

The change in prices affect utility through the marginal utility of consumption in period ν.
Behavioral responses from other arguments of the utility function drop out of this equation
due to the envelope theorem. The key feature of equation 12 is that the price changes, p′I (s)
and p′U (s), for the insured and uninsured are weighted by individual’s marginal utilities of
ν
. This means that transfers between insured and uninsured have value from
consumption, ∂u
∂cν
an ex-ante perspective to the extent to which they help move resources from states of the
world with low marginal utilities of income to states of the world with high marginal utilities
of income.
Proposition 1 provides a characterization of W ′ (s) for all s that illustrates how ex-ante
welfare depends crucially on the difference in marginal utilities between the insured and
uninsured.
Proposition 1. For budget neutral policies satisfying G′ (s) = 0, the marginal welfare impact
of expanding the size of the insurance market from s to s + ds is given by
W ′ (s) = EA (s) + D (s) − C (s) + δp (s)

(14)

where EA (s) is the additional ex-ante value of expanding the size of the insurance market,


∂D
EA (s) = s (1 − s) −
∂s



(15)

β (s)

and β (s) is the percentage difference in marginal utilities of income for the insured relative
to the uninsured,
h
i
h
i
E

β (s) =

∂uν
∂cν |S

ν
(θµ ) < s − E ∂u
∂cν |S (θµ ) ≥ s
i
h
ν
|θ
∈
Θ
E ∂u
µ
µ
∂cν

(16)

and δp (s) is a term that adjusts for the case when the marginal willingness to pay for insurance
depends on pU ,

where δp (s) = 0 if

−s
∂D
δp (s) =
∂D
∂pU 1 + s ∂p
U
∂D
∂pU





∂D
1 + (1 − s) β (s) 1 + s
∂s



= 0, as is assumed in many empirical applications.

Proof. See Appendix A.
∂D
Equation (14) shows that when ∂p
= 0 the marginal ex-ante willingness to pay for a
U
larger insurance market is given by the sum of D (s) + EA (s) − C(s). The term D (s) −
C (s) is traditional market surplus: expanding the size of the insurance market increases exante welfare to the extent to which individuals are willing to pay more than their costs for
insurance. EA (s) captures the additional ex-ante value of expanding the size of the market

20

through its impact on insurance prices. Expanding the insurance market induces a transfer
from uninsured to insured of size (1 − s) (−sD′ (s)).23 The transfer is valued according to
the difference in marginal utilities between the insured and uninsured, β (s).
Sign of β (s) Canonical models of insurance predict that β (s) > 0. This is because those
who choose not to purchase insurance expect to have out of pocket medical spending that
is lower than the marginal price of insurance, which implies that the consumption of the
insured are lower than those of the uninsured. Concavity of the utility function then implies
that the marginal utilities of the insured are higher than the uninsured, so that β (s) > 0.
But, it is possible to have β (s) < 0. For example, if (a) moral hazard is sufficiently large
and (b) differences in liquidity is a primary driver of insurance purchase, then it could be
that the uninsured have a higher marginal utility of income than the insured, β (s) < 0. In
this case, expanding the size of the insurance market will transfer resources from the liquidity
constrained to those who are less constrained, which would suggest that EA (s) < 0.24

4.2

Non-Budget Neutral Policies: The MVPF

In many cases, subsidies for the insured are paid by those not in the insurance market (i.e.
θµ 6∈ Θµ ), not through higher prices to the uninsured in the market, pU . Massachusetts provides subsidies for insurance for low-income individuals that are financed by taxpayers more
generally, not by the uninsured with incomes at 150% FPL. Health insurance subsidies are a
method of redistribution to the low-income individuals who purchase health insurance. Are
insurance subsidies to those earning near 150% FPL an) efficient method of redistribution?
To answer this question, we follow the approach developed in Hendren (2016) and Hendren and Sprung-Keyser (2019) to construct the marginal value of public funds, MVPF, of
increased subsidies that lower pI . The MVPF is given by the ratio of individuals’ willingness to pay for higher subsidies normalized by the net cost to the government of increasing
23

The original version of this manuscript defined W (s) to be the willingness to pay out of the insured
population as opposed to the average uninsured population when s = 0. As a result, the Taylor approximation
in the earlier draft was performed around the average consumption of the insured as opposed to the average
level of consumption in the population. The result of this is that the formula for EA (s) included an additional
C (s) − D (s) term in earlier manuscripts. The revised definition of W (s) now implies it is most appropriate
to do the Taylor approximation around the average individual in the market. This leads to the formula
for EA (s) in equation (15) that does not include a C (s) − D (s) term and is also identical to the formula
provided in Section 2.
24
Relatedly, it is important to note that the model remains valid if the underlying heterogeneity generates
advantageous as opposed to adverse selection. This could occur if S reflects a preference shock or liquidity
shock such that those who prefer not to purchase insurance are also the latently higher risk population.
In this case, the difference in marginal utilities between insured and uninsured remains the key sufficient
statistic required for measuring ex-ante expected utility.

21

subsidies,

W ′ (s)
Marginal WTP
M V P F (s) = ′
=
G (s)
Marginal Cost

For every $1 of net government spending, the policy delivers MVPF dollars of welfare to the
beneficiaries in units of their own willingness to pay. Previous literature (e.g. Hendren and
Sprung-Keyser (2019) and Hendren (2014, 2016)) shows how one can use MVPFs to make
statements about the social welfare impact of hypothetical budget neutral policies. Given
two policies, A and B, spending more on policy A financed by reduced spending on policy
B increases social welfare if and only if one prefers giving M V P FA to policy A beneficiaries
versus M V P FB to policy B beneficiaries.25
Returning to the comparison of health insurance subsidies to tax cuts to those earning
near 150% FPL, one can consider the MVPF of a reduction in pI . The marginal cost has
two components. First, lowering pI by $1 increases the cost by $1 for each of the s enrollees.
Second, there is an additional cost from those induced to purchase insurance by the lower
prices. These enrollees pay D (s) = pI (s) but cost the insurer C (s). So, the new enrollees
impose a cost of C (s) − D (s). A $1 price reduction increases the size of the market by
1
. Normalizing by the size of the market, s, the total cost of lowering premiums by $1
−D ′ (s)
.26
is 1 + C(s)−D(s)
s(−D ′ (s))
For willingness to pay, an individual who has already learned that their value of θµ is
such that S (θµ ) < s so that they decide to purchase insurance would be willing to pay $1
to have premiums that are $1 lower. So, if willingness to pay were calculated after learning
1
.
θµ , the numerator would simply by 1 and the MVPF would be C(s)−D(s)
1+

s(−D ′ (s))

Not everyone at 150% FPL purchases insurance. This means that one cannot readily
compare the MPVF of health insurance subsidies to the MPVF of a tax credit that gives
everyone at 150% FPL additional income. The two policies have different distributional
incidence – those purchasing insurance might be sicker than the average population and
have a higher (or lower) marginal utility of income. The ex-ante perspective provides a
novel path forward to compare health insurance subsidies to a tax credit. From behind
a veil of ignorance, one can ask whether individuals would want to have $1 spent on tax
cuts to those earning near 150% FPL or $1 spent on health insurance subsidies to those
earning near 150% FPL. Which policy increases welfare depends on which MVPF is higher,
25
When two policies have the same distributional incidence, they can provide a Pareto-based guidance on
optimal policy: if the MVPF of lowering health insurance prices is higher than the MPVF of a tax cut to an
identical population, then everyone’s welfare can be increased by lowering health insurance prices financed
by a reduction in tax subsidies.
26
More generally, if there are additional behavioral responses that affect the government budget (e.g. if
insurance improves health and increases taxable income, or if the subsidies distort labor supply, etc.), these
would also need to be incorporated into the marginal cost of lowering premiums.

22

where crucially one needs to use the WTP for health insurance subsidies from an ex-ante
perspective prior to learning their health risk (i.e. prior to learning their particular value
of θµ ∈ Θµ ). Proposition 2 shows that one can construct exactly this measure by adding
(1 − s) β (s) to the willingness to pay in the MVPF for health insurance subsidies. This
adjusts for the fact that those purchasing insurance might have a higher marginal utility of
income as compared to the average population with θµ ∈ Θµ .
Proposition 2. Suppose pU (s) = 0. The MVPF of additional insurance market subsidies
when a fraction s of the market is insured is given by
M V P F (s) =

1 + (1 − s) β (s)
W ′ (s)
=
Marginal Cost
1 + C(s)−D(s)
s(−D ′ (s))

(17)

where β (s) is the percentage difference in marginal utilities of income for the insured relative
to the uninsured given by equation (16).
Proof. See Appendix B
From behind the veil of ignorance,
$1 for theiinsured is valued using the marginal utility of
h
∂uν
consumption for the insured, E ∂cν |S (θµ ) < s . In contrast, a tax cut to those with incomes
h
i
∂uν
near 150% FPL has a willingness to pay of $1 for each person, E ∂cν |θµ ∈ Θµ . Therefore,
i
i
h
h
∂uν
ν
|S
(θ
)
<
|θ
∈
Θ
s
/E
the desired willingness to pay needs to be inflated by E ∂u
µ
µ ,
∂cν
∂cν µ
which can be expressed as 1 + (1 − s) β (s).
Estimates of the MVPF for changes to the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) range
between 0.9 and 1.3 (Hendren and Sprung-Keyser (2019)). To the extent to which this
MVPF reflects the MVPF of a more targeted tax credit to those with incomes at 150% FPL,
this provides a benchmark against which one can compare the MVPF for health insurance
subsidies. If the MVPF in equation (17) exceeds this MVPF for the EITC, then reduced
spending on the EITC that is used to finance greater health insurance subsidies for those
with low incomes would increase ex-ante expected utility.

5

Implementation

The key additional parameter required to construct measures of ex-ante expected utility
is the difference in marginal utilities between insured and uninsured, β (s). The canonical
approach to measuring ex-ante expected utility would estimate a structural model. In this
sense, the results above show that the key parameter that drives the ability of structural

23

models to generate measures of ex-ante welfare is through their estimates of the difference
in marginal utilities of income between the insured and uninsured, β (s).
The aim of this section is to provide a transparent method for estimating ex-ante expected
utility that does not require specification of the underlying market primitives that are often
difficult to observe (e.g. information sets). I provide a set of assumptions that enable
β (s) to be written as a function of market demand curves combined with a measure of risk
aversion. The required assumptions are not without loss of generality. To assess the quality
of the fit and impact of violating these assumptions, I compare the estimates to a simulated
implementation using a structural model in Section 8.
I begin by outlining the benchmark implementation using market demand and cost curves,
combined with a measure of risk aversion.

5.1

Estimating β (s) Using Market Demand and Cost Curves

To provide a method for estimating β (s), I draw upon assumptions commonly used in the
literature on optimal unemployment insurance. In particular, I begin by assuming that the
marginal utility of income does not depend on θν or m.
Assumption 1. uc depends only on the level of consumption, c, and does not vary across
individuals, so that the marginal utility of consumption can be written as
∂uν
(c, m; θν ) = f (c)
∂c
for all m and all θν .
Assumption 1 implies that if one can observe the level of an individual’s consumption,
then one can infer their marginal utility of income. This is a common assumption imposed
in the literature on optimal unemployment insurance (e.g. Baily (1978); Chetty (2006)), but
this assumption is not without loss of generality. Most notably, it assumes away preference
heterogeneity that is correlated with the marginal utility of income. I discuss violations of
this assumption in Section 8.
Imposing Assumption 1 means β (s) can be written as the coefficient of absolute risk aversion multiplied by the average difference in consumption between the insured and uninsured,
as stated in Proposition 3.
Proposition 3. Suppose Assumption 1 holds. Then, β (s) can be written as
β (s) ≈ γ∆c
24

(18)

where “≈” represents equality to a first order Taylor expansion of f (c), ∆c = E [c (θν ) |S ≥ s]−
E [c (θν ) |S < s] is the difference in consumption between the uninsured and insured, and
γ=

−f ′ (c)
f (c)

=

2u
∂c2
∂u
∂c

−∂

is the coefficient of absolute risk aversion.

Proof. Recall
E
β (s) =

h

∂uν
∂cν |S

i
h
i
ν
(θµ ) < s − E ∂u
|S
(θ
)
≥
s
µ
∂cν
h
i
ν
E ∂u
|θ
∈
Θ
ν
ν
∂cν

Begin with the denominator. Let c∗ denote any value of consumption. Note to first order, f (c) =
f (c∗ ) + f ′ (c∗ ) (c − c∗ ). This implies

∂uν
|S (θµ ) < s = f (c∗ ) + f ′ (c∗ ) E [c|S (θµ ) < s]
E
∂cν


and


∂uν
|S (θµ ) ≥ s = f (c∗ ) + f ′ (c∗ ) E [c|S (θµ ) ≥ s]
E
∂cν


So,
E






∂uν
∂uν
|S (θµ ) < s − E
|S (θµ ) ≥ s = f ′ (c∗ ) (E [c|S (θµ ) < s] − E [c|S (θµ ) ≥ s])
∂cν
∂cν

Now, since c∗ is as of yet left arbitrary, one can pick c∗ to satisfy E

h

∂uν
∂cν |θν

i
∈ Θν = f (c∗ ) exactly,

or one could choose
c∗ to beithe population average consumption of those with θν ∈ Θν , which
h
∗
ν
would satisfy E ∂u
∂cν |θν ∈ Θν = f (c ) exactly. In either case, the resulting expression yields
E

h

∂uν
∂cν |S

i
h
i
ν
(θµ ) < s − E ∂u
|S
(θ
)
≥
s
µ
∂cν
f ′ (c∗ )
i
h
=
(E [c|S (θµ ) < s] − E [c|S (θµ ) ≥ s])
f (c)
ν
E ∂u
∂cν |θν ∈ Θν

Multiplying each RHS term by −1 to give

−f ′ (c∗ )
f (c∗ )

and (E [c|S (θµ ) ≥ s] − E [c|S (θµ ) < s]) yields

the result.

If one observes consumption, then equation (18) provides a direct method for measuring
the difference in marginal utilities. This is analogous to the methods used in the literature
on optimal unemployment insurance (Baily (1978); Chetty (2006)).
In practice consumption is rarely observed. To provide an implementation method without consumption data, I make the additional assumption that incomes, yν (θ) do not vary
systematically between the insured and uninsured.
Assumption 2. No differences in average liquidity/income between the insured and unin25

sured,
E [yν (θν ) |S ≥ s] = E [yν (θν ) |S ≤ s]

∀s

Assumption 2 is not without loss of generality, but is natural in contexts like the MA
health insurance subsidies for those with incomes at exactly 150% FPL. But, in many contexts this assumption may be violated. Indeed, if the disposable income in period ν,yν (θν ),
is the result of endogenous savings to whether individuals have purchased insurance then
this could also generate a violation of Assumption 2. I return to a discussion of how one can
use consumption data to relax Assumption 2 in Section 8.1 below. The key advantage of
Assumption 2 is that it allows one to replace ∆c in equation 18 with information contained
in the market level demand curve, D (s), as is shown in Proposition 4.
Proposition 4. Suppose Assumptions 1 and 2 hold. Suppose moreover that the marginal
∂D
= 0. Then, for any full insurance
willingness to pay for insurance does not depend on pU , ∂p
U
27
contract with x (mν ) = 0 , the difference in marginal utilities is given by
β (s) = γ∆D

(19)

where ∆D is the difference between the marginal price of insurance and the average willingness to pay for the uninsured population,
∆D = D (pU (s) , s) − E [D (pU (s) , S (θµ )) |S (θµ ) ≥ s]
Proof. See Appendix D.
Proposition 4 provides a method of estimating ex-ante willingness to pay using the demand curve, combined with a measure of risk aversion. The estimate of risk aversion can
either be imported from external settings, or it can be estimated internally using the relationship between the markup individuals are willing to pay and the reduction in consumption
variance provided by the insurance, as discussed in Appendix C.

6

Application to MA Health Insurance Subsidies

This section measures the ex-ante welfare impacts of subsidies and mandates for low-income
adults at 150% FPL in the MA health insurance exchange using the demand and cost curve
27

It is straightforward to extend the result for for partial insurance contracts. The difference in marginal
utilities is given by β (s) = γ∆D + E [x (mν ) |S (θµ ) < s], where E [x (mν ) |S (θµ ) < s] is the average out of
pocket spending by the insured.

26

estimates from Finkelstein et al. (2019). I contrast these welfare conclusions to those generated from a more traditional analysis of market surplus.

3000

Figure 4: Market Surplus Measures of Welfare

567-0)

2000

5<=>

@0/10'-$!"#$%& ,0)A-'$&()*%(&$BC$5DE

1000

*,& F5<E=<

0

5>>?

&,& F$D<G

0

.2

.4

.6

.8

1

8)09':#/$;/&()-1

6.1

Budget neutral policies

I begin with the welfare impact of increasing subsidies for insurance if they are financed by
increasing prices/penalties on the insured. Figure 4 shows the market surplus approach to
this question by comparing D (s) to C (s). Market surplus is maximized when a fraction
s = 41% of the market is insured. The marginal price for insurance would then be $1581,
equal to the marginal cost of this individual imposed on the insurer. The welfare gain from
moving from s = 0 to s = 41% is given by the integral between D (s) and C (s). Individuals
in the market are on aggregate willing to pay $182 to have 41% of the market insured (instead
of no one insured). One can also ask whether mandates (s = 100%) are preferred to the full
unraveling allocation of s = 0. For those with D (s) below $1581, they would on aggregate
be willing to pay $227 to avoid the mandate. This means that mandates would lower total
27

market surplus by $45.
What insurance prices maximize ex-ante expected utility? To measure this, one requires
an estimate of risk aversion. For the baseline case, I take a common estimate from the health
insurance literature of γ = 5x10−4 (e.g. similar to estimates in Handel et al. (2015)).28 Table
1 also presents estimates for a range of alternative risk aversion coefficients discussed below.

Figure 5: Ex-Ante Welfare of Health Insurance for Low-Income
Adults
B. Expected-Utility Maximizing Market Size

3000

3000

A. Measuring Ex-Ante WTP

42MKE3HIJ2MKE3$F$<E>N

@0/10'-$'()%$*&$& -OP0/'-$Q-%+0)-$BC$5<RL

1000

1000

IJ2KE3$F$>L<

!2&3
42MKE3$F$<>N>

5NNL

567-0)
2000

567-0)
2000

42&3HIJ2&3

5<?M

*-0 F$5<S<<?

!2MKE3$F$<DNL

0

0

42&3

0

.2

.4

.6

.8

&-0 F$EDG

0

1

8)09':#/$;/&()-1

.2

.4

.6

.8

1

8)09':#/$;/&()-1

Figure 5 presents the ex-ante demand curve and welfare analyses using γ = 5x10−4 and
equation (19). Panel A illustrates the calculation of EA (s) when 50% of the population
owns insurance. The cost of the marginal enrollee is given by C (0.5) = 1438, willingness to
pay is D (0.5) = 1232, and the slope of willingness to pay is D′ (0.5) = −3405.29 The average
willingness to pay with those whose demand is below D (0.5) = 1232 is 548. Equation (15)
implies that the ex-ante willingness to pay for a larger insurance market is
EA (s) = (1 − s) s (−D′ (s)) γ (D (s) − E [D (S) |S ≥ s])

= .5 (0.5 ∗ 3405) 5x10−4 (1232 − 548)
= 291

28

As discussed in Appendix ??, Handel et al. (2015) estimates this for a relatively middle to high income
population making choices over insurance plans. Under the natural assumption that absolute risk aversion
decreases in consumption levels, this estimate is likely a lower bound on the size γ.
29
Finkelstein et al. (2019) estimate a piece-wise linear demand cure. To obtain smooth estimates of the
slope of demand, I regress the estimates of D (s) from Finkelstein et al. (2019) on a 10th order polynomial
in s. The results are similar for other smoothed functions.

28

Individuals with median (0.5) levels of willingness to pay are willing to pay $1,232 for insurance at the time the econometrician observes them in the market. But, prior to learning
their willingness to pay for insurance, individuals are willing to pay to have lower insurance
prices. From behind a veil of ignorance everyone would have been willing to pay $2.91 to
have the opportunity to purchase insurance at the prices that lead to 51% of the market
insured instead of 50% of the market insured (291 ∗ (0.51 − 0.5)).
Figure 5A also presents the ex-ante WTP curve, DEx−Ante (s), for all values of s.30 Expected utility is maximized when W ′ (s) = 0, or D (s) + EA (s) = C (s). This occurs when
54% of the market owns insurance and the marginal price of insurance is $1,117, as shown
in Figure 5B. This contrasts with the market surplus-maximizing size of the market of 41%.
The ex-ante optimal price is roughly 30% lower than the surplus-maximizing price of $1,580.
What is the welfare gain from pricing insurance optimally relative to the full unraveling
of the competitive market (s = 0)? Everyone would be willing to contribute $340 per person
if they could live in a world in which insurance prices set at p = $1117 as opposed to
having no one obtain insurance. This $340 is much larger than the loss of market surplus
of $182 shown in Figure 4. After learning their willingness to pay for insurance, D (s),
individuals would only be willing to contribute an average of $182 per person to set prices to
maximize economic surplus. The ex-ante welfare perspective leads to different conclusions
about optimal insurance prices and the welfare cost of adverse selection.
Mandates Is it better for the government to impose a binding mandate (s = 1) or allow
the private market to unravel (s = 0)? As Figure 4 illustrates, mandates reduce market
surplus by $45 relative to s = 0. On aggregate, individuals in the market would be willing
to pay $45 per person to prevent a mandate.
In contrast, from an ex-ante expected utility perspective, the value of insuring the 54%
of the market with the highest willingness to pay is $339, and the welfare cost of insuring the
remaining 46% of the market is $170. Prior to learning their willingness to pay, individuals
would pay an average of $169 per person to have a mandate instead of having no insurance.
Mandates increase ex-ante expected utility, but decrease market surplus.
Alternative Risk Aversion Values The results above rely on a coefficient of relative
risk aversion of 5x10−4 . Table 1 presents estimates of the above results for alternative risk
30

It is perhaps surprising that EA (s) < 0 for low values of s. Mathematically, this is because for low
values of s, C (s) − D (s) < sD′ (s). Economically, this means that expanding the size of the insurance
market actually generates a Pareto improvement, as it can lower prices for both the insured and uninsured
because the marginal cost of the new enrollees is sufficiently below their willingness to pay. As a result,
market surplus actually over-states the welfare impact of expanding the insurance market for low values of
s.

29

aversion measures. Columns (1) and (2) present the market surplus and baseline ex-ante
welfare estimates for γ = 5x10−4 . Columns (3) and (4) consider alternative coefficients
of absolute risk aversion of 1x10−4 and 10x10−4 and columns (5)-(10) consider alternative
coefficients of relative risk aversion ranging from 1 to 10.31
The baseline specification of γ = 5x10−4 is consistent with the estimates in Handel et al.
(2015) but it implies a large coefficient of relative risk aversion of 8.2. Table 1 shows that a
coefficient of relative risk aversion of 3 implies that the optimal insurance prices are $1,351,
which is 15% lower than the optimal price from a market surplus perspective of $1581. Such
prices would lead to 47% of the market insured, which is less than the 54% of the market that
would be insured if prices were set to maximize ex-ante welfare in the baseline specification.
Although the precise optimal size of the market varies with the coefficient of risk aversion,
the conclusion that mandates increase ex-ante welfare remains fairly robust across specifications. Mandates increase ex-ante expected utility as long as the coefficient of absolute risk
aversion is above 1.05x10−4 and coefficients of relative risk aversion above 1.7. This means
that for a range of plausible coefficients of risk aversion, an ex-ante welfare perspective leads
to different normative conclusions about the optimal insurance subsidies and desirability of
mandates.

6.2

Non-budget neutral policies

The insurance subsidies in Massachusetts are not paid by low-income individuals at 150%
FPL choosing to forego insurance. Rather, they are ultimately paid by other taxpayers
beyond those at 150% FPL. Here, I show how to estimate the marginal value of public funds
of higher/lower subsidies. Recall, the MVPF equals the marginal willingness to pay of the
31

To translate the coefficient of relative risk aversion into a coefficient of absolute risk aversion I multiply
by 10,890x1.5, where 10,890 is the FPL for single adults.

30

beneficiaries for insurance subsidies per dollar of government expenditure. This is given by
the formula:
M V P F (s) =

1
1+

C(s)−D(s)
s(−D ′ (s))

(1 + (1 − s) γ (D (s) − E [D (S) |S ≥ s]))

where β (s) = γ (D (s) − E [D (S) |S ≥ s]) is the difference in marginal utilities between the
insured and uninsured.
Following Finkelstein et al. (2019), Figure 6 presents the MVPF for the case when 30%
and 90% of the market have insurance. When 30% of the market is insured, annual costs
are given by C (0.3) = 1738, willingness to pay is given by D (0.3) = 1978, and the slope
of willingness to pay is given by D (0.3) = −3610. The average willingness to pay for those
with s ≥ 0.3 is 853. Therefore, the MVPF is given by
M V P F (0.3) =

1

1 − 1978−1738
0.3∗3654
= 1.282 ∗ 1.394

1 + .7 ∗ 5x10−4 ∗ (1978 − 853)



= 1.79
The willingness to pay by those choosing to purchase insurance for additional subsidies is
$1.28 per dollar of government spending. Every $1 of subsidy generates $1.28 lower prices
for the insured. This is greater than $1 because the marginal types that are induced to enroll
from lower prices have a lower cost of being insured, D (0.3) > C (0.3).
Behind the veil of ignorance, these lower prices to the insured have additional value
because the insured have a 40% higher marginal utility of income relative to the average
person in this setting. Accounting for this, the results suggest that individuals would be
willing to pay $1.79 for every $1 that the government spends to lower insurance prices for
those with incomes at 150% FPL.
For comparison, the MVPF of low-income tax cuts, such as expansions of the Earned
Income Tax Credit (EITC) have MVPFs ranging between 0.9-1.3 (Hendren and SprungKeyser (2019)). When only 30% of the market is insured, these results suggest expanded
insurance subsidies financed by a budget-neutral reduction in EITC would increase ex-ante
expected utility. Table 1 shows that with an alternative specification of a coefficient of
relative risk aversion of 3, the MVPF would be 1.47. This remains above the general values
found for the EITC. To the extent to which these EITC MVPF estimates generalize to a
more targeted transfer to those at 150% FPL, it suggests that health insurance subsidies
would increase ex-ante welfare more than tax subsidies when 30% of the market is insured.

31

Figure 6: MVPF for Health Insurance Subsidies for Low-Income
Adults
>KMM

@0)A-'PV()*%(&$@TU8
IOPJ/'-$@TU8

<K?L

<K=M
<KRM
<KDM

@TU8$5MKE<$W:.W-)$+)#,$-OP0/'-$*-)&*-9':X<K>=

@TU8

<K>M
<KMM
MK=M

MK=M

MK=<

MKRM
MKDM
MK>M
MKMM

NMG$;/&()-1

LMG$;/&()-1
8)09':#/$;/&()-1

In contrast, the MVPFs are lower when prices are more heavily subsidized so that more
of the market has insurance. When s = 0.9, the willingness to pay of the marginal type
1
is below her cost, D (s) < C (s), so that
C(s)−D(s) = 0.8. And, the distinction between
1+

s(−D ′ (s))

market surplus and ex-ante expected utility is smaller. This is because the difference between
D (s∗ ) and E [D (s) |s ≥ s∗ ] is smaller when a larger fraction of the market has insurance.
This means that the consumption of the insured relative to the average in the population
population is smaller when a larger fraction of the market is insured. Comparing this to the
MVPF for the EITC, this suggests that subsidies leading to 90% of the market being insured
are too generous: reducing health insurance subsidies and using the resources to expand tax
credits to those with incomes near 150% FPL would increase ex-ante expected utility.

32

7

Comparison to Structural Model

The most common approach to measuring ex-ante welfare estimates a structural model.
If one knows the utility function, information sets, and distribution of outcomes, one can
recover measures of ex-ante expected utility.
In this section, I fit the estimated willingness to pay and cost curves to a fully specified
structural model. The model relies heavily on the setup in Einav et al. (2013b) to model
both adverse selection and moral hazard.32 The model is parsimonious but flexible enough to
perfectly match the estimated willingness to pay and cost curves in Finkelstein et al. (2019).
I then use the structural model to validate the sufficient statistics approach relative to
a structural benchmark. In Section 8, I use extensions of the model to evaluate the impact
of violating Assumptions 1 and 2 in the proposed implementation, and in particular explore
the impact of preference heterogeneity.

7.1

Setup

The structural model follows the environment developed in Einav et al. (2013a). In period
ν, individuals obtain a realization of θν and choose c and m to maximize utility, which is
given by:
2
1
1
(20)
u (c, m; θν ) = − e−γ [(m−λ(θν ))− 2w (m−λ(θν )) +c(m)]
γ
where c (m) = y − pI if the individual is insured and c (m) = y − m − pU if the individual is
uninsured (I assume a full insurance contrast). The realization of θν affects utility through
the function λ (θν ), which determines an individual’s demand for medical spending. To see
this, note that the first order conditions for m imply mI = λ + w and mU = λ. This means
that λ (θν ) is the baseline demand for medical spending by the uninsured who pay its full cost
and w is the causal effect of insurance on the individual’s medical spending. For simplicity,
I assume the causal effect of insurance, w, income, y, and risk aversion, γ, are all constant
across individuals. Allowing w to be heterogeneous does not affect the results (conditional
on matching the demand and cost curves). Section 8 explores the robustness of the results
when one allows y and γ to vary across individuals.
Plugging in the choices of individuals, the utility functions for type θν are given by
−1 −γ[y−λ(θν )−pU ]
e
if they are uninsured. The realized utility for the insured is given by
γ
1
− 1 e−γ [ 2 w+y−pI ] .
γ

32

To my knowledge, no previous paper has evaluated the ex-ante welfare impact of insurance market
policies using a structural approach that includes moral hazard. In the current setting, allowing for moral
hazard is essential to match the fact that the demand curve lies below the cost curve for a broad range of
the distribution, as shown in Figure 4.

33

7.2

Matching Demand and Cost Curves

At the time of deciding whether to purchase insurance, individuals have some knowledge,
given by θµ , about their realization of λ (θν ), which generates their marginal willingness to
pay for insurance. As in Section 3, the population is ordered descending in their willingness
to pay, given by D (pU , S (θµ )) where S (θµ ) = s corresponds to individuals with willingness
to pay at the 1 − sth quantile of the willingness to pay distribution. When a fraction s
purchases insurance, all those with θµ such that S (θµ ) < s will purchase insurance.
The structural model requires the researcher to specify individuals’ beliefs about future
realizations of θν . To do so, I assume that the realizations of λ (θν ) are normally distributed
with mean E [λ (θν ) |s] = C (s) and variance Σ (s), where C (s) is the marginal cost curve
in the economy and Σ (s) is a variance term. This variance will be set below to match the
willingness to pay and cost curves. Both C (s) and Σ (s) are known to the individual at
the time of insurance purchase, but they may vary for individuals with different levels of
willingness to pay.
The utility function in equation (20) implies that the marginal willingness to pay for
insurance solves:
w γΣ (s)
(21)
D (pU , s) = C (s) + +
2
2
Individuals are willing to pay their expected costs, C (s), plus half of the moral hazard
induced spending, w2 , plus an additional term corresponding to the risk premium provided
by insurance: to the extent to which the insurance reduces the variance of their consumption,
Σ (s), the CARA utility structure implies that they value this reduction according to the risk
aversion parameter, γ, divided by 2. The CARA utility structure implies that willingness
to pay does not depend on pU . Therefore, as in earlier sections, I write D (s) to refer to
D (pU , s).
Matching WTP and Cost Curves Risk aversion is set to γ = 5x10−4 . To account for
individuals having WTP below cost, I set w to be equal to mean net costs of 1,336, which
ensures that D (s) > 0 for all s.33 Given w, γ and C (s), I set Σ (s) to solve (21). The
resulting model structure is able to perfectly match any observed willingness to pay and cost
curves at each value of s.34
33

This corresponds to roughly a 30% moral hazard affect on gross costs, roughly consistent with previous
empirical findings.
34
Moreover, the model structure satisfies the baseline assumptions made in the sufficient statistics approach
above. For example, the CARA utility structure implies that the marginal willingness to pay is not a function
of pU . The model also does not exhibit complementarities between consumption and medical spending,
ucm = 0, so that it satisfies Assumption 1 to first order.

34

7.3

Measuring Ex-Ante Expected utility

The structural model yields a straightforward solution for W (s) in equation (11), as illustrated in the following proposition.
Proposition 5. Under the modeling assumptions outlined above, W (s) in equation (11) is
given by

W (s) =




 

Z 1
γ2
γ2
w
−1
log seγpI (s) e−γ 2 + (1 − s) eγpU (s)
eγ(C(S)−w)+ 2 Σ(S) ds̃ − log E eγ(C(S)−w)+ 2 Σ(S)
γ
s

(22)

Proof. See Appendix F.

Figure 7: Comparison to Structural Approach
B. Marginal Ex-Ante Welfare and Market Surplus

400

1000

A. Total Ex-Ante Welfare and Market Surplus

YV')(9'()0%Z$$!=617

@0)A-'$V()*%(&

567-0)
0

567-0)
200

YV(++:9:-/'$V'0':&':9&Z$
!617

100

500

300

YV')(9'()0%Z$$!617

YV(++:9:-/'$V'0':&':9&Z$
!=617

@0)A-'$V()*%(&

0

-500

* 1 + 5617

E>G

E>G

EDG

D<G

EDG

-100

-1000

D<G

0

7.4

.2

.4
.6
8)09':#/$;/&()-1

.8

1

0

.2

.4
.6
8)09':#/$;/&()-1

.8

1

Results

Figure 7A compares the value of W (s) from the structural model computed using Equation
(22) (shown in the dash-dot brown line), to the value of W (s) computed using the sufficient
statistics approach (in the solid red line). The latter is obtained by integrating D (s) +
EA (s) − C (s). The figure reveals that the sufficient statistics approach does a decent job
of measuring the “true” ex-ante measure of welfare implied by the structural model.
Figure 7B compares the marginal willingness to pay measures, W ′ (s). The again illustrates that the sufficient statistics approach approximates the structural model fairly well.
The sufficient statistics correction clearly outperforms market surplus as a normative guide
to ex-ante welfare. Ex-ante welfare is maximized in the structural model when s = 52%
35

instead of 54% in the sufficient statistics implementation (compared with 41% for market
surplus). The welfare gain from the optimal size of the insurance market is slightly larger in
the structural approach ($350 versus $340), and the welfare gain from a full mandate is also
slightly larger ($180 versus $170). Overall, he sufficient statistics approach proposed in this
paper capture ex-ante welfare quite well.

8

Violations of Assumptions

The assumptions in Section 5 provide a benchmark method to estimate β (s) that only requires knowledge of the market demand curve and risk aversion. However, these assumptions
may be violated in practice. This section discusses these potential limitations and illustrates
how to potentially overcome them with additional empirical estimates. Section 8.1 considers
the case when Assumption 2 is violated. Section 8.2 considers the case when Assumption 1
is violated due to heterogeneity in risk preferences. Section 8.3 considers the case when Assumption 1 is violated due to correlations between health status and the marginal utility of
income. Section 8.4 summarizes the results and provides a practical roadmap to researchers
seeking to implement the sufficient statistics approach.

8.1

Income or Liquidity Differences

The benchmark implementation proxies for the difference in consumption between the insured and uninsured using the demand curve, D (s) − E [D (S) |S ≥ s]. This would not be a
good proxy if there were differences in liquidity or income between the insured and uninsured
populations.35 In the MA example, the insurance price variation is conditional on incomes
of 150% FPL, which suggests this may not be a primary concern in this setting; but more
generally it is likely that in many settings income is a key determinant of insurance demand.
This subsection uses the structural framework to explore the extent to which heterogeneity in income or liquidity can affect the proposed approach to measuring ex-ante welfare.
If income variation is correlated with willingness to pay for insurance, the implementation
using the market demand curve to capture β (s) discussed in Section 5 will perform poorly.
However, there is a straightforward way of correcting the estimates: instead of proxying
consumption differences between the insured and uninsured, one could directly measure the
35

A more subtle violation of Assumption 2 arises when individuals can save across periods. In this case,
those who spend money on insurance may be able to borrow or reduce savings, increasing their consumption
to help cover the cost of the insurance. This would imply the baseline approach would over-state the ex-ante
value of insurance. But, an approach that directly measures the difference in consumption - as suggested
below - would correctly recover ex-ante welfare.

36

difference in consumption and avoid this potential bias.
To see this in the context of the model, suppose that individuals with different willingnesses to pay (generated by their knowledge at the time of choosing insurance, θµ ) have
different incomes in period ν, which I denote yν (θν ). To isolate variation in incomes that
violates Assumption 2, I make the simplifying assumption that income does not vary conditional on θµ . Modifying the proof of Proposition 5 to allow for income heterogeneity,
Appendix G shows that W (s) solves
e

−γW (s)

Z

1

e
0

γ(ȳ(s̃)+C(s̃)−w)+ 21 γ 2 Σ(s̃)

=e

γpI (s) − 21 γw

e

Z

s

e
0

−γ ȳ(s̃)

ds̃ + e

γpU (s)

Z

1

1

eγ(ȳ(s̃)+C(s̃)−w)+ 2 γ

2

Σ(s̃)

ds̃

s

To the extent to which individuals with different willingnesses to pay have different incomes,
this will lead the W (s) function to differ from the baseline case with no income variation.
I calibrate income heterogeneity by starting with a base income of $16,335, which corresponds to 150% FPL for a single adult in 2011 in Massachusetts. I then consider two cases
corresponding to whether those with a higher willingness to pay for insurance have (a) higher
incomes or (b) lower incomes. For the higher incomes case, I assume that those with the
highest level of willingness to pay have an average income that is $1,382 higher than those
with the lowest willingness to pay, where $1382 is calibrated to be the mean health costs. In
contrast, for the lower incomes case, I assume the opposite: those with the highest demand
have incomes that are $1382 lower than those with the highest willingness to pay. In both
cases I assume average incomes are a linear function of s.
Figure 8A and 8B present the ex-ante willingness to pay curve, W ′ (s), for these cases.
Figure 8A reports the results when income is positively correlated with willingness to pay.
Figure 8B presents the results when income is negatively correlated with willingness to pay.
When the insured have higher incomes, their marginal utility is lower than is implied by the
demand curve. The benchmark sufficient statistics implementation that does not account for
this will over-state the true willingness to pay. Conversely, Figure 8B shows how the pattern
reverses when the insured have higher incomes. In this case, the benchmark approach in
Section 5 will under-state the ex-ante value of insurance because the insured have a higher
marginal utility of income than is implied by the demand curve.
Consumption Data In the presence of income or liquidity heterogeneity, the demand
curve no longer provides adequate guidance on the differences in consumption between the
insured and uninsured. In principle, one can recover a measure of ex-ante welfare if the
researcher observes consumption or disposable income data. To first order one can use a
modified formula for β (s) in the case when x (m; θ) = 0 as
β (s) = γ (D (s) − E [D (S) |S ≥ s] + E [yν (θν ) |S ≤ s] − E [yν (θν ) |S > s])
37

where E [yν (θν ) |S ≤ s] − E [yν (θν ) |S > s] is the difference in disposable incomes between
the insured and uninsured. More generally, if one observes consumption one can estimate
β (s) = γ∆c where ∆c is the difference in consumption between the insured and uninsured.
The dashed line in Figures 8A and 8B shows the values of W ′ (s) that use differences in
consumption to measure the correct β (s). As the figure reveals, one recovers a relatively
accurate measure of ex-ante welfare if one can observe consumption data.36

Figure 8: Income or Liquidity Differences
B. Higher WTP Have Lower Incomes

1500

1000

A. High WTP Have Higher Incomes

\)(-$IOPJ/'-$]\U

500

1000

\)(-$IOPJ/'-$]\U

500

@#1:+:-1$^2&3

-500

0

0

567-0)

[0&-%:/-$J**)#09W

567-0)

@#1:+:-1$^2&3

-1000

-500

[0&-%:/-$J**)#09W

0

8.2

.2

.4
8)09':#/$;/&()-1

.6

.8

1

0

.2

.4
8)09':#/$;/&()-1

.6

.8

1

Heterogeneity in Risk Preferences

Most structural frameworks allow for heterogeneity in preferences, as this is often important to match observed variation in willingness to pay for insurance. However, preference
heterogeneity – at least any heterogeneity that is correlated with the marginal utility of
consumption – is ruled out by Assumption 1.
This subsection uses a generalized version of the structural framework in Section 7 to (a)
document how preference heterogeneity can introduce bias in the benchmark implementation,
(b) clarify why this bias arises, and (c) propose a modified approach that recovers ex-ante
welfare. The main conclusion is that the benchmark implementation remains valid if one uses
an “ex-ante” coefficient of risk aversion that corresponds to the markup individuals would
be willing to pay to insure themselves against having to buy insurance. If preferences are
stable, then the risk aversion observed from choices in the market can be used to measure
36
Absent consumption data, one can proxy for consumption using differences in income and assuming no
differential savings between insured and uninsured.

38

the ex-ante risk aversion parameter. But, in the presence of preference heterogeneity there
is in general no such guarantee that the risk aversion values observed in the market (from
deductible or copay choices) correspond to the risk aversion that would govern the ex-ante
demand for insurance against the risk of having to purchase insurance.
In principle, the observed risk aversion in the market (e.g. the desire to insure against
the realization of θν conditional on θµ , which is identified from deductible and copay choices
in the market) could be higher or lower than ex-ante risk aversion governing the willingness
to pay to insure against the need to buy insurance (i.e. against realizations of θµ ). To see
this, return to the modeling framework as in Section 7. Recall preferences are given by
2
1
1
u (c, m; θν ) = − e−γ [(m−λ(θν ))− 2w (m−λ(θν )) +c(m)]
γ

where γ is a coefficient of absolute risk aversion. Section 7 assumed γ = 5x10−4 for all indi
viduals. Now, suppose γ ∼ N µγ , σγ2 , where µγ = 5x10−4 is the mean level of risk aversion
and σγ is its population standard deviation. I consider two values of σγ ∈ {5x10−5 , 1x10−4 }.
I refer to σ = 5x10−4 as the “low” heterogeneity value and σ = 1x10−4 as the “high” heterogeneity value.37 I assume risk aversion is independent of the realization of costs.38
When individuals have heterogeneity in γ, there are two reasons that individuals might
have high willingness to pay: on the one hand, D (s) might be driven by their expected
costs (or higher variance of costs). On the other hand, D (s) might be driven by high risk
aversion. Therefore, for two individuals with the same willingness to pay, D (s), it is no
longer the case that it would be reasonable to assume they have the same expected costs
that equals the marginal cost curve, C (s). At each value of s, the cost curve reflects an
average of individuals with different expected costs who have the same quantile of demand,
1 − s, but arrive at that quantile through different levels of risk aversion. As a result, I fit
a model with heterogeneity in individual’s expected costs that can differ from expected cost
given D (s). Appendix H develops this extension of the model in Section 7 and discusses the
minimum distance estimator that is used to solve the model’s underlying cost heterogeneity
parameters.
Figure 9 presents the results for the low heterogeneity case (Figure 9A) and high hetero37

This higher value of heterogeneity corresponds most closely to the estimates in Handel et al. (2015).
In contrast to this assumption, empirical applications of structural models of insurance often finding
positive (Cohen and Einav (2007)) or negative (Handel et al. (2015)) correlations between risk and risk
aversion. It is straightforward to establish that the conclusions developed here are similar for the case in
which there is a correlation with costs. The presence of correlated risk aversion changes the extent to which
the ex-ante risk aversion differs from the risk aversion distribution in the market. But conceptually, one
continues to need to measure the ex-ante risk aversion coefficient that governs the ex-ante willingness to pay
for a financial product that pays $1 in the event one chooses to purchase insurance in the market.
38

39

geneity case (Figure 9B). The dot-dash brown line corresponds to the true ex-ante surplus
W ′ (s) that is implied by the structural framework with preference heterogeneity. The solid
red line presents the benchmark implementation of EA (s) using a coefficient of relative risk
aversion of γ = 5x10−4 , corresponding to the population average.
For both the high and low heterogeneity cases, the benchmark implementation over-states
the ex-ante value of insurance. These differences are larger for the case with a high degree of
preference heterogeneity, as illustrated by the difference between Figure 9A and Figure 9B.
Ex-ante vs. Ex-post Risk Aversion Why does the benchmark implementation overstate the ex-ante value of insurance implied by the structural model? The reason is that
in the presence of preference heterogeneity the average risk aversion coefficient does not
correspond to the “ex-ante” risk aversion that governs the willingness to pay for insurance
against ex-ante risk. To see why, recall the utility function in the structural model has a
e−γc . This structure implies a marginal utility function of
CARA structure of the form −1
γ
e−γc . Crucially, this is decreasing in γ. This implies that those who have higher risk aversion
tend to have lower marginal utilities of consumption. Because those with higher risk aversion
will also purchase insurance, it means that the difference in marginal utilities between the
insured and uninsured will be smaller than if there was no heterogeneity in γ.
To see how this plays out in the structural model, one can calculate the implied risk
aversion that individuals exhibit from behind a veil of ignorance in order to be consistent
with the model’s true calculation of EA (s). This is given by the dash-dot brown line in
Figure 9).39 The median risk aversion value is 3.9x10−4 for the low heterogeneity case and
6.7x10−5 for the high heterogeneity case. Because the CARA utility structure implies that
the insured have lower marginal utilities of income, the implied ex-ante CARA coefficient is
not equal to the mean risk aversion coefficient – it is instead much lower.
The fact that ex-ante risk aversion is lower than the mean risk aversion is not a general
feature of all utility functions. Indeed, it is not even a feature of all utility functions with
e−γc for
constant absolute risk aversion. For example, all utility functions of the form − f (γ)
γ
any function f (◦) have a coefficient or absolute risk aversion of γ. As a result, there exists
utility functions that perfectly match the demand and cost curves for any value of f . If f ′ is
sufficiently large, the marginal utility of income will be increasing not decreasing with the
e−γc . This means that in general,
level of risk aversion, not decreasing as is implied by −1
γ
39

When prices are such that a fraction s of the market is insured, it is straightforward to show that is
given by
−1
EA (s)
γ ex−ante (s) =
s (1 − s) D′ (s) D (s) − E [D (S (θµ )) |S (θµ ) ≥ s]

40

the relationship between ex-ante risk aversion – namely the risk aversion exhibited by those
seeking to insure against the realization of θµ – can differ from the risk aversion exhibited
by those in the insurance market – namely the risk aversion determining the copay and
deductible choice to help insure against the realization of θν given θµ .

Figure 9: Risk Aversion Heterogeneity

1000

B. High Heterogeneity (σγ = 1x10−4 )

1000

A. Low Heterogeneity (σγ = 5x10−5 )

[0&-%:/-$J**)#09W$
_&:/.$> ) 0?3.$@

500

500

\)(-$IOPJ/'-$]\U

[0&-%:/-$J**)#09W$
_&:/.$> ) 0?3.$@

567-0)
0

567-0)
0

\)(-$IOPJ/'-$]\U

-500

@#1:+:-1$J**)#09W$
_&:/.$> ) A/;?3.$B

-1000

-1000

-500

@#1:+:-1$J**)#09W$
_&:/.$> ) 9/C?3.$@

0

.2

.4
.6
8)09':#/$;/&()-1

.8

1

0

.2

.4
.6
8)09':#/$;/&()-1

.8

1

Correction Using “Ex-Ante” Risk Aversion One can recover a measure of ex-ante
welfare through the reduced form approach if one uses the correct ex-ante risk aversion
corresponding to the markups individuals would be willing to pay for insurance against the
risk of having to buy insurance in the market (i.e. insurance against θµ , which may differ
from insurance against θν given θµ ). To illustrate this, the green dashed lines in Figure 9
present the ex-ante surplus calculated using a coefficient of risk aversion of 3.9x10−4 for the
low heterogeneity case and 6.7x10−5 for the high heterogeneity case. These risk aversion
values correspond to the model’s implied risk aversion against the ex-ante realization of θµ .
As illustrated in the figure, using these “ex-ante” risk aversion values generate measures of
W ′ (s) that are much closer to the true value of W ′ (s).
In practice, this suggests that while the risk aversion that is revealed through insurance
choices is a natural starting point for measuring ex-ante welfare, it may differ from the exante coefficient of absolute risk aversion – especially in settings with significant preference
heterogeneity. Ideally, one would like to elicit the risk aversion that determines the demand
for an insurance product that would pay benefits in the even the individual found themselves
in the insurance market and needing to purchase insurance. In practice, a feasible approach
would consider the robustness of the results to a range of risk aversion parameters including
41

those beyond what is implied from copay/deductible choices that insure the risk of θν given
θµ to shed light on the willingness to pay for insuring ex-ante risk of the realization of θµ .

8.3

Marginal Utility and Health Status

In addition to assuming no heterogeneity in risk aversion, Assumption 1 also embeds the
common assumption in the unemployment insurance literature that the marginal utility of
income does not depend on health status, conditional on a given level of consumption. If
the sick have higher marginal utilities of income and the sick buy insurance, then the exante willingness to pay for insurance would be biased downwards: the difference in marginal
utilities between insured and uninsured, β (s), would be larger than what is implied by γ∆c.
In contrast, if the sick have lower marginal utilities of income, then ex-ante willingness to
pay for insurance would be biased upwards.
To address this, one can extend the estimation of β (s) to include an additional term
that captures the differences in marginal utilities arising from differences in health status.
To provide some guidance on how this could be done in practice, Finkelstein et al. (2013)
use a parametric utility model combined with self-reported health and well-being elicitations
to infer that those who report being in poor health have a 10-25pp lower marginal utility of
income, conditional on a given level of income. It is difficult to directly translate their health
status results to the present setting because one does not know the relationship between
subjective health reports and insurance purchase in the MA health insurance setting. But,
to provide a back-of-the-envelope illustration of how this approach could proceed, suppose
that 1/3 of the insured are sick and none of the uninsured are sick. Then, the insured would
have a 3-8pp lower marginal utility of income than would be implied by their difference in
consumption. Hence, one could consider adjusting β (s) downward by 3-8pp. For comparison,
the estimated value of β (0.5) in the baseline implementation is 0.34. Hence, this back-of-theenvelope adjustment would lower EA (s) by roughly 10–25%. While this exercise is highly
stylized, it shows how one can incorporate future work estimating the complementarities
between health status and the marginal utility of income.

8.4

Summary

In summary, the benchmark implementation approach measures ex-ante expected utility
using only the market willingness to pay and cost curves, combined with a measure of
risk aversion. Yet, the implementation assumptions that enable this implementation are
strong. In practice, researchers will want to consider how these assumptions may affect their
conclusions in their setting.
42

The robustness analysis presented here suggest proceeding as follows. First, if researchers
suspect there are income or liquidity differences between the insured and uninsured, the
benchmark implementation may be biased because the willingness to pay curve will no
longer be a good proxy for the difference in consumption between insured and uninsured.
This means that there would be a high value in obtaining consumption data that would allow
one to construct the percentage difference in consumption between insured an uninsured.
With data on consumption, one could estimate β (s) using equation 18, β (s) = γ∆c.
Second, the ideal risk aversion parameter corresponds to an “ex-ante” measure of risk
aversion: it determines an individual’s hypothetical willingness to pay for a financial product
that pays in the event they end up in the market and need to buy insurance. In the presence of
heterogeneity in risk aversion, it is natural to worry that the ex-ante measure of risk aversion
differs from the risk aversion revealed through choices of copays or deductibles in the market,
even if one measured the average risk aversion in the market. In practice, researchers will
want to study the robustness of the results to a range of risk aversion parameters – akin to
the exploration in Table 1 above - with the knowledge that the ideal risk aversion is the one
that governs the hypothetical willingness to pay for a financial product that pays $1 in the
event they end up in the market and wish to buy insurance.
More broadly, the impact of preference heterogeneity on the benchmark approach highlights the value of future work that uses other methods to elicit the markup individuals
would be willing to pay for a product that helps lower their future insurance prices. Such a
markup would correspond directly to the percentage difference in marginal utilities between
the insured and uninsured, β (s), and could be directly used as an implementation of the
general model outlined in Section 3 and 4, avoiding the strong implementation assumptions
in Section 5. The unemployment insurance literature has developed a range of different
approaches to measuring differences in marginal utilities of income (e.g. see Landais and
Spinnewijn (2019)), which suggests future work could develop similar approaches tailored to
the health insurance context.

9

Conclusion

This paper develops a set of tools to measure the impact of insurance market policies on
ex-ante measures of welfare. Ex-ante measures of welfare differ from market surplus because
they measure expected utility before individuals learn their willingness to pay for insurance.
An ex-ante welfare perspective can lead to different normative conclusions as compared to
a market surplus perspective. Policies that maximize ex-ante expected utility often involve
lower insurance prices, a greater value of mandates, and a higher value of insurance subsidies.
43

Future work could measure the welfare consequences of contract distortions, such as
the exclusion of high cost drugs for chronic conditions. It could also expand beyond the
binary insurance decision considered here to consider menus of insurance contracts. Future
work could also extend the results to normative frameworks that allow for behavioral biases
(e.g. as in Spinnewijn (2017)), which have been shown to be important in health insurance
settings.
Future work can also extend the ideas developed here to settings where prices are not
observed. For example, many approaches use labor supply responses to infer the value of
social insurance programs (e.g. Keane and Moffitt (1998); Gallen (2014); Dague (2014)).
These approaches capture the value of insurance against only the risk that remains after
choosing labor supply. Other approaches use changes in consumption around a shock to
infer willingness to pay (e.g. Gruber (1997); Meyer and Mok (2013)). But consumption
should change when information about the event is revealed, not when the event occurs.
The approaches developed here could be extended to measure ex-ante expected utility in
such settings.
Lastly, many macroeconomic welfare measures face similar conceptual issues. This includes the famous calculations of the welfare cost of business cycles in Lucas (2003). When
consumption responds to information over time, the variance of consumption changes may
under-state measures of ex-ante welfare. Future work could could extend the tools in this
paper to measure the ex-ante welfare cost of business cycles and other macroeconomic risk.

References
Baily, M. N. (1978). Some aspects of optimal unemployment insurance. Journal of Public
Economics 10(3), 379–402. 1, 5.1, 5.1
Cabral, M. (2017). Claim timing and ex post adverse selection. Review of Economic Studies 84 (1). 1
Chetty, R. (2006). A general formula for the optimal level of social insurance. Journal of
Public Economics 90 (10), 1879–1901. 1, 3.1, 5.1, 5.1
Cohen, A. and L. Einav (2007). Estimating risk preferences from deductible choice. American
economic review 97 (3), 745–788. 38
Dague, L. (2014). The effect of Medicaid premiums on enrollment: A regression discontinuity
approach. Journal of Health Economics 37, 1–12. 1, 9

44

Einav, L., A. Finkelstein, and M. R. Cullen (2010). Estimating welfare in insurance markets
using variation in prices. Quarterly Journal of Economics 125 (3). 1, 2, 10, 3.1, 16, C
Einav, L., A. Finkelstein, S. P. Ryan, P. Schrimpf, and M. R. Cullen (2013a). Selection on
moral hazard in health insurance. American Economic Review 103 (1), 178–219. 1, 7.1
Einav, L., A. Finkelstein, S. P. Ryan, P. Schrimpf, and M. R. Cullen (2013b). Selection on
moral hazard in health insurance. American Economic Review 103(1), 178–219. 7
Einav, L., A. Finkelstein, and H. Williams (2016). Paying on the margin for medical care:
Evidence from breast cancer treatments. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 8 (1), 52–79. 2, 2, 20
Feldman, R. D. and B. E. Dowd (1982). Simulation of a health insurance market with adverse
selection. Operations Research 30 (6), 1027–1042. 1
Finkelstein, A., N. Hendren, and E. F. Luttmer (2016). The value of medicaid: Interpreting results from the oregon health insurance experiment. NBER Working
Paper,, http://scholar.harvard.edu/hendren/publications/value–medicaid–interpreting–
results–oregon–health–insurance–experiment. 2
Finkelstein, A., N. Hendren, and M. Shepard (2019). Subsidizing health insurance for lowincome adults: Evidence from massachusetts. American Economic Review 109 (4), 1530–
67. 1, 3.1, 3.2, 18, 6, 29, 6.2, 7
Finkelstein, A., E. F. Luttmer, and M. J. Notowidigdo (2013). What good is wealth without health: The effect of health on the marginal utility of consumption. Journal of the
European Economic Association 11(s1), 221–258. 8.3
Finkelstein, A., K. McGarry, and A. Sufi (2005). Dynamic inefficiencies in insurance markets:
Evidence from long-term care insurance. American Economic Review 95 (2), 224–228. 1
Gallen, T. S. (2014). Measuring the value of Medicaid using TennCare. Working Paper . 1,
5, 9
Gruber, J. (1997). The consumption smoothing benefits of unemployment insurance. American Economic Review 87(1), 192–205. 1, 9
Hackmann, M. B., J. T. Kolstad, and A. E. Kowalski (2015). Adverse selection and an individual mandate: When theory meets practice. The American Economic Review 105 (3),
1030–1066. 1
45

Handel, B., I. Hendel, and M. D. Whinston (2015). Equilibria in health exchanges: Adverse
selection versus reclassification risk. Econometrica 83 (4), 1261–1313. 2, 1, 2, 3.1, 12, 20,
6.1, 28, 6.1, 37, 38
Harsanyi, J. C. (1978). Bayesian decision theory and utilitarian ethics. The American
Economic Review 68 (2), 223–228. 4, 3.1
Hendren, N. (2013). Private information and insurance rejections. Econometrica 81 (5),
1713–1762. 1
Hendren, N. (2014). The inequality deflator: Interpersonal comparisons without a social
welfare function. NBER Working Paper, http://www.nber.org/papers/w20351 . 4.2
Hendren, N. (2016). The policy elasticity. Tax Policy and the Economy 30. 1, 4.2
Hendren, N. (2017). Knowledge of future job loss and implications for unemployment insurance. American Economic Review 107 (7). 1
Hendren, N. and B. D. Sprung-Keyser (2019). A unified welfare analysis of government
policies. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research. 1, 4.2, 4.2, 6.2
Hirshleifer, J. (1971). The private and social value of information and the reward to inventive
activity. The American Economic Review 61 (4), 561–574. 1, 2
Keane, M. and R. Moffitt (1998). A structural model of multiple welfare program participation and labor supply. International economic review , 553–589. 1, 9
Landais, C. and J. Spinnewijn (2019). The value of unemployment insurance. Working
Paper . 8.4
Lucas, R. E. (2003). Macroeconomic priorities. American economic review 93 (1), 1–14. 9
Meyer, B. D. and W. K. Mok (2013). Disability, earnings, income and consumption. Technical
report, National Bureau of Economic Research. 1, 9
Panhans, M. (2018). Adverse selection in aca exchange markets: Evidence from colorado.
The American Economic Journal: Applied Economics. 1
Spinnewijn, J. (2017). Heterogeneity, demand for insurance, and adverse selection. American
Economic Journal: Economic Policy 9 (1), 308–43. 9

46

Online Appendix: Not For
Publication
A

Proof of Proposition 1

This Appendix walks through the proof of Proposition 1. To begin, the derivative,
can be written as:


∂uν
∂V (∞, 0, W (s))
=E
|θµ ∈ Θµ
∂τ
∂cν

∂V (∞,0,W (s))
,
∂τ

ν
where ∂u
is evaluated using the choices uninsured individuals would make with incomes
∂cν
increased by W (s) in all states of the world. Combining,

W ′ (s)

=

=

i
h
i
ν
(θµ ) < s + (1 − s) p′U (s) E −∂u
|S
(θ
)
≥
s
µ
∂cν
i
h
∂uν
E ∂cν |θµ ∈ Θµ
h
h
i
i
h
i
∂uν
∂uν
ν
E
E −∂u
|S
(θ
)
<
s
|S
(θ
)
<
s
−
E
|S
(θ
)
≥
s
µ
µ
µ
∂cν
∂cν
∂cν
h
i + (1 − s) p′U (s)
h
i
− (sp′I (s) + (1 − s) p′U (s))
∂uν
∂uν
E ∂cν |θµ ∈ Θµ
E ∂cν |θµ ∈ Θµ
sp′I (s) E

h

−∂uν
∂cν |S

Now, turn to the resource constraint when G (s) = 0:
spI (s) + (1 − s) pU (s) = sAC (s)
Differentiating yields:
pI (s) + s

dpI
dpU
+ (1 − s)
− pU (s) = C (s)
ds
ds

or
sp′I (s) + (1 − s) p′U (s) = C (s) − pI (s) + pU (s)
or
− (sp′I (s) + (1 − s) p′U (s)) = D (pU (s) , s) − C (s)
Moreover, one can express −p′U (s) as follows. Differentiating the demand identity pI (s) − pU (s) =

47

D (pU (s) , s) yields p′I (s) − p′U (s) =

∂D
∂s

+

∂D
∂pU

p′U (s). So,

−sp′I (s) − (1 − s) p′U (s)

∂D ′
∂D
+
p (s) − (1 − s) p′U (s)
−s
∂s
∂pU U



∂D
−p′U (s) 1 + s
∂pU


p′U (s)=

−1
∂D
1 + s ∂p
U



(pI (s) − pU (s)) − C (s)

=

(pI (s) − pU (s)) − C (s)
∂D
(pI (s) − pU (s)) − C (s) + s
∂s


∂D
1
(p
(s)
−
p
(s))
−
C
(s)
+
s
I
U
∂D
∂s
1 + s ∂p
U

=

−p′U (s)
or

=

=

∂D
D (pU (s) , s) − C (s) + s
∂s



Now, plugging back into the expression for W ′ (s) yields
E

′

W (s) = (D (pU (s) , s) − C (s))

h

! 
−∂uν
|S θµ < s
∂c
h ν
i
ν |θ ∈ Θ
E ∂u
µ
µ
∂cν

i

−

(1 − s)

E

∂D
1 + s ∂p

h

∂uν
∂cν

U

i
i
h
! 
! 


ν |S θ
|S θµ < s − E ∂u
µ ≥ s
∂D
∂cν
h
i
D (pU (s) , s) − C (s) + s
ν |θ ∈ Θ
∂s
E ∂u
µ
µ
∂c
ν

or
i
h
i
ν
|S (θµ ) < s − E ∂u
|S (θµ ) ≥ s
∂cν
U
h
i
(D (pU (s) , s) − C (s))
ν
E ∂u
|θ ∈ Θµ
∂cν µ
h
i
h
i
∂uν
∂uν


∂D E ∂cν |S (θµ ) < s − E ∂cν |S (θµ ) ≥ s
s (1 − s)
h
i
−
+
∂D
ν
∂s
1 + s ∂p
E ∂u
|θµ ∈ Θµ
U
∂c
E

W ′ (s)

=

h

−∂uν
∂cν

i
|S (θµ ) < s −

1−s
∂D
1+s ∂p



E

h

∂uν
∂cν

ν

And,
 




∂uν
1−s
∂uν
−∂uν
E
|S (θµ ) < s −
|S (θµ ) < s − E
|S (θµ ) ≥ s
E
∂D
∂cν
∂cν
∂cν
1 + s ∂p
U


 



∂D
1 + s ∂p
−∂uν
∂uν
1−s
∂uν
U
E
|S
(θ
)
<
s
−
E
|S
(θ
)
<
s
−
E
|S
(θ
)
≥
s
µ
µ
µ
∂D
∂D
∂cν
∂cν
∂cν
1 + s ∂p
1 + s ∂p
U
U
 
 



∂D
−∂uν
∂uν
1
s 1+
E
|S (θµ ) < s + (1 − s) E
|S (θµ ) ≥ s
∂D
∂pU
∂cν
∂cν
1 + s ∂pU
 





∂D
s ∂p
−∂uν
−∂uν
1
∂uν
U
sE
E
|S
(θ
)
<
s
+
(1
−
s)
E
|S
(θ
)
≥
s
+
|S
(θ
)
<
s
µ
µ
µ
∂D
∂D
∂cν
∂cν
∂cν
1 + s ∂p
1 + s ∂p
U
U




∂D
s ∂p
∂uν
−∂uν
1
U
E
E
|θµ ∈ Θµ +
|S (θµ ) < s
∂D
∂D
∂cν
∂cν
1 + s ∂p
1 + s ∂p
U
U
%


!



∂D
∂D
1 + s ∂p
s ∂p
∂uν
1
−∂uν
∂uν
U
U
|θµ ∈ Θµ + E
|θµ ∈ Θµ
|S
(θ
)
<
s
−
+
E
E
µ
∂D
∂D
∂D
∂cν
∂cν
∂cν
1 + s ∂p
1 + s ∂p
1 + s ∂p
U
U
U
% 

 !



∂D
s ∂p
∂uν
∂uν
∂uν
U
E
|θµ ∈ Θµ −
|θµ ∈ Θµ + E
|S (θµ ) < s
E
∂D
∂cν
∂cν
∂cν
1 + s ∂p


=
=
=
=
=
=

U

48

So,
′

W (s)

=

=

(D (pU (s) , s) − C (s)) + s (1 − s)



(D (pU (s) , s) − C (s)) + s (1 − s)



−

−

∂D
∂s
∂D
∂s



β (s) −



∂D
s ∂p

U



s (1 − s) 

∂D
1 + s ∂p

−

∂D

U



β (s) +

−s

∂D

∂D
∂pU 1 + s ∂p



∂s





β (s) − 

1 + (1 − s) β (s)



∂D
s ∂p

1+

1+s

U

U
∂D
s ∂p
U

∂D
∂s




E

h

∂uν
∂cν

i
h
i
! 
ν |S θ
|θµ ∈ Θµ + E ∂u
µ < s
∂cν

h
i
ν |θ ∈ Θ
E ∂u
µ
µ
∂c
ν



Lastly, note that EA (s) is given by the second term in the equation above:


∂D
EA (s) = s (1 − s) −
∂s



β (s)

and δp (s) is given by the third term:
δp (s) =

−s
∂D
∂D
∂pU 1 + s ∂p
U





∂D
1 + (1 − s) β (s) 1 + s
∂s

∂D
= 0. Re-writing
where clearly δp (s) = 0 when the marginal willingness to pay does not depend on pU , ∂p
U
′
′
the expression for W (s), one arrives at W (s) = D (pU (s) , s) − C (s) + EA (s) + δp (s).

B

Proof of Proposition 2

Every dollar the government spends on additional subsidies imposes a cost on the government of
1−

C(s)−D(s)
sD ′ (s) .

And, from behind the veil of ignorance, the willingness to pay for these subsidies

in units of the average income of those with θµ ∈ Θµ is
given by

i
(θµ ) < s
h
i
M V P F (s) =
ν
1−
E −∂u
|θ
∈
Θ
µ
µ
∂cν
E

Now,
E

h

E

i
! 
|S θµ < s
i
∂uν
|θµ ∈ Θµ
∂c

∂uν

∂c
h ν

ν

=

h

−∂uν
∂cν |S

1
C(s)−D(s)
sD ′ (s)

∂uν
∂cν

ν

=

. Therefore, the MVPF is

i
h
i
! 
! 
ν |S θ
|S θµ < s + (1 − s) E ∂u
µ < s
∂c
h
i ν
ν |θ ∈ Θ
E ∂u
µ
µ
∂cν
h
i
h
i
i
h
i
 h
! 
! 
! 
! 
∂uν
∂uν
ν |S θ
ν |S θ
sE ∂c |S θµ < s + (1 − s) E ∂u
(1 − s) E ∂u
µ ≥ s
µ < s − E ∂c |S θµ ≥ s
∂c
∂cν
ν
h
h
i ν
i ν
+
ν |θ ∈ Θ
ν |θ ∈ Θ
E ∂u
E ∂u
µ
µ
µ
µ
∂c
∂c
sE

=

h

i

h

−∂uν
|S(θµ )<s
h ∂cν
i
−∂uν
E ∂c |θµ ∈Θµ
ν

E

ν

1 + (1 − s) β (s)

Hence, the MVPF is given by
M V P F (s) =

1 + (1 − s) β (s)
1+

49

C(s)−D(s)
s(−D ′ (s))

C

Measuring Risk Aversion

In addition to the demand and cost curves in the Einav et al. (2010) framework, measuring
ex-ante willingness requires an estimate of risk aversion, γ (s). As discussed in Section 8.2, the
relevant notion of risk aversion is the one that governs willingness to pay for insurance against
ex-ante risk – namely the risk of having a risk type realization of θµ that leads you to buy
insurance. In the absence of heterogeneity in risk aversion, one can principle infer the relevant
risk aversion parameter within the demand and cost curve setup. Risk aversion is revealed
by comparing individual’s willingness to pay for insurance to the reduction in variance of
expenditures that is provided by the insurance product. For example, it is well-known that
if preferences have a constant absolute risk aversion and the risk of medical expenditures
is normally distributed (i.e. a “CARA-Normal” model), then the markup individual’s are
willing to pay for insurance by is given by the variance reduction offered by the insurance
.
multiplied by γ(s)
2
More generally, one can consider a second-order Taylor approximation to equation (6)
that characterizes willingness to pay, D (s̃). Again, I assume marginal willingness to pay
∂x
denote the price of additional medical spending
does not depend on pU . Let p (s̃) = ∂m
when insured. Under the additional assumption that umm = 0, then the it is straightforward
to show40 that the coefficient of absolute risk aversion is given by:


D (s) − C (s) + (1 − p (s)) E mI (θν ) − mU (θν ) |S (θµ ) = s
γ (s) = 2
V
40

(23)

To see this, suppress notation w.r.t. θν and condition all expectations on S (θµ ) = s for a given s. Let
c̄, m̄, θ̄ denote the average bundle of a type with S (θµ ) = s. Taking a Taylor expansion to the utility
function around this bundle in equation (6) yields
 h
i2 
h
i
 h
i 1
+ um E mI − m̄
uc E y − xI − D (s) − pU − c̄ + ucc E y − xI − D (s) − pU − c̄
2


h
i
1
= uc (E [y − pU ] − c̄) + ucc E [y − pU − c̄]2 + um E mU − m̄
2

or
h

i
E y − xI − D (s) − pU − c̄ − (E [y − pU ] − c̄)
 h

i
i2
h
−1
ucc E y − xI − D (s) − pU − c̄ − E [y − pU − c̄]2 + um E mU − mI
=
2
uc



or
 h
i
um
− 1 E mI − mU
uc
 


D (s) − C (s) + 1 − uum E mI − mU

 h
i
D (s) − E mI − xI

=

γ (s)
V +
2

γ (s)

=

2



c

V



where C (s) = E mI (θν ) − xI (θν ) |S (θµ ) = s is the cost to the insurer of enrolling the type s.

50

where D (s) − C (s) is the markup individuals of type s are willing to pay above the cost
they impose on the insurer, V is approximately the reduction in variance of consumption
offered by the insurance:
V =E

h

U

y − x − pU − c̄

2

i

|S (θµ ) = s − E

h

I

y − x − D (s̃) − pU − c̄

2

|S (θµ ) = s

i



and (1 − p (s)) E mI (θν ) − mU (θν ) |S (θµ ) = s is a correction term to account for moral


hazard. E mI (θν ) − mU (θν ) |S (θµ ) = s is the causal effect of insurance on medical spending to a type θ. If p (s) < 1, some of this additional cost that is imposed on the insurer will
not be fully valued by the individual.
In this sense, one needs to observe two additional pieces of information in order to generate
an internal measure of risk aversion, γ (s): (1) the impact of insurance on medical spending


for type s, E mI (θν ) − mU (θν ) |S (θµ ) = s and (2) the impact of insurance on the variance
of consumption, V (s). In this sense, one need not necessarily rely on an external measure
of risk aversion, but can instead infer risk aversion from individuals revealed willingness to
pay to reduce their variance in consumption.

D

Proof of Proposition 4

Proposition 4 provides an expression for β (s) that uses the demand curve to proxy for
consumption. To arrive at this expression, let D (s̃, pU ) denote the price that a type s̃ is
willing to pay for insurance when facing a price pU of being uninsured. For a full insurance
contract with x (m) = 0, this solves
E [u (yν (θν ) − D (pU , S (θµ )) , m (θν ) ; θν ) |S (θµ ) = s] = E [u (yν (θν ) − m (θν ) − pU , m (θν ) ; θν ) |S (θµ ) = s]

So that
∂
∂
E [u (yν (θν ) − m (θν ) − pU , m (θν ) ; θν ) |S (θµ ) = s] =
E [u (yν (θν ) − D (pU , S (θµ )) − pU , m (θν ) ; θν ) |S (θµ ) = s]
∂pU
∂pU

So that the average marginal utility of income for the uninsured can be expressed as:





∂D
∂u
∂u
(yν (θν ) − m (θν ) − pU , m (θν ) ; θν ) |S (θµ ) ≥ s = E
(yν (θν ) − D (pU , S (θµ )) − pU , m (θν ) ; θν ) |S (θµ ) ≥ s
+1
E −
∂c
∂pU
∂c

The key advantage of this equation is that it relates the marginal utility of income for
the uninsured (LHS) to the marginal utility of income these same people would experience
if they instead chose to purchase insurance.
∂D
= 0 means that the
Now, imposing assumption 1 along with the assumption that ∂p
U

51

same Taylor expansion approach in Proposition 3 yields
β (s) = γ (∆y + ∆D)
where
∆y = E [yν (θν ) |S (θµ ) ≥ s] − E [yν (θν ) |S (θµ ) < s]
is the difference in income between insured and uninsured and
∆D = D (pU (s) , s) − E [D (pU (s) , S (θµ )) |S (θµ ) ≥ s]
is the difference between the price paid by the insured and the average willingness to pay
for the uninsured.

E

Insurance Versus Redistribution: Conditioning on
X=x

The approach provided here can also be amended to facilitate welfare analysis after some
observable information, X, has been revealed about θ. For example, perhaps one does not
wish to incorporate the value of insurance to the extent to which it redistributes across those
with different incomes or health conditions.
This appendix provides a brief sketch of how one can make adjustments to the baseline
formula for EA (s) by conditioning on the observable characteristics, X = x. To see how this
can work, suppose prices, pU and pI , are charged uniformly to people with different values
of X and that a fraction s of the market purchases insurance.41 Let sx denote the fraction
of the population with characteristics X = x that are uninsured. Note that s = EX [sx ] is
the total fraction of the market insured. Next, let β (s, x) denote the difference in marginal
utilities between the insured and uninsured given by a generalized version of equation (16):
E
β (s, x) =

h

∂uν
∂cν |S

i
h
i
ν
(θµ ) < s, X = x − E ∂u
∂cν |S (θµ ) ≥ s, X = x
h
i
ν
E ∂u
|θ
∈
Θ
,
X
=
x
µ
µ
∂cν

Now, note that the aggregate impact on pU of expanding the size of the insurance market is
still determined by the aggregate resource constraint. Therefore, the slope of the aggregate
demand curve continues to determine how much prices change for a given group. This means
that the ex-ante value of expanding the insurance market for those with characteristics X = x
41

If prices, pU and pI , are charged differentially to those with different X characteristics, then one can
simply conduct welfare analysis by conditioning on X everywhere in Proposition 1.

52

is given by



∂D
EA(s, x) = (1 − sx ) s −
∂s



(24)

β (sx , x)

and aggregating across all values of X using equal weights on those with different X characteristics yields an ex-ante welfare value of EX [EA (s, X)]. This approach aggregates welfare
from behind a set of “veils of ignorance” – one for each value of X. In the limiting case
where X incorporates all information about s, then there is no difference in marginal utilities across s conditional on X, β (sx , x) = 0. Hence, there would be no additional ex-ante
value to the insurance (EA (s, x) = 0). This is simply another way of saying that market
surplus treats all sources of differences in demand as redistribution as opposed to having
potential insurance value.
Analogous derivations show that the MVPF conditional on X = x generalizes to
M V P F (s) =

F

1 + (1 − sx ) β (sx , x)
1+

C(s)−D(s)
s(−D ′ (s))

Proof of Proposition 5

Note that the expected utility in the economy when a fraction s is insured, as specified in
equation (10) is given by:




1
1
1
V (pI (s) , pU (s) , 0) = sE − e−γ [y−pI (s)+ 2 w] |S (θµ ) < s + (1 − s) E − e−γ[y−pU (s)−λ(θν )] |S (θµ ) ≥ s
γ
γ

So, S EA (s) solves




i
1
1
1 h
1
− E e−γ[y−λ(θν )+W (s)] = sE − e−γ [y−pI (s)+ 2 w] |S (θµ ) < s + (1 − s) E − e−γ[y−pU (s)−λ(θν )] |S (θµ ) ≥ s
γ
γ
γ

or
h
h
i
i
1
E e−γ[y−λ(θν )+W (s)] = se−γ [y−pI (s)+ 2 w] + (1 − s) E e−γ[y−pU (s)−λ(θν )] |S (θµ ) ≥ s

and,

e−γW (s)

Z

1
0

h
i
e−γW (s) E eγλ(θν )

=

h
i
E eγλ(θν ) |S (θµ ) = s̃ ds̃

=

i
h
1
seγ [pI (s)− 2 w] + (1 − s) E eγ[pU (s)+λ(θν )] |S (θµ ) ≥ s
Z 1 h
i
1
seγpI (s) e−γ 2 w + (1 − s) eγpU (s)
E eγλ(θν ) |S = s̃ ds̃
s

 



γ2
Next, we note that E eγλ(θν ) |S (θµ ) = s̃ = e−γC(s̃)+ 2 Σ(s̃) . So, Es̃ E eγλ(θν ) |S (θµ ) = s̃ =

R 1 −γC(s̃)+ γ 2 Σ(s̃)
R1 
R1
γ2
2
e
ds̃. Analogously, s E eγλ(θν ) |S = s̃ ds̃ = s e−γC(s̃)+ 2 Σ(s̃) ds̃. Taking logs
0
53

then yields the result.

G

Income Heterogeneity

To see this, note that with heterogeneity in y (θν ) we have:




i
1
1
1 h
1
− E e−γ[y(θν )−λ(θν )+W (s)] = sE − e−γ [y(θν )−pI (s)+ 2 w] |S < s + (1 − s) E − e−γ[y(θν )−pU (s)−λ(θν )] |S ≥ s
γ
γ
γ
or
h
h
i
i
h
i
1
E e−γ[y(θν )−λ(θν )+W (s)] = sE e−γ [y(θν )−pI (s)+ 2 w] |S < s + (1 − s) E e−γ[y(θν )−pU (s)−λ(θν )] |S ≥ s
h
i
i
h
i
h
1
e−γW (s) E e−γ[y(θν )−λ(θν )] = seγpI (s) e− 2 γw E e−γy(θν ) |S < s + (1 − s) eγpU (s) E e−γ[y(θν )−λ(θν )] |S ≥ s
Now, conditioning first on S = s̃ and then integrating over a uniform distribution of s̃ yields
e−γW (s)

Z

1
0

Z
i
h
1
E e−γ[y(θν )−λ(θν )] |S = s̃ ds̃ = eγpI (s) e− 2 γw

s
0

Z
h
i
E e−γy(θν ) |S = s̃ ds̃+eγpU (s)

1
s

h
i
E e−γ[y(θν )−λ(θν )] |S = s̃ ds̃

where
i
h
1 2
E e−γ[y(θν )−λ(θν )] |S = s̃ = eγ(ȳ(s̃)+C(s̃)−w)+ 2 γ Σ(s̃)
So,
e−γW (s)

H

Z

1
0

1

eγ(ȳ(s̃)+C(s̃)−w)+ 2 γ

2

Σ(s̃)

1

= eγpI (s) e− 2 γw

Z

s

e−γ ȳ(s̃) ds̃ + eγpU (s)

0

Z

1

1

eγ(ȳ(s̃)+C(s̃)−w)+ 2 γ

2

Σ(s̃)

ds̃

s

Preference Heterogeneity

As noted in the text, there are two reasons that individuals might have high willingness to
pay: on the one hand, WTP might be driven by their expected costs (or higher variance of
costs). On the other hand, WTP might be driven by high risk aversion. Therefore, for two
individuals with the same willingness to pay, i.e. D (pU , s), it is no longer the case that it
would be reasonable to assume they have the same expected costs that equals the marginal
cost curve, C (s). Instead, at each level the cost curve reflects an average of individuals with
different expected costs who have the same quantile of demand, 1 − s, but arrive at that
quantile through different levels of risk aversion. As a result, I introduce heterogeneity in to
the cost curve.
I proceed as follows. First, i enumerate all individuals who are in the insurance market.
Let λ̄i denote an uninsured individual’s expected costs given what they know at the time of
purchasing insurance and let Vi denote their subjective variance of their expected costs. I
continue to assume moral hazard is constant (i.e. no variation in w). So, demand is given
by
w γi Vi
(25)
Di = λ̄i + +
2
2

54

As noted above, demand could be high because of high expected costs, λ̄i , or because of
high risk aversion, γi (or also high variance Vi ). So, while previously in the subsection above
we assumed that λ̄i = C (s) − w for each person at the 1 − sth quantile of demand, this
assumption is no longer reasonable if there is heterogeneity in γi .
Instead, I proceed as follows. First, I draw a sample of individuals (I choose 10,000
individuals, but this is not essential). For each individual, I draw a random risk aversion
coefficient as:
γ = γ̄ + ǫγ

where γ̄ is the mean level of risk aversion and ǫγ ∼ N 0, σγ2 is a normally distributed error
term. I take γ̄ = 5x10−4 and σγ ∈ {5x10−5 , 1x10−4 }. Note that in principle this can generate
risk loving individuals with γ < 0. I therefore choose to censor the distribution to impose
γ > 0, although this is not essential for the results.
Second, as before, fix the moral hazard component as w = E [C (s)] so that average costs
are doubled due to moral hazard (which corresponds to roughly a 30% increase in costs
relative to their gross costs).
Third, I draw a realization of the expected cost and variance for each individual, λ̄i . I
model the expected costs as a draw from the random distribution of {C (s) , V (s)} from the
cost distribution and variance outcomes from the model with no heterogeneity. But, I then
add an error term κi to the expected costs, so that
λ̄i = C (U ) − w + κi
where κi ∼ N (0, σc2 ) and C (U ) reflects the fact that we drew costs randomly from the 100
row dataset of the estimated cost curve.
I use a simple minimum distance estimator to estimate σc . For each individual, I construct
Di using equation (25) above. Sorting the data yields the predicted quantile s for each person,
and a “demand curve” that would be implied by the structural model, D̂ (s). I construct
ηD (s) to be the distance between the sth quantile of the estimated demand and the model’s
implied demand curve:
2
ηD
(s) = D̂ (s) − D (s)
Next, I consider the cost curve. I take the sorted data and regress the costs of the insured
population on each individuals quantile of the demand curve 1 − s, or s for simplicity:
λ̄i + w = f (s)
where f is estimated using a local polynomial. The predicted fˆ yields the cost curve implied
55

by the model:
Ĉ (s) = fˆ (s)
I then construct ηC (s) to be the difference between the model’s implied cost curve and the
cost curve estimated in the data:
ηC2 = Ĉ (s) − C (s)
I then choose σc to minimize the squared loss, weighting each quantile equally:
L=

X

2
(s)
ηC2 (s) + ηD

s



This then generates the primitives of the model. I then use these to construct W (s) using
equation (11), being sure to correctly account for preference heterogeneity when taking
expectations.

56

