                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




HOW MUCH CONSUMPTION INSURANCE IN BEWLEY MODELS WITH ENDOGENOUS
                      FAMILY LABOR SUPPLY?

                                        Chunzan Wu
                                        Dirk Krueger

                                     Working Paper 24472
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w24472


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   March 2018




We thank Greg Kaplan and Luigi Pistaferri for useful conversations at an early stage of this
project. Krueger gratefully acknowledges financial support from the NSF under grant
SES-0820494. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Chunzan Wu and Dirk Krueger. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
How Much Consumption Insurance in Bewley Models with Endogenous Family Labor Supply?
Chunzan Wu and Dirk Krueger
NBER Working Paper No. 24472
March 2018
JEL No. D15,D31,E21

                                        ABSTRACT

We show that a calibrated life-cycle two-earner household model with endogenous labor supply
can rationalize the extent of consumption insurance against shocks to male and female wages, as
estimated empirically by Blundell, Pistaferri and Saporta-Eksten (2016) in U.S. data. With
additively separable preferences, 43% of male and 23% of female permanent wage shocks pass
through to consumption, compared to the empirical estimates of 34% and 20%. With non-
separable preferences the model predicts more consumption insurance, with pass-through rates of
29% and 16%. Most of the consumption insurance against permanent male wage shocks is
provided through the labor supply response of the female earner.


Chunzan Wu
Department of Economics
University of Miami
Jenkins Building 521
5250 University Drive
Coral Gables, FL 33146
cwu@bus.miami.edu

Dirk Krueger
Economics Department
University of Pennsylvania
160 McNeil Building
3718 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
dkrueger@econ.upenn.edu
1       Introduction
    How does household consumption respond to shocks to wages of the primary
earner? The baseline version of the permanent income hypothesis in which a house-
hold has only one bread winner and labor supply of the primary earner is exoge-
nous provides a sharp answer: household consumption responds to permanent wage
shocks one for one, and essentially not at all to purely transitory shocks. In a se-
quence of important papers, Blundell, Pistaferri, and Preston (2008) and Kaplan
and Violante (2010) propose to measure the magnitude of the household consump-
tion response to earnings shocks with various persistence by consumption insur-
ance coefficients. This measure is defined as the fraction of the variance of a given
shock to log-earnings that does not translate into a corresponding change in log-
consumption.1 That is, if the consumption insurance coefficient for a given earnings
shock is 1, household consumption growth is completely insulated from the earn-
ings shock, and if it is zero, the earnings shock translates one for one into consump-
tion. Blundell, Pistaferri, and Preston (2008) empirically estimate these consump-
tion responses to transitory and permanent earnings shocks on U.S. data and find
close to perfect insurance against purely transitory shocks (except for poor house-
holds), as well as substantial insurance against permanent shocks, with a consump-
tion insurance coefficient of 35%.2 Kaplan and Violante (2010) evaluate whether a
calibrated incomplete-markets life cycle model in which a single-earner household
faces transitory and permanent earnings shocks is consistent with the empirical ev-
idence provided by Blundell, Pistaferri, and Preston (2008). They find that in the
model households are close to fully insured against transitory earnings shocks, but
that there is too little consumption insurance against permanent shocks: the model-
    1
     Formally, denoting by cit the log of consumption of household i at time or age t, the consump-
tion insurance coefficient for earnings shock xnit of type (persistence) n is defined as

                                            Covi (∆ log(cit ), xnit )
                                φnt = 1 −                             ,
                                                 V ari (xnit )

where Covi and V ari are taken with respect to the cross-section of household observations indexed
by i observed at time (or age) t.
   2
     Also see Santaeulàlia-Llopis and Zheng (2017) for a recent application of the same method to
Chinese data.



                                                  1
implied consumption insurance coefficient ranges between 7% and 22%, depend-
ing on how tight borrowing constraints are assumed to be, and thus is significantly
smaller than the estimates of Blundell, Pistaferri, and Preston (2008).
    In both Blundell, Pistaferri, and Preston (2008) and Kaplan and Violante (2010),
as in much of the empirical and model-based consumption literature household
earnings are treated as exogenous, and the key mechanism through which con-
sumption insurance is achieved is saving (and borrowing, if permitted) at a state
non-contingent interest rate. By construction this literature is therefore silent about
the underlying shocks behind earnings fluctuations, as well as the alternative mech-
anisms by which households can and do respond to these underlying shocks. The
current paper aims at contributing to the literature by modeling the fundamental
sources of consumption risk in an otherwise standard incomplete-markets model
with idiosyncratic shocks (of various persistence) to wages of the male and female
earner of a two-member household. Our primary model-based contribution is to
quantify the extent to which wage shocks translate into consumption movements,
and to evaluate the relative importance of alternative mechanisms (adjustment of la-
bor hours of both members of the household and participation of the female earner,
as well as precautionary savings) by which consumption insurance occurs in the
model.
    The key applied contribution of this paper is the assessment whether the stan-
dard Bewley model with endogenous labor supply of two-earner households can
match well the empirically estimated labor supply and consumption responses to
transitory and permanent wage shocks, as derrived in the recent paper by Blun-
dell, Pistaferri, and Saporta-Eksten (2016), henceforth BPS. In this work, which
is the natural extension of Blundell, Pistaferri, and Preston (2008) to endogenous
household labor supply choices, the authors empirically estimate the transmission
coefficients from transitory and permanent wage shocks to labor earnings and con-
sumption in two-earner (male and female) households.3 We treat their estimates
as the empirical benchmark against which the transmission coefficients estimated
   3
     For consumption, their transmission coefficients have exactly the same interpretation as the con-
sumption insurance coefficients discussed above, but are now understood as measuring the degree
consumption insurance against wage rather than earnings shocks. With single earner households and
exogenous labor supply the two coincide exactly.


                                                  2
from model-simulated data should be compared, very much in the same spirit Ka-
plan and Violante (2010) used the empirical estimates of Blundell, Pistaferri, and
Preston (2008).
    Our findings suggest that the model fits the data quite well. That is, a standard
Bewley model with two-earner households and endogenous labor supply can ex-
plain most of the responsiveness of household consumption and labor income to
wage shocks in the data, in contrast to Kaplan and Violante (2010) who concluded
that, treating income as exogenous, the standard Bewley model predicts signifi-
cantly too little consumption insurance against permanent income shocks. In our
calibrated model with additively separable preferences between consumption and
labor supply, about 43% of male permanent wage shocks and 23% of female per-
manent wage shocks pass through to household consumption. The corresponding
empirical estimates of BPS are 34% and 20%, respectively. Hence the model can
account for virtually all of the empirically observed consumption insurance against
female wage shocks and most (86%) of the insurance against permanent shocks to
male wages. The insurance against transitory wage shocks is almost perfect in the
model with close-to-zero pass-through rates for both male and female shocks, while
the BPS counterparts are slightly negative but not far away from zero. In addition,
both the model and the empirical BPS results indicate that consumption insurance
against permanent wage shocks improves over the life cycle, in the model caused
by an improved asset position as households age. A decomposition of consump-
tion insurance against male permanent wage shocks in the model shows that labor
supply responses of the female member of the household account for most of this
insurance, with a contribution that is almost constant over the life cycle. In contrast,
the contribution of male labor supply is negative (that is, male hours fall in response
to a permanent negative male wage shock), increasingly so over the life cycle.
    The empirical analysis of BPS also finds empirical evidence for complementar-
ity between consumption and leisure, and between leisure of both spouses. Hence
we also consider a version of the model with non-separable utility between con-
sumption and labor supply of constant elasticity of substitution functional form
and calibrate it to match the complementarities estimated by BPS. Non-separability
between consumption and labor supply in preferences increases the amount of con-


                                           3
sumption insurance against permanent wage shocks in the model: the pass-through
rates of male and female permanent wage shocks in the model are now 29% and
16%, slightly lower than the BPS estimates. Non-separable preferences also help
the model match the negative pass-through rates of transitory wage shocks to con-
sumption that BPS document empirically.
    In order to make sure that the comparison between our model results and the
empirical evidence, as represented by the BPS estimates, is not contaminated by
potential bias of the estimation method BPS employ, we also evaluate their empir-
ical approach using model-simulated data. What are the potential sources of the
bias? For this, note that the derivation of the BPS estimators from a theoretical
model with endogenous labor supply and incomplete asset markets requires inte-
rior solutions of the household maximization problem, which is not always assured
in a model with potentially binding borrowing constraints or an operative extensive
margin of female labor supply. However, we show that the performance of the BPS
estimator is not affected too strongly by the violation of these assumptions. This is
partly due to the fact that BPS restrict attention to households aged 30 to 57, and
when we follow this sample selection criterion in model-simulated data most of the
households in this age are no longer impacted by the tight borrowing constraints
(as they have accumulated away from it). The extensive labor supply margin in-
duces relatively larger biases in the estimates related to female labor supply, but the
impact of this model feature is limited, because the female non-participation rate
is only moderate, both in our simulated data as well as in the original BPS data
set. Hence a potentially operative extensive margin of female labor supply is not a
significant source of bias either.
    Overall, our results suggest their estimation method performs well on simulated
data, and hence the results discussed in the previous paragraphs concerning the
comparison between the model-based and the empirical BPS results are not signifi-
cantly affected by potential biases in the estimation method. The BPS method tends
to underestimate consumption insurance against male permanent wage shocks, whereas
the direction of the bias on the consumption insurance coefficient against female
permanent wage shocks depends on the form of preferences (separable vs. nonsep-
arable preferences). In each case, however, the magnitude of these biases is small,


                                         4
around 2% in terms of the pass-through rates.4
    Abstracting from the papers by Blundell, Pistaferri, and Preston (2008), Ka-
plan and Violante (2010) and Blundell, Pistaferri, and Saporta-Eksten (2016) that
directly motivate this study, our work is related to the broader literature that has
studied heterogeneous household models with idiosyncratic risks, as pioneered in
Bewley (1986), Imrohoroğlu (1989), Huggett (1993) and Aiyagari (1994). The
structural life cycle model we employ is most closely related to the models an-
alyzed by Heathcote, Storesletten, and Violante (2010) and Holter, Krueger, and
Stepanchuk (2018). However, their applications mainly focus on inequality and tax
policy rather than the consumption insurance question we address here, and they do
not consider the possibility of non-separable preferences. The paper is also related
to the literature on within-household risk-sharing and the role female labor supply
plays in this context. For example, Attanasio, Low, and Sánchez-Marcos (2005)
study the importance of female labor supply as an insurance mechanism against
idiosyncratic income risk within the family, but in their model the labor supply de-
cision is discrete and the intensive margin of labor supply is absent. Ortigueira and
Siassi (2013) investigate the impact of within-household risk-sharing on household
labor supply and savings. However, only idiosyncratic unemployment risk is con-
sidered and there is no life cycle in their model. To our knowledge, no previous
work has examined the issue of consumption insurance against wage shocks in a
structural life cycle model of two-earner households with endogenous labor supply
of both household members.5
    The rest of this paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 and Section 3 describe
the model and its calibration; Section 4 introduces the transmission coefficients
and offers a brief review of the BPS method; Section 5 reports and discusses the
   4
     BPS add an “outside insurance” coefficient to some of their empirical specifications, in order to
capture potential insurance obtained through channels other than endogenous labor supply and self-
insurance through savings. We find that the estimate of this outside insurance is more significantly
downward biased when implemented on model-simulated data, in the order of about 10%, which
might in turn bias the estimates of consumption insurance, which depend on the “outside insurance”
coefficient, more noticeably.
   5
     Perhaps closest to our work in this regard is Heathcote, Storesletten, and Violante (2014) who
study consumption insurance against wage shocks in an economy populated by single households
making endogenous labor supply decisions and having access to within-group risk-sharing arrange-
ments.


                                                  5
main results; Section 6 evaluates the performance of the BPS method and Section
7 concludes. The appendix contains supplementary results as well as details of the
model calibration and implementation of the BPS methodology.


2     Model

2.1    Environment
     We study a partial equilibrium life cycle model with idiosyncratic wage risk
and endogenous labor supply. We follow a cohort of a continuum of measure 1
households over their life cycle. Households live for T periods, from age t = 1 to T ,
work in the first R periods of life and then are retired from age R + 1 onward. Each
household has two members: a male and a female. As in BPS we use the notation
Xj,t to denote the variable X of earner j at age t, with j = 1 and 2 corresponding
to the male and female members of the household.
     In each period, households receive utility from joint household consumption,
Ct . A working household’s utility is also affected by the levels of their labor supply,
H1,t and H2,t . Hence the period utility function is assumed to be u(Ct , H1,t , H2,t )
for a working household and uR (Ct ) for a retired household. The two members
of each household are assumed to make joint decisions on consumption and la-
bor supply. Both members of a working household can work and receive wages
determined by their own labor productivity. The wages of two members in each
household, Wj,t , are stochastic and can be represented by

                                 log Wj,t = gj,t + Fj,t + uj,t ,

                                       Fj,t = Fj,t−1 + vj,t ,
                      "          #                  "                       #!
                          v1,t                           σv21     σv1 ,v2
                                     ∼ iid N   0,                                ,
                          v2,t                          σv1 ,v2    σv22
                     "           #                  "                       #!
                          u1,t                           σu21     σu1 ,u2
                                     ∼ iid N   0,                                ,
                          u2,t                          σu1 ,u2    σu22

where gj,t is the deterministic mean life-cycle trend of log Wj,t ; Fj,t is the permanent

                                                 6
stochastic component and uj,t is the transitory component of log-wages. Hence vj,t ,
is the permanent shock to earner j’s wage, and uj,t is the transitory shock. Both
vj,t and uj,t can be correlated across the two members of each household, but are
assumed to be independent between each other and over time. After retirement,
labor productivity is assumed to fall to zero, and hence households optimally do not
work in retirement. A retired household receives a fixed amount of social security
benefits, b, in each period she is alive.6
     As is common in standard incomplete-markets models, households cannot trade
fully state contingent Arrow securities, but they can save, and potentially borrow,
at the risk-free interest rate r. They are, however, subject to age-dependent and
potentially binding borrowing constraints At .


2.2      Household Optimization Problem
       A working household’s problem is then in recursive form

V (A, F1 , F2 , u1 , u2 , t) =      max         u(C, H1 , H2 )
                                 C,A0 ,H1 ,H2
                      1  X                          X
                 +           π(F10 , F20 |F1 , F2 )     π(u01 , u02 )V (A0 , F10 , F20 , u01 , u02 , t + 1)
                     1+δ 0 0                        0 0
                            (F1 ,F2 )                      (u1 ,u2 )

                     s.t. C + A0 = W1,t H1 + W2,t H2 + (1 + r)A,
                           C, H1 , H2 ≥ 0, A0 ≥ At+1 ,

        1
where 1+δ is the time discount factor and π(·|·) governs the transition probabilities
of the wage shocks.7 The dynamic programming problem of a retired household is
   6
      We abstract from a progressive labor income tax in the model because BPS find that adding this
feature to their analysis does not significantly change the results.
    7
      Since we will discretize the support of the wage shocks when computing the model, we rep-
resent the conditional expectation in the dynamic programming problem as a sum, rather than an
integral.




                                                      7
given by:

                                                       1
                     V R (A, t) = max0 uR (C) +           V R (A0 , t + 1)
                                    C,A               1+δ
                         s.t.   C + A0 = b + (1 + r)A,
                                C ≥ 0, A0 ≥ At+1 ,

where uR (C) is the utility function for retired households.


2.3     Choice of the Utility Function
    As a benchmark, we assume that the period utility function is additively sepa-
rable in household consumption and labor of both household members, and has the
form:
                                             1+η −1        1+η −1
                                C 1−σ      H1 1          H2 2
               u(C, H1 , H2 ) =       − ψ1          − ψ2          ,
                                1−σ        1 + η1−1      1 + η2−1
where the parameter σ governs the intertemporal elasticity of substitution for con-
sumption, and its reciprocal is the Frisch elasticity of consumption with respect to
its own price. The parameters η1 and η2 are the Frisch elasticities of male and fe-
male labor supply with respect to their own wages. The advantage of using this
preference structure, apart from simplifying the computation of the model,8 is that
the intertemporal and Frisch labor supply elasticities are exclusively determined by
exogenous parameters which are therefore directly interpretable.
    However, this separable preference structure is restrictive in that it does not per-
mit hours worked to affect the marginal utility of consumption (and reversely, does
not allow consumption to impact the marginal disutility of hours worked). Further-
more, BPS argue forcefully that non-separabilities between consumption and labor
supply are useful for fitting the micro data. Therefore we also study non-separable
   8
      With additively separable preferences between consumption and labor supply, the Euler equa-
tion of consumption is identical to that in a model with the constant relative risk aversion (CRRA)
utility function and exogenous labor supply. Optimal levels of labor supply are easily pinned down
by the intratemporal optimality conditions, and are simple functions of optimal consumption in the
current period.




                                                8
preferences of constant elasticity of substitution form:
                                                                         γ   1−σ
                         {αC γ + (1 − α)[ξH1θ + (1 − ξ)H2θ ]− θ }             γ    −1
        u(C, H1 , H2 ) =                                                                .      (2.1)
                                            1−σ

    Here γ governs the substitution pattern between consumption and labor supply,
and θ governs the substitution pattern between male and female labor supply. The
main advantage of this utility function is that it is flexible enough to accommo-
date different substitution patterns while keeping the computational burden of the
problem manageable.9 However, now the simple mapping between the preference
parameters and Frisch elasticities is lost, in that the Frisch elasticities are no longer
deep parameters, but rather depend on the endogenous choices by households.
    Given the fact that a significant proportion of females do not participate in the
labor market, an operative extensive margin of female labor supply is included in
the model by adding a fixed utility cost to the period utility when female hours
worked are strictly positive. That is, we add a term −I(H2 > 0)f to the period
utility where I(·) is the indicator function and f is the fixed cost.
    The period utility function for a retired household is chosen to be of CRRA
form:
                                             C 1−σ − 1
                                 uR (C) = Ψ             ,
                                                1−σ
where Ψ is a constant that scales marginal utility of consumption after retirement.10


3       Calibration Strategy
    In this section we describe how we parameterize the model, using empirical
targets derived from U.S. household data, as measured in the PSID.
    9
       Optimal labor supply can still be represented in closed from as a function of optimal consump-
tion.
    10
       For additively separable preferences, Ψ is simply set to 1. For non-separable preferences, Ψ
is chosen such that the age profile of consumption is smooth at retirement. Consumption typically
falls upon retirement in the data, but the literature on the retirement consumption puzzle shows that
it is mainly due to work-related consumption expenditures not modelled here. See Hurst (2008) for
a survey of this literature.




                                                 9
3.1     Data
    In BPS, the data used are from the 1999 to 2009 waves of the Panel Study of
Income and Dynamics (PSID). The PSID collects data from two groups of house-
holds: one group representative of the U.S. population, the other from low income
households in the Survey of Economic Opportunity (SEO). BPS’ estimation uses
only data from non-SEO households with male household heads aged between 30
and 57 that are married and participate in the labor market. Because we want to
compare the results of our model with the empirical BPS estimates, the model is
calibrated to match the statistics from precisely this group of households whenever
possible. This calibration strategy gives the best chance to the model to fit the BPS
estimates. If we still find significant differences between our model and the BPS
empirical results, they are likely caused by mis-specification of the model rather
than inappropriate parameter values. We now briefly describe the calibration of the
model, with details relegated to Appendix C.


3.2     Demographic and Initial Wealth
    Households are assumed to be born at age 21, retire at age 65 and die at age 80.
So age 1 in the model corresponds to age 21 in the data, and T and R are 60 and 45,
respectively. Initial household asset levels are set to be zero.11
  11
     The median age at first marriage in the U.S. between 2000 and 2010 is 27.5 for males and 26
for females, according to U.S. Census data. The starting age of 21 of households in the model is
therefore younger than in the data. There are mainly two reasons why we made this choice. First,
the starting age of a couple cohabitating and thus sharing risk could be much younger than that of
eventual marriage. Second, at the time of official marriage couples likely have already accumulated
some assets, and have permanent wage components determined by previously realized sequences
of shocks. It is difficult to empirically identify the permanent components of wages at individual
level, and thus problematic to measure an exact empirical joint distribution of the permanent wage
components and asset level (the initial states of simulated households). Thus, as an imperfect com-
promise, we assume that the life cycle of a household begins at an earlier age with zero assets. When
calculating the relevant model statistics, only simulated data from households with ages 30 to 57 are
used (the same age group employed by BPS), and therefore the choice of initial conditions is not
critical for our results.




                                                10
3.3     Wage Process
    The deterministic life cycle profile of wages is taken from Rupert and Zanella
(2015). They estimate this wage profile from PSID 1967-2008. The original wage
profile starts from age 23 and only has values biennially after age 52, so we interpo-
late it to an annual profile and extend the age range to 21-65. Because Rupert and
Zanella (2015) report only a pooled wage profile for males and females, and the es-
timation of female wage profile often suffers from the selection bias from females’
participation decisions, in the model we assume that deterministic life cycle wage
profiles of male and female earners have the same shape, but at different levels.12
The life cycle average of the male wages is normalized to be 1. In the BPS data, av-
erage annual earnings of males is 2.031 times that of working females; we calibrate
the level of female wages to match this earnings ratio.
    Turning to the stochastic component of wages, the covariance matrices of tran-
sitory and permanent wage shocks are taken directly from the BPS estimates. As
in their work, both the permanent and transitory wage shocks are assumed to be
iid across time but potentially positively correlated between the two earners of a
household:
                        "                        #       "                   #
                              σu21     σu1 ,u2               0.0275 0.0058
                                                     =                           ,
                             σu1 ,u2    σu22                 0.0058 0.0125
                         "                       #       "                   #
                               σv21    σv1 ,v2               0.0303 0.0027
                                                     =                           .
                             σv1 ,v2    σv22                 0.0027 0.0382


3.4     Borrowing Limit
    Since the tightness of the borrowing limit is an important determinant of con-
sumption smoothing opportunities, we consider two extreme cases, and present cal-
ibrations and results for both. The first alternative is to rule out borrowing altogether
and impose a borrowing constraint of zero (ZBC) on households. The second ex-
treme is to permit the household to borrow freely, subject to certain repayment of
  12
    Since the deterministic wage trends are perfectly predictable by households in the model, the
behavioral response of households with respect to wage shocks, the main focus of this paper, is not
significantly affected by the precise life cycle profile of the deterministic wage component.



                                                     11
debt at the end of life. We call the associated constraints non-binding borrowing
constraints (NBBC). Reality likely lies somewhere between these two extremes.13


3.5     Discount Factor and Interest Rate
    We adopt BPS’ choice of the real risk-free interest rate of r = 2% per year.
The discount factor δ, a key determinant of household precautionary (and life cycle)
saving is calibrated such that the aggregate wealth-income ratio for households aged
30 to 57 in the model is approximately equal to 3, the value in the BPS data set.


3.6     Social Security Benefits
    In the U.S., social security benefits are piecewise linear functions of average
monthly earnings over the working life. Additional rules govern benefits for spouses.
A full representation of the U.S. social security system is costly in terms of com-
putation and the complexity of the model. Hence we model the progressivity of the
U.S. social security benefit formula starkly, by assuming that benefits b per house-
hold are independent of past contributions. We calibrate b to match the ratio of
average social security benefits per household to average household income. In
2012, the monthly average social security benefit of a retired worker is $1262 (So-
cial Security Administration report 2013), and household annual mean income is
$71274 dollars (Current Population Survey 2013). Hence the ratio of the retirement
benefit per household to average household income in the model is calibrated to
1262×2×12
   71274
           = 42.5%.
  13
     Note that with endogenous labor supply the specification of the NBBC case is not obvious.
The natural borrowing limits employed by Kaplan and Violante (2010) are the loosest constraints
that guarantee, in their environment, that households can pay back their debts with probability one.
However, with unbounded endogenous labor supply, households can pay back any amount of debt
by working sufficiently long hours. Therefore, we need to use a different set of non-binding borrow-
ing constraints. In particular, we first solve the model with very large negative constraints, and check
that in simulations no household is ever at the constraints. Then we trace the lowest asset positions
reached by different age groups in any simulation, and use these as sequence of age-dependent bor-
rowing constraints to solve the model again. This procedure is repeated until the implied borrowing
constraints do not change any further.




                                                  12
3.7     Fixed Utility Cost of Positive Female Labor Supply
    In the data, both males and females have non-trivial non-participation rates in
the labor market. However, since the BPS results are based on a sample of house-
holds with a working male member, we do not include an extensive margin of male
labor supply decision in the model. To take into account female labor supply de-
cisions along the extensive margin in the model, the fixed utility cost of positive
female labor supply f is chosen such that the average female non-participation rate
of age 30 to 57 households is the same 20% as in the BPS data.


3.8     Additively Separable Preference Parameters
     With additively separable preferences, the parameters 1/σ, η1 , and η2 are the
consumption, male and female labor supply Frisch elasticities with respect to their
own prices, i.e., ηc,p , ηh1 ,w1 and ηh2 ,w2 .14 Therefore, we directly adopt the values
BPS estimate under the assumption of separability: σ = 1/0.578, η1 = 0.528, and
η2 = 0.850. The values of the parameters ψ1 and ψ2 scaling the disutility of labor
are calibrated to match average male and female hours worked in the data. For
males, mean hours are normalized to 1, which means that one unit of labor supply
in the model corresponds to average hours worked by males in the BPS data, that
is, 2302 hours per year. Average hours worked by females, conditional on working,
in BPS data set is 1688 hours, and hence the target value for average female hours,
conditional on working, is 0.733 in the model.
     Table 1 summarizes the calibration of the model with separable preferences.


3.9     Parameters for Non-separable Preferences
    With non-separable preferences, Frisch elasticities are no longer deep param-
eters. Given the functional form in this paper, we are able to derive the Frisch
elasticities as functions of preference parameters and allocations. The formulas
   14
      Following the original BPS paper, Frisch elasticities are denoted by η. The meaning of sub-
scripts are c for consumption, hj for earner j’s labor supply, p for the price of consumption and wj
for earner j’s wage. For example, ηc,p is the Frisch elasticity of consumption with respect to its own
price.


                                                 13
            Table 1: Parameter Values for Additively Separable Preferences

          Parameter      Governing                                               ZBC         NBBC
               δ         discount rate of utility                               0.0111       0.0093
              ψ1         disutility of male labor supply                         0.499        0.523
              ψ2         disutility of female labor supply                       0.524        0.550
               b         retirement benefits                                     0.910        0.900
              σ          inverse of consumption Frisch elasticity              1/0.578      1/0.578
              η1         male labor supply Frish elasticity                      0.528        0.528
              η2         female labor supply Frisch elasticity                   0.850        0.850
              f          fixed utility cost of female labor participation       0.0168       0.0175
          eg1,t −g2,t    male/female wage trend ratio                            2.07         2.06


are shown in Appendix D. The preference parameters are then calibrated jointly to
match the Frisch elasticities estimated by BPS in the absence of the separability
assumption, and average hours worked by males and females in the BPS data. The
parameters γ, θ and σ mainly affect the Frisch elasticities, whereas the parameters
α and ξ mainly affect labor supply. In particular, for a given set of parameters, the
model is first solved and a panel of household data are simulated. Then, based on
the simulated data and the formulas for Frisch elasticities, the sample averages of
Frisch elasticities and labor supply are calculated and compared with the calibration
targets.15
    The values of calibrated parameters of the model with non-separable prefer-
ences and the implied Frisch elasticities are summarized in Tables 12 and 13 of
Appendix C.


4        Transmission Coefficients and the BPS Method
    The main applied purpose of our paper is to quantify how household labor sup-
ply, income, and ultimately consumption respond to permanent and transitory wage
    15
     Note that, given the functional form of the utility function, there are not enough degrees of
freedom to match all Frisch elasticities perfectly, and we focus on matching the upper triangular
part of the matrix of Frisch elasticities, in particular, ηc,p , ηc,w1 , ηc,w2 , ηh1 ,w1 , ηh1 ,w2 and ηh2 ,w2 .
In fact, there might be no utility function that can match exactly all Frisch elasticities estimated by
BPS, due to the theoretical restrictions between Frisch elasticities imposed by their definitions. In
the calibration of the non-separable utility function we then need to choose between a good fit of
own-price elasticities (ηc,p , ηh1 ,w1 and ηh2 ,w2 ) and cross-elasticities (ηc,w1 , ηc,w2 and ηh1 ,w2 ). The
chosen parameterization is a compromise between both.

                                                      14
shocks of its two members. In this section we briefly review the concept of the
transmission coefficients that BPS use to measure these responses empirically, and
provide a description of the BPS method used to estimate them from PSID data.16
We also discuss possible biases and concerns associated with their method, and de-
scribe how we can use our model to assess the potential magnitude of these biases.
    Let lower case letters denote logarithms of a variable, so that ∆ct , ∆yj,t are the
growth rates of household consumption and labor income of household member
j.17 The response of these household variables to permanent and transitory wage
shocks are captured by the transmission coefficients κ in the following equation:
                                                                                    
                                                                         ∆u1,t
               ∆ct         κc,u1 κc,u2 κc,v1 κc,v2                                  
                                                                           ∆u2,t   
              ∆y1,t  =  κy1 ,u1 κy1 ,u2 κy1 ,v1 κy1 ,v2                         .       (4.1)
                     
                                                                             v1,t   
               ∆y2,t       κy2 ,u1 κy2 ,u2 κy2 ,v1 κy2 ,v2
                                                                                    
                                                                              v2,t

The transmission coefficients measure directly how consumption and labor income
respond to wage shocks of different persistence. For example, κc,vj measures how
consumption responds to earner j’s permanent wage shocks. A value of κc,vj = 0.4
means that 40% of earner j’s permanent wage shocks pass through to household
consumption, and hence 60% are insured.
    If transitory and permanent wage shocks were separately observable, Equation
(4.1), and thus the transmission coefficients, could be estimated directly. However,
in practice, only the sum of transitory and permanent wage shocks are observed
directly in the data:
                               ∆wj,t = ∆uj,t + vj,t .

A key contribution of BPS is to provide an empirically applicable method to esti-
mate these transmission coefficients. The authors show that if one log-linearizes
the first-order conditions and the intertemporal budget constraint of a two-earner
household life cycle model very similar to the one described in Section 2, and as-
  16
      Detailed derivations of their key formulas relevant for this paper, and the details of how we
implement the BPS method are provided in Appendix E.
   17
      Empirically, ct and yj,t are the residuals of log consumption and log labor income of earner j
at age t after controlling for the effects of household observable characteristics.


                                                15
sumes interior solutions (thus abstracting from binding borrowing constraints and
extensive margin labor supply decisions), then one can derive the transmission co-
efficients as functions of Frisch elasticities {η}, (human) wealth shares (πt , sj,t ) and
an “outside insurance” coefficient β without fully solving the structural model, as
we do in this paper. For example, the transmission coefficient from permanent male
wage shocks to consumption κc,v1 is given as

            (−ηc,p + ηc,w1 + ηc,w2 )[ηc,w1 − (1 − β)(1 − πt )(s1,t + ηh,w1 )]
  κc,v1 =                                                                     + ηc,w1 ,
             ηc,p − ηc,w1 − ηc,w2 + (1 − β)(1 − πt )(ηh,p + ηh,w1 + ηh,w2 )
                                                                                    (4.2)
where the η’s are individual Frisch elasticities and η’s are weighted average Frisch
elasticities in the household.18 As the authors argue, πt is well approximated by the
share of assets in total discounted wealth of a household at age t,

                                                   Assett
                                   πt ≈                           ,
                                          Assett + Human W ealtht

where human wealth is the expected value of the discounted future labor income
stream of the household and sj,t is approximately the share of earner j’s human
wealth in the total human wealth of the household,

                                            Human W ealthj,t
                                   sj,t ≈ P2                    .
                                           i=1 Human W ealthi,t


BPS introduce the parameter β to capture sources of household insurance that are
not explicitly present in their model (neither in ours), such as the insurance provided
by networks of relatives and friends. The higher the values of πt and β are, the less
consumption responds to wage shocks, and therefore the better these shocks are
insured. The baseline results of BPS are estimated with the restriction of no outside
insurance, β = 0.
    Thus BPS’ method for estimating the transmission coefficients κ encompasses
four steps: (1) Estimate the variance-covariance matrices of the permanent and tran-
sitory shocks directly from wage data (with results that were documented in Section
3). (2) Measure the wealth shares πt and sj,t directly from the asset and labor in-
  18
                              P2                           P2                                  P2
       Specifically, ηh,p ≡    j=1 sj ηhj ,p ,   ηh,w1 ≡    j=1 sj ηhj ,w1   and, as ηh,w2 ≡    j=1 sj ηhj ,w2 .



                                                       16
come data. (3) Conditional on the results obtained from the first two steps, and
using the empirical second-order moments of ∆ct and ∆yj,t , employ a generalized
method of moments (GMM) strategy to jointly estimate the Frisch elasticities η’s
(and the “outside insurance” coefficient β unless restricted to zero).19 (4) Calcu-
late the estimates of the transmission coefficients based on the formulas (such as
Equation (4.2)) for each household and report as results sample averages across
households.
    Several assumptions are imposed in the BPS approach which delivers a trans-
parent and empirically operational, and thus very powerful methodology. Viola-
tions of these assumptions of course may result in biased estimation results for the
Frisch elasticities in step (3) of their procedure. For example, the log-linearization
of the household optimality conditions requires interiority of saving and labor sup-
ply decisions. This assumption is systematically violated if household borrowing
constraints are frequently binding or if nonparticipation of at least one household
member is ubiquitous.20 As part of the contribution of the paper, we therefore eval-
uate, in Section 6, the quality of the BPS methodology for simulated data generated
from our model with an extensive labor supply margin and potentially binding bor-
rowing constraints for which we know the true parameters, Frisch elasticities and
transmission coefficients. But first we study, in Section 5, after briefly documenting
basic life cycle properties of the model, its implied wage-shock transmission coef-
ficients. The twofold question we answer is how well is consumption (and labor
income) insured against wage shocks in the model, and how does this degree of in-
surance compare with the empirical evidence as represented by the BPS estimates.
  19
      For the general non-separable utility function no prior restrictions are imposed in estimation on
the Frisch elasticities. The assumption of separability in the utility function translates into restric-
tions for the cross Frisch elasticities to be zero in the GMM estimation.
   20
      BPS also assume that transitory wage shocks have no wealth effect on consumption or labor,
an assumption that is not exactly correct in life cycle models, especially not towards the end of
the working life where permanent and transitory shocks become indistinguishable. Finally, a first-
order approximation might not capture fully the nonlinear relationship between the wage shocks and
endogenous consumption and labor income growth.




                                                  17
5         Results from the Life Cycle Model
    As a benchmark we choose the additively separable preference specification,
as it permits an intuitive interpretation of the estimation results and transparent
comparison to the empirical findings of BPS. We present results for non-separable
preferences in Section 5.5. Since the tightness of the borrowing constraints de-
termines the degree of consumption insurance, but also the extent to which the
assumption of interior allocations in the BPS approximations is violated, we ex-
plore both the case of tight borrowing constraints (the ZBC case) and non-binding
borrowing constraints (the NBBC case). We recalibrate all economies to the same
empirical targets to make them comparable to each other.
    To generate results for each economy, optimal household policy functions are
solved numerically using a policy function iteration algorithm combined with the
endogenous grid method proposed by Carroll (2006). The policy functions are then
used to simulate a panel of 50, 000 households from age 21 to age 80 (although we
only use observations from age 30 to 57 when comparing model implications to the
BPS estimates, consistent with the data set they use). The results we report below
are based on these simulated data.21


5.1         Life Cycles in the Benchmark Economy
    Prior to turning to the main interest of the paper, the magnitude of insurance
against wage shocks implied by the model, as measured by the transmission coeffi-
cients, we briefly want to document its basic life cycle properties. Figure 1 displays
average consumption, asset, labor supply and income profiles, for both specifica-
tions of the borrowing constraints. With tight borrowing constraints (In the ZBC
economy), average assets are initially zero, but rise fairly quickly as households
accumulate away from the borrowing constraint due to their precautionary and life
cycle savings motives. By age 30, only a very small share of households remain at
or close to zero assets, an important observation for our assessment of the potential
bias of the BPS estimates in Section 6. As is common in life cycle models, assets
peak at the age of retirement (65 in the model) and are then decumulated to fund
    21
         Details about the numerical method are provided in Appendix F.

                                                  18
retirement consumption. The consumption profile initially follows the rising labor
income profile, and continues to grow since the product of gross interest rate and
discount factor, 1+r
                 1+δ
                     , is greater than one. Declining mean labor supply and rising
mean labor income over the life cycle for both the male and female reflect the in-
come effect of the rising wages (and thus incomes and consumption) over the life
cycle.
                              Consumption                                                      Wealth

           2.5                                                        20
                                                                      15
            2
                                                                      10
           1.5
                                                                       5
            1                                                          0

                 30          40        50    60   70        80                30          40        50    60   70        80
                                       Age                                                          Age
                            Male Labor Supply                                            Male Labor Income
           1.2
                                                                       2
           1.1
                                                                      1.5
            1
                                                                       1
           0.9
                                                                      0.5
                      30          40         50        60                          30          40         50        60
                                       Age                                                          Age
                           Female Labor Supply                                          Female Labor Income
                                                                      1.2
           0.7
                                                                       1
          0.65                                                        0.8
           0.6                                                        0.6
          0.55                                                        0.4
           0.5                                                        0.2

                      30          40         50        60                          30          40         50        60
                                       Age                                                          Age

                                                             ZBC            NBBC


                           Figure 1: Life Cycles of Cross-sectional Means

    Relaxing borrowing constraints (i.e. moving to the NBBC economy) affects
average life cycle profiles only in the early stages of economic life. In the NBBC
economy households borrow to attain higher consumption and be able to afford
lower labor supply during their 20s, thereby attaining smoother consumption, hours
and thus utility profiles. By age 30 average life cycle profiles in both economies
essentially coincide.22
  22
    In Appendix A we document that income and consumption inequality is rising over the life
cycle as wage distributions fan out, that initially income inequality is smaller in the economy with


                                                                 19
5.2     Transmission Coefficients in the Model and the Data
    The main question we address in this paper is how household consumption and
labor income respond to permanent and transitory wage shocks, as measured by
the transmission coefficients κ in Equation (4.1). In the model simulation, realiza-
tions of transitory and permanent wage shocks are known separately, in addition
to household consumption and labor income. Thus, in the model, the transmis-
sion coefficients can be obtained directly from OLS regressions of Equation (4.1).
BPS must estimate these transmission coefficients from the data without separate
knowledge of the different wage shocks; their method was developed precisely to
tackle this problem. From now on, results from model-simulated data are labeled
as “Model True”,23 whereas results estimated from PSID data by BPS are labeled
as “Data BPS”.
    Before discussing the results of this comparison, we want to clarify why the
model-based transmission coefficients may differ from the BPS empirical coun-
terparts. First, the BPS methodology might deliver biased estimates of the true
transmission coefficients in the data (for example, if potentially binding borrowing
constraints are shaping the data). In Section 6 we verify that this is not a major con-
cern, at least not when applied to model-simulated data. Second, our model might
be a poor representation of the true data generating process. This is possible despite
the fact that we calibrate the model to match the BPS estimates of the Frisch elastic-
ities that then enter the formulas for the transmission coefficients such as Equation
(4.2). The transmission coefficients also depend on the joint distribution of the
wealth shares πt and sj,t which BPS derive directly from the data, whereas they are
the direct outcome of household saving and labor supply behavior in our model.
Only if the model represents well the data along this dimension, will the transmis-
sion coefficients estimated by BPS and from our model line up closely. Our results
below will therefore be informative about the question whether our model is a good
summary of the true data generating process, at least for those aspects related to the
tight borrowing constraints (since wage-poor workers supply high hours to smooth consumption
in the absence of borrowing capacities), and that life cycle inequality behaves very similar in both
economies after age 30.
   23
      Due to the large sample size of simulated data, statistic errors are essentially zero. Hence the
results from simulated data can be seen as the true values implied by the model.


                                                 20
consumption and labor income dynamics.
    Table 2 reports the “Model True” transmission coefficients (both with tight and
loose borrowing constraints), together with the “Data BPS” results.24 Since BPS
only use data of households aged 30 to 57, the “Model True” transmission coeffi-
cients are based on model-simulated data for this age group as well.

               Table 2: Transmission Coefficients in the Data and the Model

                                        Data BPS                 Model True
                                                              ZBC       NBBC
                           kc,u1       −0.15(0.06)            0.02       0.02
                           κc,u2       −0.03(0.06)            0.01       0.01
                           κc,v1       0.34(0.05)             0.43       0.43
                           κc,v2       0.20(0.03)             0.23       0.24

                           κy1 ,u1     1.59(0.15)             1.51            1.51
                           κy1 ,u2     0.10(0.05)            −0.01           −0.01
                           κy1 ,v1     0.90(0.08)             1.13            1.13
                           κy1 ,v2     −0.23(0.03)           −0.21           −0.21

                           κy2 ,u1     0.21(0.11)            −0.02           −0.02
                           κy2 ,u2     1.87(0.22)             1.84            1.84
                           κy2 ,v1     −0.78(0.14)           −0.56           −0.56
                           κy2 ,v2     1.40(0.08)             1.41            1.42
                          Note: The numbers inside parentheses are standard errors from
                          BPS.


    Comparing the consumption transmission coefficients in the ZBC economy with
the BPS estimates, we observe that the model implies almost perfect consumption
insurance against transitory wage shocks. Only 2% of male and 1% of female tem-
porary wage shocks pass through to household consumption. This result is com-
mon in life cycle models with self-insurance through saving and additively sepa-
rable preferences, and is in line with BPS’ estimates of statistically insignificant
or marginally significant but economically small consumption responses to tem-
porary wage shocks of both household members. More importantly, our model
predicts that only about 43% of male and 23% of female permanent wage shocks
pass through to household consumption. The corresponding estimates from BPS
are 34% for shocks to the male and 20% for shocks to the female wage. Thus the
  24
       As comparison we use the BPS results without taxes and without the separability assumption.


                                                      21
model-implied consumption insurance against permanent wage shocks is quantita-
tively close to the empirical estimates. Taking BPS’ point estimates, the model can
explain about 86% and 96% of the consumption insurance against permanent wage
shocks.25
     The table also shows that the model not only fits well the consumption insurance
patterns in the data, but also gives an accurate account of the empirical transmis-
sions of wage shocks to labor income (and thus labor supply). In the ZBC economy
with tight borrowing constraints, the responses of male and female labor income
to their own transitory wage shocks, κyj ,uj , are larger than one, indicating that la-
bor supply increases when wages are temporarily high.26 In the model, transitory
wage shocks have only a small wealth effect, and thus the substitution effect domi-
nates the labor supply response. The small wealth effect (and an absent substitution
effect) also explains the slightly negative transmission coefficient κyj ,u−j to labor
income from a wage shock of the spouse.
     The labor income transmission coefficients to own permanent wage shocks,
κyj ,vj , are smaller than their transitory counterparts since labor supply responds
less to own permanent wage shocks, on account of the stronger wealth effects. In
contrast, when the spouse receives a permanent wage shock, labor supply of the
other earner responds more strongly. The value of κy1 ,v2 = −0.21 represents an
0.21% increase in male labor supply in response to a permanent 1% decline in the
female wage, and κy2 ,v1 = −0.56 implies a strong positive response of female hours
to a 1% permanent reduction in male wages. These results suggest that the labor
supply adjustment of spouses, and especially of females, is a crucial coping mecha-
nism to reduce the adverse effect on household income of permanent wage shocks.
Overall, female labor supply is more responsive to wage shocks than male labor
supply. Crucially, comparing the transmission coefficients in the ZBC economy
with their empirical counterparts, “Data BPS,” the model is overall able to repro-
duces the main patterns in the data quite well, with more pronounced quantitative
deviations observed only in the magnitude of the cross income response of one
    25
       Recall that one key finding of Kaplan and Violante (2010) was that there is substantially too
little consumption insurance against permanent income shocks in Bewley-type models.
    26
       The labor supply response to wage shocks can be deduced by subtracting the percentage change
of wages due to a specific shock from the associated transmission coefficients to labor income.


                                                22
household member to wage shocks of the other member.
    Finally, Table 2 also demonstrates that the transmission coefficients are not sub-
stantially affected by the tightness of the borrowing constraints, comparing the re-
sults in the ZBC and NBBC economies. This quantitative result is primarily due to
the fact that, to facilitate the comparison with BPS’ empirical results, only obser-
vations for households aged 30 to 57 are used in the calculation of the transmission
coefficients, thus excluding young households mostly affected by binding borrow-
ing constraints.27


5.3     Age Profiles of Transmission Coefficients
    The transmission coefficients in Table 2 are sample averages for all households
aged 30 to 57. Figure 2 documents that there is very substantial age heterogeneity
in the response of labor supply, income and consumption by household age. The
transmission coefficients to consumption and labor income from transitory shocks,
κc,uj , κyj ,uj , are relatively stable over the life cycle, due to the small wealth ef-
fects transitory shocks have. The transmission of permanent wage shocks displays
much more significant variation over the life cycle. The transmission coefficients to
consumption, κc,vj , decreases with age, i.e., the amount of consumption insurance
against permanent shocks rises over the life cycle. This is the result of increased
asset accumulation and declining human wealth with age, so that permanent wage
shocks become less important the older the household turns. In their data, BPS
also find increasing consumption insurance with age against permanent male wage
shocks, another dimension along which the model fits the data. The transmission
coefficient to male labor income from his own permanent wage shocks, κy1 ,v1 , in-
creases with age since the substitution effect on labor from higher wages is offset
less by a declining wealth effect over the life cycle. That is, young households
increase their male labor supply less than old households in response to a positive
male permanent wage shock. Most notably, whereas in young ages female labor
  27
    An additional important factor is that both economies are calibrated separately to fit the same
empirical targets. If one would keep all parameters of the ZBC economy intact for the NBBC
economy, the amount of consumption insurance would be affected, but so would be all other model-
implied statistics, rendering the model counterfactual along many dimensions, most notably the
aggregate wealth-income ratio.

                                                23
                       κc,u1                            κc,u2                              κc,v1                            κc,v2
          0.2                              0.2                               0.6                               0.4

          0.1                              0.1                               0.5                               0.3

            0                                0                               0.4                               0.2

          -0.1                             -0.1                              0.3                               0.1

          -0.2                             -0.2                              0.2                                 0
                 35   40    45   50   55          35   40    45   50   55            35   40    45   50   55          35   40    45   50   55
                           Age                              Age                                Age                              Age
                      κy1 ,u1                          κy1 ,u2                            κy1 ,v1                          κy1 ,v2
                                                                             1.4
                                           0.2                                                                   0
          1.7
                                                                             1.3
                                           0.1                                                                 -0.1
          1.6
                                                                             1.2
                                             0                                                                 -0.2
          1.5
                                                                             1.1
                                           -0.1                                                                -0.3
          1.4
                                                                                 1
                                           -0.2                                                                -0.4
          1.3

                 35   40    45   50   55          35   40    45   50   55            35   40    45   50   55          35   40    45   50   55
                           Age                              Age                                Age                              Age
                      κy2 ,u1                          κy2 ,u2                            κy2 ,v1                          κy2 ,v2
          0.2                                                                -0.3
                                             2                                                                 1.6
          0.1                                                                -0.4
                                           1.9                                                                 1.5
            0                                                                -0.5
                                           1.8                                                                 1.4
          -0.1                                                               -0.6
                                           1.7                                                                 1.3
          -0.2                                                               -0.7
                                           1.6                                                                 1.2
                 35   40    45   50   55          35   40    45   50   55            35   40    45   50   55          35   40    45   50   55
                           Age                              Age                                Age                              Age

                                                                       ZBC                NBBC


                      Figure 2: Age Profiles of Transmission Coefficients


supply and thus female earnings respond quite strongly to an adverse permanent
male wage shock (κy2 ,v1 = −0.7), with age this adjustment becomes less impor-
tant (κy2 ,v1 declines in absolute value) since older households smooth consumption
primarily using assets, and rely less on adjustments of labor supply.


5.4   How Do Households Insure Against Wage Shocks?
    From the results in the previous subsection we know that the degree of con-
sumption insurance especially against permanent wage shocks varies strongly by
age, and that importance of labor supply adjustments in providing this consumption
insurance display a clear life cycle pattern as well. In this section we provide a
systematic decomposition of the importance of the consumption insurance mecha-
nisms present in the model. In our economy, households can smooth wage shocks
through four basic mechanisms, two of which are exogenous to the household, and
two involve active decisions. First, taking labor supply as given, the fact that wage


                                                                            24
shocks are imperfectly correlated among the two household members provides in-
come and thus consumption insurance against individual wage fluctuations. Sec-
ond, the social security system guarantees some income after retirement, which is
independent of past wages and thus mitigates the impact of wage shocks on house-
hold lifetime income. The two key margins along which households can adjust
behavior in response to wage shocks are the labor supply of both members,28 as
well as the accumulation (and decumulation) of assets.
    Table 3 displays the transmission coefficient to consumption of permanent and
transitory male wage shocks in a sequence of economies that differ in their avail-
ability of insurance mechanisms.29 The table also breaks down, for each economy,
how much of the consumption insurance is provided by labor supply and thus in-
come adjustments of the male, the female earner as well as through assets and
social security (combined). For example, the first line shows that in an economy
with exogenous labor supply where the female household member does not work
and the male member works full-time, a permanent male wage shock by construc-
tion transmits into male income (and thus household income) one for one (i.e. the
transmission coefficient to male and total household income is 1). The transmis-
sion coefficient to consumption is 70%, and thus 30% of the permanent male wage
shock is insured. By construction all of this consumption insurance stems from pre-
cautionary saving and from the redistributive social security system. The rows in
the table then successively introduce endogenous male labor supply, positive (but
exogenous) female labor supply and finally endogenous female labor supply. The
bottom panel does the same, but for transitory male wage shocks. Note that in order
to maximize comparability across economies we retain the same calibration across
all models, implying that they differ in terms of asset accumulation over the life
cycle.
  28
      This is true for the intensive and extensive margin. However, our experiments show that for the
provision of consumption insurance in the model the extensive margin is of secondary importance.
Furthermore, our decompositions below involve changes in log-earnings which is not well-defined
for a household member that switches between participation and non-participation. Therefore, the
results in this subsection stem from a version of the model that abstracts from the extensive margin
of female labor supply.
   29
      We focus on the male wage shocks since they are quantitatively by far the most important one
for household consumption, and because female wage shocks display the same qualitative results.



                                                25
                          Table 3: Transmission of a 1% Male Wage Shock
                                                    % Change of                             Insurance Provided by
                                      Male    Female Household   Household              Male Female        Savings+           Total
 Economy                             Income   Income   Income   Consumption            Earner Earner Social Security        Insurance
 A. Permanent Shock
 (i) H1,t = 1, H2,t = 0                 1      −             1           0.70            0         −           30%            30%
 (ii) H1,t endogenous, H2,t = 0       0.97     −           0.97          0.61           3%         −           36%            39%
 (iii) H1,t endogenous, H2,t = H̄2    1.07     0           0.81          0.50          −7%        26%          31%            50%
 (iv) H1,t , H2,t both endogenous     1.13    −0.64        0.62          0.43          −13%       51%          19%            57%

 B. Transitory Shock
 (i) H1,t = 1, H2,t = 0                 1      −             1           0.03            0         −            97%           97%
 (ii) H1,t endogenous, H2,t = 0       1.51     −           1.51          0.02          −51%        −           149%           98%
 (iii) H1,t endogenous, H2,t = H̄2    1.51     0           1.14          0.02          −51%       37%          112%           98%
 (iv) H1,t , H2,t both endogenous     1.51    −0.02        1.07          0.02          −51%       44%          105%           98%
Note: The results are based on sample averages of transmission coefficients from different economies with the same parameters as in the
ZBC benchmark economy, but with different labor supply choice sets. H̄2 is set equal to the average female labor supply in economy
(iv).



     Our discussion will focus mostly on the permanent wage shocks, since these
are more important determinants of household welfare, are harder to insure, and
it is with respect to these shocks that Kaplan and Violante (2010) found the most
significant deviations between theory (i.e. a standard Bewley model with exogenous
earnings) and data (i.e. the estimates of Blundell, Pistaferri, and Preston (2008)).
The key result is that while households obtain some consumption insurance through
precautionary asset accumulation, the presence of a secondary earner that can (and
optimally does) adjust labor supply in response to permanent wage shocks of the
primary earner is the main operative insurance mechanism, and implies that in the
benchmark model only 43% of the wage shock transmits to household consumption
(i.e. 57% are insured), see the forth row in Table 3, which collects the results for
the benchmark economy.
     It is instructive to arrive at this result in a sequence of steps. Economy (i) in
Table 3 corresponds to the standard incomplete-markets model with exogenous in-
come shocks similar Kaplan and Violante (2010), with all insurance provided by
savings and social security. As stated above, this insurance mechanism alone leads
to 30% of the permanent wage shock being insured, and 70% being transmitted into
consumption.30
  30
     This extent of consumption insurance is slightly higher than documented in Kaplan and Violante
(2010) (30% v.s. their 23%). Since we do not recalibrate, economy (i) has a higher asset to income
ratio than the one in Kaplan and Violante (2010) (and a higher one than our economy (iv) as well
as the data), implying better consumption insurance against permanent income shocks. In addition,


                                                                  26
    The second row demonstrates that the adjustment of labor supply by the primary
earner in response to permanent shocks to his own wages is not an effective tool
for providing income and thus consumption insurance: 97% of wage fluctuations
transmit into earnings fluctuations. Consequently the overall extent of consumption
insurance is only moderately affected (the transmission falls from 70% to 61%),
and asset accumulation (and social security) remain the predominant mechanisms
providing insurance. The third row, economy (iii), shows that the presence of a
secondary earner with imperfectly correlated wages, even if this secondary earner
does not adjust labor supply in response to shocks to the primary earners’ wage,
is a significant source of household earnings insurance, as the transmission of the
wage shock to household earnings falls from 97% to 81%. This is true despite the
fact that now, in response to a permanent negative wage shock the primary earner
reduces hours, so that the impact of the shock on male earnings exceeds 100%.
Only 50% of the wage shock now spills over into household consumption, and the
decomposition analysis makes clear that female income insurance of the male wage
shock is quantitatively almost as important as asset accumulation for this result.
    Finally, in the benchmark economy (iv), when the labor supply of the female
earner can adjust to a permanent male wage shock, household income insurance
and consumption insurance rises further. Only 62% of the male wage shock trans-
mits to household earnings (despite the fact that male earnings move more than
one for one with the wage shock), and only 43% of the permanent wage shock
is reflected in consumption, for a consumption insurance coefficient of 57%. Of
this consumption insurance, 51%57%
                                    ≈ 89% is provided by the female earner, both
through exogenously imperfectly correlated wages as well as through the endoge-
nous adjustment of hours worked. In the presence of spousal earnings insurance
the importance of precautionary saving for consumption insurance diminishes no-
ticeably (providing only 19% consumption insurance), but remains non-negligible.
These results demonstrate the quantitatively crucial role that earnings of the second
worker in the household plays for the insurance of consumption against permanent
since our empirical comparison is Blundell, Pistaferri, and Saporta-Eksten (2016), we only use
households aged 30 to 57, whereas the results in Kaplan and Violante (2010) also include very
young households with low assets whose consumption responds especially strongly to permanent
earnings shocks.


                                             27
wage shocks.
    Table 3 also shows that, perhaps not surprisingly, household consumption is
almost perfectly insured against transitory wage shocks, fairly independently of
whether there is a secondary earner in the household and whether this earner can
adjust hours worked or not. Furthermore, now the endogenous hours response of the
male labor supply amplifies the transitory wage shocks, and asset accumulation and
social security are the crucial factors in providing consumption insurance against
these temporary wage shocks.
                 Male Permanent Shocks                             Female Permanent Shocks
        1.5                                            1.5



          1                                              1



        0.5                                            0.5



          0                                              0



        -0.5                                           -0.5


               30      40          50    60                        30      40         50     60
                            Age                                                 Age

                                  Male        Female          Savings+SS         Total


        Figure 3: Age Profiles of Consumption Insurance Decomposition

    To briefly investigate whether the contributions of the insurance mechanisms
we have highlighted in the previous table vary over the life cycle, in Figure 3 we
plot the consumption insurance contributions for a permanent wage shock against
household age. The left panel pertains to a permanent shock to male wages, whereas
the right panel displays the results for a permanent female wage shock. We observe
that, for all ages, the labor supply response of the person whose wage is hit by
a permanent shock exacerbates the shock (i.e. the insurance contribution is nega-
tive, increasingly so as the household ages and the substitution effect increasingly
dominates the wealth effect). Consistent with the main theme of Table 3, the labor
supply response of the other spouse is the most potent insurance mechanism, and is
roughly constant over time, whereas the insurance provided by savings and social


                                                  28
security keeps rising in importance over the life cycle, indicating that older house-
holds rely more on self-insurance through savings. This is also the main reason for
the increasing age profile of total consumption insurance.


5.5   Non-separable Preferences
    The advantage of additively separable preferences between consumption and
labor is that there is a direct mapping between preference parameters and Frisch
elasticities, so that the BPS parameter estimates are readily interpretable, and can
be used in our structural model directly. In addition, Table 2 demonstrates that this
specification generates consumption and labor income responses to wage shocks in
the model close to their empirical counterparts. However, when BPS relax the as-
sumption of separability in their estimation, they find important Frisch complemen-
tarity between consumption and leisure (ηc,wj < 0, ηhj ,p > 0), and also between
the leisure of both spouses (ηhj ,w−j > 0). In addition, introducing non-separable
preferences into the model could, in principle, help it to better capture additional
aspects of the data the benchmark model thus far struggles with, for example, the
negative consumption response to positive transitory wage shocks (κc,uj < 0) in the
BPS results.
    We therefore now adopt a non-separable preference specification as outlined
in Equation (2.1), and calibrate it as described in Section 3.9. This specification
is computationally tractable and at the same time can capture the Frisch comple-
mentarity between consumption and leisure, and between leisure of both spouses,
implied by the BPS estimation results. The purpose of our analysis here is to learn
how such non-separability affects the amount of model-implied consumption insur-
ance (and the other transmission coefficients), and to what extent it helps the model
match the data better. Table 4 summarizes the most relevant results; the complete
set of findings complementing the separable results from the previous sections are
available in Appendix B.
    Relative to separable utility, now consumption and leisure are Frisch comple-
ments, and thus higher labor supply reduces the marginal utility of consumption,
and higher consumption increases the marginal disutility of labor supply. The main


                                         29
           Table 4: Transmission Coefficients in the Data and the Model
                          (Non-separable Preferences)

                                   Data BPS                 Model True
                                                        ZBC        NBBC
                      kc,u1       −0.15(0.06)           −0.20      −0.21
                      κc,u2       −0.03(0.06)           −0.09      −0.09
                      κc,v1       0.34(0.05)             0.29       0.29
                      κc,v2       0.20(0.03)             0.16       0.16

                      κy1 ,u1     1.59(0.15)             1.75            1.77
                      κy1 ,u2     0.10(0.05)             0.05            0.07
                      κy1 ,v1     0.90(0.08)             0.94            0.94
                      κy1 ,v2     −0.23(0.03)           −0.35           −0.34

                      κy2 ,u1     0.21(0.11)             0.11            0.15
                      κy2 ,u2     1.87(0.22)             1.69            1.70
                      κy2 ,v1     −0.78(0.14)           −0.60           −0.59
                      κy2 ,v2     1.40(0.08)             1.19            1.18
                     Note: The numbers inside parentheses are standard errors from
                     BPS.



implied difference for consumption insurance is that now the consumption response
to transitory wage shocks (of both spouses) is negative in the model, as in the data.
Transitory wage shocks only have a small wealth effect, and thus the substitution
effect induces labor supply to increase with the transitory wage increase, thus re-
duces the marginal utility of consumption and thus the household optimally cuts
consumption in response to a temporary decline in wages. The same logic applies
to a permanent wage shock, and hence the consumption response to such a shock is
muted (relative to the separable case) by the consumption leisure complementarity,
but of course remains positive. Compared to the “Data BPS” results, the model now
matches better the more than 100% consumption insurance against transitory shocks
in the data, and generates slightly higher consumption insurance against permanent
wage shocks than the data. The pass-through rates of permanent wage shocks to
consumption in the model are only 29% and 16% for male and female permanent
wage shocks, respectively, relative to 34% and 20% as estimated by BPS. Our main
conclusion from the previous section thus remains intact, in fact is strengthened: the
Bewley model with endogenous dual earner labor supply implies roughly as much
insurance against wage shocks as the data appear to exhibit.

                                                 30
    Finally, nonseparable preferences also alter, qualitatively, the labor supply and
thus earnings response to wage shocks. Specifically, the labor income responses to
transitory wage shocks of the other earner are now positive, in contrast to the addi-
tively separable case, and consistent with the BPS estimates. Overall, we conclude
that the transmission coefficients to labor income (and indeed consumption) from
wage shocks in the model replicate well the empirical evidence.31


6        Performance of the BPS Method
    Section 5 argues that the Bewley type model with two-earner households and
endogenous labor supply is an empirically successful model of household consump-
tion and labor supply behavior in the presence of wage shocks, in the sense that re-
sponses to these shocks of household consumption and labor income in the model
match the empirical results from BPS well. This conclusion would not be valid
if the BPS estimates were significantly biased. To assess this possibility, in this
section we apply the BPS methodology to data simulated from the model. Since
we control the data generating process, we know the true Frisch elasticities and
transmission coefficients, which we label as “Model True” in the tables below. The
estimates based on the BPS methodology are denoted as “Model BPS”.32 Following
the BPS baseline results, we do not estimate the “outside insurance” coefficient β,
and set it to the true value of zero, unless specified otherwise.33
    To summarize our findings, on model-simulated data the BPS method works
well in the estimation of the Frisch elasticities and transmission coefficients, with
biases that are in general modest, both for additively separable and non-separable
    31
      The transmission coefficients in the NBBC economy are again very close to those of the ZBC
economy, for the same reasons already discussed in the additively separable preference case.
   32
      Because the sample size of simulated data is very large (and can be made arbitrarily large), the
standard errors of the “Model BPS” results are practically zero, and hence the differences between
the “Model True” and “Model BPS” results must be due to the potential bias of the BPS method,
and tell us how well the BPS method identifies these parameters.
   33
      Although the model includes a social security system with retirement benefit b, the effect of
this public insurance is accounted for explicitly in the modified BPS formulas of this paper by qt .
Hence the true value of the “outside insurance” coefficient β in the model is zero. The relevant
details are contained in Appendix E, where we also supply the specifics how we implement the BPS
methodology on our simulated data.


                                                 31
preferences. These results give us some confidence that the key finding from Sec-
tion 5 that our Bewley model with dual labor supply captures well the empirically
observed responses to wage shocks, is not contaminated by the fact that BPS esti-
mate these transmission coefficients with bias.34


6.1     With Additively Separable Preferences
   Tables 5 to Table 7 summarize the results from applying the BPS estimation
methodology to the benchmark economy with the additively separable preferences.

                           Table 5: Estimation of Wage Process

                                        Model True        Model BPS
                            A. Transitory Shocks
                            σu2 1          0.0275            0.0272
                            σu2 2          0.0125            0.0124
                            σu1 ,u2        0.0058            0.0055

                            B. Permanent Shocks
                            σv21          0.0303             0.0306
                            σv22          0.0382             0.0365
                            σv1 ,v2       0.0027             0.0037


    Table 5 reports estimates for the parameters governing the exogenous wage pro-
cess. We observe that the variances of male shocks are estimated very accurately;
the variance of the permanent female wage shocks and the covariance with the male
wage shock display slightly larger (but still moderate) biases as a result of the sam-
ple selection due to the extensive margin of female labor supply in the model.
    The main interest of the paper lies with the transmission coefficients, but as an
intermediate step, the Frisch elasticities need to be estimated first. Table 6 contains
the relevant results. It shows that the BPS method identifies the Frisch elasticities
very precisely, with the possible exception of the female labor supply elasticity to
her own wages, ηh2 ,w2 , which displays a somewhat larger bias due to the extensive
margin of female labor supply.35
  34
      Of course, the fact that the BPS method performs well on simulated data does not guarantee
that it performs equally well when applied to actual data.
   35
      Correctly imposing the separability assumption on the preferences does not impact the estima-


                                                32
           Table 6: Estimation of Frisch Elasticities and Outside Insurance

                                                   ZBC                                  NBBC
                          Model                 Model BPS                               Model
                          True         Baselinea Separableb Outsidec                     BPSa
                A. Frisch Elasticities
                ηc,p      0.578         0.579      0.615     0.593                       0.578
                ηc,w1       0           0.004        0      −0.002                       0.004
                ηc,w2       0           0.021        0       0.022                       0.020

                ηh1 ,p       0            −0.005             0          0.003           −0.005
                ηh1 ,w1    0.528           0.528           0.520        0.535            0.527
                ηh1 ,w2      0            −0.002             0          0.002           −0.001

                ηh2 ,p       0            −0.049             0         −0.052           −0.047
                ηh2 ,w1      0            −0.004             0          0.003           −0.002
                ηh2 ,w2    0.850           0.802           0.812        0.805            0.817

                B. Outside Insurance
                β           0                 −             −          −0.107              −
              Note: (a) the baseline BPS method; (b) BPS method assuming separable preferences; (c)
              BPS method allowing for outside insurance.



    Finally, Table 7 reports the results for the transmission coefficients.36 For tran-
sitory shocks, the BPS method slightly overestimates the consumption insurance
against male shocks, and underestimates it against female shocks. For permanent
shocks, it tends to underestimate both the insurance against male and female shocks.
However, the main message of the table is that the magnitude of the bias in all cases
is quite small.
    The bias for the wage transmission coefficients to labor income are roughly on
the same magnitude as for the consumption insurance coefficients, with the excep-
tion of the transmission coefficients to female labor income of male and female
permanent wage shocks, κy2 ,vj . The BPS method overestimates these female la-
bor income responses, likely due to the selection problem caused by the extensive
tion results much. The estimation of the “outside insurance” coefficient is slightly negatively biased,
with a magnitude of 10.7%, and the tightness of borrowing constraints does not affect the bias no-
ticeable, since the sample only includes simulated households aged 30 to 57, and young households
who are mostly affected by the tight borrowing constraints are not included in the estimation.
   36
      Figure 10 in Appendix E.3 summarizes the true and estimated transmission coefficients to
household consumption over the life cycle, and confirms that the BPS method works well fairly
uniformly by age of the household.


                                                      33
                      Table 7: Estimation of Transmission Coefficients

                                            ZBC                                       NBBC
                         Model               Model BPS                            Model  Model
                         True       Baselinea Separableb Outsidec                 True    BPSa
          κc,u1          0.016       0.004        0      −0.002                   0.016  0.004
          κc,u2          0.008       0.021        0       0.022                   0.008  0.020
          κc,v1          0.432       0.445      0.456     0.472                   0.432  0.442
          κc,v2          0.235       0.237      0.238     0.254                   0.235  0.238

          κy1 ,u1         1.513       1.528        1.520         1.535           1.513         1.527
          κy1 ,u2        -0.007      -0.002          0            0.002          −0.007       −0.001
          κy1 ,v1         1.133       1.114        1.135         1.089           1.134         1.115
          κy1 ,v2        -0.215      -0.206        −0.201        −0.217          −0.215       −0.206

          κy2 ,u1        -0.020      -0.004          0            0.003          −0.019       −0.002
          κy2 ,u2         1.836       1.802        1.812         1.805           1.840         1.817
          κy2 ,v1        -0.556      -0.599        −0.601        −0.622          −0.559       −0.610
          κy2 ,v2         1.413       1.509        1.498         1.499           1.416         1.515
         Note: (a) the baseline BPS method; (b) BPS method assuming separable preferences; (c) BPS method
         allowing for outside insurance.



margin of female labor supply.


6.2     With Non-separable Preferences
    Finally, we assess whether the good performance of the BPS method (with
respect to simulated data) extends to the model with preferences that are non-
separable between consumption and hours worked. Table 8 presents the results for
the estimation of the Frisch elasticities.37 The patterns and magnitudes of biases are
similar to those with additively separable preferences, and the “outside insurance”
coefficient is still negatively biased by about 10%.
    Table 9 reports the results for transmission coefficients. The major difference
from the additively separable case is that now the BPS method tends to more signifi-
cantly overestimate consumption insurance against female permanent wage shocks.
However, overall, we conclude that the BPS methodology, when applied to simu-
lated data, measures well the degree of true consumption insurance. To the extent
  37
     The “Model True” Frisch elasticities are no longer deep parameters under non-separable prefer-
ences, but rather depend on allocations. The reported results are sample averages of household level
elasticities calculated using formulas in Appendix D.

                                                       34
         Table 8: Estimation of Frisch Elasticities and Outside Insurance
                          (Non-separable Preferences)

                                     ZBC                                     NBBC
                          Model        Model BPS                         Model  Model
                           True     Baselinea Outsideb                   True    BPSa
             A. Frisch Elasticities
             ηc,p         0.371      0.351     0.366                     0.370        0.351
             ηc,w1       −0.193 −0.210 −0.213                           −0.198       −0.217
             ηc,w2       −0.114 −0.093 −0.090                           −0.117       −0.098

             ηh1 ,p           0.285        0.256         0.260           0.280        0.254
             ηh1 ,w1          0.764        0.783         0.786           0.779        0.801
             ηh1 ,w2          0.080        0.061         0.062           0.100        0.082

             ηh2 ,p           0.285        0.229         0.224           0.280        0.232
             ηh2 ,w1          0.139        0.124         0.126           0.173        0.166
             ηh2 ,w2          0.705        0.645         0.645           0.706        0.663

             B. Outside Insurance
             β              0                −         −0.100               0           −
            Note: (a) the baseline BPS method; (b) BPS method allowing for outside insurance.



that the same is true for real data, the fact that the Bewley model with dual la-
bor supply replicates well the empirically observed transmission coefficients then
follows from our results in Section 5.




                                                    35
                     Table 9: Estimation of Transmission Coefficients
                               (Non-separable Preferences)

                                             ZBC                                NBBC
                               Model           Model BPS                   Model   Model
                                True        Baselinea Outsideb              True    BPSa
                kc,u1          −0.199       −0.210 −0.213                  −0.207 −0.217
                κc,u2          −0.086       −0.093 −0.090                  −0.090 −0.098
                κc,v1          0.288         0.307     0.326                0.287  0.305
                κc,v2          0.156         0.133     0.142                0.155  0.133

                κy1 ,u1        1.753          1.783        1.786            1.773        1.801
                κy1 ,u2        0.052          0.061        0.062            0.070        0.082
                κy1 ,v1        0.943          0.912        0.894            0.941        0.909
                κy1 ,v2        −0.349        −0.318       −0.323           −0.343       −0.312

                κy2 ,u1        0.109          0.124        0.126            0.148        0.166
                κy2 ,u2        1.692          1.645        1.645            1.700        1.663
                κy2 ,v1        −0.604        −0.667       −0.675           −0.593       −0.666
                κy2 ,v2        1.188          1.301        1.299            1.179        1.296
               Note: (a) the baseline BPS method; (b) BPS method allowing for outside insurance.



7     Conclusions
    In this paper we have argued that a Bewley type model with two-earner house-
holds facing idiosyncratic wage shocks and making endogenous labor supply de-
cisions can generate the amount of consumption insurance consistent with BPS’
estimates from US data. The successful performance of BPS’ estimation method-
ology on data simulated from such a model suggests that the model fits the actual
data well, at least for the U.S.38
    Overall, the results in this paper suggest that life cycle models of the form em-
ployed in this work can be used in applications where the extent of consumption
insurance, and the mechanisms through which it is achieved, are important. This
includes the evaluation of social insurance and tax policies for which the adjust-
ment of labor supply of both household members as well as savings responses can
be expected to be important. We view the use of the model exhibited in this paper
for these questions as important avenues for future work.

   38
      Verifying this statement for data from other countries would of course be an important step for
future research.


                                                       36
References
Aiyagari, S. Rao. 1994. “Uninsured Idiosyncratic Risk and Aggregate Saving”. The
   Quarterly Journal of Economics 109 (3): 659–684.
Attanasio, Orazio, Hamish Low, and Virginia Sánchez-Marcos. 2005. “Female La-
   bor Supply as Insurance Against Idiosyncratic Risk”. Journal of the European
   Economic Association 3 (2/3): 755–764.
Bewley, Truman. 1986. “Stationary monetary equilibrium with a continuum of in-
   dependently fluctuating consumers”. Contributions to Mathematical Economics
   in Honor of Gerard Debreu: 79–102.
Blundell, Richard, Luigi Pistaferri, and Ian Preston. 2008. “Consumption Inequality
   and Partial Insurance”. American Economic Review 98 (5): 1887–1921.
Blundell, Richard, Luigi Pistaferri, and Itay Saporta-Eksten. 2016. “Consumption
   Inequality and Family Labor Supply”. American Economic Review 106 (2):
   387–435.
Carroll, Christopher D. 2006. “The method of endogenous gridpoints for solving
   dynamic stochastic optimization problems”. Economics Letters 91 (3): 312 –
   320.
Heathcote, Jonathan, Kjetil Storesletten, and Giovanni L. Violante. 2014. “Con-
   sumption and Labor Supply with Partial Insurance: An Analytical Framework”.
   American Economic Review 104 (7): 2075–2126.
— . 2010. “The Macroeconomic Implications of Rising Wage Inequality in the
  United States”. Journal of Political Economy 118 (4): 681–722.
Holter, Hans A., Dirk Krueger, and Serhiy Stepanchuk. 2018. How Does Tax Pro-
   gressivity and Household Heterogeneity Affect Laffer Curves? Working Paper.
Huggett, Mark. 1993. “The risk-free rate in heterogeneous-agent incomplete-insurance
  economies”. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 17 (5-6): 953 –969.
Hurst, Erik. 2008. “Understanding Consumption in Retirement: Recent Develop-
   ments.” In Recalibrating Retirement Spending and Saving, ed. by John Ameriks
   and Olivia S. Mitchell. Oxford University Press.

                                        37
Imrohoroğlu, Ayşe. 1989. “Cost of Business Cycles with Indivisibilities and Liq-
   uidity Constraints”. Journal of Political Economy 97 (6): 1364–1383.
Kaplan, Greg, and Giovanni L. Violante. 2010. “How Much Consumption Insurance
   beyond Self-Insurance?” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 2 (4):
   53–87.
Ortigueira, Salvador, and Nawid Siassi. 2013. “How important is intra-household
   risk sharing for savings and labor supply?” Journal of Monetary Economics 60
   (6): 650 –666.
Rupert, Peter, and Giulio Zanella. 2015. “Revisiting wage, earnings, and hours pro-
   files”. Journal of Monetary Economics 72:114 –130.
Santaeulàlia-Llopis, Raül, and Yu Zheng. 2017. The Price of Growth: Consumption
   Insurance in China 1989-2009. Working Paper.
Tauchen, George. 1986. “Finite state markov-chain approximations to univariate
   and vector autoregressions”. Economics Letters 20 (2): 177 –181.




                                        38
    Online Appendix: For Review Only
A     Additional Model Life Cycle Findings
    In this appendix we display life cycle profiles of economic inequalty. Specifi-
cally, Figure 4 shows the life cycle of income and consumption inequality in both
the economy with tight and with loose borrowing constraints, where inequality is
measured by the cross-sectional variance of log household income and log house-
hold consumption. As expected, both income and consumption inequality rise with
age due to the accumulation of the permanent wage shocks during working life. The
rise in consumption inequality slows down for working households near retirement,
whereas the rise of household income inequality accelerates during the same pe-
riod. Consumption inequality is constant after retirement because there is no labor
income risk after that time in the model ( and we omit it from the graph), and con-
sumption levels are simply determined by the total discounted wealth of households
at retirement. Consistent with the data, the consumption inequality in the model is
smaller than income inequality, reflecting the consumption insurance channels in
the model. Income inequality in the NBBC economy is notably higher than that
of the ZBC economy in the early years of the life cycle. This is due to the fact
that in the ZBC economy, young households hit by transitory negative wage shocks
have to work longer hours to smooth consumption, whereas in the NBBC economy
these households can simply borrow and avoid to increase their labor supply, which
results in lower income for them than in the ZBC economy. This difference van-
ishes quickly as households accumulate enough assets through saving, and hence
the income inequality patterns are almost identical for older households in both
economies.




                                        39
                 V ar[ln(Household Income)]                       V ar[ln(Consumption)]

                                                     0.4
         1
                                                    0.35

        0.8                                          0.3

                                                    0.25
        0.6
                                                     0.2

        0.4                                         0.15

                                                     0.1
        0.2
                                                    0.05

         0                                            0

                   30     40      50     60                       30     40     50        60
                            Age                                           Age
                                              ZBC          NBBC


              Figure 4: Life Cycles of Income and Consumption Inequality


B    Supplementary Results For Non-separable Prefer-
     ences
   This section presents all the figures and tables for the ZBC and NBBC economies
with the non-separable preferences that are not included in the main text. Each of
them corresponds to one figure or table for the additively separable preferences.




                                               40
B.1   Life Cycles

                         Consumption                                                      Wealth
       2                                                         15

                                                                 10
      1.5
                                                                  5

                                                                  0
       1
            30          40        50    60   70        80                30          40        50    60   70        80
                                  Age                                                          Age
                       Male Labor Supply                                            Male Labor Income

      1.4                                                        1.5

      1.2
                                                                  1
       1

      0.8
                                                                 0.5
                 30          40         50        60                          30          40         50        60
                                  Age                                                          Age
                      Female Labor Supply                                          Female Labor Income
                                                                 0.8
      0.8

      0.7                                                        0.6

      0.6                                                        0.4

      0.5                                                        0.2

                 30          40         50        60                          30          40         50        60
                                  Age                                                          Age

                                                        ZBC            NBBC


                      Figure 5: Life Cycles of Cross-sectional Means
                                (Non-separable Preferences)




                                                            41
             V ar[ln(Household Income)]                                                            V ar[ln(Consumption)]

0.6                                                                          0.16

                                                                             0.14
0.5
                                                                             0.12
0.4
                                                                                 0.1

0.3                                                                          0.08

                                                                             0.06
0.2
                                                                             0.04
0.1
                                                                             0.02

  0                                                                               0
                  30         40             50           60                                    30             40            50             60
                                  Age                                                                          Age
                                                                   ZBC                  NBBC


       Figure 6: Life Cycles of Income and Consumption Inequality
                       (Non-separable Preferences)

              κc,u1                                κc,u2                                 κc,v1                                   κc,v2
                                                                         0.5
  0
                                    0.1
                                                                                                               0.3
                                                                         0.4
-0.1
                                        0
                                                                                                               0.2
                                                                         0.3
-0.2
                                    -0.1
                                                                                                               0.1
                                                                         0.2
-0.3
                                    -0.2
                                                                                                                   0
                                                                         0.1
-0.4
                                    -0.3
                                                                                                               -0.1
        35   40    45   50   55              35   40    45    50   55              35   40    45    50   55            35    40     45     50   55
                  Age                                  Age                                   Age                                  Age
              κy1 ,u1                             κy1 ,u2                                κy1 ,v1                                 κy1 ,v2
  2                                 0.3                                                                        -0.1
                                                                         1.2

1.9                                 0.2                                                                        -0.2
                                                                         1.1

1.8                                 0.1                                                                        -0.3
                                                                             1

1.7                                     0                                                                      -0.4
                                                                         0.9

1.6                                 -0.1                                                                       -0.5
                                                                         0.8


        35   40    45   50   55              35   40    45    50   55              35   40    45    50   55            35    40     45     50   55
                  Age                                  Age                                   Age                                  Age
              κy2 ,u1                             κy2 ,u2                                κy2 ,v1                                 κy2 ,v2
                                    1.9                                                                        1.4
0.3                                                                      -0.4
                                    1.8                                                                        1.3
0.2                                                                      -0.5
                                    1.7                                                                        1.2
0.1                                                                      -0.6
                                    1.6                                                                        1.1
  0                                                                      -0.7
                                    1.5                                                                            1
-0.1                                                                     -0.8
        35   40    45   50   55              35   40    45    50   55              35   40    45    50   55            35    40     45     50   55
                  Age                                  Age                                   Age                                  Age

                                                                   ZBC                  NBBC


               Figure 7: Age Profiles of Transmission Coefficients
                          (Non-separable Preferences)


                                                                        42
B.2        Consumption Insurance Decomposition

                         Table 10: Transmission of a 1% Male Wage Shock
                                    (Non-separable Preferences)
                                                       % Change of                              Insurance Provided by
                                      Male       Female Household   Household               Male Female        Savings+      Total
 Economy                             Income      Income   Income   Consumption             Earner Earner Social Security   Insurance
 A. Permanent Shock
 (i) H1,t = 1, H2,t = 0                 1         −             1           0.63             0          −         37%        37%
 (ii) H1,t endogenous, H2,t = 0       0.69        −           0.69          0.38           31%          −         31%        62%
 (iii) H1,t endogenous, H2,t = H̄2    0.79        0           0.56          0.31           21%         23%        25%        69%
 (iv) H1,t , H2,t both endogenous     0.94       −0.68        0.47          0.29            6%         47%        18%        71%

 B. Transitory Shock
 (i) H1,t = 1, H2,t = 0                 1          −            1          0.03              0          −          97%       97%
 (ii) H1,t endogenous, H2,t = 0       1.78         −          1.78         −0.27           −78%         −         205%      127%
 (iii) H1,t endogenous, H2,t = H̄2    1.72          0         1.23         −0.17           −72%        49%        140%      117%
 (iv) H1,t , H2,t both endogenous     1.75        0.13        1.28         −0.20           −75%        47%        148%      120%
Note: The results are based on sample averages of transmission coefficients from different economies with the same parameters as the
ZBC economy with non-separable preferences but different household structures. H̄2 is set equal to the average female labor supply in
economy (iv).



                           Male Permanent Shocks                                      Female Permanent Shocks
             1.5                                                          1.5



               1                                                            1



             0.5                                                          0.5



               0                                                            0



             -0.5                                                         -0.5


                         30          40          50      60                           30          40         50     60
                                          Age                                                          Age

                                                Male          Female             Savings+SS             Total


             Figure 8: Age Profiles of Consumption Insurance Decomposition
                              (Non-separable Preferences)




                                                                     43
                 1.1

                  1

                 0.9

                 0.8

                 0.7

                 0.6

                 0.5

                 0.4
                                                                Male
                 0.3                                            Female

                        25   30   35   40        45   50   55    60      65
                                            Age

                       Figure 9: Male and Female Wage Trends


C     Calibration Details

C.1    Wage Profiles
   The life-cycle male wage trend is interpolated and extrapolated from Rupert and
Zanella (2015) and plotted in Figure 9. The scale of it is normalized such that the
average male trend wage is 1. The female wage trend is rescaled from the male
wage trend to match the ratio of the average earnings between working males and
females in the BPS data set.


C.2    Parameter Values and Moments Matched
    The parameter values which are the same for all the economies are reported
in Table 11. The preference-specific parameter values are reported in Table 1 and
12 for the additively separable and non-separable preferences, respectively. The
moments matched in calibration and their values from data are in Table 14. The
calibrated Frisch elasticities and their BPS counterparts for the non-separable pref-
erences are in Table 13.




                                            44
                      Table 11: Values of Common Parameters

              Parameter     Governing                              Value
                  r         interest rate                          0.02

              Transitory Wage Shocks
                 σu2 1    variance of male shocks                  0.0275
                 σu2 2    variance of female shocks                0.0125
                σu1 ,u2   covariance of male and female shocks     0.0058

              Permanent Wage Shocks
                 σv21    variance of male shocks                   0.0303
                 σv22    variance of female shocks                 0.0382
                σv1 ,v2  covariance of male and female shocks      0.0027


       Table 12: Parameter Values for Non-separable Preferences

Parameter      Governing                                             ZBC     NBBC
     δ         discount rate of utility                             0.0146   0.0121
    α          weight of consumption                                 0.689    0.625
     ξ         weight of male labor supply                           0.445    0.438
     b         retirement benefits                                   0.765    0.745
    σ          consumption Frisch elasticity                         2.380    2.380
     γ         substitution between consumption and leisure         −4.00    −3.90
     θ         substitution between male and female labor supply     2.60     2.65
    Ψ          consumption level after retirement                    0.597    0.610
    f          fixed utility cost of female labor participation     0.0096   0.0107
eg1,t −g2,t    male/female wage trend ratio                          2.06     2.05


Table 13: Calibrated Frisch Elasticities with Non-separable Preferences

                                               ZBC           NBBC
                          Data BPS           Model True     Model True
              ηc,p      0.372(0.086)           0.371          0.370
              ηc,w1     −0.148(0.060)         −0.193         −0.198
              ηc,w2     −0.030(0.059)         −0.114         −0.117

              ηh1 ,p      0.085(0.035)           0.285           0.280
              ηh1 ,w1     0.594(0.155)           0.764           0.779
              ηh1 ,w2     0.104(0.053)           0.080           0.100

              ηh2 ,p      0.035(0.069)           0.285           0.280
              ηh2 ,w1     0.212(0.108)           0.139           0.173
              ηh2 ,w2     0.871(0.221)           0.705           0.706



                                            45
           Table 14: Values of Matched Moments

Moment Matched                                         Target Value
wealth/income ratio                                       2.999
average male labor supply                                   1
average female labor supply | work                        0.733
average benefits/average income ratio                     0.425
average female nonparticipation rate                       20%
average male earnings/average female earnings | work      2.031




                                46
D     Frisch Elasticities for Non-separable Preferences
    In this section, we derive the formulas for the Frisch elasticities with the non-
separable preferences. They are generally functions of household allocations, i.e.,
they are not deep parameters. So we use the sample averages of them as the ap-
proximated true values of the Frisch elasticities, i.e., the “Model True” results.
    The utility function for the non-separable preferences is
                                                                      γ   1−σ
                         {αC γ + (1 − α)[ξH1θ + (1 − ξ)H2θ ]− θ }          γ    −1
        u(C, H1 , H2 ) =                                                             .
                                            1−σ

The intertemporal budget constraint is

                   P C + P A0 = P (1 + r)A + W1 H1 + W2 H2 ,

where P , W1 , and W2 are the price of the consumption good and the wages for male
and female earners. From the recursive formulation of the household problem, the
first-order conditions are
                        1−σ
                            −1
               uC = ∆    γ       αC γ−1 = λP,
                            1−σ                γ
                                −1
              uH1 = −∆       γ       (1 − α)Γ− θ −1 ξH1θ−1 = −λW1 ,
                            1−σ                γ
                                −1
              uH2 = −∆       γ       (1 − α)Γ− θ −1 (1 − ξ)H2θ−1 = −λW2 ,

where λ is the lagrangian multiplier on the budget constraint, ∆ ≡ αC γ + (1 −
                        γ
α)[ξH1θ + (1 − ξ)H2θ ]− θ , and Γ ≡ ξH1θ + (1 − ξ)H2θ . Taking log difference for both
sides of these equations, we get

                      1−σ
                        (   − 1)d ln ∆ + (γ − 1)d ln C = d ln λ + d ln P,
                        γ
      1−σ                 γ
    (     − 1)d ln ∆ + (− − 1)d ln Γ + (θ − 1)d ln H1 = d ln λ + d ln W1 ,
       γ                  θ
      1−σ                 γ
    (     − 1)d ln ∆ + (− − 1)d ln Γ + (θ − 1)d ln H2 = d ln λ + d ln W2 ,
       γ                  θ




                                             47
and

           d ln Γ = θBd ln H1 + θ(1 − B)d ln H2 ,
                               γ
           d ln ∆ = γAd ln C − (1 − A)d ln Γ
                               θ
                  = γAd ln C − γ(1 − A)Bd ln H1 − γ(1 − A)(1 − B)d ln H2 ,

                    γ             ξH θ
where A ≡ αC ∆
                and B ≡ Γ 1 . Substitute d ln ∆ and d ln Γ with the formulas above,
the system of equations becomes
                                                            
                                d ln C         d ln λ + d ln P
                          G ×  d ln H1  =  d ln λ + d ln W1  ,
                                                            

                                d ln H2       d ln λ + d ln W2

where
                                                                                                                            
          (γ − 1)(1 − A) − σA              (γ − 1 + σ)(1 − A)B                          (γ − 1 + σ)(1 − A)(1 − B)
G=           (1 − γ − σ)A      [(γ − 1 + σ)(1 − A) − (γ + θ)]B + (θ − 1)         [(γ − 1 + σ)(1 − A) − (γ + θ)](1 − B)      .
                                                                                                                            

              (1 − γ − σ)A           [(γ − 1 + σ)(1 − A) − (γ + θ)]B         [(γ − 1 + σ)(1 − A) − (γ + θ)](1 − B) + (θ − 1)


By the definition of Frisch elasticities, we have
                                                                
                                          −ηc,p ηc,w1 ηc,w2
                                G−1   =  ηh1 ,p ηh1 ,w1 ηh1 ,w2  .
                                                                

                                          ηh2 ,p ηh2 ,w1 ηh2 ,w2

Note that because the values of A and B depend on the allocations chosen by house-
holds, G and the Frisch elasticities all depend on the allocations and are not deep
parameters.
    If we want the Frisch elasticities to be deep parameters with such utility func-
tion, we must have A and B as constants. From the FOC’s, this would require
                                                           1−σ
                                                       ∆    γ    A = λP C,
                                               1−σ
                                           ∆    γ    (1 − A)B = λW1 H1 ,
                                     1−σ
                                 ∆    γ    (1 − A)(1 − B) = λW2 H2 .


                                                        48
⇒

                                   A       PC
                                        =       = Constant,
                               (1 − A)B   W1 H1
                                A          PC
                                        =       = Constant.
                         (1 − A)(1 − B)   W2 H2

This implies the utility function needs to take the Cobb-Douglas form, i.e., γ = 0
and θ = 0. In that case, the utility function becomes

                                         [C α (H1ξ H21−ξ )−(1−α) ]1−σ − 1
                    U (C, H1 , H2 ) =                                     .
                                                      1−σ

Follow the same method, we can derive that
                                                                                                 
       α − 1 − ασ          (1 − σ)(α − 1)ξ                      (1 − σ)(α − 1)(1 − ξ)
 G =  (1 − σ)α     −σ(α − 1)ξ + (α − 2)ξ + (ξ − 1)   −σ(α − 1)(1 − ξ) + (α − 2)(1 − ξ) + (1 − ξ)  ,
                                                                                                 

        (1 − σ)α      −σ(α − 1)ξ + (α − 2)ξ + ξ         −σ(α − 1)(1 − ξ) + (α − 2)(1 − ξ) − ξ


and the Frisch elasticity matrix is just G−1 . However, the Cobb-Douglas form is not
a good choice because it implies that the ratios between male labor income, female
labor income and consumption expenditures are all constants independent of the
price of consumption and wages, which is counterfactual.


E     The BPS Method in This Paper

E.1       Formulas for the Transmission Coefficients
    We follow closely the approximation method proposed by Blundell, Pistaferri,
and Saporta-Eksten (2016) (BPS) and try to use the notations consistent with the
original paper. However, we do make one slight modification to their formulas.
In particular, we add the channel of social security explicitly. We define the hu-
man wealth as the sum of the discounted labor income and the discounted retire-
ment benefits, and the share of the retirement benefits in the total discounted human
wealth is represented by qt . By doing so, the true value of the “outside insurance”
coefficient β in the model should be zero.


                                               49
   As in BPS, the wage of earner j in household i at age t is determined by

                                        Wj 0 Wj
                         ln Wi,j,t = Zt     β     + Fi,j,t + ui,j,t ,

        Wj
where Zt     is a group of observable characteristics affecting wages such as age, and

                                 Fi,j,t = Fi,j,t−1 + vi,j,t .

This implies
                                          Wj 0 Wj
                      ∆ ln Wi,j,t − ∆Zt       β     = ∆ui,j,t + vi,j,t .

Define ∆wi,j,t as the unexpected growth of wage that is not explained by the ob-
servables, i.e.,
                            ∆wi,j,t = ∆ui,j,t + vi,j,t .

Log-linearize the first-order conditions of the household problem, and apply the
definition of the Frisch elasticities, we have
                                                                
         d ln C        −ηc,p ηc,w1 ηc,w2             d ln λ + d ln P
        d ln H1  =  ηh1 ,p ηh1 ,w1 ηh1 ,w2  ×  d ln λ + d ln W1  .
                                                                

         d ln H2       ηh2 ,p ηh2 ,w1 ηh2 ,w2       d ln λ + d ln W2

BPS derive that
                                   ∆ ln λt = ωt + εt ,

where ωt only depends on age, and hence it will be absorbed by the age dummies
in regressions. Then we have

  ∆ct = (−ηc,p + ηc,w1 + ηc,w2 )εt + ηc,w1 (∆u1,t + v1,t ) + ηc,w2 (∆u2,t + v2,t ),
∆h1,t = (ηh1 ,p + ηh1 ,w1 + ηh1 ,w2 )εt + ηh1 ,w1 (∆u1,t + v1,t ) + ηh1,w2 (∆u2,t + v2,t ),
∆h2,t = (ηh2 ,p + ηh2 ,w1 + ηh2 ,w2 )εt + ηh2 ,w1 (∆u1,t + v1,t ) + ηh2 ,w2 (∆u2,t + v2,t ),

where ∆ct and ∆hj,t represent the unexpected growth of consumption and labor
supply that are not explained by the observables. Transform labor supply into labor



                                             50
income, and we have

  ∆ct = (−ηc,p + ηc,w1 + ηc,w2 )εt + ηc,w1 (∆u1,t + v1,t ) + ηc,w2 (∆u2,t + v2,t ),
∆y1,t = (ηh1 ,p + ηh1 ,w1 + ηh1 ,w2 )εt + (1 + ηh1 ,w1 )(∆u1,t + v1,t ) + ηh1,w2 (∆u2,t + v2,t ),
 ∆y2,t = (ηh2 ,p + ηh2 ,w1 + ηh2 ,w2 )εt + ηh2 ,w1 (∆u1,t + v1,t ) + (1 + ηh2 ,w2 )(∆u2,t + v2,t ),
                                                                                       (E.1)
where ∆yj,t is the unexpected growth of earner j’s labor income at age t.
    From the log-linearization of the intertemporal budget constraint, assuming the
transitory shocks have negligible wealth effects, BPS derive that

  (−ηc,p + ηc,w1 + ηc,w2 )εt + ηc,w1 v1,t + ηc,w2 v2,t
                2
                X
= (1 − πt )qt         sj [(1 + ηhj ,wj )vj,t + ηhj ,w−j v−j,t + (ηhj ,p + ηhj ,wj + ηhj ,w−j )εt ],
                j=1


where πt is approximately the share of asset in the total discounted wealth for the
household at age t; sj,t is approximately the share of earner j’s discounted labor
income in the total discounted labor income of the household; 1 − qt is the share
of the retirement benefits in the total discounted wealth of the household at age t.
From this, we can get the formula for εt as

                             ηc,w1 − (1 − πt )qt [s1 + ηh,w1 ]
           εt =                                                            v1,t
                ηc,p − ηc,w1 − ηc,w2 + (1 − πt )qt (ηh,p + ηh,w1 + ηh,w2 )
                             ηc,w2 − (1 − πt )qt [s2 + ηh,w2 ]
              +                                                            v2,t
                ηc,p − ηc,w1 − ηc,w2 + (1 − πt )qt (ηh,p + ηh,w1 + ηh,w2 )
              ≡ κε,v1 v1,t + κε,v2 v2,t ,

where ηh,p ≡ 2j=1 sj ηhj ,p , ηh,w1 ≡ 2j=1 sj ηhj ,w1 , and ηh,w2 ≡ 2j=1 sj ηhj ,w2 .
             P                       P                             P

   Substitute εt in Equation (E.1) with the formula above, and we get the formulas




                                                 51
for the transmission coefficients:
                                                                                
                                                                     ∆u1,t
             ∆ct         κc,u1 κc,u2 κc,v1 κc,v2                                
                                                                       ∆u2,t   
            ∆y1,t  =  κy1 ,u1 κy1 ,u2 κy1 ,v1 κy1 ,v2                       ,
                   
                                                                         v1,t   
             ∆y2,t       κy2 ,u1 κy2 ,u2 κy2 ,v1 κy2 ,v2
                                                                                
                                                                          v2,t

where

                 κc,uj = ηc,wj ,
                 κc,vj = (−ηc,p + ηc,w1 + ηc,w2 )κε,vj + ηc,wj ,
                κyj ,uj = 1 + ηhj ,wj ,
               κyj ,u−j = ηhj ,w−j ,
                κyj ,vj = (ηhj ,p + ηhj ,wj + ηhj ,w−j )κε,vj + (1 + ηhj ,wj ),
               κyj ,v−j = (ηhj ,p + ηhj ,wj + ηhj ,w−j )κε,v−j + ηhj ,w−j ,

and
                                   ηc,wj − (1 − πt )qt [sj + ηh,wj ]
          κε,vj =                                                                .
                    ηc,p − ηc,w1   − ηc,w2 + (1 − πt )qt (ηh,p + ηh,w1 + ηh,w2 )
    The formulas when the separable preference assumption is imposed can be ob-
tained by assuming the values of all the cross Frisch elasticities to be zero.


E.2     Estimation
    The estimation method in this paper follows the empirical strategy in the orig-
inal BPS paper. To apply the method, we first need the data on the unexpected
wage growth ∆wj,t , unexpected consumption growth ∆ct , and unexpected labor in-
come growth ∆yj,t at household level. These can be obtained by regressing the
log-differences of the corresponding variables on observable characteristics and
constructing the residuals, i.e.,

                                   ∆ log Xt = Z β̂ + ∆xt ,



                                              52
where Z represents the observable characteristics, and β̂ is the estimated coeffi-
cients. For the simulated data, because all the households are ex ante identical, Z
contains only a group of age dummies.

E.2.1   Wage Covariances

   From the wage process, we know

                                 ∆wj,t = ∆uj,t + vj,t .

Following BPS, we estimate the six wage process parameters, σu21 , σu22 , σu1 ,u2 , σv21 ,
σv22 , and σv1 ,v2 , by GMM with an identity weighting matrix using 7 moment con-
                    2        2
ditions: E[∆w1,t      ], E[∆w2,t ], E[∆w1,t ∆w2,t ], E[∆w1,t ∆w1,t−1 ], E[∆w2,t ∆w2,t−1 ],
E[∆w1,t ∆w2,t−1 ], and E[∆w2,t ∆w1,t−1 ]. This step requires only wage data.

E.2.2   Smoothing Parameters

   The smoothing parameters πt , sj,t and qt are calculated directly from the data.
The labor wealth of earner j at age t is calculated as

                                                           Yj,t+k
                     Labor W ealthj,t = Yj,t + Et ΣR−t
                                                   k=1             .
                                                          (1 + r)k

Note that the expected future income levels should technically depend on the cur-
rent states of the households. However, in practice, it is difficult to calculate such
conditional expectations exactly, so following BPS, the expected future income lev-
els are only conditional on characteristics that either do not change over time (e.g.
education) or change in a perfectly forecastable way (e.g. age). Then sj,t is simply

                                     Labor W ealthj,t
                            sj,t = P2                    .
                                    j=1 Labor W ealthj,t




                                           53
The retirement wealth, which we define as the sum of discounted retirement bene-
fits, for a household at age t is

                                                    T −R
                                             1      X       b
                   Retirement W ealtht =        R−t
                                                                  .
                                         (1 + r)    k=1
                                                         (1 + r)k

We then define the human wealth of a household at age t as

                                                                    2
                                                                    X
        Human W ealtht = Retirement W ealtht +                            Labor W ealthj,t .
                                                                    j=1


So qt is
                                         Retirement W ealtht
                                  qt =                       ,
                                          Human W ealtht
and πt is
                                             Assetst
                             πt =                            .
                                    Assetst + Human W ealtht

E.2.3      Frisch Elasticities and Outside Insurance

    For the Frish elasticities and the “outside insurance” coefficient, we follow BPS
and use the 31 moment conditions in Figure 8 of the original BPS paper (and Table
1 of the BPS online Appendix) to conduct a GMM estimation with an identity
weighting matrix. The moment conditions include a set of second-order moments
of ∆ct , ∆yj,t , ∆wj,t , and the lag of them. The formulas for these moment conditions
are derived based on the BPS formulas for ∆ct , ∆yj,t and ∆wj,t . For example,

E(∆c2t ) = E[(κc,u1 ∆u1,t + κc,u2 ∆u2,t + κc,v1 v1,t + κc,v2 v2,t )2 ]
= E[κ2c,u1 (2σu21 ) + κ2c,u2 (2σu22 ) + 2(κc,u1 κc,u2 )(2σu1 u2 )
+ κ2c,v1 (σv21 ) + κ2c,v2 E(σv22 ) + 2(κc,v1 κc,v2 )(σv1 v2 )]
             N   T
         1 XX 2
= p lim            {κ (i, t)(2σu21 ) + κ2c,u2 (i, t)(2σu22 ) + 2[κc,u1 (i, t)κc,u2 (i, t)](2σu1 u2 )
        N T i=1 t=1 c,u1
+ κ2c,v1 (i, t)(σv21 ) + κ2c,v2 (i, t)(σv22 ) + 2[κc,v1 (i, t)κc,v2 (i, t)](σv1 v2 )}.




                                                  54
The results for other moment conditions can be derived in a similar way. We also
impose the symmetry assumptions in the form of ηhj ,p = −ηc,wj wpc
                                                                 j hj
                                                                      , j = 1, 2 as
the original BPS paper.

E.2.4   Transmission Coefficients

    Collecting the estimation results from previous steps, the transmission coeffi-
cients for each household at each age are calculated using the formulas derived in
Appendix E.1. The reported transmission coefficients are the sample averages of
them.


E.3     Additional Results on the Performance of the BPS Method
    In this subsection we provide further results documenting how well the BPS
method performs on model-simulated data. In particular, Figure 10 and Figure 11
report the true and estimated transmission coefficients to household consumption
of permeant wage shocks over the life cycle for the additively separable and non-
separable preferences respectively.
                             κc,v1                                         κc,v2
        0.55                                          0.28


         0.5                                          0.26


        0.45                                          0.24


         0.4                                          0.22


        0.35                                           0.2


         0.3                                          0.18



                  35    40     45    50    55                   35    40       45   50    55
                              Age                                           Age

                  ZBC Model True      ZBC Model BPS          NBBC Model True        NBBC Model BPS


               Figure 10: Age Profiles of κc,vj : Model True vs. Model BPS




                                                  55
                             κc,v1                                         κc,v2

                                                      0.18
        0.35


                                                      0.16
         0.3


                                                      0.14
        0.25

                                                      0.12
         0.2

                                                       0.1
                  35    40     45    50    55                   35    40       45   50    55
                              Age                                           Age

                  ZBC Model True      ZBC Model BPS          NBBC Model True        NBBC Model BPS


               Figure 11: Age Profiles of κc,vj : Model True vs. Model BPS
                              (Non-separable Preferences)


F     Computation Method
    The household optimization problem is solved backwards using the endogenous
grid method proposed by Carroll (2006). When the extensive margin of female la-
bor supply is allowed, for each iteration and each household state, the optimization
problem is solved twice under two alternative scenarios: the current period female
labor supply is strictly positive or zero. The final optimal policy is obtained by
comparing the discounted utility achieved in these two scenarios.
    The grid for asset has 100 grid points, and the distance between two adjacent
grid points increases with the asset level such that the grid points are denser around
the low asset levels where borrowing constraints are more likely to bind. The range
of the asset grid is age-dependent and eventually endogenously determined by the
model to have a better coverage of the more relevant state space.
    The joint process of the two earners’ permanent wage components is approxi-
mated by a discrete Markov process with age-dependent sets of states and transition
matrices, and each state corresponds to one possible realization of the two perma-
nent components. The number of states is fixed, but the values of them vary across
ages to match the unconditional dispersion of the joint distribution over the life cy-
cle. The grid points and transition matrices are constructed in the same spirit as


                                                  56
Tauchen (1986), and try to mimic the joint unit-root process. The grid for the two
permanent components has 11 points in each dimension, so there are in total 121
grid points at each age. The discretization of the transitory components is similar
and simpler. Since the transitory components are iid across ages, the grid no longer
needs to be age-dependent, and no transition matrix is required. The grid for the
transitory components has 5 points in each dimension, so there are in total 25 grid
points.
    In the following, we briefly describe how we solve the household optimization
problem when female labor supply is strictly positive. When female labor supply is
zero, one only needs to impose this restriction properly in the first-order conditions,
and follows the same steps.


F.1    Additively Separable Preferences
   For a working household, the first-order conditions are

                                        C −σ =λ,
                                         η −1
                                ψ1 H1 1 =λeh1,t +F1 +u1 ,
                                         η −1
                                ψ2 H2 2 =λeh2,t +F2 +u2 ,



and the Euler equation is

                      1+r X                          X
             C −σ ≥           π(F10 , F20 |F1 , F2 )     π(u01 , u02 )C 0−σ
                      1+δ 0 0                        0 0
                            (F1 ,F2 )                     (u1 ,u2 )

                                                with equality when A0 > At+1 .

For a retired household, the Euler equation is

                          1 + r 0−σ
                 C −σ ≥        C    with equality when A0 > At+1 .
                          1+δ

   When the borrowing constraint is not binding, for any A0 > At+1 , given the


                                                57
policy function for the next period c(A0 , F10 , F20 , u01 , u02 , t + 1), we can solve for the
current consumption (C) directly using the Euler equation. Then we can pin down
the corresponding male and female labor supply (H1 and H2 ) using the first-order
conditions if it is a working household, and finally the current asset level (A) using
the budget constraint. For the current asset levels such that the borrowing constraint
is binding, i.e., A0 = At+1 , we can first denote the male and female labor supply in
terms of the current consumption as implied by the first-order conditions, and then
solve for the current consumption using the budget constraint.


F.2     Non-separable Preferences
    For a working household, the first-order conditions are
                                                             1−σ
                                                                 −1
                                                         ∆    γ       αC γ−1 = λP,
                                        1−σ                    γ
                                            −1
                                   ∆     γ       (1 − α)Γ− θ −1 ξH1θ−1 = λW1 ,
                               1−σ                   γ
                                   −1
                           ∆    γ       (1 − α)Γ− θ −1 (1 − ξ)H2θ−1 = λW2 ,

                                                                      γ
where ∆ ≡ αC γ + (1 − α)[ξH1θ + (1 − ξ)H2θ ]− θ and Γ ≡ ξH1θ + (1 − ξ)H2θ . The
Euler equation for a working household is then

        1−σ
            −1              1+r X                          X                 0 1−σ     γ−1
    ∆    γ       C γ−1 ≥            π(F10 , F20 |F1 , F2 )     π(u01 , u02 )∆ γ −1 C 0
                            1+δ 0 0                        0 0
                                    (F1 ,F2 )                             (u1 ,u2 )

                                                                      with equality when A0 > At+1 .

The Euler equation for a retired household is

                                 1 + r 0 −σR
                    C −σR ≥           C      with equality when A0 > At+1 .
                                 1+δ

For an age R household, the Euler equation is

                  1−σ
                      −1                1+r     −σ
           α∆      γ       C γ−1 ≥          ΨC 0 R with equality when A0 > AR+1 .
                                        1+δ

    From the first-order conditions and the utility function, we know H1 is always


                                                         58
positive for strictly positive wages. So if female labor supply is also strictly positive,
we have

                                               ξH1θ−1      W1
                                                     θ−1
                                                         =    ,
                                            (1 − ξ)H2      W2
                                     αC γ−1                P
                                    − γθ −1          θ−1
                                                         =    .
                            (1 − α)Γ        (1 − ξ)H2      W2

Then after some algebra, we can denote H1 and H2 in terms of C:

                   (1 − α)                 θ                   θ     γ    ξ               γ+θ    1
H1 = {C 1−γ P              {ξ[(1 − ξ)W1 ] θ−1 + (1 − ξ)(ξW2 ) θ−1 }− θ −1    [(1 − ξ)W1 ] θ−1 } γ+1
                      α                                                   W1
            1−γ
    ≡ φ1 C γ+1 ,
                   (1 − α)                 θ                   θ     γ    (1 − ξ)        γ+θ    1
H2 = {C 1−γ P              {ξ[(1 − ξ)W1 ] θ−1 + (1 − ξ)(ξW2 ) θ−1 }− θ −1         (ξW2 ) θ−1 } γ+1
                      α                                                     W2
            1−γ
    ≡ φ2 C γ+1 .

Substitute H1 and H2 in the marginal utility of consumption with the formulas
above, we can write the marginal utility in terms of only C:
                                 1−σ
                                     −1
     M U (C, H1 , H2 ) = α∆       γ       C γ−1
                                                                  γ   −2γ   1−σ−γ
                          = α{α + (1 − α)[ξφθ1 + (1 − ξ)φθ2 ]− θ C γ+1 }      γ     C −σ .

After retirement,
                                     M U (C) = ΨC −σ .

    Now we can solve the household optimization problem in a way similar to the
separable preference case. When the borrowing constraint is not binding, for any
A0 > At+1 , given the next period policy function c(A0 , F10 , F20 , u01 , u02 , t + 1), we
can calculate the marginal utility of consumption in the next period and then solve
for the current consumption using the Euler equation. If the borrowing constraint
is binding, we can again pin down the current consumption using the budget con-
straint.




                                                  59
