                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND
                            THE TIMING AND COMPONENTS
                               OF POPULATION GROWTH




                                  David E. Bloom

                                Richard B. Freeman




                              Working Paper No. 2448




                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  November 1987




The authors are indebted to Ansley Coale for thoughtful comments on their work
in this area, to Neil Bennett for helpful discussions, and to John Heyde for
providing many hours of diligent computational and research assistance. The
research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in Labor Studies.
Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                   NBER Working Paper #2448
                                                   November 1987




                       Economic Development and the Timing

                       and Components of Population Growth




                                    ABSTRACT




      This paper examines the relationship between population growth and
 economic growth in developing countries from 1965 to 1985. Our results
 indicate that developing countries were able to shift their labor force from
 low-productivity agriculture to the higher-productivity industry and service
 sectors, and to increase productivity within those sectors, despite the
 rapid growth of their populations. We also find that at given rates of
 population growth, income growth is related to the time path of population
 growth and that population growth due to high. birth and death rates is
 associated with slower income growth than population growth due to
 relatively low birth and death rates. Hence, the timing and components of
 population growth are important elements in the process of economic
 development.




David E. Bloom                                      Richard B. Freeman
Department of Economics                             Department of Economics
Columbia University                                 Harvard University
New York, NY 10027                                  cambridge, MA 02138
(212) 280—9807                                      (617) 495—4950
              Economic Development and the Timing and Components
                             of Population Growth




I.   Introduction.


     The population of today's less developed countries increased by roughly

1.3 billion people between 1965 and 1985 -- an increase that is larger than

the 1985 population of all of the more developed countries in the world

combined. [1) Despite the fears of 'population pessimists' that rapid

population growth will hinder the growth of per capita income, and the

counter-claims of 'population optimists' that population growth promotes

economic expansion, the empirical evidence shows little relation between the

growth of population and income per head or related economic variables. [2]

Enough countries have simultaneously experienced rapid population and

economic growth and enough have experienced rapid population growth and slow

or negative economic growth to support a 'population neutralist' point of

view that population growth does not necessarily help or impede economic

development. [3]

      Population growth can, however occur in various ways: through high

birth rates and moderate or even high death rates, through low birth rates

and lower death rates, through mass immigration, and so forth. Similarly,

changes in the rate of population growth may be caused by changes in birth

rates with roughly constant death rates, changes in death rates with roughly

constant birth rates, or by more complex changes in both fertility and

mortality as in the demographic transition. The impact of population growth

on labor supply and economic well-being may well differ depending on the

reasons underlying the growth.


                                 1
     In their seminal book detailing the economic benefits of reduced

population growth, Coale and Hoover (1958) focused attention not on growth

per se but rather on declines in fertility, which immediately lower the

number of persons below working age without a concomitant decline in the

size of the labor force.       (Indeed, a fertility decline may even result in an

increase in the size of the labor force due to an increase in female labor

force participation.) More recently, Coale (1986) has reiterated the point

that levels of fertility and mortality are likely to affect the growth of

per capita income independently of their difference (which determines

population growth). In support of this point, Coale presents three simple

pieces of empirical evidence relating to different regions of the developing

world between 1960 and 1982:       (1) a graph showing little association between

rates of population increase and the growth of per capita income; (2) a

graph showing a pronounced negative association between total fertility

rates and the growth of per capita income; and (3) a graph showing a

positive association between the expectation of life at birth and the growth

of per capita income. This evidence would seem to provide a clear

indication that the growth of income per capita has been weakest in the high

fertility/high mortality regions of the world and that these regions do not

coincide closely with the regions experiencing the most rapid rates of

population growth. It would also appear to constitute evidence in favor of

a 'modified population pessimist view' that a demographic transition is an

important prerequisite for economic development.

     In this paper we explore the relation between the time path of

population growth and two major components of population growth -    - birth   and

death rates - -   and   the growth of labor supply, the ratio of persons of


                                   2
working age to nonworking age, and economic well-being as reflected in GNP

per capita and other measures of economic development from 1965 to 1985. We

seek to determine the extent to which the 'neutralist' finding that we

reported in our previous work (Bloom and Freeman, 1986) - -   that   there is

little cross-country association between population growth and economic

growth --   should be amended or amplified by taking account of the timing and

components of population growth and by considering more recent developing

country experience. Our focus throughout is on the labor market

consequences of population growth, beginning with population-induced

increases in the supply of labor and proceeding to changes in output per

worker and the sectoral allocation of the labor force. As the labor market

consequences of population growth depend not only on labor market factors

but also on the response of capital investment, technology, and the like to

population growth, our empirical findings reflect the behavior of various

markets and soclo-economic agents beyond the labor market as well.

     Our major empirical findings, which relate to the time period 1965-

1985, are the following:    (1) developing countries were able to shift their

labor forces from low-productivity agriculture to the higher-productivity

industry and service sectors, and to increase productivity within those

sectors, despite the rapid growth of their populations; (2) countries with

similar average rates of population growth had significantly different

patterns of instantaneous population growth and different combinations of

birth and death rates; (3) average rates of population growth tended to be

unrelated to the growth of per capita income over the entire time period,

although they did exhibit a negative relation over the years 1980-1985; (4)

the time profile of population growth is significantly related to income


                                 3
growth, with countries experiencing a reduction in population growth tending

to experience more rapid income growth; and (5) the association between

income growth and population growth depends on the level of birth and death

rates, with the relation being slightly negative among countries with high

birth and death rates, and positive among countries with relatively low

birth and death rates.




                              4
II. Labor Supply and the Components of Population Growth


     The labor supply forthcoming from a population depends on the number of

persons in different age and sex groups and on the rate of labor force

participation for each of those groups, i.e., the ratio of the number of

individuals who are employed or unemployed and seeking work to the total

number of individuals in the group. [4]   The history of fertility,

mortality, and migration directly determines the number of persons in each

age and sex group and is also likely to affect labor supply by influencing

labor force participation rates within those groups, though economic and

cultural factors also significantly influence those rates. [5] In

discussing the effects of population growth on labor supply, we refer to

changes in labor supply due to changes in the size and age structure of the

population at fixed labor force participation rates as "accounting effects"

and to changes in labor supply due to changes in participation rates as

"behavioral" effects.

     With regard to accounting effects, there are two main points we wish to

make about the interrelation between the components of population growth and

labor supply. First, we note that changes in fertility and mortality that

have the same effects on population growth can have different effects on the

supply of labor, both immediately when the changes occur and later when the

population achieves a stable form. This relation exists because fertility

and mortality changes have different effects on the age distribution of a

population. To illustrate, consider the two West model stable populations

presented in McNicoll (l984a, p. 187). The first population has a birth

rate of .045 and a death rate of .020 while the second population has a

birth rate of .030 and a death rate of .005. The growth rates of population


                               5
are thus the same, but the age distributions of the population are

different: in the first model, 54 percent of the population falls between

the ages 15 and 64 whereas in the second, 57 percent of the population falls

in that working age category. Although this difference in age distributions

is not great, it illustrates the point that even in stable populations the

magnitude of the components of population growth will affect the age

distribution independently of their crude difference (i.e. ,   the crude growth
rate). Given different labor force participation rates by age, the

magnitudes of the components of growth will therefore also affect the size

of the labor force, and, all else the same, per capita output. It also

follows that the components of changes in the rate of population growth will

exert independent influences on changes in labor supply and, other things

equal, on economic well-being.

     Second, in any time period, population growth will alter labor supply

with a lag whose length depends on the reasons underlying the growth. For

example, if population growth is the result of relatively high fertility or

of an age distribution that is heavily concentrated in the childbearing

years, the growth in any one year will have its impact focused at age 0 of

the age distribution. Thus, it will take on the order of 10 to 15 years

before the effects of a particular years population growth begins to affect

the labor force, and 20 to 25 years before the net additions to the

population have a substantial impact on the labor force. [6] On the other

hand, if population growth is mainly the result of substantial in-migration

or of declines in mortality that are evenly spread throughout the age

distribution (as occurs in middle mortality populations) the effects on

labor supply will be more immediate.


                                 6




                                                                                  j
     On the behavioral side, we note that fertility increases and mortality

declines are likely to have immediate impacts on labor supply by altering

labor force participation rates. Because childrearing and labor force

participation are both time-intensive activities, declines in fertility could

be expected to have immediate impacts on the size of the female labor force

due to increases in female labor force participation rates. Empirical

evidence on this point is, however, mixed, with participation rates of 30-45

year old women increasing as fertility declines in some countries but not in

others -   - presumably reflecting the importance of cultural factors and
measurement problems related to female labor force participation. [7]

     Mortality changes can also affect age-specific labor force participation

rates, and perhaps more importantly, the quality and productivity of the work

force. To the extent that individuals perceive a decline in mortality as

extending their worklife horizons, they may delay entry into the labor force

in order to acquire more education. Indeed, one of the most regular empirical

patterns of change that occurs with development is the declining rate of labor

force participation among the young as they continue in school --   a   pattern

that would make little economic sense if the young did not forsee increasingly

long working lives.

     Looking beyond labor supply issues, population growth is also likely to

have different effects on investment and savings behavior, the composition

of investment, and other broad economic phenonomena depending on the cause

of growth. Growth due to reduced mortality among older persons can be

expected to affect savings rates and is likely to spur greater investment in

medical care facilities. As another example, growth due to increased

fertility will tend to induce more investment in housing and education.


                                 7
     In sum, a priori analysis supports the view that the effects of any

given level or change in population growth on labor supply and per capita

income depend, at least in part, on both the timing and the underlying

components of that growth or change in growth.

III. Empirical Patterns


      We now present empirical evidence on the relationship between

population growth, the components of growth, and changes in population

growth and its components, across developing countries in the 1965-85

period. Most of the statistics we analyze are drawn from publications of

the World Bank, and our analysis follows the conventional grouping of

countries in those publications. Developing countries are classified by

level of GNP per capita into three groups: low-income developing countries,

consisting of 37 countries whose 1985 per capita GNP was less than $400 (the

average per capita income for these countries was $270); lower middle-income

developing countries, consisting of 36 countries with per capita incomes

between $400 and $1600 (average per capita income of $760); and upper

middle-income developing countries, consisting of 23 countries with GNP per

capita above $1600 (average per capita income of $1890). We also present

figures for 19 industrial market economies whose GNP per capita averaged

$11,180. [8]

     Table 1 reports several measures of population growth and its

components for countries in each income group. First, we present average

annual rates of population growth over the years 1965 to 1985. These rates

of growth, which are calculated by the World Bank from regressions of the

natural logarithm of population size on a time trend, are the standard



                               8
measures used in analyses of the relationship between population growth and

economic development. Although they reflect a great deal of information

about population growth in each year within the intervals they cover

(including rates of net migration), they are consistent with a variety of

time paths of instantaneous population growth rates (i.e. ,   the   rates of

change in a particular year) and thus, with instantaneous population growth

rates that increase, decrease, or remain stable over time. Based on the

arguments of the preceding section, information on the timing of population

growth has important implications for the growth of the labor force and

therefore for the productive capacity of the population during the time

period over which income growth is measured.

     Hence, the second set of measures of population growth we report in

Table 1 are the instantaneous rates of growth in 1965 and 1985. These

growth rates, which are calculated as the differences between crude birth

rates and crude death rates in 1965 and 1985, contain no information on the

contribution of net migration to population growth. Neither do they reflect

information on pdpulation growth in the years between 1965 and 1985.

However, they convey useful information on the time path of the population

growth rate, assuming that path has been approximately linear over time.

     The third set of measures related to population growth reported in

Table I are crude birth rates and crude death rates. As discussed above,

these measures are more informative than instantaneous rates of population

growth because they also reveal the position of a population along the

spectrum of the demographic transition. In particular, they allow one to

distinguish between populations that are growing slowly because they have

either not begun the demographic transition (i.e., they have relatively high



                               9
birth rates and high death rates) or because they have more or less

completed the demographic transition (i.e. ,     they have relatively low birth
rates and low death rates). It is also worth noting that crude birth rates

and death rates reflect the influence of a population's age structure on its

rate of growth and that these rates are simply and usefully related to the

instantaneous population growth rates (i.e., the instantaneous growth rate

equals the crude birth rate minus the crude death rate). It therefore seems

preferable to analyze the components of population growth in terms of these

measures •   rather   than in terms of the measures used by Coale - -   the   total

fertility rate and the expectation of life at birth --      that   have neither of

these properties. [9]

     The statistics reported in Table 1 reveal several important aspects of

recent demographic experience. First, with the marked exception of China,

average population growth rates were extremely high in developing countries

from 1965 to 1985, with implied doubling times of about 30 years. In

comparison, the implied population doubling time for the industrial market

economies was roughly 100 years. Second, the instantaneous growth rates

show a decelerating trend in population growth. The growth rates in 1985

were below those in 1965 for every country group (except for the low-income

countries, excluding China and India). The example of China is especially

notable in this regard because the population growth rate in China declined

by 1.4 percentage points over just a 20 year period. Such a rapid and

substantial decline suggests that the Chinese population -     - which   grew at

the relatively rapid annual rate of 1.9 percent from 1965 to 1985 --          is   now

increasing at a much slower pace than the Chinese labor force, which would

tend to promote the growth of income per capita, other things equal.



                                  10
    Third, birth and death rates have declined from 1965 to 1985 for all

income groups of developing countries. The declines in the birth rate

ranged from 3 per thousand in the low income countries (exclusive of India

and China) to 20 per thousand in China, while the declines in the death rate

ranged from 2 per thousand in the upper middle-income countries to 8 per

thousand in the lower middle-income countries and India. Moreover, the

birth and death rates do not show similar patterns of decline across country

groups. For example, the decrease in the population growth rate that would

have resulted from just the birth rate declines was offset to widely varying

degrees by the death rate declines across the country groups. Thus, the

structure of demographic change from 1965 to 1985 has not been uniform

across country groups, an indication of the potential importance of taking

account of the components of population growth in studying effects of

population changes on economic development.

     It is important to recognize that the averages given in Table 1 mask

substantial country differences in growth rates and in the components of

growth within the same income grouping. With respect to population growth,

among the low-income countries, Kenya and Tanzania had, for example, average

growth rates of 4.1 and 3.5 percent between 1980 and 1985 while Sri Lanka

and Haiti had growth rates of 1.4 and 1.8 percent. As another example,

among upper middle-income economies Iraq and Algeria had population growth

rates of 3.6 and 3.3 percent from 1980 to 1985, roughly five times the rates

in Uruguay and Portugal.

     Turning to the components of growth, we present in Table 2 the range of

1985 birth and death rates for countries divided into those above the median

and those below the median in terms of the average annual rate of population



                              11
growth in their income category. The figures reveal a wide range of birth

and death rate experiences for countries with comparable population growth

rates. The statistics also reveal considerable overlap in the birth and

death rate ranges for countries in different income groups. These patterns

highlight the empirical significance of the analytical message conveyed

earlier: that countries with similar population growth rates have different

dombinations of birth and death rates and thus y have very different labor

supply and economic growth experiences.

     To evaluate the significance of demographic transition in the period,

we cross-classified developing countries according to whether their crude

birth rates increased 1significantly" (i.e.   ,   by more than 10 percent),
decreased significantly, or did not move significantly from 1965 to 1985.

Similarly, we divided the countries according to whether their crude death

rates did or did not move up or down significantly. At a very simple level,

the demographic transition model is consistent with a pattern of cross-

classification in which countries experience either (1) significant declines

in both their birth and death rates; (2) a drop in the death rate but no

significant change in the birth rate; (3) a drop in the birth rate with no

significant change in the death rate; or (4) no significant change in either

the birth rate or the death rate. Of the 91 countries in our sample, 82

fell into one of these four cells, with the majority of those (54 percent)

experiencing significant declines in both crude birth rates and crude death

rates (see Table 3). The remaining countries were distributed fairly

randomly across the five cells that are not consistent with the demographic

transition model, although it is notable that not a single developing

country experienced a significant increase in both its birth rate and death



                             12
rate from 1965 to 1985. Insofar as these countries are not unusually

concentrated among country income groups, the demographic transition model

would appear to provide a reasonable construct for viewing the demographic

experience of developing countries over the past two decades.




                              13
IV. Population Growth and Economic Outcomes


     In this section we turn from the independent variables that reflect

population growth experiences to outcome variables likely to depend, at

least in part, on population growth. Rather than limiting our analysis to a

single outcome measure -- say growth of per capita income -- we examine

several variables: labor force growth, the proportion of a population of

working age, and labor force participation rates; the sectoral distribution

of the labor force and sectoral output per worker; and GNP per worker and

per capita. Our concern with the sectoral distribution of the labor force

between agriculture, industry, and services reflects the critical role that

sectoral reallocation of labor has been shown to play in economic

development (see Kuznets, 1965, 1984) and the importance of the traditional

sector/modern sector dichotomy in 'dualistic' models of developing country

labor markets (see Lewis, 1954). The main implication of these models for

the impact of population growth on economic development (discussed at length

in our earlier paper) is that rapid population growth is likely to reduce

the rate at which "surplus labor" in the traditional sector is absorbed into

productive employment and thus to postpone the elimination of economic

dualism and the rise of living standards that characterizes modern economic

growth.


A. Labor Supply

     Table 4 presents growth rates of population and labor force for country

groups for the periods 1965-1980 and 1980-1985. The statistics document the

fact that changes in the rate of population growth are- not immediately

translated into changes in the rate of labor force growth: except for the



                              14
upper middle-income countries, labor force growth accelerated between 1965-

80 and 1980-85, despite the fact that population growth tended to decelerate

or remain steady. This pattern is most accentuated for China, causing the

labor force-to-population ratio to increase by 1.3 percent per annum between

1980 and 1985 (i.e., the difference between the growth rates of labor force

and population).

     To what extent are the observed changes in gross labor force

participation rates the result of "accounting" effects that arise from

shifts in the age distribution toward age groups with relatively high

participation rates and to what extent are the changes the result of

behavioral effects due to changes in labor force participation rates? Table

5 presents evidence that addresses this question. It reports the relative

size of the working age population in different country groups and the ratio

of the labor force (including persons aged less than 15 and over 64) to the

working age population. The figures reveal an increase in the working age

share of population in all income categories from 1965 to 1985 (except the

low-income countries excluding China and India, where the share remained

unchanged), with a remarkable ten point increase in China that brought its

share to levels comparable to those of the industrial market economies. By

contrast, the ratio of the labor force to the population aged 15-64 declined

across country groups, except for a modest increase among the upper middle-

income developing economies. Part of the decline in developing countries is

likely to reflect increased attendance in school. At any rate, both the

"accounting effects" and the "behavioral effects" of population growth on

labor supply are, sizable, although they work in opposite directions and tend

to cancel each other - -   perhaps for the reasons stressed by Easterlin (1968)


                                 15
- - the   result being that the labor force-to-population ratio in developing

countries has remained fairly constant over the past two decades.

B. Sectoral Allocation of Labor

     We examine next the rate at which the labor force in developing

countries shifted from agricultural to nonagricultural activities and the

level and changes in output per worker among sectors. As in our analysis of

population and labor force, we use World Bank data to examine patterns

across income groups. The three sectors on which the Bank provides data

are: agriculture (encompassing forestry, fishing, and hunting, as well as

agriculture) [10]; industry (manufacturing, mining, construction, and

utilities); and services (defined as a residual category of all economic

activity beyond agriculture and industry). Our focus on the shift of labor

out of agriculture does not imply that agricultural development is

unimportant in the growth process. To the contrary, the shift out of

agriculture is generally accompanied or preceded by sizeable increases in

productivity in agriculture, placing agricultural development at the center

of the labor adjustment process. [11]

     The key findings of our analysis are that, despite the unprecedented

magnitude of population growth in the 1965-85 period, developing countries:

(1) shifted their work forces from low-productivity agriculture to the

higher-productivity service sector and to a somewhat lesser extent to the

high-productivity industrial sector; and (2) raised output per worker in all

sectors. In the following section we will examine whether countries with

greater or lesser population growth, or different sources of such growth,

were more or less successful along these dimensions of development.

     Table 6 contains the evidence for our first claim: that developing



                                16
countries shifted their work forces out of agriculture during the years 1965

to 1980. It reports the distribution of the labor force across economic

sectors in 1965 and 1980 by country income categories. While we would have

preferred to carry the analysis forward through 1985, 1980 is the latest

year for which we are able to obtain data on the sectoral distribution of

the labor force. Whatever changes occurred from 1980 to 1985 are, in any

case, unlikely to have reversed the pattern of the preceding 15 years.

     Comparing the fraction of the labor force engaged in agriculture across

country income groups confirms the well-established fact that agriculture's

share. is inversely related to the level of economic development. Examing

the agricultural share over time shows that the time-series pattern is

roughly consistent with the cross-sectional pattern: the agriculture share

of the labor force fell. Still, agriculture remains the largest employer of

labor in the developing world (save for countries in the upper middle-income

group). [12] Finally, the figures on industry and services show that the

declining share of labor in agriculture coincided mainly with a shift in

labor to the service sector, which tended to be larger than industry in both

1965 and 1980, though here as elsewhere China is exceptional. In the case

of China, the industry share of the labor force increased by 75 percent

between 1965 and 1980 to exceed the services share.

     Declines in the share of workers in agriculture in a period of growing

labor supply does not, of course, imply declines in the absolute number of

workers in the sector. Indeed, in the developing world taken as a whole,

the size of the agricultural labor force increased by nearly one-fourth from

1965 to 1980, from 668 million to 823 million individuals. It is notable,

however, that the upper middle-income countries experienced a 10 percent



                               17
decline in the size of their agricultural labor force
                                                         during this period.
 [131

        Shifts in the distribution of the labor force from agriculture to

services and industry contribute (all else the same) to increasing income

per capita because sectoral output per worker tends to be higher in industry

and services than in agriculture. We document the differences in output per

worker in Table 7, where we report ratios of gross domestic product per

worker by sector in 1965 and 1980 to the economy-wide gross domestic product

per worker. Figures greater than 1.0 indicate that a sector has above-      -


average labor productivity. Figures below 1.0 indicate the reverse. In all

of the developing country groups, agriculture has markedly below-average

labor productivity whereas industry has the highest product per worker. In

the industrial market economies, by contrast, and to a growing extent in the

upper middle-income developing countries, output per worker in industry is

roughly at the economy-wide average.

        To estimate the contribution of shifts in the distribution of the labor

force to the growth of GDP per worker in the economy as a whole, we have

used the 1965 and 1980 relative GDP per worker figures as
                                                            "productivity
weights", and calculated the percentage change in GDP per worker

attributable to the observed changes in the distribution of the labor force:

this is simply the sum of the productivity weights multiplied by the change

in shares. The results, summarized in Table 8, show that the changes in the

sectoral distribution of labor contributed importantly to observed

productivity growth, whichever set of weights is used. This pattern is

especially strong in China, where between one-third and one-half of the

growth in GDP per head from 1965 to 1980 is attributable to the shift in



                                18
labor force out of agriculture.


C. Output Per Worker

     In the pessimists' scenario, population-induced increases in labor

supply have adverse consequences for productivity per worker, particularly

in the 'labor surplus' agricultural sector. Did the 1965-1980 increase in

labor force reduce sectoral productivity in developing countries in accord

with this view?

     The figures in Table 9 suggest that it did not. Indeed, exactly the

opposite occurred in this period of rapid population growth: for each

sector, the growth of GDP exceeded the growth of the labor force --   for   all

income groups of economies. The net result of increasing output per worker

by sector and shifts in the distribution of the labor force towards more

productive sectors are increases in COP per worker in the overall economy.

     Finally, while there was some decline in labor force per capita from

1965 to 1985 in developing countries, its effect on per capita output was

dwarfed by the increase in per worker output, the net result being a large

increase in per capita output. While this pattern does not imply that

population growth over this period contributed to economic development, nor

rule out the possibility that it hindered development, it certainly gainsays

the worst fears of the population pessimists. Despite population increasing

rapidly -- more rapidly than the labor force until the 1980s --   developing
countries managed, on the whole, to improve their economic positions

significantly.




                              19
V. Effects of the Timing and Components of Population Growth


     In this section, we turn our attention to the following two questions:

     (1) Whether over the past two decades, countries with more rapid

population growth had relatively better or worse rates of economic

development than countries with less rapid population growth?

     (2) Whether differences in the timing and components of population

growth had affected the rate of economic growth in countries with the same

overall rate of population growth?

     As both of these questions relate to differences in performance among

countries, we change analytic focus and technique. Instead of examining

averages for groups of countries, we use a multiple regression model to

relate indicators of economic development for individual countries to growth

rates of population, and to levels of birth and death rates. Our

observations consist of all developing countries in the World Bank data set

for which the requisite data are available. To differentiate between

countries with differing levels of income and other circumstances, we

include in all of our specifications the log of 1965 per capita GNP and a

vector of dununy variables relecting each country's regional location.

     Table 10 presents the results of regressing the rate of growth of

several economic outcomes on the rate of growth of population for the

periods 1965-85, 1965-80 (recall that labor force distribution figures are

available only through 1980) and, for 1980-85. While the statistical

analysis shows some positive and some negative associations between

population growth and economic outcomes, the overriding pattern of results

provides no support for the population optimist point of view, and some

support for both the neutralist and pessimist views. The best single


                              20
summary measure of outcome    growth of CD? per capita --   is   essentially

unrelated to the growth of population over the long run. Labor force per

capita is negatively related to the growth of population from 1965 to 1980

and from 1965 to 1985, but its effect on the growth of per capita output is

offset by the statistically weak but positive relation between the rate of

growth of population and the growth of GDP per laborer shown in the third

row of estimates.

     In the 1980-1985 period, by contrast, population growth is negatively

associated with growth of CDP per capita, with an increased negative

coefficient on the growth of labor force per capita and a negative rather

than positive association with growth of GD? per worker. This pattern of

results suggests that, in a weak world economy, countries with rapid

population growth (which cannot be "turned off" readily) may be at greater

risk of suffering setbacks in economic growth than countries with less rapid

population growth. [14] Although we are reluctant to extrapolate or

generalize from this relatively short period of time, this evidence does

favor the population pessimist view.

     Looking within sectors, the data reject strongly the implications of

the dualistic labor market model that faster population growth reduces the

movement out of agriculture and retards growth of labor productivity in

agriculture. The regression estimates show exactly the opposite: more

rapid reductions in the share of the labor force in agriculture and more

rapid increases in GDP per worker in agriculture in countries with faster

rates of population growth, though neither relation is exceptionally strong.

The most sensible interpretation of these regressions is that population

growth has little or, at most, a weak relation to the sectoral allocation of


                              21
labor and to labor productivity within sectors.

     We now turn to the relation of per capita income, labor force, and

productivity to the timing and components of population growth. First, we

replace the average population growth rate with the instantaneous population

growth rates in 1965 and 1985 in the regression equations in Table 10. This

specification provides us with a measure of the association between the

acceleration/deceleration of population growth and the indicators of

economic development. As can be seen in the first panel of Table 11, past

population growth is positively associated with labor force participation,

labor productivity, and GNP per capita while the present rate of population

growth is negatively associated with those same variables. Second, in panel

2 of Table 11 we replace the 1965 and 1985 population growth rates by their

difference and control for the average rate of population growth. Here we

see that while average population growth has no relation to the growth of

per capita income, countries with more sharply declining rates of population

growth tend to have a higher rate of per capita income growth, both because

they are able to enjoy higher rates of labor force per capita and because of

increases in GDP per worker. In part, these findings reflect the lag

between growth of population and labor force, as countries with declining

rates of growth will tend to have an older population, and thus a higher

proportion of their population concentrated in the working ages and

generating savings that can be used to finance investments in both human and

physical capital that will generate returns relatively quickly. Overall,

these results provide strong evidence that the time path of population

growth exerts an influence on economic development that is independent of

the level of population growth. The results modify, but do not contradict,


                              22
the population neutralist view that we expressed in our earlier work, as

different steady states of population growth are estimated to have

essentially no effect on per capita income growth.

     In panel 3 of Table 11 we report the results of regressions with crude

birth rates and crude death rates in 1965 and 1985 included as regressors.

These specifications essentially break up the instantaneous growth rates in

panel 1 into their components. However, the estimates provide relatively

little additional insight beyond that gained from the constrained estimates

reported in panel 1. At the margin, high birth rates in the past are

associated with higher growth rates of labor force, labor productivity, and

output per capita, while high birth rates in the present are associated with

slower growth of labor force, productivity, and output per capita. Death

rates tend to have an association with labor force growth that is opposite

in sign to that of birth rates, but of greater magnitude. This pattern is

probably due to the fact that changes in the death rate in most developing

countries partly reflect improvements in infant and child mortality, which

are demographically similar to increased birth rates, and partly reflect

reduced mortality in the working ages that has a more immediate effect on

the size of the labor force. The one puzzling result in the table is that

the coefficients on the death rate in 1985 do not have equal and opposite

signs to those on the birth rate in 1985 in the regressions for CNP per

capita and per worker. Perhaps further decomposition of death rates by age

is needed here.

     The estimates in panel 4 of Table 11 are from a regression

specification in which the coefficient on the average annual rate of

population growth from 1965 to 1985 is allowed to depend on the level of


                              23
fertility and mortality. In particular, we divided the sample into thirds

according to the sum of birth rates and death rates for different countries.

By interacting the population growth rate with dummy variables reflecting

which of the three groups each country falls into, we are able to test

whether population growth affects economic development differently for

countries at different stages of the demographic transition. The estimates

indicate that the insignificant correlation between population growth and

the growth of GNP per capita (.01, with a standard error of .36 --     not
reported in Table 10 where we focus instead on GD? per capita) is an average

of (1) a moderately-sized positive relation among countries with the lowest

birth and death rates (i.e. ,   countries   that tend to be closest to completing

the demographic transition), (2) a small positive (and imprecise) relation

among countries that were in the midst of the demographic transition over

the years 1965 to 1985, and (3) a small (and imprecise) negative relation

for countries that had not begun the demographic transition. For all three

groups of countries, population growth is negatively associated with the

growth of labor force per capita, with the strength of the association

tending to be strongest for those countries with moderate and high birth and

death rates. By contrast, productivity growth shows little association with

population growth among the high fertility/mortality populations and is

positively related to population growth among the low and middle

fertility/mortality populations. The positive link between population

growth and productivity and per capita income growth for the low

fertility/mortality group represents the only evidence we have found that is

consistent with the population optimist view that population growth promotes

economic development. As the results for the other two country groups do


                                 24
not show such a pattern, however, the safest generalization appears to be

the neutralist view that the overall effect of population growth on economic

development is negligible although its impact seems to differ depending on

the levels of birth and death rates.
  •
      In sum, the estimates in Table 11 support the view that it is useful to

go beyond simple correlations between average rates of population growth and

economic development to consider the relation between the timing of

population growth and the underlying components of that growth and economic

development. The next step in the analysis should be to examine these

relations in a broader model that considers not only the impact of

population growth on per capita income but also the feedback effects of

economic development on population growth.




                               25
VI. Conclusion


     This paper has reported the results of research on the relationships

between the timing and components of population growth and the economic

growth experienced by developing countries from 1965 to 1985. The results

indicate that developing countries were able to shift their labor force from

low-productivity agriculture to the higher-productivity industry and service

sectors, and to increase productivity within those sectors, despite the

rapid growth of their populations. We also find that at given rates of

population growth, income growth is related to the time path of population

growth and that population growth due to high birth and death rates is

associated with slower income growth than population growth due to

relatively low birth and death rates. Hence, the timing and components of

population growth appear to be important elements in the process of economic

development.




                             26
                              Notes

1. By developed countries we mean Western Europe, Australia, New Zealand,

Japan, Canada, and the United States, as indicated in the World Development

Report 1987 (World Bank, 1987). Except for countries with mid-1984

populations below one million, high-income oil exporters, and East European

non-market economies, all other countries are considered less developed,

despite the wide range of industrialization and income per capita among

them.


2. See Bloom and Freeman, 1986.


3. See Bloom and Freeman, 1986.


4. We limit our discussion to the size of the labor force, to the exclusion

of other important aspects of supply, such as hours worked and the

education, skill, and motivation of the labor force. These characteristics,

while imporant determinants of a country's productive capacity, raise issues

that are beyond the scope of this paper.


5. Easterlin (1968) presents evidence that rapid growth of the population of

working age in the U.S. was associated with slower growth of labor force

participation rates.


6. This simple insight into the dynamic relationship between population and

labor force growth underlay some of the main results derived by Coale and

Hoover (1958) in one of the earliest neoclassical treatments of the

relationship between population and economic growth.


7.   See Durand (1975) for a thorough empirical study of labor force



                              27.
participation rates in less developed countries. See Standing (1976), Dixon

(1982), and Anker (1983) for thorough treatments of the problems involved in

measuring the labor force participation of women in developing countries.


8. Countries for which per capita GNP data are either unavailable or

unreliable are classified on the basis of characteristics likely to be

correlated with income. These countries are not included in the regression

analyses reported below.


9.   See Entwisle (1981) for some further analysis of this issue.


10. Since much agricultural production in developing countries is not

exchanged, the World Bank has imputed part of its value for many countries.


11. Ideally, we would also like to analyze the wage effects of rapid

population growth. Unfortunately, the sketchy and unreliable nature of wage

data for most developing countries render such an analysis beyond the scope

of this paper. However, we will analyze variations in a kindred measure --

output   per worker -- across sectors and over time.


12. See Kuznets (1984) for a detailed analysis of the decline of

agricultural employment.


13. See the data in the 1987 World Development Report.


14. One possible reason for this is that the world economic slowdown may

compress rates of growth of GDP across countries, so that given rates of

population growth have more adverse effects on per capita income growth.

Another possibility is that the 1980-1985 period is simply a short-run

aberration.


                               28
                           References


Richard Anker. 1983. "Female Labour Force Activity in Developing
Countries: A Critique of Current Definitions and Data Collection Methods."
International Labour Review 122: 790-723.

David E. Bloom and Richard B. Freeman. 1986. "The Effects of Rapid
Population Growth on Labor Supply and Employment in Developing Countries."
Population and Development Review 12: 381-414.

Ansley J. Coale. 1986. "Population Trends and Economic Development." In
World Population and U.S. Policy: The Choices Ahead. Jane Menken, Ed. New
York: W.W. Norton and Company. 96-104.

Ansley J. Coale and Edgar M. Hoover. 1958. Population Growth and Economic
Development in Low-Income Countries. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University
Press.

Ruth B. Dixon. 1982. "Women in Agriculture: Counting the Labor Force in
Developing Countries." Population and Development Review 8: 539-566.

John D. Durand. 1975. The Labor Force in Economic Development: A
Comparison of International Census Statistics: 1946-1966. Princeton, New
Jersey: Princeton University Press.

Richard A. Easterlin. 1968. Population, Labor Force, and Long Swings in
Economic Growth. New York: National Bureau of Economic Research.

Barbara Entwisle. 1981. "CBR Versus TFR in Cross-National Fertility
Research." Demography 18: 635-643.

Simon Kuznets. 1965. Economic Growth and Structure: Selected Essays. New
York: W. W. Norton and Company.

Simon Kuznets. 1984. "The Pattern of Shift of Labor Force from
Agriculture, 1950-1970." In The Theory and Experience of Economic
Development, Eds. , Marc Gersovitz, Carolos Diaz-Alejandro, Gustav Ranis, and
Mark Rosenzweig. London: George Allen and Unwin, 44-59.

W. Arthur Lewis. 1954. "Economic Development with Unlimited Supplies of
Labour." Manchester School 22: 137-191.

Geoffrey McNicoll. 1984. "Consequences of Rapid Population Growth: An
Overview and Assessment." Population and Development Review 10: 177-240.

Guy M. Standing. 1976. "Concepts of Labor Force Participation and
Underutilisation." International Labour Office, Population and Employment
Working Paper No. 40, Geneva.


                              29
World Bank. 1982, 1984, 1987. world Development Report. New York: Oxford
University Press.

world Bank. 1983. world Tables. Volume II: Social Data. New York:
Oxford University Press.

World Bank. 1986. Social Indicators Data Sheets. Washington, D.C.
June.




                            30
Table 1.  Growth rates of population and components of growth by type
of economy, 1965-85

                                  Average
                                  annual
                                  population      Instantaneous
                      1985        growth rates    population growth
                      population (percent)        rates (percent)
Type of economy       (millions) 1965-85          1965   1985   Change
Low-income          2415.3        2.2             2.6    1.9    -0.7
   China            1040.3        1.9             2.6   1.2     -1.4
   India             765.1        2.3             2.5    2.1    -0.4
   Other             609.8        2.7             2.5   2.8      0.3
Lower middle-income 672.0         2.5             2.7    2.5    -0.2
Upper middle-income 567.2         21              2.5   1.9     -0.6
Industrial market    737.3        0.8             1.1   0.4     -0.7

                      Birth rate                 Death rate
                      (per thousand              (per thousand
                      population)                population)
Type of economy       1965   1985 Change         1965   1985   Change
Low-income            43     29    -14           17     10     -7
   China              39     19    -20           13      7     -6
   India              45     33    -12           20     12     -8
   Other              46     43    - 3           21     15     -6
Lower middle-income   44     36    - 8           17     11     -B
Upper middle-income   36     28    - 8           11      9     -2
Industrial market     20     13    - 7            9      9      0

Source: World Bank (1987).
Table 2. Ranges of birth and death rate experiences with different
rates of population growth, by type of economy, 1985.

                      Countries with above average population growth
                      rates within their income group

                                                      Birth rate plus
                      Birth rate      Death rate      death rate (per
                      (per thousand   (per thousand   thousand
Type of economy       population)     population)     population

Low-income            34   -   54      8   - 21       42 - 72
Lower middle-income   33   -   49      7   - 16       40 - 65
Upper middle-income   17   -   44      5   - 14       23 - 58
Industrial market     19   -   23      6   - 9        25 - 31

                      Countries with below average population growth
                      rates within their income group

                                                      Birth rate plus
                      Birth rate      Death rate      death rate (per
                      (per thousand   (per thousand   thousand
Type of economy       population)     population)     population

Low-income            19   -   50      6   -   26     26 - 76
Lower middle-income   22   -   50      4   -   21     29 - 69
Upper middle-income   12   -   26      6   -   13     23 - 33
Industrial market     16   -   19      9   -   12       26 - 30

Source: Authors' calculations from World Bank (1987).
Table 3. Number of economies within each income group, by birth and
death rate experiences, 1965-85.

                Increase in           No change in        Decrease in
                birth rate            birth rate          birth rate

Increase in     0 low-income          1 low-income        0 low-income
death rate      0 lower               0 lower             0 lower
                  middle-income         middle-income       middle-income
                o upper               2 upper             4 upper
                 middle -   income     middle - income      middle - income

                O all developing 3 all developing 4 all developing

No change in    0 low-income          1 low-income        0 low-income
death rate      0 lower               0 lower             0 lower
                 middle - income       middle - income     middle - income
                O upper               2 upper             3 upper
                  middle-income         middle-income       middle-income

                O all developing 3 all developing 3 all developing

Decrease in     1 low-income         22 low-income        9 low-income
death rate      1 lower               9 lower            24 lower
                 middle - income       middle - income     middle -   income
               o upper                1 upper            11 upper
                 middle - income       middle - income     middle -   income

                2 all developing 32 all developing 44 all developing

Source: World Bank (1987).

Note: An increase or decrease in the birth or death rate is defined
here as a change of ten percent or more from the 1965 birth or death
rate.
Table 4. Growth rates of population and labor force, by type of
economy, 1965-80 and 1980-85.

                                                         Differences in
                      Average annual   Average annual    growth rates
                      population       labor force       (labor force
                      growth rates     growth rates      minus
                      (percent)       (percent)          population)
Type of economy       1965-80 1980-85 1965-80 1980-85   1965-80 1980-85

Low-income            2.3     1.9      2.1     2.3      -0.2    0.4
   China              2.2     1.2      2.4     2.5       0.2     1.3
   India              2.3     2.2      1.7     2.0      -0.6    -0.2
   Other              2.7     2.7      2.2     2.5      -0.5    -0.2
Lower middle-income   2.5     2.5      2.4     2.6      -0.1     0.1
Upper middle-income   2.2     2.0      2.6     2.3       0.4     0.3
Industrial market     0.9     0.6      1.3     1.0       0.4     0.4

Source: World Bank (1987).
Table 5. Breakdown of labor force per capita, by type of economy,
1965 and 1985.

                                          Population        Labor force
                           Labor force    aged 15-64        per person
                           per capita     (percent          aged 15-64
                           (percent)      (of population)   (percent)

Type of economy            1965    1985   1965    1985      1965    1985

Low-income                 46      45     54      59        85      76
   China                   45      50     55      65        82      77
   India                   41      37     54      56        76      66
   Other                   38      35     52      52        73      67
Lower middle-income        38      37     52      55        73      67
Upper middle-income        36      38     56      58        64      66
Industrial market          n.a.    n.a.   63      67        n.a.    n.a.

Source: World Bank (1986, 1987).

n.a. =   not   available
Table 6.  Percent distribution of labor force across economic sectors,
by type of economy, 1965 and 1980.

                      Percent of the labor force in

                      Agriculture     Industry          Services

Type of economy       1965    1980    1965       1980   1965    1980

Low-income            78      72       9         13     13      15
   China              81      74       8         14     11      12
   India              73      70      12         13     15      17
   Other              78      70       8         10     14         20
Lower middle-income   66      55      12         15     22         29
Upper middle-income   45      29      24         31     30      40
Industrial market     14       7      38         35     48         58

Source: World Bank (1987).
Table 7. Cross domestic product per worker, for each sector, relative
to gross domestic product per worker in the economy as a whole, by
type of economy, 1965 and 1980.

                      Agriculture     Industry       Services

Type of economy [a]   1965    1980    1965   1980    1965       1980

Low-income            0.54    0.50   3.11    2.69    2.31       1.93
   China              0.48    0.42   4.75    3.36    2.09       1.83
   India              0.64    0.53   1.83    2.00    2.07       2.18
   Other              0.53    0.63    2.25   1.70    2.93       2.00
Lower middle-income * 0.44    0.62   2.00    1.55    1.74       1.50
Upper middle-income * 0.33    0.37   1.48    1.46    1.59       1.14
Industrial market     0.36    0.57    1.05   1.06    1.15       1.07

Source: World Bank (1982, 1984, 1987) and Table 6.

* 1980 figures are 1982 GDP share divided by 1980 labor share. GDP
figures for 1980 are not separately available for the lower and upper
middle-income countries.

 [a] Figures are not completely comparable because some countries
have changed income groups over the period.
Table 8.  Estimates of the percentage change in GD? per worker attri-
butable to shifts in the sectoral distribution of labor, by country
group according to type of economy, 1965-80.


                            Assuming 1965       Assuming 1980
                            relative GDP        relative GD?
Type of economy             per worker          per worker

Low-income                  14.0                13.3
   China                    48.5                31.0
   India                      2.3                3.5
   Other                     10.3               10.9
Lower middle-income          16.8               15.8
Upper middle-income          19.3               16.4
Industrial market             6.5                0.5

Source: Tables 6 and 7, calculated by applying 1980 distribution of
labor force to 1965 relative GDPs per worker and 1965 distributions of
labor force to 1980 relative GDPs per worker.
Table 9. Percent increase of real GDP and of the labor force by
sector from 1965 to 1980 by type of economy.

                                  Real GDP

Type of economy        Overall   Agriculture    Industry   Services

Low-income             102.0      49.1          200.0      107.9
Middle-income          157.2      67.5          200.0      164.5
Industrial market       72.5      19.6           70.0       77.5

                                  Labor force

Type of economy        Overall   Agriculture    Industry   Services

Low-income              36.6      27.7          97.3       46.4
Middle-income           44.8      11.2          95.9       82.3
Industrial market       21.4     -39.3          11.8       46.6

Source: Authors' calculations using data contained in World Bank
(1987)
Table 10. Regression estimates of the effect of population growth on
measures of economic growth and development in developing countries,
1965-80, 1980-85, and 1965-85. [a]

                             Coefficient of population growth [b]

Measure of economic growth                                      .



or development               1965-80         1980-85       1965-85

Growth rates of:

   GDP per capita            0.24 (0.33) -0.86 (0.49) -0.05 (0.34)

   Labor force per capita    -0.30 (0.09) -0.42 (0.10) -0.30 (0.09)

   GDP per laborer in
        All sectors           0.55   (0.32) -0.44 (0.48)   0.36 (0.32)
        Agriculture           1.00   (0.46)
        Industry              0.60   (0.79)
        Services             -0.03   (0.52)

Change in the percent of
the labor force in
     Agriculture             -0.52 (0.88)
     Industry                 0.24 (0.55)
     Services                 1.22 (0.77)

[a] The coefficients are from regressions of the measure of economic
growth or development on the average annual percentage increase in
population, the natural logarithm of GNP per capita in 1965, and six
regional dummy variables. The measures of economic growth or develop-
ment are average annual growth rates except for the changes in the
percent of the labor force by sector, which are raw differences in the
percent of the labor force in each sector. All dependent variables,
as well as the average annual growth in population, are measured in
percentage points. The regions used in the regressions are Sub-
Saharan Africa, Middle East and North Africa, East Asia and Pacific,
South Asia, Latin America and the Caribbean, and Southern Europe.
   Care was taken to use the most complete set of data possible. The
regressions of growth rates of GDP per capita, labor force per capita,
and CD? per worker in the whole economy are regressions from samples
with of 75 observations. Because of the nature of the data
constraints, however, the sample sizes for the sectoral regression
estimates range from El to 77 observations.

[b] Estimated standard errors are reported in parentheses.

Data source: World Bank (1982, 1983, 1987).
Table 11. Regression estimates of the effect of demographic variables
on measures of economic growth and development in developing coun-
tries, 1965-85. [a]

                        Dependent variables
                        (Average annual growth rates)

Estimated               GNP             Labor force     GDP
coefficients   [b]      per capita      per capita      per worker

Model 1:

   P0P65                1.58 (0.50)     0.61 (0.11)      0.92 (0.49)

   P0P85                -1.79 (0.50)    -0.69 (0.11)    -0.80 (0.49)

Model 2:

   AVPOP                0.24 (0.33)     -0.22 (0.07)     0.49 (0.32)

   (P0P85 - P0P65)      -1.74 (0.46)    -0.60 (0.10)    -0.98 (0.44)

Model 3:

   BIRTH6S              0.50 (0.59)     0.54 (0.14)     0.06 (0.59)

   RIRTH8S              -1.10 (0.59)    -0.58 (0.14)    -0.35 (0.59)

   DEATH65              -0.70 (1.00)    -0.92 (0.24)    0.29 (1.00)

   DEATH85              -1.30 (1.21)    0.91 (0.28)     -2.24 (1.21)

Model 4:

   AVPOP *   LOW        0.73 (0.47)     -0.13 (0.11)    0.78 (0.43)

   AVPOP * MID          0.30 (0.39)     -0.33 (0.09)    0.59 (0.37)

   AVPOP * HIGH         -0.20 (0.36)    -0.30 (0.09)    0.21 (0.34)



[a] The coefficients are from regressions of the dependent variable
on the listed independent variables. In addition, all four models
also include, as independent variables, six regional dummy variables
and the natural logarithm of 1965 GNP per capita. The regions used in
the regressions are the same as those used in Table 10, and each
regression was fit on a sample of 75 observations.

[b] Estimated standard errors are reported in parentheses.

Data source: World Bank (1983, 1987).
Definitions of independent variables used in regressions in Table 11.

Independent variable     Explanation

AVPOP                    Average annual population growth, 1965-85
                         (percentage points)

P0P65                    Annual population growth rate, 1965
                         (percentage points)

P0P85                    Annual population growth rate1 1985
                         (percentage points)

BIRTII65                 Annual birth rate, 1965
                         (births per hundred population)

B1RT1185                 Annual birth rate, 1985
                         (births per hundred population)

DEATH6S                  Annual death rate, 1965
                         (deaths per hundred population)

DEATH8S                  Annual death rate, 1985
                         (deaths per hundred population)

LOW                      A dummy variable equal to one for countries
                         in the lowest third of developing countries
                         ranked by values of birth rate plus death
                         rate (average of 1965 and 1985 values), and
                         equal to zero otherwise.

MID                      A dummy variable equal to one for countries
                         in the middle third of developing countries
                         ranked by values of birth rate plus death
                         rate (average of 1965 and 1985 values), and
                         equal to zero otherwise,

HIGH                     A dummy variable equal to one for countries
                         in the high third of developing countries
                         ranked by values of birth rate plus death
                         rate (average of 1965 and 1985 values), and
                         equal to zero otherwise.
