                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           SOME SIMPLE BITCOIN ECONOMICS

                                        Linda Schilling
                                         Harald Uhlig

                                      Working Paper 24483
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24483


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                           April 2018, Revised May 2019




Uhlig has an ongoing consulting relationship with a Federal Reserve Bank, the Bundesbank and
the ECB. We thank our discussants Aleksander Berentsen, Alex Cukierman, Pablo Kurlat, Aleh
Tsivinski and Randy Wright. We thank Pierpaolo Benigno, Bruno Biais, Gur Huberman, Todd
Keister, Ricardo Reis and many participants in conferences and seminars for many insightful
comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Linda Schilling and Harald Uhlig. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Some Simple Bitcoin Economics
Linda Schilling and Harald Uhlig
NBER Working Paper No. 24483
April 2018, Revised May 2019
JEL No. D50,E40,E42,E50

                                         ABSTRACT

In a novel model of an endowment economy, we analyze coexistence and competition between
traditional fiat money (Dollar) and another intrinsically worthless medium of exchange, not
controlled by a central bank, such as Bitcoin. Agents can trade consumption goods in either
currency or hold on to currency for speculative purposes. A central bank ensures a Dollar
inflation target, while Bitcoin mining is decentralized via proof-of-work. We analyze Bitcoin
price evolution and interaction between the Bitcoin price and monetary policy which targets the
Dollar. We obtain a fundamental pricing equation, which in its simplest form implies that Bitcoin
prices form a martingale. We derive conditions, under which Bitcoin speculation cannot happen,
and the fundamental pricing equation must hold. We show that the block rewards are not a tax on
Bitcoin holders: they are financed by Dollar taxes imposed by the Dollar central bank. We
discuss monetary policy implications and characterize the range of equilibria.


Linda Schilling
Ecole Polytechnique CREST
5 Avenue le Chatelier
Palaiseau, Fran 91120
France
lin.schilling@gmail.com

Harald Uhlig
Dept. of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 E 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
huhlig@uchicago.edu
1       Introduction
In December 2018, the total market capitalization of cryptocurrencies reached nearly
400 Billion U.S. Dollars, equivalent to 11% of U.S. base money or M1.1 One funda-
mental use case of currency is that it serves as a store of value. The apparent price
volatility of cryptocurrencies, however, suggests a lack of this fundamental feature of
currencies and has exposed cryptocurrencies to criticism.
    Traditional quantity theory of money suggests that central banks can control the
price level (inflation) of their fiat currencies through variation in the total currency
supply. Cryptocurrencies, however, are not controlled by central banks. Their prices
fluctuate freely according to supply and demand while the total cryptocurrency supply
may only increase over time. What determines the price of cryptocurrencies, how can
their fluctuations arise and what are the consequences for the monetary policy of
central bank controlled currencies, given the competition to cryptocurrencies? This
paper sheds light on these questions.
    For our analysis, we construct a novel yet simple model, where a cryptocurrency
competes with traditional fiat money for usage. We assume that there are two types
of infinitely-lived agents, who alternate in the periods, in which they produce and in
which they wish to consume a perishable good. This lack of the double-coincidence
of wants provides a role for a medium of exchange. We assume that there are two
types of intrinsically worthlessmonies: Bitcoins and Dollars. A central bank targets a
stochastic Dollar inflation via appropriate monetary injections, while Bitcoin produc-
tion is decentralized via proof-of-work, and is determined by the individual incentives
of agents to mine them. In particular, the central bank controls the inflation of a
traditional fiat money while the value of the cryptocurrency is uncontrolled and its
supply can only increase over time. Both monies can be used for transactions. In
essence, we imagine a future world, where a cryptocurrency such as Bitcoin has be-
come widely accepted as a means of payments, and where technical issues, such as
safety of the payments system or concerns about attacks on the system, have been
resolved. We view such a future world as entirely within the plausible realms of pos-
sibilities, thus calling upon academics to think through the key issues ahead of time.
We establish properties of the Bitcoin price expressed in Dollars, construct equilibria
    1
    Source: coincodex.com. Base money or M1 were both approximately at 3600 Billion U.S. Dollars
as of July 2018
and examine the consequences for monetary policy and welfare. Due to currency
competition, the increase in the stock of Bitcoin or “block rewards” are not a tax
on Bitcoin holders, they are financed by Dollar taxes imposed by the Dollar central
bank.
    While we denote the cryptocurrency as Bitcoin, our analysis applies more broadly.
Instead of Bitcoin one may imagine any other cryptocurrency or intrinsically worthless
object, which is storable, pays no dividend, whose price is not stabilized by some
institution and which may be used as a medium of exchange. Therefore, our analysis
applies just as much to certain cryptocurrencies such as Litecoin as it applies to
objects such as pebbles, seashells, notwithstanding the caveats raised by Goldberg
(2005). The analysis does not apply to gold, sugar, utility tokens such as ether and
binance coin, equity tokens or stablecoins.
    Our key results are propositions 1, 2 and theorem 1 in section 3. Proposition 1
provides what we call a fundamental pricing equation2 , which has to hold in the funda-
mental case, where both currencies are simultaneously in use. In its most simple form,
this equation says that the Bitcoin price expressed in Dollar follows a martingale, i.e.,
that the expected future Bitcoin price equals its current price. Proposition 2, on the
other hand, shows that in expectation the Bitcoin price has to rise if not all Bitcoins
are spent on transactions. Under this speculative condition, agents hold back Bitcoins
now in the hope to spend them later at an appreciated value, expecting Bitcoins to
earn a real interest. Under the assumption 3, theorem 1 shows that this speculative
condition cannot hold and that therefore the fundamental pricing equation has to
apply. The paper, therefore, deepens the discussion on how, when and why expected
appreciation of Bitcoins and speculation in cryptocurrencies can arise.
    Section 4 provides a further characterization of the equilibrium. We rewrite the
fundamental pricing equation to decompose today’s Bitcoin price into the expected
price of tomorrow plus a correction term for risk-aversion which captures the corre-
lation between the future Bitcoin price and a pricing kernel. This formula shows,
why constructing equilibria is not straightforward: since fiat currencies have zero
dividends, the involved covariances cannot be constructed from more primitive as-
   2
    In asset pricing, one often distinguishes between a fundamental component and a bubble com-
ponent, where the fundamental component arises from discounting future dividends, and the bubble
component is paid for the zero-dividend portion. The two monies here are intrinsically worthless:
thus, our paper, including the fundamental pricing equation, is entirely about that bubble compo-
nent. We assume that this does not create a source of confusion.



                                               2
sumptions about covariances between the pricing kernel and dividends. Proposition 6
therefore reduces the challenge of equilibrium construction to the task of construct-
ing a pricing kernel and a price path for the two currencies, satisfying some suitable
conditions. We provide the construction of such sequences in the proof, thereby
demonstrating existence. We subsequently provide some explicit examples, demon-
strating the possibilities for Bitcoin prices to be supermartingales, submartingales
as well as alternating periods of expected decreases and increases in value. Under
some conditions, and if the stock of Bitcoins is bounded, we state that the real value
of the entire stock of Bitcoins shrinks to zero when inflation is strictly above unity.
Furthermore, we show that at any point in time the real Bitcoin price is bounded.
    Section 5 finally discusses the implications for monetary policy. Our starting
point is the market clearing equation arising per theorem 1, that all monies are spent
every period and sum to the total nominal value of consumption. As a consequence,
the market clearing condition imposes a direct equilibrium interaction between the
Bitcoin price and the Dollar supply set by the central bank policy. It then follows
that the increase in the quantity of Bitcoin or block rewards is not a tax on Bitcoin
holders. The rewards are financed by Dollar taxes imposed by the Dollar central
bank, see theorem 2. Armed with these insights, we then examine two scenarios. In
the conventional scenario, the Bitcoin price evolves exogenously, thereby driving the
Dollar injections needed by the Central Bank to achieve its inflation target. In the
unconventional scenario, we suppose that the inflation target is achieved for a range
of monetary injections, which then, however, influence the price of Bitcoins.
    The first part of the paper focuses on the agent’s decision to trade Bitcoin, and
we treat the additional Bitcoins arriving each period in the form of block rewards as
a lump sum payment to all agents. In section 6, we extend the analysis by assuming
that it takes effort to “mine” these additional coins. We show an irrelevance theorem.
Any equilibrium of the first part of the paper is also an equilibrium when it takes effort
to mine coins: the only difference is the provision of effort. Intuitively, since the total
Bitcoin stock increases deterministically and independent of the total hash rate of the
network, then for every equilibrium in the effortless Bitcoin production setting, there
exists an effort level in the Bitcoin production setting which supports the same equi-
librium outcome. We further discuss the taxation of Bitcoin production and discuss
welfare implications. In section 7 we discuss random, free entry of cryptocurrencies
and its implications for our results. Appendix A provides some background regard-


                                            3
ing Bitcoin and further discussion of the literature. Appendix B contains proofs. In
appendix C, we demonstrate existence, characterize equilibria, and construct exam-
ples. We generalize our key no-speculation theorem in appendix D, while E discusses
additional monetary policy implications.


1.1    Literature
Our analysis is related to a substantial body of the literature. The idea of the “de-
nationalisation of money” goes back to Hayek (1976). Our model can be thought
of as a simplified version of the Bewley model (1977), the turnpike model of money
as in Townsend (1980) or the new monetarist view of money as a medium of ex-
change as in Kiyotaki-Wright (1989) or Lagos-Wright (2005). With these models as
well as with Samuelson (1958), we share the perspective that money is an intrinsi-
cally worthless asset, useful for executing trades between people who do not share
a double-coincidence of wants. Our aim here is decidedly not to provide a new mi-
cro foundation for the use of money, but to provide a simple starting point for our
analysis.
    The key perspective for much of the analysis is the celebrated exchange-rate
indeterminacy result in Kareken-Wallace (1981) and its stochastic counterpart in
Manuelli-Peck (1990). Our fundamental pricing equation in proposition 1 as well
as the indeterminacy of the Bitcoin price in the first period, see proposition 6, can
perhaps be best thought of as a modern restatement of these classic result. Similar
to Manuelli-Peck (1990), we consider a stochastic endowment economy with compet-
ing currencies. There are three key differences from Manuelli-Peck (1990). First, in
our analysis, agents are infinitely lived. Therefore, the agent’s incentive for currency
speculation competes with her incentive to use currency for trade. Second, we explic-
itly allow the money supply for both Bitcoin and the Dollar to change over time, by
this deriving novel results: we analyze how the Bitcoin price evolution impacts the
monetary policy of the Dollar central bank under currency competition. Further, we
show how the central bank can exploit its flexibility in providing currency and the
fact that Bitcoin is supplied in a deterministic way with an upper bound: novel to
the literature, the central bank can crowd out Bitcoin by printing Dollars. Third,
in an extension, we analyze Bitcoin production by this deviating from a standard
endowment economy.


                                           4
    A closely related contribution in the literature to our paper is Garratt-Wallace
(2017). Like us, they adopt the Kareken-Wallace (1981) perspective to study the
behavior of the Bitcoin-to-Dollar exchange rate. However, there are a number of dif-
ferences. They utilize a two-period OLG model: the speculative price bound does not
arise there. They focus on fixed stocks of Bitcoins and Dollar (or “government issued
monies”), while we allow for Bitcoin production and monetary policy. Production
is random here and constant there. There is a carrying cost for Dollars, which we
do not feature here. They focus on particular processes for the Bitcoin price. The
analysis and key results are very different from ours.
    The literature on bitcoin, cryptocurrencies and blockchain is currently growing
quickly. We provide a more in-depth review of the background and discussion of
the literature in the appendix section A, listing only a few of the contributions here.
Velde (2013), Brito and Castillo (2013) and Berentsen and Schär (2017, 2018) pro-
vide excellent primers on Bitcoin and related topics. Related in spirit to our exercise
here, Fernández-Villaverde and Sanches (2016) examine the scope of currency compe-
tition in an extended Lagos-Wright model and argue that there can be equilibria with
price stability as well as a continuum of equilibrium trajectories with the property
that the value of private currencies monotonically converges to zero. Relatedly, Zhu
and Hendry (2018) study optimal monetary policy in a Lagos and Wright type of
model where privately issued e-money competes with central bank issued fiat money.
Athey et al. (2016) develop a model of user adoption and use of virtual currency
such as Bitcoin in order to analyze how market fundamentals determine the exchange
rate of fiat currency to Bitcoin, focussing their attention on an eventual steady state
expected exchange rate. By contrast, our model generally does not imply such a
steady state. Huberman, Leshno and Moallemi (2017) examine congestion effects in
Bitcoin transactions and their resulting impediments to a Bitcoin-based payments
system. Prat and Walter (2018) predict the computing power of the Bitcoin network
using the Bitcoin-Dollar exchange rate. Chiu and Koeppl (2017) study the optimal
design of a blockchain based cryptocurrency system in a general equilibrium mone-
tary model. They and Budish (2018) argue that the blockchain protocol underlying
Bitcoin is vulnerable to attack. Likewise, Abadi and Brunnermeier (2017) exam-
ine potential blockchain instability. Sockin and Xiong (2018) price cryptocurrencies
which yield membership of a platform on which households can trade goods. This
generates complementarity in households’ participation in the platform. In our pa-


                                          5
per, in contrast, fiat money and cryptocurrency are perfect substitutes and goods
can be paid for with either currency without incurring frictions. Griffin and Shams
(2018) argue that cryptocurrencies are manipulated. By contrast, we imagine a fu-
ture world here, where such impediments, instabilities, and manipulation issues are
resolved or are of sufficiently minor concern for the payment systems both for Dollars
and the cryptocurrency. Makarov and Schoar (2018) find large and recurrent arbi-
trage opportunities in cryptocurrency markets across the U.S., Japan, and Korea.
Liu and Tsyvinksi (2018) examine the risks and returns of cryptocurrencies and find
them uncorrelated to typical asset pricing factors. We view our paper as providing a
theoretical framework for understanding their empirical finding.


2     The model
Time is discrete, t = 0, 1, . . .. In each period, a publicly observable, aggregate random
shock θt ∈ Θ ⊂ R   I is realized. All random variables in period t are assumed to be
functions of the history θt = (θ0 , . . . , θt ) of these shocks, i.e. measurable with respect
to the filtration generated by the stochastic sequence (θt )t∈{0,1,...} and thus known to
all participants at the beginning of the period. Note that the length of the vector
θt encodes the period t: therefore, functions of θt are allowed to be deterministic
functions of t.
     There is a consumption good which is not storable across periods. There is a
continuum of mass 2 of two types of agents. We shall call the first type of agents “red”,
and the other type “green”. Both types of agents j enjoy utility from consumption
ct,j ≥ 0 at time t per u(ct,j ), as well as loathe providing effort et,j ≥ 0, where effort may
be necessary to produce Bitcoins, see in particular section 6. The consumption-utility
function u(·) is strictly increasing and concave. The utility-loss-from-effort function
h(·) is strictly increasing and weakly convex. We assume that both functions are
twice differentiable.
     Red and green agents alternate in consuming and producing the consumption
good, see figure 1: We assume that red agents only enjoy consuming the good in
odd periods, while green agents only enjoy consuming in even periods. Red agents
j ∈ [0, 1) inelastically produce (or: are endowed with) yt units of the consumption
good in even periods t, while green agents j ∈ [1, 2] do so in odd periods. This
creates the absence of the double-coincidence of wants, and thereby reasons to trade.

                                              6
We assume that yt = y(θt ) is stochastic with support yt ∈ [y, ȳ], where 0 < y ≤ ȳ. As
a special case, we consider the case, where yt is constant, y = ȳ and yt ≡ ȳ for all t.
We impose a discount rate of 0 < β < 1 to yield life-time utility
                                "   ∞
                                                                      #
                                    X
                         U =E             β t (ξt,j u(ct,j ) − h(et,j )) .           (1)
                                    t=0

    Formally, we impose alternation of utility from consumption per ξt,j = 1t is odd
for j ∈ [0, 1) and ξt,j = 1t is even for j ∈ [1, 2].




                            c             p                                  c


                   o                      e                     o


                   p                                  c           p




Figure 1: Alternation of production and consumption. In odd periods , green agents
produce and red agents consume. In even periods, red agents produce and green
agents consume. Alternation and the fact that the consumption good is perishable
gives rise to the necessity to trade using fiat money.

   Trade is carried out using money. More precisely, we assume that there are two
forms of money. The first shall be called Bitcoins and its aggregate stock at time t
shall be denoted with Bt . The second shall be called Dollar and its aggregate stock at
time t shall be denoted with Dt . These labels are surely suggestive, but hopefully not
overly so, given our further assumptions. In particular, we shall assume that there is
a central bank, which governs the aggregate stock of Dollars Dt , while Bitcoins can
be produced privately.
   The sequence of events in each period is as follows. First, θt is drawn. Next, given
the information on θt , the central bank issues or withdraws Dollars, per “helicopter
drops” or lump-sum transfers and taxes on the agents ready to consume in that
particular period. The central bank can produce Dollars at zero cost. Consider a

                                                 7
green agent entering an even period t, holding some Dollar amount D̃t,j from the
previous period. The agent will receive a Dollar transfer τt = τ (θt ) from the central
bank, resulting in
                                  Dt,j = D̃t,j + τt .                               (2)

We allow τt to be negative, while we shall insist, that Dt,j ≥ 0: we, therefore, have
to make sure in the analysis below, that the central bank chooses wisely enough so
as not to withdraw more money than any particular green agent has at hand in even
periods. Red agents do not receive (or pay) τt in even period. Conversely, the receive
transfers (or pay taxes) in odd periods, while green agents do not. The aggregate
stock of Dollars changes to
                                  Dt = Dt−1 + τt .                                 (3)


                      CB                                          CB
           MINING          c         p       e
                                                     MINING           c


                o                    e                    o


                            MINING                                    MINING
                 p     e                         c            p   e



                                             CB
Figure 2: Transfers: In each period, a central bank injects to or withdraws Dollars
from agents, before they consume, to target a certain Dollar inflation level. By this,
the Dollar supply may increase or decrease. Across periods, agents can put effort to
mine Bitcoins. By this, the Bitcoin supply can only increase.

    The green agent then enters the consumption good market holding Bt,j Bitcoins
from the previous period and Dt,j Dollars, after the helicopter drop. The green agent
will seek to purchase the consumption good from red agents. As is conventional, let
Pt = P (θt ) be the price of the consumption good in terms of Dollars and let

                                              Pt
                                      πt =
                                             Pt−1

                                          8
denote the resulting inflation. We could likewise express the price of goods in terms
of Bitcoins, but it will turn out to be more intuitive (at the price of some initial
asymmetry) as well as in line with the practice of Bitcoin pricing to let Qt = Q(θt )
denote the price of Bitcoins in terms of Dollars. The price of one unit of the good
in terms of Bitcoins is then Pt /Qt . Let bt,j be the amount of the consumption good
purchased with Bitcoins and dt,j be the amount of the consumption good purchased
with Dollars. The green agent cannot spend more of each money than she owns but
may choose not to spend all of it. This implies the constraints

                                      Pt
                                 0≤      bt,j ≤ Bt,j ,                               (4)
                                     Qt
                                  0 ≤ Pt dt,j ≤ Dt,j .                               (5)

The green agent then consumes

                                    ct,j = bt,j + dt,j ,                             (6)

and leaves the even period, carrying

                                                   Pt
                             Bt+1,j = Bt,j −           bt,j ≥ 0,                     (7)
                                                   Qt
                             Dt+1,j = Dt,j       − Pt dt,j ≥ 0                       (8)

Bitcoins and Dollars into the next and odd period t + 1.
     At the beginning of that odd period t + 1, the aggregate shock θt+1 is drawn and
added to the history θt+1 . The green agent produces yt+1 units of the consumption
good.
     Green agents produce At+1,j ≥ 0 additional Bitcoins per agent, which they can
spend in the subsequent period. For the baseline version of the model, we assume that
the production of these additional Bitcoins takes the form of an endowment and is
the same for all agents of the same type, At+1,j = At+1 , and that no effort is involved,
et,j ≡ 0. In section 6, we examine the case, where nonzero effort is required to receive
or “mine” Bitcoins, and provide more comparison to the actual practice of mining
Bitcoins. In both cases, we assume that the aggregate quantity At+1 ≥ 0 of additional
Bitcoins (or: “Bitcoin block rewards”)is a deterministic function of time. Thus, the
aggregate stock of Bitcoin Bt is a deterministic and weakly increasing function of


                                             9
time. We will occasionally impose that the Bitcoin quantity is bounded from above,
Bt ≤ B̄ for all t: this is a feature of Bitcoin in practice.
    In odd periods, only green agents may produce Bitcoins, while only red agents get
to produce Bitcoins in even periods.
    The green agent sells the consumption goods to red agents. Given market prices
Qt+1 and Pt+1 , he decides on the amount of output xt+1,j ≥ 0 sold for Bitcoins and
zt+1,j ≥ 0 sold for Dollars, where

                                xt+1,j + zt+1,j = yt+1 ,

as the green agent has no other use for the good. After these transactions, the green
agent holds
                            D̃t+2,j = Dt+1,j + Pt+1 zt+1,j

Dollars, which then may be augmented per central bank lump-sum transfers at the
beginning of the next period t + 2 as described above. As for the Bitcoins, the green
agent carries the total of

                                                       Pt+1
                        Bt+2,j = At+1,j + Bt+1,j +          xt+1,j
                                                       Qt+1

to the next period.
    The aggregate stock of Bitcoins has increased to
                                             Z   2
                            Bt+2 = Bt+1 +            At+1,j dj,
                                               j=0


noting that red agents do not produce Bitcoins in even periods.
    The role of red agents and their budget constraints is entirely symmetric to green
agents, per merely swapping the role of even and odd periods. There is one difference,
though, and it concerns the initial endowments with money. Since green agents are
first in period t = 0 to purchase goods from red agents, we assume that green agents
initially have all the Dollars and all the Bitcoins and red agents have none.
    While there is a single and central consumption good market in each period,
payments can be made with the two different monies. We therefore get the two




                                          10
market clearing conditions
                                            Z   2                   Z   2
                                                    bt,j dj =               xt,j dj,                                          (9)
                                             j=0                     j=0
                                            Z 2                     Z 2
                                                    dt,j dj =               zt,j dj,                                        (10)
                                              j=0                     j=0


where we adopt the convention that xt,j = zt,j = 0 for green agents in even periods
and red agents in odd periods as well as bt,j = dt,j = 0 for red agents in even periods
and green agents in odd periods.
     The central bank picks transfer payments τt , which are itself a function of the
publicly observable random shock history θt , and thus already known to all agents at
the beginning of the period t. In particular, the transfers do not additionally reveal
information otherwise only available to the central bank. For the definition of the
equilibrium, we do not a priori impose that central bank transfers τt , Bitcoin prices Qt
or inflation πt are exogenous. Our analysis is consistent with a number of views here.
For example, one may wish to impose that πt is exogenous and reflecting a random
inflation target, which the central bank, in turn, can implement perfectly using its
transfers. Alternatively, one may fix a (possibly stochastic) money growth rule per
imposing an exogenous stochastic process for τt and solve for the resulting Qt and
πt . Generally, one may want to think of the central bank as targeting some Dollar
inflation and using the transfers as its policy tool, while there is no corresponding
institution worrying about the Bitcoin price Qt . The case of deterministic inflation
or a constant Dollar price level Pt ≡ 1 arise as special cases. These issues require a
more profound discussion and analysis, which we provide in section 5.
     So far, we have allowed individual green agents and individual red agents to make
different choices. We shall restrict attention to symmetric equilibria, in which all
agents of the same type end up making the same choice. Thus, instead of subscript
j and with a slight abuse of notation, we shall use subscript g to indicate a choice
by a green agent and r to indicate a choice by a red agent. With these caveats and
remarks, we arrive at the following definition.

Definition 1. An equilibrium is a stochastic sequence

  (At , At,r , At,g , Bt , Bt,r , Bt,g , Dt , Dt,r , Dt,g , τt , Pt , Qt , bt , ct , dt , et , ēt , xt , yt , zt )t∈{0,1,2,...}



                                                               11
which is measurable3 with respect to the filtration generated by (θt )t∈{0,1,...} , such that

   1. Green agents optimize: given aggregate money quantities (Bt , Dt , τt ), produc-
      tion yt , prices (Pt , Qt ) and initial money holdings B0,g = B0 and D0,g = D0 ,
      a green agent j ∈ [1, 2] chooses nonnegative consumption quantities bt , ct , dt in
      even periods and xt , zt , nonnegative effort et and Bitcoin production At,g in odd
      periods as well as individual money holdings Bt,g , Dt,g , all non-negative, so as
      to maximize                       "∞                              #
                                          X
                                 Ug = E       β t (ξt,g u(ct ) − h(et ))             (11)
                                           t=0

       where ξt,g = 1 in even periods, ξt,g = 0 in odd periods, subject to the budget
       constraints

                                         Pt
                                    0≤      bt ≤ Bt,g ,                                      (12)
                                        Qt
                                     0 ≤ Pt dt ≤ Dt,g ,                                      (13)
                                            ct = bt + d t ,                                  (14)
                                                           Pt
                                        Bt+1,g = Bt,g − bt ,                                 (15)
                                                           Qt
                                        Dt+1,g = Dt,g − Pt dt ,                              (16)

       in even periods t and

                                       et = 0 andAt,g = At ,                                 (17)
                                       yt = xt + zt ,                                        (18)
                                                            Pt
                                  Bt+1,g = At,g + Bt,g +       xt ,                          (19)
                                                            Qt
                                  Dt+1,g   = Dt,g + Pt zt + τt+1 ,                           (20)

       in odd periods t.

   2. Red agents optimize: given aggregate money quantities (Bt , Dt , τt ), production
      yt , prices (Pt , Qt ) and initial money holdings B0,r = 0 and D0,r = 0, a red agent
      j ∈ [0, 1) chooses nonnegative consumption quantities bt , ct , dt in odd periods
      and xt , zt , nonnegative effort et and Bitcoin production At in even periods as
   3
   More precisely, Bt , Bt,g and Bt,r are “predetermined”, i.e. are measurable with respect to the
σ−-algebra generated by θt−1


                                                 12
  well as individual money holdings Bt,r , Dt,r , all non-negative, so as to maximize
                                    "   ∞
                                                                        #
                                        X
                         Ur = E               β t (ξt,r u(ct ) − h(et ))                     (21)
                                        t=0


  where ξt,r = 1 in odd periods, ξt,r = 0 in even periods, subject to the budget
  constraints

                                 Dt,r = Dt−1,r + τt ,                                        (22)
                                 Pt
                             0≤     bt ≤ Bt,r ,                                              (23)
                                Qt
                             0 ≤ Pt dt ≤ Dt,r ,                                              (24)
                                    ct = bt + d t ,                                          (25)
                                                   Pt
                                Bt+1,r = Bt,r − bt ,                                         (26)
                                                   Qt
                                Dt+1,r = Dt,r − Pt dt ,                                      (27)

  in odd periods t and

                               et = 0 and4 At,r = At ,                                       (28)
                               yt = xt + zt ,                                                (29)
                                                         Pt
                           Bt+1,r = At,r + Bt,r +           xt ,                             (30)
                                                         Qt
                           Dt+1,r       = Dt,r + Pt zt + τt+1 ,                              (31)

  in even periods t.
                                                                             Pt
3. The central bank supplies Dollar transfers τt to achieve                 Pt−1
                                                                                   = πt , where πt
   and P0 are exogenous

4. Markets clear:

                                Bitcoin market: Bt = Bt,r + Bt,g ,                           (32)
                                Dollar market: Dt = Dt,r + Dt,g ,                            (33)
                Bitcoin denom. cons. market:                bt    = xt ,                     (34)
                 Dollar denom. cons. market: dt                   = zt ,                     (35)
                               Aggregate effort:            et    = ēt .                    (36)

                                              13
   The equilibrium condition (17) is later replaced by equation (65) in section 6 as
soon as agents can put effort to mine Bitcoin.


3     Analysis
For the analysis, proofs not included in the main text can be found in appendix B.
The equilibrium definition implies that ct = yt , that Bt+1 = Bt + At and that Dt =
Dt−1 + τt . Bitcoin production is analyzed in appendix 6. We restrict attention to
equilibria, where Dollar prices are strictly above zero and below infinity, and where
inflation is always larger than unity

Assumption A. 1. 0 < Pt < ∞ for all t and

                                            Pt
                                    πt =        ≥ 1.                            (37)
                                           Pt−1

   For example, if inflation is exogenous, this is a restriction on that exogenous
process. If inflation is endogenous, restrictions elsewhere are needed to ensure this
outcome.
   It will be convenient to bound the degree of consumption fluctuations. The fol-
lowing somewhat restrictive assumption will turn out to simplify the analysis of the
Dollar holdings.

Assumption A. 2. For all t,

                             u0 (yt ) − β 2 Et [u0 (yt+2 )] > 0.                (38)

    The assumption says that no matter how many units of the consumption good an
agent consumes today she will always prefer consuming an additional marginal unit
of the consumption good now as opposed to consuming it at the next opportunity
two periods later. The assumption captures the agent’s degree of impatience.


3.1    Equilibrium Conditions for Simultaneous Currency Trade
The following proposition is a consequence of a central bank policy aimed at price
stability, inducing an opportunity cost for holding money. This is in contrast to the



                                             14
literature concerning the implementation of the Friedman rule, where that opportu-
nity cost is absent: we return to the welfare consequences in section 5. Note that
assumption (38) holds.
Lemma 1. (All Dollars are spent:) Agents will always spend all Dollars. Thus,
Dt = Dt,g and Dt,r = 0 in even periods and Dt = Dt,r and Dt,g = 0 in odd periods.
Lemma 2. (Dollar Injections:) In equilibrium, the post-transfer amount of total
Dollars is
                               Dt = Pt zt ,

and the transfers are
                                       τt = Pt zt − Pt−1 zt−1 .                                     (39)
   The following proposition establishes properties of the Bitcoin price Qt in the
“fundamental” case, where Bitcoins are used in transactions.
Proposition 1. (Fundamental pricing equation5 :)
Suppose that sales happen both in the Bitcoin-denominated consumption market as
well as the Dollar-denominated consumption market at time t as well as at time t + 1,
i.e. suppose that xt > 0, zt > 0, xt+1 > 0 and zt+1 > 0. Then
                                                                     
                               0     Pt          0        (Qt+1 /Pt+1 )
                       Et u (ct+1 )        = Et u (ct+1 )                 .                         (40)
                                    Pt+1                    (Qt /Pt )

In particular, if consumption and production is constant at t + 1, ct+1 = yt+1 ≡ ȳ = y,
or agents are risk-neutral, then
                                                                 −1
                                                 Qt+1           1
                                   Qt = Et              · Et            .                           (41)
                                                 πt+1          πt+1

                      1
If further Qt+1 and πt+1 are uncorrelated conditional on time-t information, then the
stochastic Bitcoin price process {Qt }t≥0 is a martingale

                                          Qt = Et [Qt+1 ] .                                         (42)

    If zero Bitcoins are traded, the fundamental pricing equation becomes an inequal-
ity, see lemma 3 in the appendix.

  5
      The proof for this proposition as well as most other results are in the appendix section B.

                                                      15
    The logic for the fundamental pricing equation is as follows. The risk-adjusted real
return on Bitcoin has to equal the risk-adjusted real return on the Dollar. Otherwise,
agents would hold back either of the currencies.
    The result can be understood as an updated version of the celebrated result in
Kareken-Wallace (1981). These authors did not consider stochastic fluctuations. Our
martingale result then reduces to a constant Bitcoin price, Qt = Qt+1 , and thus their
“exchange rate indeterminacy result” for time t = 0, that any Q0 is consistent with
some equilibrium, provided the Bitcoin price stays constant afterwards. Our result
here reveals that this indeterminacy result amounts to a potentially risk-adjusted
martingale condition, which the Bitcoin price needs to satisfy over time while keeping
Q0 undetermined.
    Our result furthermore corresponds to equation (14’) in Manuelli-Peck (1990) who
provide a stochastic generalization of the 2-period OLG model in Kareken-Wallace
(1981). Aside from various differences in the model, note that Manuelli-Peck (1990)
derive their results from considering intertemporal savings decisions, which then, in
turn, imply the indifference between currencies. While we agree with the latter, we do
not insist on the former. Indeed, it may be empirically problematic to base currency
demand on savings decisions without considering interest-bearing assets. By contrast,
we obtain the indifference condition directly.
    Equation (40) can be understood from a standard asset pricing perspective. The
goods seller will sell against the currency which offers a higher risk-preference adjusted
return. Due to the currency competition, sales against both Bitcoins and Dollars
implies seller indifference. The risk-adjusted returns, therefore, have to be the same.
    Finally, our result relates to the literature on uncovered interest parity. In that
literature, it is assumed that agents trade safe bonds, denominated in either currency.
That literature derives the uncovered interest parity condition, which states that
the expected exchange rate change equals the return differences on the two nominal
bonds. This result is reminiscent of our equation above. Note, however, that we
do not consider bond trading here: rates of returns, therefore, do not feature in our
results. Instead, they are driven entirely by cash use considerations.




                                           16
3.2    Equilibrium Conditions for (no) Speculation
The next proposition establishes properties of the Bitcoin price Qt , if potential goods
buyers prefer to keep some or all of their Bitcoins in possession, rather than using them
in a transaction, effectively speculating on lower Bitcoin goods prices or, equivalently,
higher Dollar prices for a Bitcoin in the future. This condition establishes an essential
difference to Kareken and Wallace (1981). In their model, agents live for two periods
and thus splurge all their cash in their final period. Here instead, since agents are
infinitely lived, the opportunity of currency speculation arises which allows us to
analyze currency competition and asset pricing implications simultaneously.

Proposition 2. (Speculative price bound:)
Suppose that Bt > 0, Qt > 0, zt > 0 and that not all Bitcoins are spent in t,
bt < (Qt /Pt )Bt . Then,
                                                               
                          0         2       0     (Qt+2 /Pt+2 )
                         u (ct ) ≤ β Et u (ct+2 )                 ,                 (43)
                                                    (Qt /Pt )

where this equation furthermore holds with equality, if xt > 0 and xt+2 > 0.

    A few remarks regarding that last proposition and the equilibrium pricing equa-
tion Proposition (1) are in order. To understand the logical reasoning applied here,
it is good to remember that we impose market clearing. Consider a (possibly off-
equilibrium) case instead, where sellers do not wish to sell for Bitcoin, i.e., xt = 0,
because the real Bitcoin price Qt /Pt is too high, but where buyers do not wish to
hold on to all their Bitcoin, and instead offering them in trades. This is a non-market
clearing situation: demand for consumption goods exceeds supply in the Bitcoin-
denominated market at the stated price. Thus, that price cannot be an equilibrium
price. Heuristically, the pressure from buyers seeking to purchase goods with Bitcoins
should drive the Bitcoin price down until either sellers are willing to sell or potential
buyers are willing to hold. One can, of course, make the converse case too. Suppose
that potential goods buyers prefer to hold on to their Bitcoins rather than use them
in goods transactions, and thus demand bt = 0 at the current price. Suppose, though,
that sellers wish to sell goods at that price. Again, this would be a non-market clear-
ing situation, and the price pressure from the sellers would force the Bitcoin price
upwards.
    Considering the right-hand side of equations (40) as well as (43): these are ex-

                                                17
pected utilities of the next usage possibility for Bitcoins only if transactions actually
happen at that date for that price. However, as equation (43) shows, Bitcoins may be
more valuable than indicated by the right-hand side of (40) states, if Bitcoins are then
entirely kept for speculative reasons. These considerations can be turned into more
general versions of (40) as well as (43), which take into account the stopping time
of the first future date with positive transactions on the Bitcoin-denominated goods
market. The interplay of the various scenarios and inequalities in the preceding two
propositions gives rise to potentially rich dynamics, which we explore and illustrate
further in the next section.
    If consumption and production are constant at t, t + 1 and t + 2, ct = ct+1 =
                                 1
ct+2 ≡ ȳ = y, and if Qt+1 and πt+1 are uncorrelated conditional on time-t information,
absence of goods transactions against Bitcoins xt = 0 at t requires
                                                                      
                                               2               1
                         Et [Qt+1 ] ≤ Qt ≤ β Et Qt+2                                      (44)
                                                           πt+2 πt+1

per propositions 2 and Lemma 3. We next show that this can never be the case.
Indeed, even with non-constant consumption, all Bitcoins are always spent, provided
we impose a slightly sharper version of assumption 2.

Assumption A. 3. (Global Impatience:) For all t,

                                u0 (yt ) − βEt [u0 (yt+1 )] > 0.                          (45)

    Global impatience together with the law of iterated expectations imply assump-
tion 2. If assumption 2 holds, then (45) cannot be violated two periods in a row.
Since consumption alternates between the green and the red agent group across time,
equation (45) compares marginal utilities across agent groups. We discuss this issue
further in appendix D.

Theorem 1. (No-Bitcoin-Speculation:) Suppose that Bt > 0 and Qt > 0 for all
t. Impose assumption 3. Then in every period, all Bitcoins are spent.

   One way of reading this result is, that under assumption 3, the model endogenously
reduces to a two period overlapping generations model.6
  6
    In two-period OLG models, agents die after two time periods and thus consume their entire
endowment and savings at the end of their life. Here, agents do so endogenously. Thus, the time


                                              18
Proof. [Theorem 1] Since all Dollars are spent in all periods, we have zt > 0 in all
periods. Observe that then either inequality (77) holds, in case no Bitcoins are spent
at date t, or equation (40) holds, if some Bitcoins are spent. Since equation (40)
implies inequality (77), (77) holds for all t. Calculate that
                                                      
       0        Qt+2                               Qt+2
 2
β Et [u (ct+2 )      ] = β Et Et+1 u0 (ct+2 )
                          2
                                                               (law of iterated expectation)
                Pt+2                               Pt+2
                                                          
                                                   Pt+1 Qt+1
                       ≤ β Et Et+1 u0 (ct+2 )
                          2
                                                                   (per equ. (77) at t + 1)
                                                   Pt+2 Pt+1
                                                        
                                                   Qt+1
                       ≤ β Et Et+1 [u0 (ct+2 )]
                          2
                                                                                 (per ass. 1)
                                                   Pt+1
                                              
                                   0      Qt+1
                       < βEt u (ct+1 )                                     (per ass. 3 in t+1)
                                          Pt+1
                                              
                                   0       Pt      Qt
                       ≤ βEt u (ct+1 )                                    (per equ. (77) at t)
                                          Pt+1     Pt
                                          Qt
                       ≤ βEt [u0 (ct+1 )]                                           (per ass. 1)
                                          Pt
                                  Qt
                       < u0 (ct )                                             (per ass. 3 in t).
                                  Pt



which contradicts the speculative price bound (43) in t. Consequently, bt = Q      t
                                                                                  Pt
                                                                                     Bt ,
i.e. all Bitcoins are spent in t. Since t is arbitrary, all Bitcoins are spent in every
period.


4     Equilibrium: Price Properties and Construction
Since our equilibrium construction draws on a covariance characterization of the Bit-
coin price, we first show the characterization and then discuss equilibrium construc-
tion.
period at which an agent earns her stochastic endowment can be interpreted as the agents birth,
since she carries no wealth from previous time periods.




                                               19
4.1     Equilibrium Pricing
The No-Bitcoin-Speculation Theorem 1 implies that the fundamental pricing equation
holds at each point in time. Next, we discuss Bitcoin pricing implications.
   Define the nominal pricing kernel mt per

                                               u0 (ct )
                                        mt =                                          (46)
                                                 Pt

We can then equivalently rewrite equation (40) as

                                               covt (Qt+1 , mt+1 )
                           Qt = Et [Qt+1 ] +                       .                  (47)
                                                   Et [mt+1 ]

Note that one could equivalently replace the pricing kernel mt+1 in this formula with
the nominal stochastic discount factor of a red agent or a green agent, given by
Mt+1 := β 2 (u0 (ct+1 )/u0 (ct−1 ))/(Pt+1 /Pt−1 ). For deterministic inflation πt+1 ≥ 1,

                                           covt (Qt+1 , u0 (ct+1 ))
                         Qt = Et [Qt+1 ] +                          .                 (48)
                                                Et [u0 (ct+1 )]

With that, we obtain the following corollary to theorem 1 which fundamentally char-
acterizes the Bitcoin price evolution

Corollary 1. (Equilibrium Bitcoin Pricing Formula:)
 Suppose that Bt > 0 and Qt > 0 for all t. Impose assumption 3. In equilibrium, the
Dollar-denominated Bitcoin price satisfies

                        Qt = Et [Qt+1 ] + κt · corrt (mt+1 , Qt+1 ) ,                 (49)

where
                                       σmt+1 |t · σQt+1 |t
                                κt =                       > 0,                       (50)
                                         Et [mt+1 ]
where σmt+1 |t is the standard deviation of the pricing kernel, σQt+1 |t is the standard
deviation of the Bitcoin price and corrt (mt+1 , Qt+1 ) is the correlation between the
Bitcoin price and the pricing kernel, all conditional on time t information.

    One immediate implication of corollary 1 is that the Dollar denominated Bitcoin
price process is a supermartingale (falls in expectation) if and only if in equilibrium the
pricing kernel and the Bitcoin price are positively correlated for all t+1 conditional on

                                              20
time t-information. Likewise, under negative correlation, the Bitcoin price process is
a submartingale and increases in expectation. In the special case that in equilibrium
the pricing kernel is uncorrelated with the Bitcoin price, the Bitcoin price process is
a martingale.
    If the Bitcoin price is a martingale, today’s price is the best forecast of tomorrow’s
price. There cannot exist long up- or downwards trends in the Bitcoin price since
the mean of the price is constant over time. If Bitcoin prices and the pricing kernel
are, however, positively correlated, then Bitcoins depreciate over time. Essentially,
holding Bitcoins offers insurance against the consumption fluctuations, for which the
agents are willing to pay an insurance premium in the form of Bitcoin depreciation.
Conversely, for a negative correlation of Bitcoin prices and the pricing kernel, a risk
premium in the form of expected Bitcoin appreciation induces the agents to hold
them.
    One implication of our pricing formula is that the equilibrium evolution of the Bit-
coin price can be completely detached from the central bank’s inflation level. Consider
Pt ≡ 1 across time. Then the Bitcoin price can be all, a super- or a submartingale,
depending on its correlation with marginal utility of consumption. That is, the price
evolution across time may differ substantially although inflation is held constant.
    If on the other hand agents are risk-neutral, then the distribution of the Dollar
price level and its correlation with Bitcoin determines the Bitcoin price path, see (41).

   The following result is specific to cryptocurrencies which have an upper limit on
their quantity, i.e., in particular, Bitcoin. Independently of whether all, some or no
Bitcoins are spent,
Proposition 3. (Real Bitcoin Disappearance:)
Suppose that the quantity of Bitcoin is bounded above, Bt ≤ B̄ and let πt ≥ π for all
t ≥ 0 and some π > 1. If marginal consumption is positively correlated or uncorrelated
with the exchange rate Q t+1
                       Pt+1
                             , covt (u0 (ct+1 ), Qt+1
                                                 Pt+1
                                                      ) ≥ 0, then
                                          
                                      Qt
                             E0          Bt → 0, as t → ∞.                           (51)
                                      Pt

In words, the purchasing power of the entire stock of Bitcoin shrinks to zero over time,
if inflation is bounded below by a number strictly above one.


                                             21
   The assumption on the covariance is in particular satisfied when agents are risk-
neutral, or for constant output ct ≡ yt ≡ ȳ = y. Note also, that we then have
                                                  −1            
                        Qt        Qt+1           1              Qt+1
                           = Et          · Et            ≥ Et          ,                       (52)
                        Pt        Pt+1          πt+1            Pt+1

that is, the real value of Bitcoin falls in expectation (is a supermartingale) by equation
(41).
    Another way to understand this result is to rewrite the fundamental pricing equa-
tion for the case of a constant Bitcoin stock Bt ≡ B and a constant inflation πt ≡ π
as                                                                  
                                                    0           vt+1
                            
                              vt+1
                                         cov t   u   (c t+1 ),  vt     1
                         Et          =−                0
                                                                       + ,            (53)
                               vt               Et [u (ct+1 )]          π
where
                                                  Qt
                                           vt =      Bt
                                                  Pt
is the real value of the Bitcoin stock at time t. The left-hand side of (53) is the growth
of the real value of the Bitcoin stock. The first term on the right-hand side (including
the minus sign) is the risk premium for holding Bitcoins. With a fixed amount of
Bitcoins and a fixed inflation rate, the equation says that the expected increase of
the real value of the stock of Bitcoins is (approximately) equal to the risk premium
minus the inflation rate on Dollars7 . Should those terms cancel, then the real value
of the stock of Bitcoins remains unchanged in expectation.
    The following result requires that the total supply of the analyzed cryptocurrency
is strictly bounded away from zero.

Corollary 2. (Real Bitcoin price bound:) Suppose that Bt > 0 and Qt , Pt > 0
for all t. The real Bitcoin price is bounded by Q
                                                Pt
                                                  t
                                                    ∈ (0, Bȳ0 ).

Proof. It is clear that Qt , Pt ≥ 0. Per theorem 1, all Bitcoins are spent in every
periods. Therefore, the Bitcoin price satisfies

                                  Qt   bt   bt   ȳ
                                     =    ≤    ≤    = Q̄.                                      (54)
                                  Pt   Bt   B0   B0
   7
    Note that a Taylor expansion yields 1/π ≈ 1 − (π − 1) for π ≈ 1, and that π − 1 is the inflation
rate.




                                                22
    The upper bound on the Bitcoin price is established by two traits of the model.
First, the Bitcoin supply may only increase implying that Bt (the denominator) can-
not go to zero. This is a property only common to uncontrolled cryptocurrencies.
Second, by assumption, we bound production fluctuation. However, even if we allow
the economy to grow over time, this bound continues to hold.8
    Obviously, the current Bitcoin price is far from that upper bound. The bound
may therefore not seem to matter much in practice. However, it is conceivable that
Bitcoin or digital currencies start playing a substantial transaction role in the future.
The purpose here is to think ahead towards these potential future times, rather than
restrict itself to the rather limited role of digital currencies so far.
    Heuristically, assume agents sacrifice consumption today to keep some Bitcoins as
an investment in order to increase consumption the day after tomorrow. Tomorrow,
these agents produce goods which they will need to sell. Since all Dollars change
hands in every period, sellers always weakly prefer receiving Dollars over Bitcoins as
payment. The Bitcoin price tomorrow can therefore not be too low. However, with
a high Bitcoin price tomorrow, sellers today will weakly prefer receiving Dollars only
if the Bitcoin price today is high as well. But at such a high Bitcoin price today, it
cannot be worth it for buyers today to hold back Bitcoins for speculative purposes, a
contradiction.


4.2       Constructing Equilibria
The challenge in explicitly constructing equilibria (and thereby showing their exis-
tence) lies in the zero-dividend properties of currencies. In asset pricing, one usually
proceeds from a dividend process Dt . Denoting by Qt the price of the asset, one
usually exploits the asset pricing formula Qt = Dt + Et [Mt+1 Qt+1 ] and “telescopes”
out the right-hand side in order to write Qt as an infinite sum of future dividends,
discounted by stochastic discount factors. Properties of fundamentals such as cor-
relations of dividends Dt with the stochastic discount factor then imply correlation
properties of the price Qt and the stochastic discount factor. This approach will not
work here for equilibria with nonzero Bitcoin prices since dividends of fiat currencies
are identical to zero.
  8                                                                                                Qt       yt
      Assume, we allow the support of production yt to grow or shrink in t: yt ∈ [y, y t ], then   Pt   ≤   B0 .




                                                    23
    The solution rests in rewriting equation (47) as

                                                   covt (t+1 , mt+1 )
                          Qt+1 = Qt + t+1 −                           .              (55)
                                                      Et [mt+1 ]

To sketch the idea, let a sequence of Dollar goods prices Pt and pricing kernels mt be
given, which satisfy the strong impatience assumption, written as
                                             
                                    mt+1 Pt+1
                          βEt                   <1          for all t.                (56)
                                     mt Pt
Pick the initial Bitcoin price Q0 and pick some sequence t with Et [t+1 ] = 0 and some
chosen conditional covariance with the pricing kernels. Recursively, construct the
sequence Qt+1 per (55). In order to arrive at an equilibrium, one needs to ensure that
Qt > 0 and Qt Bt < Pt yt for all t and all sample paths. Under some mild constraints
on the sequence t , this will be so for a nonempty interval of initial Bitcoin prices Q0 ,
thereby delivering a version of the exchange-rate indeterminacy result in Kareken-
Wallace (1981) and its stochastic counterpart in Manuelli-Peck (1990), proposition
3.2. For the exact details and explicit examples, we refer the reader to section C in
the appendix.


5     Implications for Monetary Policy
Throughout the section, we impose assumption 3. The resulting No-Bitcoin-Speculation
Theorem 1 in combination with the equilibrium conditions implies interdependence
between the Bitcoin price and monetary policy of the central bank. Since all Dollars
and Bitcoins change hands in every period, the velocity of money equals one. In a
world with only one money, classical quantity theory yields that depending on the
exogenous realization of output, the central bank adjusts the dollar quantity such
that the desired Dollar price level realizes, i.e., according to

                                                 Dt
                                          yt =      .                                 (57)
                                                 Pt
In our model instead, with two monies, equilibrium market clearing imposes

                                             Dt Qt
                                      yt =      + Bt .                                (58)
                                             Pt  Pt


                                              24
That is, there are now two endogenous variables, the Dollar quantity and the Bitcoin
price. This already shows a crucial distinction between our two-currency world and
a one-currency world. Holding Pt , yt and Qt constant, in equilibrium, a deterministic
increase in Bt must be compensated by a corresponding decrease in Dt :

Theorem 2. (Bitcoin block rewards are financed by Dollar taxes:) Any
no-speculation equilibrium price sequence (Qt , Pt ) with Qt > 0 for some given path
Bt > 0 can also be supported as an equilibrium price sequence by an alternative path
Bt0 , provided that 0 < Bt0 < (Pt /Qt )yt , per appropriately adjusting the Dollar quantity
Dt . For given Dollar lump-sum transfers τt in the original equilibrium, the adjusted
Dollar lump-sum transfers τt0 are given by

         τt0 = τt − (Qt − Qt−1 )(Bt0 − Bt ) − Qt−1 (Bt0 − Bt−1
                                                           0
                                                                               
                                                               ) − (Bt − Bt−1 )       (59)

    Suppose the economy is deterministic and that the Bitcoin quantity in the original
economy is constant Bt ≡ B, while the Bitcoin stock in the new economy is increasing
period-per-period per the Bitcoin block rewards A0t , i.e. Bt+1
                                                              0
                                                                  = A0t + Bt0 . Theorem 1
with proposition 1 implies that Qt is constant, Qt ≡ Q. Equation (59) then states
                         0
that τt0 = τt − Q(Bt0 − Bt−1 ), i.e. the Dollar lump-sum taxes pay for the block rewards.
    This logic applies to (59) generally. The no-speculation equilibrium imposes the
fundamental pricing equation to hold for Pt and Qt . Since this equation imposes
no constraints on Bt and Dt , the alternative Bitcoin quantity path Bt0 with adjusted
Dollar supply Dt0 and Dollar lump-sum transfers τt0 is equally compatible with the
equilibrium prices Pt and Qt . In particular, a change in the path Bt does neither
require nor necessarily allow a change in Qt . Formulated more succinctly: the block
rewards to miners, which are provided in our baseline model as lump-sum distribution
to agents and which are earned through effort in section 6, are financed not by de-
flating the Bitcoin currency but by the Dollar central bank, which has to accordingly
decrease its Dollar supply, per imposing Dollar lump-sum taxes on the population.
The block rewards are not a tax on Bitcoin holders but are financed through Dollar
taxes imposed by the Dollar central bank. This may have important consequences
for the political debate.
    To understand their further relationship, first, consider the price level Pt to be
endogenous as well. Think of the Dollar quantity as a policy choice, while keeping
yt = y and Bt = B as exogenously given. Without Bitcoins or with Bt = 0, we are

                                            25
back to equation (57) and the classic relationship between the quantity of money and
the price level. With Bt > 0 and Qt endogenous, however, matters become a bit
more involved. Consider two different Dollar quantities Dt = D and Dt = D0 . For
each Dollar quantity, there is now a set or line of equilibrium values for P = Pt and
Qt = Q satisfying the market clearing equation (58),

                                D    B                       D0    B
           L = {(Q, P ) | P =     + Q }, L0 = {(Q, P ) | P =    + Q }.
                                y    y                       y     y

These two lines are shown in the left panel of figure 3. Suppose we start from the
equilibrium at point A for the Dollar quantity D. What happens, as the central bank
issues the Dollar quantity D0 instead? Without further assumptions, any (Q, P )-pair
on line L0 may constitute the new equilibrium. Some additional equilibrium selec-
tion criterion would be required. One possibility, which we label the “conventional
scenario”, is to think of the Bitcoin price as moving exogenously: in the figure, we
fix it at Q = Q̄. In that case, we get a version of the classic relationship in that the
increase in the dollar quantity from D to D0 leads to a higher price level, moving the
equilibrium from point A to point B. Another possibility though, which we label the
“unconventional scenario”, is to instead fix the price level at some exogenously given
level P = P̄ : now, increasing the Dollar quantity reduces the Bitcoin price, moving
the equilibrium from point A to point C. Many other equilibrium selection criteria
can be introduced, in principle.
    We have side-stepped these equilibrium selection issues per fixing πt as an ex-
ogenous stochastic process along with P0 . There is an extensive literature on the
capability of central banks to influence the Dollar price level, and we have nothing
new to contribute to that: our assumption about the exogeneity of the price level
encodes that literature. The question of interest here is to what degree the central
bank can influence the Bitcoin price. The relevant equilibrium relationship is then
given by the right panel of figure 3, where we have now fixed the price level P . The
“conventional” scenario now amounts to assuming exogenous fluctuations in Q, mov-
ing, say, from Q to Q0 , to which the central bank has to react per moving the Dollar
quantity from D to D0 in order for (58) to continue to be satisfied. The equilib-
rium then moves from point A to point B. Conversely, and for the “unconventional”
scenario, one may wish to think of the central bank as picking the Dollar quantity
as D or D0 and thereby picking the Bitcoin price to be Q or Q0 . Both (and more)


                                          26
scenarios are consistent with our definition of equilibrium. We proceed to examine
the consequences of each in greater detail.

        P                               B                      D
                       L’: for D’                            Py
        P                                                                 B
                                          A                   D’
                   C
      y/D’
                       L: for D                                                        A
                                                              D
      y/D

                                      Q           Q                      Q’        Q         Q


       Figure 3: Examining equation (58), y =                D
                                                             P
                                                                  +Q
                                                                   P
                                                                     B, taking y and B as given.

    In order to bring structure to that discussion, it is useful to expand and alter the
model slightly. First, let us introduce two new random variables Pt∗ > 0 and Q∗t > 0,
which we call the target outcomes, drawn alongside yt as a function of the stochastic
state history θt at the beginning of the period9 . Second, we introduce a central bank
objective via the loss function

                                    L(Pt , Qt ) = −(Pt − Pt∗ )2 − (Qt − Q∗t )2 .                   (60)

The loss function can be thought of reflecting a desire by the central bank to stabilize
the Dollar price level as well as the Bitcoin price near their target outcomes. The
central bank seeks to minimize this loss through suitable choice of the dollar supply
Dt , subject to the market clearing equation (58). The two scenarios now differ in
what else gets drawn alongside Pt∗ , Q∗t , yt at the beginning of the period as a function
of θt . These scenarios have additional implications, which we discuss in appendix E.
We discuss welfare implications and optimal monetary policy in section 6.1, once we
have introduced effort-driven mining of additional Bitcoins.


5.1          Conventional Scenario
For the conventional scenario, we shall assume that the Bitcoin price Qt is exogenous.

Assumption A. 4. (Conventional Scenario:) Assume that Qt is drawn alongside
Pt∗ , Q∗t , yt at the beginning of the period as a function of θt .
  9
      Recall that the Bitcoin quantity Bt is a deterministic function of time.


                                                        27
Corollary 3. (Conventional Monetary Policy:)
Under assumption 4, the loss-minimizing central bank picks the Dollar quantity

                                      Dt = yt Pt∗ − Qt Bt ,

to uniquely achieve the Dollar price level Pt = Pt∗ .
    Corollary 3 and the fundamental pricing equation provide a straightforward receipt
for forecasting the dollar supply.
Implication 1 (Forecasting the Dollar supply). Since Bt+1 is known at time t, using
Corollary 3, Corollary 1 and Bt+1 = Bt + At we obtain

                                                        u0 (ct+1 )
 Et [Dt+1 ] = Et [yt+1 Pt+1 ] − (Bt + At ) (Qt − κt · corrt (      , Qt+1 ))
                                                          Pt+1
                                                                       u0 (ct+1 )
           = Et [yt+1 Pt+1 ] − Bt Qt − At Qt + κt (Bt + At ) · corrt (            , Qt+1 )
                                                                         Pt+1
           = Dt − (yt Pt − Et [yt+1 Pt+1 ]) − At Qt + κt (Bt + At ) · corrt (u0 (ct+1 ), Qt+1 ),

where κt stems from Corollary 1.


5.2     Unconventional Scenario
For the unconventional scenario, we shall assume that the Dollar price level Pt is
exogenous.
Assumption A. 5. (Unconventional Scenario:) Assume that Pt is drawn along-
side P̄t , Q∗t , yt at the beginning of the period as a function of θt .
   Assumption 5 implies that the central bank can maintain the inflation level πt
independently of the transfers she sets.
Corollary 4. (Policy-driven Bitcoin price:)
Under assumption 5, the loss-minimizing central bank picks the Dollar quantity

                                      Dt = yt Pt − Q∗t Bt ,

to uniquely achieve the Bitcoin price Qt = Q∗t
   Intuitively, the causality is in reverse compared to the conventional scenario: now
the central bank policy drives Bitcoin prices.

                                               28
5.3    Robustness
We are next interested in the implications of our model should the No-Speculation
Theorem fail. For instance, assume, assumption 3 does not hold. Assume, not all
Bitcoins are spent. Then either some Bitcoins are spent, or no Bitcoins are spent.
Since all Dollars are spent in each period, by Lemma 1, if some Bitcoins are spent the
fundamental pricing equation 1 and therefore Corollary 1 still apply. If no Bitcoins
are spent, the fundamental condition holds with inequality, see Lemma 3. As a
consequence, the covariance formula in Corollary 1 becomes

                                                        u0 (ct+1 )
                                                                        
                     Qt ≥ Et [Qt+1 ] + κt · corrt                  , Qt+1 ,          (61)
                                                          Pt+1

which implies price bounds. Concerning monetary policy, if not all Bitcoins are spent
we have bt < (Qt /Pt )Bt . Market clearing and other equilibrium conditions yield

                           Pt yt = Pt (bt + zt ) < Qt Bt + Dt ,

which implies bounds for monetary policy respectively the Bitcoin price.


6     Bitcoin Production
So far, we have assumed that Bitcoin production takes the form of an exogenous
endowment. The purpose of this section is to examine what happens when it takes
effort et,j for agent j to produce or “mine” additional Bitcoins (or: “receive Bit-
coin block rewards”) At,j . Effort et,j causes disutility h(et,j ), where h(·) is strictly
increasing and weakly convex. We have chosen the effort formulation rather than
a resource-cost formulation, in order to avoid some tedious terms of reducing over-
all goods consumption, due to the diversion of output into Bitcoin production. To
the degree that the resource costs of producing Bitcoins in practice are still minor
compared to global output, this seems appropriate for the analysis. In light of that
practice, one may wish to interpret effort et,j as the individually provided hash rate
resulting from consuming electricity or a combination of electricity and the appropri-
ate utilization of hardware. If electricity is the only input and production is viewed
as scalable, then it is appropriate to choose h(·) as a linear function with a positive
slope. If there is an additional capacity constraint arising from available hardware,

                                            29
then h(·) could be chosen to be piecewise linear, with a low slope up to that constraint
and a much higher slope beyond. This leaves aside the issue of hardware acquisition
and investment, an issue studied in considerable detail in Prat-Walter(2018).
   Define the aggregate effort level for mining Bitcoin at time t per
                                                   Z
                                           ēt =                 et,j dj.                          (62)
                                                   j∈[0,1]


As before, let At be the deterministic quantity of additional Bitcoins added in period
t. We assume that an individual agent expanding effort et,j ≥ 0 will then receive
additional Bitcoins according to the production function

                                                                 et,j
                                             At,j = At                .                            (63)
                                                                  ēt

As a consequence of equation (63), the total number of newly mined coins per period
indeed satisfies                      Z
                                At =          At,j dj,                         (64)
                                                       j∈[0,1]

and is independent of the aggregate effort level. This modeling choice captures the
real-life feature, that the increase in the hash rate has no impact on the total Bitcoin
production10 , see Huberman, Leshno and Moallemi (2017). In comparison to the
                                                                 e
practice of Bitcoin mining, one might wish to interpret R t+1,j              as the probabil-
                                                              j∈[0,1] et+1,j
ity for an individual miner to win the proof-of-work competition for the next block
reward. Typically, individual miners associate in large mining pools, thereby elimi-
nating the idiosynchratic risk of mining success, see Cong, He, and Li (2018). Thus,
At+1,j becomes a deterministic function of individual and aggregate effort and the
deterministic increase in the aggregate stock of Bitcoins.
    The equilibrium conditions (17) and (28) for mining in the definition of an equi-
librium now need to be replaced by

                                             et
                                    At,g = At , with et ≥ 0,                                       (65)
                                             ēt
                                             et
                                    At,r = At , with et ≥ 0,                                       (66)
                                             ēt
                                                                                                   (67)
  10
       This is achieved by regular adaption of the difficulty level of the proof-of-work competition.




                                                        30
while the rest of the equilibrium definition remains unchanged.
   As for the production of Bitcoins, we obtain the following result.

Proposition 4. (Bitcoin Production Condition:) Suppose that the aggregate
quantity At of additionally mined Bitcoins in period t is strictly positive11 . Given the
processes12 for Qt+1 , Pt+1 , yt+1 , the equilibrium Bitcoin production effort et,j = ēt > 0
is the unique solution to
                                                           
                                 0             0        Qt+1 At
                               h (ēt ) = βEt u (yt+1 )          .                              (68)
                                                        Pt+1 ēt

   In particular, the Proposition implies that the equilibrium mining effort ēt is
always strictly positive provided that the price Qt+1 > 0 and the aggregate quantity
At are strictly positive. Intuitivly, this is due to the externality in mining: If other
agents put zero mining effort, then an agent can ensure herself the entire new block
reward but putting only small effort. Equation (68) further tells us that the individual
and therefore also the aggregate mining effort increases as expectations on the real
Bitcoin price increase.
   We can now show, that introducing Bitcoin production does not otherwise change
the equilibrium. This may be a bit of a surprise: one might have thought that
costly Bitcoin production should somehow lead to a tax on Bitcoin transactions, for
example13 or alter the outcomes in some other way.

Theorem 3. (Irrelevance of Mining effort:) Consider an equilibrium of the orig-
inal economy with exogenous (effort-less) Bitcoin production, and that Bitcoin pro-
duction is always strictly positive. Then, there exists an equilibrium of the economy
with effort needed to produce Bitcoins, where all variables are the same except that
et = ēt > 0 is the unique solution to equation (68) rather than et = ēt = 0.

Proof. Recall that the aggregate Bitcoin production is assumed to be an exogenous
and deterministic function of time. Therefore, all equations in the no-effort equilib-
rium continue to hold, if effort of production is introduced instead.
  11
     Recall that we assumed the aggregate quantity At to be deterministic and exogenous.
  12
     Recall that we focus on equilibria in which Qt+1 > 0. If Qt+1 ≡ 0 instead, then mining effort in
t must be zero.
  13
     One reads this argument frequently in popular postings on Bitcoins.




                                                 31
6.1     Optimal Monetary Policy and Welfare
Analyzing welfare in the baseline model or in the baseline model extended with effort-
driven Bitcoin production is straightforward14 . Let 0 < λ < 1 be the welfare weight
on green agents and 1 − λ be the welfare weight on red agents, assuming that agents
of the same type all receive the same weight, see also appendix D. The overall welfare
function is then given by
                                 W = λUg + (1 − λ)Ur ,

where Ug and Ur are given in equations (11) and (21). Welfare is maximized if
all output of the consumption good is always consumed and no Bitcoins are ever
produced. For this, note that the social planner cannot redistribute consumption
goods from even to odd periods, i.e., changing the welfare weight λ does not change
the welfare-maximal allocation.
    In all our equilibria, all output of the consumption good is always consumed.
Therefore, the welfare arising from goods consumption is unaffected by monetary
policy or the price path for Bitcoins. This implies that low inflation, as well as high
inflation, all achieve the same goods consumption welfare. The only part of utility
possibly affected is the disutility from producing Bitcoin.
    Any equilibrium in the baseline model, where additional Bitcoins are received
as endowment without the supply of effort, is welfare optimal. Any production of
Bitcoin requiring effort is wasteful in terms of welfare. This result should not sur-
prise in this model. Anything that can be done with Bitcoin can be done with Dollar.
Since Bitcoins are costly to produce, while Dollars can be produced costlessly, Dollars
should be used, if otherwise, Bitcoin production is necessary. It is a policy conclu-
sion reached straight from the assumption, that the government is better at doing
something than the private sector, and thus not very informative. It may also be
interesting to note that the mining of Bitcoins adds to the gross national product
since the mined Bitcoins would need to be evaluated at their market price. More
Bitcoin production means more GNP, but less welfare. In summary, all equilibria, in
which no Bitcoin production takes place or where Bitcoin production takes no effort,
are welfare optimal and minimize GNP. Nevertheless, these results are unlikely to
remain true in generalizations of our model.
  14
    The welfare analysis becomes a bit more involved if we allow for effort-driven Bitcoin production
as well as versions of the unconventional scenario and thereby endogeneity of Qt . We leave that to
future research.


                                                 32
6.2     Taxing Bitcoin Production
Could a government capable of imposing a tax on Bitcoin production change the
equilibrium outcome and how? As a practical matter, it may be easiest to impose
a proportional tax on the energy consumption of miners or, in the language here,
on the effort of miners. If one reads h(et,j ) as the energy costs of mining effort et,j ,
these costs will then increase to h(et,j )/(1 − τ ), where τ ∈ [0, 1) is that tax rate. The
Bitcoin equilibrium production equation (68) then generalizes to

                               h0 (ēt )
                                                            
                                                0        Qt+1 At
                                         = βEt u (yt+1 )          ,                            (69)
                               1−τ                       Pt+1 ēt

per the same logic as in the proof above. Some more analysis reveals the overall
consequences of imposing these taxes.

Proposition 5. (Irrelevance of Mining Taxation:) Consider an equilibrium of
the original economy without imposing taxes on Bitcoin production, and that Bitcoin
production is always strictly positive. There is then an equilibrium of the economy
with imposing taxes 0 < τ < 1 on Bitcoin production, where all variables are the same
except that et = ēt is the unique solution to equation (69) rather than (68). Compared
to the no-tax equilibrium, effort levels are always strictly lower and welfare is strictly
higher.

    The logic of the proposition and the argument in the proof goes through, when
imposing the linear tax in some other manner, distributing the proceeds lump-sum
to the group of taxed agents15 . Generally, effort provision is imposing a wasteful
externality on all other effort-providing agents in the economy, since the additional
quantity of Bitcoins is not affected: it, therefore, should not surprise that welfare can
be improved per taxing that activity. Note that this conclusion is likely to change in a
setting where the total hash rate provided by the network is relevant for the security
of the mining network and thus the cryptocurrency as a whole. Keep in mind that
we are assuming in the proposition above, that Bitcoin production can happen right
away if this turns out to be profitable. In practice, capacity such as computing farms
together with programmers capable of writing the appropriate code may need to build
  15
    The results might get altered, if the tax schedule is nonlinear, as one could now introduce,
e.g. multiple equilibria. They would also be altered, if, say, the tax receipts collected from green
agents are redistributed to red agents, but equilibrium-altering redistributive taxes do not require
the taxation of Bitcoin production.

                                                33
up gradually over time. One could extend the model to allow for such time-to-build
of capacity as investigated in Prat and Walter (2018), and it may be interesting to
do so.


7     Multiple Private Currencies and Free Entry
So far we have analyzed competition between two fiat currencies without addressing
entry of new currencies. This section offers a sketch on how to extend our analysis
to that situation. A full development is left to future research.
    While the supply of any particular cryptocurrency may evolve deterministically
over time and be bounded, the total supply of all cryptocurrencies may be stochastic
and unbounded due to entry. One particular property of monetary equilibria is that
they are self-eliminating backwards in time. As Kareken and Wallace (1981) already
mention in their deterministic setting, if tomorrow’s price of a currency is zero, its
price today is zero as well. For a fiat currency to enter, the opposite effect must be
true. The fundamental pricing equation (40) will hold for any cryptocurrency with a
nonzero price at date t. That equation expresses, in particular, the logic that agents
accept a currency at some date t at a strictly positive price only because they believe
that the currency will have a positive price at the following date t + 1 with some
nonzero probability. Put differently, if today sufficiently many agents believe that
tomorrow sufficiently many agents believe that the currency has value, then its price
today is positive indeed. In that sense, monetary equilibria are self-fulfilling, see also
Sockin-Xiong (2018). This reasoning applies in particular to the initial sale of a new
currency or the initial coin offering. Furthermore, this argument has to work from
the perspective of a miner. As in our main model, suppose that the sale of a (new)
coin in t + 1 takes mining effort in date t. A miner mines the first coin only if her
joint belief about the measure of agents who will accept the currency tomorrow as
well as the price of the currency justifies her effort level today.
    Under free entry, the pricing formula (40) remains correct. If trade in all posi-
tively priced currencies happens simultaneously, sellers are marginally indifferent in
accepting all of these currencies. This can only be the case if the sellers expect the
risk-adjusted returns on all traded currencies to be equal, as expressed in the fun-
damental pricing equation (40). Under the global impatience assumption 3 and the
no-speculation theorem 1, assume that the quantity of any cryptocurrency cannot

                                           34
decrease. Let Qjt denote the price of cryptocurrency j at date t. Let nt the ran-
dom quantity of distinct cryptocurrencies available for purchase at date t. Denote by
Btjj ≥ 0 the initial stock of cryptocurrency j, where tj0 ≥ 0 is the time of the initial
    0
coin offering of currency j. Let Btj the stock of that cryptocurrency at date t where
Btj = 0 for t < tj0 before the ICO. Then, the real price bound of corrolary 2 generalizes
to                                    nt
                                     X   Qjt j
                                             Btj ≤ ȳ,                              (70)
                                     j=1
                                         P t   0


                     P t Qjt j
since we must have nj=1      B ≤ yt . The result on Bitcoin disappearance may no
                           Pt t
longer obtain. If over time new currencies enter faster than established currencies
devalue, the total purchasing power of all cryptocurrencies may not vanish and can
even increase.


8       Conclusions
This paper analyzes the evolution of cryptocurrency prices and the consequences for
monetary policy in a model, in which a cryptocurrency such as Bitcoin coexists and
competes with a traditional fiat money (Dollar) for usage. A central bank targets
a stochastic inflation level for the Dollar via appropriate monetary injections, while
Bitcoin production is decentralized via proof-of-work and Bitcoin supply may only
increase over time. Both monies can be used for transactions. We derive a “funda-
mental pricing equation” for Bitcoin prices when both currencies are simultaneously
in use. It implies that Bitcoin prices form a martingale in a special case. Due to
currency competition, the block rewards are not a tax on Bitcoin holders. Instead,
they are financed by Dollar taxes imposed by the central bank. We also provide a
”speculative price bound” when Bitcoins are held back in transactions in the hope
of a Bitcoin price appreciation. We provide conditions, under which no speculation
in Bitcoins arises. We further provide a general method for constructing equilibria,
thereby demonstrating their existence. Specific examples show that the Bitcoin price
might appreciate or depreciate in expectation, or a mix thereof. We study the impli-
cations for monetary policy under a ”conventional” as well as an ”unconventional”
scenario. In the conventional scenario, the Bitcoin price evolves exogenously, thereby
driving the Dollar injections needed by the central bank to achieve its inflation target.


                                           35
In the unconventional scenario, we suppose that the inflation target is achieved for
a range of monetary injections, which then, however, influence the price of Bitcoins.
We discuss the taxation of Bitcoin production.
    For our analysis, one should think of Bitcoin as a representative of the family
of intrinsically worthless, storable, non-dividend paying objects, which are used as
a medium of exchange but whose price process is not manipulated or stabilized by
a third institution such as a central bank. We abstract from several features which
distinguish Bitcoin from for instance Visa, Paypal, and cash such as censorship resis-
tance, transparency, and speed of trading. These characteristics may be important
for future research when thinking about Bitcoin speculation.


References
 [1] Abadi, Joseph and Brunnermeier, Markus (2018), “Blockchain economics”,
     mimeo Princeton University.

 [2] Athey, Susan, Ivo Prashkevov, Vishnu Sarukkai, Jing Xia (2016), “Bitcoin Pric-
     ing, Adoption, and Usage: Theory and Evidence”, draft, Stanford University.

 [3] Badev, Anton and Matthew Chen (2014), “Bitcoin: Technical Background and
     Data Analysis,” Federal Reserve Board, Washington, D.C., Staff Working Paper
     2014-104.

 [4] Bech, Morten and Rodney Garratt (2017), “Central Bank Cryptocurrencies,”
     BIS Quarterly Review (September), 55-70.

 [5] Berentsen, Aleksander and Fabian Schär, Bitcoin, Blockchain und Kryptoassets:
     Eine umfassende Einführung. BoD, Norderstedt, 2017.

 [6] Berentsen, Aleksander and Fabian Schär (2018a), “A Short Introduction to the
     World of Cryptocurrencies,” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, First
     Quarter 2018, 100 (1), pp. 1-16.

 [7] Bewley, Truman (1977), “The permanent income hypothesis: a theoretical for-
     mulation,” Journal of Economic Theory, vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 252–292.

 [8] Biais, Bruno and Bisiere, Christophe and Bouvard, Matthieu and Casamatta,
     Catherine (2018), “The blockchain folk theorem”.

                                         36
 [9] Böhme, Rainer, Nicolas Christin, Benjaimin Edelman and Tyler Moore (2015),
     “Bitcoin: Economics, Technology and Governance,” Journal of Economic Per-
     spectives (Spring), vol. 29, no. 2, pp. 213-238.

[10] Bolt, Wilko and Maarten R.C. van Oordt (2016), “On the Value of Virtual
     Currencies,” Financial Stability Department, Bank of Canada, draft.

[11] Borgonovo, Emanuele, Stefano Caselli, Alessandra Cillo and Donato Mascian-
     daro (2017), “Beyond Bitcoin and Cash: do we would like a central bank digital
     currency? A financial and political economics approach,” Bocconi WP 65.

[12] Brandvold, Morten, Peter Molnár, Kristian Vagstad, Ole Christian Andreas Val-
     stad, “Price discovery on Bitcoin exchanges,” Journal of International Financial
     Markets, Institutions & Money, vol. 36 (2015), 18-35.

[13] Brito, Jerry and Andrea Castillo (2013), “Bitcoin. A Primer for Policymakers,”
     Mercatus Center, George Mason University, draft.

[14] Budish, Eric (2018), “The Economic Limits of Bitcoin and the Blockchain”,
     National Bureau of Economic Research.

[15] Burnside, Craig, Martin Eichenbaum and Sergio Rebelo (2011), “Carry Trade
     and Momentum in Currency Market,” Annual Review of Financial Economics,
     vol. 3, pp. 511-535.

[16] Burnside, Craig, Martin Eichenbaum and Sergio Rebelo (2015), “Understanding
     Booms and Busts in Housing Markets,” draft, Northwestern University.

[17] Carstens, Augustin (2018), “Money in the digital age: what role for central
     banks?”, Lecture at the House of Finance, Goethe University Frankfurt February
     6th, 2018, available as a draft from BIS.

[18] Catalini, Christian and Joshua S. Gans (2016), “Some Simple Economics of the
     Blockchain,” NBER WP 22952.

[19] Chiu, Jonathan, and Thorsten V. Koeppl (2017) ”The economics of cryptocur-
     rencies–Bitcoin and beyond.”

[20] Chohan, Usman W. (2017), “A History of Bitcoin,” Discussion Paper, University
     of New South Wales, Canberra.

                                         37
[21] Cong, Lin William, Zhiguo He, and Jiasun Li (2018), ”Decentralized mining in
     centralized pools,” draft, The University of Chicago Booth School of Business.

[22] Cong, Lin William and Zhiguo He (2018), “Blockchain Disruption and Smart
     Contracts,” draft, Booth School of Business, University of Chicago.

[23] Fantazzini, Dean, Erik Nigmatullin, Vera Sukhanovskaya and Sergey Ivliev
     (2016), “Everything you always wanted to know about Bitcoin modelling but
     were afraid to ask,” draft (in English), Moscow School of Economics, published
     (in Russian) in Applied Econometrics (2016), vol. 44, 5-24 as part I and Applied
     Econometrics (2017),vol. 45, pp. 5-28 as part 2.

[24] Fernández-Villaverde, Jesús and Daniel Sanches (2016), “Can Currency Compe-
     tition Work?”, draft, University of Pennsylvania.

[25] Foley, Sean, Jonathan R. Karlsen, Talis J. Putnins (2018), “Sex, drugs, and
     Bitcoin: how much illegal activity is financed through cryptocurrencies?”, draft,
     University of Sydney.

[26] Gandal, Neil and Hanna Halaburda (2014), “Competition in the Cryptocurrency
     Market,” CEPR DP 10157, CEPR, London.

[27] Garratt, Rodney and Neil Wallace (2017), “Bitcoin 1, Bitcoin 2, ... : An Exper-
     iment in Privately Issued Outside Monies,” draft, UC Santa Barbara and Penn
     State University.

[28] Goldberg, Dror (2005), “Famous Myths of ‘Fiat Money’ ”, Journal of Money,
     Credit and Banking, vol. 37, no. 5, pp. 957-967.

[29] Griffin, John M. and Amin Shams (2018), “Is Bitcoin Really Un-Tethered?”,
     draft, McCombs School of Business, The University of Texas at Austin.

[30] Guerrieri, Veronica and Harald Uhlig (2016), “Housing and Credit Markets:
     Booms and Busts,” chapter 17 in Handbook of Macroeconomics, John Taylor
     and Harald Uhlig, eds., Elsevier, pp. 1427-1496.

[31] Halaburda, H., and M. Sarvary (2015), Beyond Bitcoin: The Economics of Dig-
     ital Currencies, Palgrave Macmillan.


                                         38
[32] Hayek, Friedrich (1976), The Denationalization of Money, Institute of Economic
     Affairs.

[33] Huberman, Gur and Leshno, Jacob D and Moallemi, Ciamac C (2017),
     “Monopoly without a monopolist: An economic analysis of the Bitcoin payment
     system”.

[34] Kareken, John and Neil Wallace (1981), “On the Indeterminacy of Equilibrium
     Exchange Rates,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 96, No. 2 (May),
     pp. 207-222.

[35] Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro and Randall Wright (1989), “On Money as a Medium of
     Exchange,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 97, No. 4 (August), pp. 927-954.

[36] Lagos, Ricardo and Randall Wright (2005), “A Unified Framework for Monetary
     Theory and Policy Analysis,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 113, No. 3
     (June), pp. 463-484.

[37] Lee Kuo Chuen, David, ed. (2015), Handbook of Digital Currency, 1st edition,
     Elsevier.

[38] Liu, Yukun and Tsyvinski, Aleh (2018), “Risks and Returns of Cryptocurrency”,
     National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper no. 24877.

[39] Makarov, Igor, and Antoinette Schoar, (2018), “Trading and Arbitrage in Cryp-
     tocurrency Markets.”

[40] Manuelli, Rodolfo E., and James Peck. ”Exchange rate volatility in an equilib-
     rium asset pricing model.” International Economic Review (1990): 559-574.

[41] Narayanan, Arvind, Joseph Bonneau, Edward Felten, Andrew Miller and Steven
     Goldfeder (2016), Bitcoin and Cryptocurrency Technologies: A Comprehensive
     Introduction, Princeton University Press.

[42] Nakamoto, Satoshi (2008), “Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System,”
     www.Bitcoin.org.

[43] Prat, Julien, and Benjamin Walter (2018), ”An equilibrium model of the market
     for Bitcoin mining,” draft, CREST, France.


                                        39
[44] Routledge, Bryan and Zetlin-Jones, Ariel (2018), “Currency Stability Using
     Blockchain Technology”, draft, Carnegie-Mellon.

[45] Samuelson, Paul A. (1958), “An Exact Consumption Loan Model of Interest,
     With or Without the Social Contrivance of Money,” Journal of Political Economy
     66(5), pp. 467—482.

[46] Scheinkman, José A. and Wei Xiong (2003), “Overconfidence and speculative
     bubbles,” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 111 no. 6, pp. 1183-1220.

[47] Schnabel, Isabel and Hyun Song Shin (2018), “Money and trust: lessons from
     the 1620s for money in the digital age,” BIS Working Paper no 698.

[48] Sockin, Michael and Xiong, Wei (2018), “A model of cryptocurrencies”, draft,
     Princeton University.

[49] Tirole, Jean (1982), “On the Possibility of Speculation under Rational Expecta-
     tions,” Econometrica, vol. 50, no. 5, pp. 1163-1181.

[50] Townsend, Robert (1980), “Models of Money with Spatially Separated Agents,”
     in Models of Monetary Economies, John Kareken and Neil Wallace, eds., Federal
     Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, pp. 265-303.

[51] Trimborn, Simon and Wolfgang Härdle, “CRIX or evaluating blockchain based
     currencies,” SFB 649 Discussion Paper 2016-021, Humboldt University Berlin.

[52] Velde, Francois R. (2013), “Bitcoin: A primer,” Chicago Fed Letter, The Federal
     Reserve Bank of Chicago, December, no. 317.

[53] Weber, Beat (2013), “Bitcoin and the legitimacy crisis of money,,’ Oesterreichis-
     che Nationalbank.

[54] Yermack (2015), David, “Is Bitcoin a real currency?” in D. Lee (ed), The Hand-
     book of Digital Currency, Elsevier, pp. 31-44.

[55] Zhu and Hendry (2018), “A framework for analyzing monetary policy in an
     economy with E-money”, Bank of Canada.




                                         40
          ONLINE                               APPENDIX

A     Some background and literature
The original Bitcoin idea and the key elements of its construction and trading system
are described by the mysterious author Nakamoto (2008). They can perhaps be
summarized and contrasted with traditional central-bank issued money as follows:
this will be useful for our analysis. While there are many currencies, each currency
is traditionally issued by a single monopolist, the central bank, which is typically
a government organization. Most currencies are fiat currencies, i.e. do not have
an intrinsic value as a commodity. Central banks conduct their monetary operations
typically with the primary objective of maintaining price stability as well as a number
of perhaps secondary economic objectives. Private intermediaries can offer inside
money such as checking accounts, but in doing so are regulated and constrained by
central banks or other bank regulators, and usually need to obtain central bank money
to do so. By contrast, Bitcoin is issued in a decentralized manner. A Bitcoin is an
entry in an electronic, publicly available ledger or blockchain. Issuing or creating
(or “mining”) a Bitcoin requires solving a changing mathematical problem. Anyone
who solves the problem can broadcast the solution to the Bitcoin-using community.
Obtaining a solution is hard and becoming increasingly harder while checking the
correctness of the solution is relatively easy. This ”proof of work” for creating a
Bitcoin thus limits the inflow of new Bitcoins. Bitcoins and fractions of Bitcoins
can be transferred from one owner to the next, per broadcasting the transaction to
the community and adding that transaction to the ledger information or blockchain.
Transaction costs may be charged by the community, which keeps track of these
ledgers.
    There is an increasing number of surveys or primers on the phenomenon, its
technical issues or its regulatory implications, often provided by economists working
for central banks or related agencies and intended to inform and educate the public
as well as policymakers. Velde (2013), as well as Brito and Castillo (2013) provide
early and excellent primers on Bitcoin. Weber (2013) assesses the potential of the
Bitcoin system to become a useful payment system, in comparison to current practice.
Badev and Chen (2014) provide an in-depth account of the technical background.
Digital Currencies have received a handbook treatment by Lee (2015), collecting

                                          41
contributions by authors from various fields and angles, and a textbook treatment in
Halaburda-Sarvary (2015) and Narayanan et al (2016). Böhme et al. (2015) provide
an introduction to the economics, technology, and governance of Bitcoin in their
Journal-of-Economics-Perspective contribution. There is now a journal called Ledger,
available per ledgerjournal.org, devoted to publishing papers on cryptocurrencies and
blockchain since its inaugural issue in 2016. Bech and Garratt (2017) discuss whether
central banks should introduce cryptocurrencies, finding its echo in the lecture by
Carstens (2018). Borgonovo et al. (2017) examine this issue from a financial and
political economics approach. Chohan (2017) provides a history of Bitcoin.
    The phenomenon of virtual currencies such as Bitcoin is increasingly attracting
the attention of serious academic study by economists. Rather than an exhaustive
literature overview, we shall only provide a sample. Some of the pieces cited above
contain data analysis or modeling as well.
    Gandal and Halaburda (2014) empirically investigate competition between cryp-
tocurrencies. Yermack (2015), a chapter in the aforementioned handbook, concludes
that Bitcoin appears to behave more like a speculative investment than a currency.
Brandvold et al. (2015) examine the price discovery on Bitcoin exchanges. Fantazzini
et al. (2016, 2017) provide a survey of econometric methods and studies, examining
the behavior of Bitcoin prices, and list a number of the publications on the topic so far.
Fernández-Villaverde and Sanches (2016) examine the scope of currency competition
in an extended Lagos-Wright model and argue that there can be equilibria with price
stability as well as a continuum of equilibrium trajectories with the property that the
value of private currencies monotonically converges to zero. Bolt and Oordt (2016)
examine the value of virtual currencies, predicting that increased adoption will imply
that the exchange rate will become less sensitive to the impact of shocks to specu-
lators’ beliefs. This accords with Athey et al. (2016), who develop a model of user
adoption and use of a virtual currency such as Bitcoin in order to analyze how market
fundamentals determine the exchange rate of fiat currency to Bitcoin, focussing their
attention on an eventual steady state expected exchange rate. They further analyze
its usage empirically, exploiting the fact that all individual transactions get recorded
on Bitcoin’s public ledgers. They argue that a large share of transactions is related
to illegal activities, thus agreeing with Foley et al. (2018), who investigate this issue
in additional detail. Trimborn and Härdle (2016) propose an index called CRIX for
the overall cryptocurrency market. Catallini and Gans (2016) provide ”some simple


                                           42
economics of the blockchain”, a key technological component of Bitcoin, but which
has much broader usages. Schnabel and Shin (2018) draw lessons from monetary
history regarding the role of banks in establishing trust and current debates about
cryptocurrencies. Bias et al (2018) as well as Cong and He (2018) examine the role
of the blockchain technology, a key component of the Bitcoin technology, for “smart
contracts”. The most closely related contribution in the literature to our paper is
Garratt-Wallace (2017), as we discussed at the end of the introduction.
    It is hard not to think of bubbles in the context of Bitcoin. There is a large
literature on bubbles, that should prove useful in that regard. In the original analysis
of Samuelson (1958), money is a bubble, as it is intrinsically worthless. We share that
perspective here for both the Dollar and the Bitcoin. It might be tempting to think
that prices for Bitcoin could rise forever, as agents speculate to receive even higher
prices in the future. Tirole (1982) has shown that this is ruled out in an economy
with infinite-lived, rational agents, a perspective which we share, whereas Burnside-
Eichenbaum-Rebelo (2015) have analyzed how bubbles may arise from agents catching
the “disease” of being overly optimistic. Our model shares some similarity with the
bubbles perspective in Scheinkman-Xiong (2003), where a bubble component for an
asset arises due to a sequence of agents, each valuing the asset for intermittent periods.
Guerrieri-Uhlig (2016) provides some overview of the bubble literature. The Bitcoin
price evolution can also be thought about in the context of currency speculation
and carry trades, analyzed e.g. by Burnside-Eichenbaum-Rebelo (2012): the three
perspectives given there may well be relevant to thinking about the Bitcoin price
evolution, but we have refrained from pursuing that here.


B     Proofs
Proof. [Lemma 1] Let D∞,g = lim inf t→∞ Dt,g . It is clear, that D∞,g = 0. By assump-
tion, it cannot undercut zero. Also, it cannot be strictly positive, since otherwise,
a green agent could improve his utility per spending D∞,g on consumption goods in
some even period, without adjusting anything else except reducing Dollar holdings
subsequently by D∞,g in all periods. Note that Dollar holdings for green agents in
odd periods are never higher than the Dollar holdings in the previous even period
since at best, they can choose not to spend any Dollars in the even periods. Consider
then some odd period, such that Dt+1,g > 0, i.e. suppose the green agent has not

                                           43
spent all her Dollars in the previous even period t. Given θt , the agent can then
increase his consumption in t at the cost of reducing his consumption in t + 2, for a
marginal utility gain of
                                                      
                       t       0      2        0    Pt
                     β    u (ct ) − β Et u (ct+2 )                                   (71)
                                                   Pt+2
                                                              
                         t      0       2     0        Pt Pt+1
                      =β     u (ct ) − β Et u (ct+2 )              .                 (72)
                                                      Pt+1 Pt+2

This gain is strictly positive, since ct = yt in all periods, and per assumption 1 and
2. For red agents, this argument likewise works for all even periods t ≥ 2.

Proof. [Lemma 2] Assume, t+1 is even. The Dollar-denominated consumption market
clearing condition implies

                    Dt+1 = Dt+1,g + Dt+1,r = Dt+1,g = Pt zt + τt+1 ,                 (73)

where we used Dt+1,r = 0 = Dt,g . If t + 1 is odd, then analogously Dt+1,g = 0 = Dt,r .
The evolution of the amount of Dollar is given as

                                    Dt+1 = Dt + τt+1 .                               (74)

Comparing (73) and (74), we have

                                          Dt = Pt zt .                               (75)

Likewise, Dt+1 = Pt+1 zt+1 . Plugging Dt+1 = Pt+1 zt+1 into (73) and using that
equation for t rather than t + 1 delivers

                                   τt = Pt zt − Pt−1 zt−1 .                          (76)



Proof. [Proposition 1] If xt > 0 and zt > 0, selling agents at time t must be marginally
indifferent between accepting Dollars and accepting Bitcoins. If they sell one marginal
unit of the consumption good for Dollars, they receive Pt Dollar with which they can
buy PPt+1
       t
          units of the consumption good at date t+1 and evaluating the extra consump-
tion at the marginal utility u0 (ct+1 ). If they sell one marginal unit of the consumption

                                               44
good for Bitcoin, they receive (Pt /Qt ) Bitcoins and can thus buy (Pt /Qt )·(Qt+1 /Pt+1 )
units of the consumption good at date t + 1, evaluating the extra consumption at the
marginal utility u0 (ct+1 ). Indifference implies (40).

Proof. [Proposition 2] Market clearing implies that demand equals supply in the
Bitcoin-denominated consumption market. Therefore, bt < (Qt /Pt )Bt implies that
buyers choose not to use some of their Bitcoins in purchasing consumption goods.
For a (marginal) Bitcoin, they could obtain Qt /Pt units of the consumption good,
evaluated at marginal utility u0 (ct ) at time t. Instead, they weakly prefer to hold
on to the Bitcoin. The earliest period, at which they can contemplate purchasing
goods is t + 2, where they would then obtain Qt+2 /Pt+2 units of the consumption
good, evaluated at marginal utility u0 (ct+2 ), discounted with β 2 to time t. As this is
the weakly better option, equation (43) results. If good buyers use Bitcoins both for
purchases as well as for speculative reasons, both uses of the Bitcoin must generate
equal utility, giving rise to equality in (43).

Lemma 3. (Zero-Bitcoin-Transactions Condition:)
Suppose that Bt > 0, Qt > 0, zt > 0 and that there is absence of goods transactions
against Bitcoins xt = bt = 0 at date t. Then
                                                                 
                          0      Pt          0        (Qt+1 /Pt+1 )
                   Et u (ct+1 )        ≥ Et u (ct+1 )                 .              (77)
                                Pt+1                    (Qt /Pt )

If consumption and production is constant at t and t + 1, i.e. if ct = ct+1 ≡ ȳ = y,
                  1
and if Qt+1 and πt+1 are uncorrelated conditional on time-t information, absence of
goods transactions against Bitcoins at date t implies

                                    Qt ≥ Et [Qt+1 ] .                                (78)

Proof. If xt = bt = 0, it must be the case, that sellers do not seek to sell positive
amounts of goods against Bitcoin at the current price in Bitcoin Qt , and at least
weakly prefer to sell using Dollars instead. This gives rise to equation (77).

Proof. [Corrolary 1)] With theorem 1, the fundamental pricing equation, i.e. proposi-
tion 1 and equation (40) always applies in equilibrium. Equation (40) implies equation
(47), which in turn implies (49).



                                           45
Lemma 4. Suppose t satisfies Et−1 [t ] = 0 for all t ≥ 1 and satisfies equation (93).
Suppose that Et [mt+1 ] are bounded from below by some strictly positive number and
that the conditional variances σmt+1 |t are bounded from above. Then,

                                   ∞
                                  X     covt (mt+1 , t+1 )
                             ψ :=     |                     |< ∞.                 (79)
                                  t=0
                                           Et [mt+1 ]

Proof. By (94), the sum of the conditional standard deviations of t is bounded above
by some finite ζ̃,
                                   X∞
                                       σt+1 |t ≤ ζ̃.                            (80)
                                          t=0

Let m be a lower bound for the sequence {Et [mt+1 ]}t≥0 and let σ̄m be an upper bound
for the conditional standard deviations of mt . Note that
                                    ∞
                                    X |corrt (mt+1 , t+1 )| σ̄m σt+1
                           ψ =
                                    t=0
                                                  |Et [mt+1 ]|
                                     ∞
                                    X     σ̄m
                               ≤              σ |t
                                    t=0
                                           m t+1
                                 σ̄m
                               ≤     ζ̃,
                                  m

by corrt (mt+1 , t+1 ) ∈ (−1, 1) for all t.

Proof. [Proposition 3] Assume πt ≥ π for all t ≥ 0 and some π > 1. Assume




                                                46
covt (u0 (ct+1 ), Qt+1
                  Pt+1
                       ) ≥ 0. Then, with equations (40) and (77),

                   Qt   Et [u0 (ct+1 ) Q t+1
                                       Pt+1
                                             ]
                      ≥                                                                    (81)
                   Pt   Et [u0 (ct+1 ) PPt+1
                                          t
                                             ]
                              Et [u0 (ct+1 ) Q t+1
                                             Pt+1
                                                   ]
                          ≥                                                                (82)
                               Et [u0 (ct+1 )] π1
                                covt (u0 (ct+1 ), Q t+1
                                                  Pt+1
                                                        ) + Et [u0 (ct+1 )] Et [ Q t+1
                                                                                 Pt+1
                                                                                       ]
                          =π                                                               (83)
                                                       Et [u0 (ct+1 )]
                                   covt (u0 (ct+1 ), Q t+1                          !
                                                           )
                                                                         
                                                     Pt+1                    Qt+1
                          =π                                   + Et                        (84)
                                    Et [u0 (ct+1 )]                          Pt+1
                                       
                                   Qt+1
                          ≥ π Et           .                                               (85)
                                   Pt+1

Writing this equation in t = 0 and iterating yields
                                                    
    Q0        Q1    2      Q2            t                  Qt
       ≥ πE0     ≥ π E0 E1    ≥ · · · ≥ π E0 E1 . . . Et−1       .                         (86)
    P0        P1           P2                               Pt

By the law of iterated expectations, find
                                   
                         Qt          Qt      Q0
                E0          Bt ≤ E0     B̄ ≤    B̄π −t → 0 for t → ∞,
                         Pt          Pt      P0

demonstrating convergence in mean.

Proof. [Theorem 2] Per equation (39) in Lemma 2, we have

                                       τt = Pt zt − Pt−1 zt−1                              (87)
                                       τt0 = Pt zt0 − Pt−1 zt−1
                                                            0
                                                                                           (88)

Since all Bitcoins are spent,

                                                      Qt
                                              xt =       Bt
                                                      Pt
                                                      Qt 0
                                              x0t   =    B
                                                      Pt t




                                                       47
Use

                                     zt = yt − xt
                                     zt0 = yt − x0t

and plug the formulas for zt and zt0 and their lags into the two equations (87) and
(88), substituting out xt , x0t , xt−1 , x0t−1 . One obtains

                      τt = Pt yt − Qt Bt − Pt−1 yt−1 + Qt−1 Bt−1
                      τt0 = Pt yt − Qt Bt0 − Pt−1 yt−1 + Qt−1 Bt−1
                                                               0



Taking the difference,

      τt0 − τt = −Qt (Bt0 − Bt ) + Qt−1 (Bt−1
                                          0
                                              − Bt−1 )
              = −(Qt − Qt−1 )(Bt0 − Bt ) − Qt−1 (Bt0 − Bt ) + Qt−1 (Bt−1
                                                                     0
                                                                         − Bt−1 )
              = −(Qt − Qt−1 )(Bt0 − Bt ) − Qt−1 ((Bt0 − Bt−1
                                                         0
                                                             ) − (Bt − Bt−1 ))

The condition 0 < Bt0 < (Pt /Qt )yt implies that zt > 0, i.e. that the resulting trades
remain compatible with a no-speculation equilibrium and spending all Bitcoins every
period.

Proof. [Corollary 3] Per assumption 4, the central bank regards Pt∗ , Qt , Q∗t in (60) as
given. Minimizing the loss over Pt results in Pt = Pt∗ . This outcome can be achieved
per Dt = yt Pt −Qt Bt , and is the only outcome compatible with that choice for Dt .

Proof. [Corollary 4] Per assumption 4, the central bank regards Pt∗ , Pt , Q∗t in (60) as
given. Minimizing the loss over Qt results in Qt = Q∗t . This outcome can be achieved
per Dt = yt Pt −Q∗t Bt , and is the only outcome compatible with that choice for Dt .

Proof. [Proposition 4] Providing effort causes disutility of h0 (et ) at time t at the
margin. Likewise and at the margin, effort generates At /ēt Bitcoins in t which can
be traded in t + 1. A Bitcoin is worth Qt+1 /Pt+1 units of the consumption good at
time t + 1, to be evaluated at marginal utility u0 (ct+1 ). In equilibrium ct+1 = yt+1
and et,j = ēt . Equating equilibrium mining disutility to the equilibrium payoff gives
rise to condition (68). Note that the right hand side diverges to infinity, as ēt → 0
and converges to zero, as ēt → ∞, while h0 (ēt ) is always strictly positive except for


                                           48
perhaps h0 (0) = 0. Both sides are continuous functions in ēt . Therefore, a solution
always exists and is strictly positive. Since the right hand side is a strictly decreasing
function of ēt , while the left hand side is a weakly increasing function of ēt , the
solution is unique.

Proof. [Proposition 5] Recall that aggregate Bitcoin production is assumed to be an
exogenous and deterministic function of time. Therefore all equations in the no-tax
equilibrium continue to hold, if the tax is imposed except for equation (68). Compared
to that equation, the left hand side is shifted up in equation (69) and still weakly
increasing in h0 (ēt ) , while the right hand side is the same and strictly decreasing in
ēt . Therefore, individual effort levels et,j = ēt are strictly lower in the equilibrium
with taxation. Welfare is therefore strictly higher, per the analysis in subsection 6.1.


C      Equilibrium Construction
C.1     Equilibrium Existence: A Constructive Approach
We seek to show the existence of equilibria and examine numerical examples. The
challenge in doing so lies in the zero-dividend properties of currencies. In asset pricing,
one usually proceeds from a dividend process Dt , exploits an asset pricing formula
Qt = Dt + Et [Mt+1 Qt+1 ] and “telescopes” out the right hand side in order to write
Qt as an infinite sum of future dividends, discounted by stochastic discount factors.
Properties of fundamentals such as correlations of dividends Dt with the stochastic
discount factor then imply correlation properties of the price Qt and the stochastic
discount factor. This approach will not work here for equilibria with nonzero Bitcoin
prices, since dividends of fiat currencies are identical to zero. Something else must
generate the current Bitcoin price and the correlations. We examine this issue as
well as demonstrate existence of equilibria per constructing no-Bitcoin-speculation
equilibria explicitly. The next proposition reduces the task of constructing no-Bitcoin-
speculation equilibra to the task of constructing sequences for (mt , Pt , Qt ) satisfying
particular properties.
Proposition 6. (Equilibrium Existence and Characterization:)

  1. Every equilibrium which satisfies assumptions 1 and 3 generates a stochastic



                                            49
     sequence {(mt , Pt , Qt )}t≥0 which satisfy equation (47) and
                                                
                                       mt+1 Pt+1
                             βEt                   <1                for all t.           (89)
                                        mt Pt

  2. Conversely, let 0 < β < 1.

      (a) There exists a strictly positive (θt )-adapted sequence {(mt , Pt , Qt )}t≥0 sat-
          isfying assumption 1 as well as equations (47) and (89) such that the
          sequences {Qt /Pt }t≥0 and {Pt mt }t≥0 are bounded from above and that
          {Pt mt }t≥0 is bounded from below by a strictly positive number.
      (b) Let {(mt , Pt , Qt )}t≥0 be a sequence with these properties. Let u(·) be an ar-
          bitrary utility function satisfying the Inada conditions, i.e. it is twice differ-
          entiable, strictly increasing, continuous, strictly concave, limc→0 u0 (c) = ∞
          and limc→∞ u0 (c) = 0. Then, there exists b̄0 > 0, such that for every
          initial real value b0 ∈ [0, b̄0 ] of period-0 Bitcoin spending, there exists a
          no-Bitcoin-speculation equilibrium which generates the stochastic sequence
          {(mt , Pt , Qt )}t≥0 and satisfies mt = u0 (ct )/Pt .

Proof. [Proposition 6]

  1. For part 1 of the proposition, consider an equilibrium satisfying assumptions 1
     and 3. Theorem 1 implies, that there will be no Bitcoin speculation, and that
     therefore equation (47) holds. Equation (89) follows directly from equation (45),
     the definition of mt and the equilibrium condition ct = yt .

  2. (a) This is trivially true for the sequence (mt , Pt , Qt ) ≡ (1, 1, 1) for all t.
      (b) Fix the sequence {(mt , Pt , Qt )}t≥0 with the properties mentioned in (a),
          that is assumption 1 and equations (47) and (89) hold. Further, there
          exist bounds µ, υ, Υ > 0 such that 0 < Qt /Pt < µ and 0 < υ < Pt mt < Υ
          for all t.
          Let u(·) an arbitrary, twice differentiable, strictly increasing, concave util-
          ity function. Pick b̄0 as the solution to the equation
                                                              
                                             0       P0
                                           u            µb̄0       = Υ.                   (90)
                                                     Q0


                                                 50
                                                                                  P0
           Note, b̄0 > 0 is well-defined since u0 (·) is invertible and since Q    0
                                                                                     µ, Υ > 0.
                                                    0          0
           Let f (·) be the unique inverse of u , i.e. f (u (c)) = c for all c > 0. Define
           the sequence {ct }t≥0 ≡ {yt }t≥0 := {f (Pt mt )}t≥0 . Note, the choice of utility
           function pins down the consumption sequence. Observe that yt ∈ [y, ȳ] for
           all t, where y = f (Υ), ȳ = f (υ) since u0 and thus f are decreasing. Also,
           {ct } and {yt } are θt -adapted. Since (89) holds by assumption for all t
           and since we defined yt = ct for all t, assumption (3) is satisfied. Given
           b0 ∈ [0, b̄0 ], let B0 := (P0 /Q0 )b0 be the initial quantity of Bitcoins resulting
           in the real quantity b0 of spending in Bitcoins, if all Bitcoins are spent.
           Note that by (90),
                                               0 ≤ B0 ≤ y/µ.                              (91)

           Pick a disutility-of-effort function such that Bitcoins are never produced,
           see the appendix for details. Therefore, the quantity of Bitcoins Bt stays
           constant at Bt ≡ B0 . Note that by (91), and the existence of the upper
           bound µ, the real value of Bitcoins is always strictly below the total value
           of output,
                                     (Qt /Pt )Bt < µBt ≤ y ≤ yt .                  (92)

           Solve for the quantity of dollars Dt = Pt yt − Qt Bt > 0 and thus the
           monetary transfers τt = Dt − Dt−1 . The remaining quantities follow from
           the equilibrium definition in a straightforward manner and by this, it is
           clear that the resulting sequences constitute an equilibrium. Since assump-
           tions 1 and 3 are satisfied, the no-Bitcoin-speculation property holds per
           theorem 1.



     Part 2b of the proposition implies a version of the Kareken-Wallace (1981) re-
sult that the initial exchange rate Q0 between Bitcoin and Dollar is not determined.
The proposition furthermore relates to proposition 3.2 in Manuelli-Peck (1990). Part
2b reduces the challenge of constructing equilibria to the task of constructing (θt )-
adapted sequences {(mt , Pt , Qt )} satisfying the properties named in 2a. This feature
can be exploited for constructing equilibria with further properties as follows. Sup-
pose we are already given strictly positive and (θt )-adapted sequences for mt and
Pt , satisfying assumption 1 as well as equation (89) such that mt Pt is bounded from


                                             51
above and below by strictly positive numbers. Suppose, additionally, that Pt as well
as Et [mt+1 ] are bounded from below by some strictly positive number and that the
conditional variances σmt+1 |t are bounded from above. For example, mt ≡ 1 and
Pt ≡ 1 will work. Then, we can show how to construct a sequence for Qt such that
part 2b of the Proposition applies:
    Pick a sequence of random shocks16 t = (θt ), such that Et−1 [t ] = 0 and such
that both the infinite sum of its absolute values and the sum of its standard deviations
are bounded by some real number 0 < ζ, ζ̃ < ∞,
                                         ∞
                                         X
                                                 | t |≤ ζ a.s.                                (93)
                                          t=0

                                            ∞
                                            X
                                                      σt ≤ ζ̃.                                (94)
                                            t=0

Pick an initial Bitcoin price Q0 satisfying
                                            ∞
                                            X covt (mt+1 , t+1 )
                                Q0 > ζ +                                   .                   (95)
                                                t=0
                                                           Et [mt+1 ]

This choice guarantees that the entire price sequence of {Qt } we are about to generate
is strictly positive. Lemma 4 in the appendix shows that the right hand side of (95)
is smaller than infinity. Therefore, a finite Q0 satisfying (95) can always be found.
Recursively calculate the sequence Qt per

                                                           covt (t+1 , mt+1 )
                            Qt+1 = Qt + t+1 −                                 .               (96)
                                                              Et [mt+1 ]

The initial condition (95) implies that Qt > 0 for all t. With Lemma 4, and iterating
backwards via (96) we have

                                   t            t
                                   X            X covt (mt+1 , t+1 )
                  Qt = Q0 +              s +                                                  (97)
                                   s=1          s=1
                                                            Et [mt+1 ]
                                    ∞              ∞
                                   X              X     covt (mt+1 , t+1 )
                        < Q0 +           | s | +     |                     |< ∞.              (98)
                                   s=1            s=1
                                                           E  t [mt+1 ]
  16
    Note that θt encodes the date t per the length of the vector θt . Therefore, we are formally
allowed to change the distributions of the t as a function of the date as well as the past history.


                                                      52
By Lemma 4 and (93). Therefore, Qt is bounded from above. By assumption, Pt
is bounded from below by a strictly positive number. Thus, it follows that Qt /Pt
is bounded from above. Since the conditional covariance of mt+1 and t+1 equals
the conditional covariance of mt+1 and Qt+1 , equation (47) is now satisfied by con-
struction. Thus, we arrived at a strictly positive (θt )-adapted sequence (mt , Pt , Qt )
satisfying assumption 1 as well as equations (47) and (89) such that the sequences
Qt /Pt and Pt mt are bounded. Part 2(b) of proposition 6 shows how to obtain a
no-Bitcoin-speculation equilibrium with these sequences.
    It is also clear, that this construction is fairly general. In any equilibrium, let

                                     t = Qt − Et−1 [Qt ]                                  (99)

be the one-step ahead prediction error for the Bitcoin price Qt . Then, equation (47)
is equivalent to equation (96). The restrictions above concern just the various bound-
edness properties, which we imposed.


C.2     Equilibrium: Examples
For more specific examples, suppose that θt ∈ {L, H}, realizing each value with
probability 1/2. Pick some utility function u(·) satisfying the Inada conditions. For
a first scenario, suppose that inflation is constant Pt = π̄Pt−1 for some π̄ ≥ 1 and
that consumption is iid, c(θt ) = cθt ∈ {cL , cH } with 0 < cL ≤ cH and such that
u0 (cH ) > β(u0 (cL ) + u0 (cH ))/2. For a second scenario, suppose that inflation is iid,
Pt /Pt−1 = πθt ∈ {πL , πH }, with 1 ≤ πL ≤ πH and that consumption is constant
ct ≡ c̄ > 0. It is easy to check that (89) is satisfied in both scenarios for mt = u0 (ct )/Pt .
For both scenarios, consider two cases for (θt ) = t (θt ),

Case A: t (L) = 2−t , t (H) = −2−t .

Case B: t (L) = −2−t , t (H) = 2−t .

We assume that the distribution for t+1 is known is one period in advance, i.e., in
period t, agents know, whether t+1 is distributed as described in “case A” or as
described in “case B”. Expressed formally, define an indicator ιt and let it take the
value ιt = 1, if we are in case A in t + 1, and ιt = −1, if we are in case B in t + 1: we
assume that ιt is adapted to (θt ). The absolute value of the sum of the t is bounded


                                              53
by ξ = 2 which holds by exploiting the geometric sum. For the first scenario, calculate

                     covt (mt+1 , t+1 )          u0 (cL ) − u0 (cH )
                                         = 2−(t+1) 0                  ιt         (100)
                        Et [mt+1 ]                u (cL ) + u0 (cH )

which is positive for ιt = 1 and cL < cH but negative for ιt = −1. For the second
scenario, likewise calculate
                                                       1          1
                         covt (mt+1 , t+1 )   −(t+1) πL
                                                         −       πH
                                             =2        1          1 ιt           (101)
                            Et [mt+1 ]                πL
                                                         +       πH


which is positive for ιt = 1 and πL < πH but negative for ιt = −1. With equation (95),
pick
                                         u0 (cL ) − u0 (cH )
                                Q0 > 2 + 0
                                         u (cL ) + u0 (cH )
for scenario 1 and
                                                1        1
                                               πL
                                                    −   πH
                                   Q0 > 2 +     1        1
                                               πL
                                                    +   πH

for scenario 2. Consider three constructions,
Always A: Always impose case A, i.e. t (L) = 2−t , t (H) = −2−t .

Always B: Always impose case B, i.e. t (L) = −2−t , t (H) = 2−t .

Alternate: In even periods, impose case A, i.e. t (L) = 2−t , t (H) = −2−t . In odd
     periods, impose case B, i.e. t (L) = −2−t , t (H) = 2−t .
For each of these, calculate the Qt sequence with equation (96) and the resulting
equilibrium with proposition 6. As third scenario, if both consumption and inflation
are constant, then all three constructions result in a martingale for Qt = Et [Qt+1 ].
Suppose that cL < cH in scenario 1 or πL < πH in scenario 2, i.e. suppose we have
nontrivial randomness of the underlying processes in either scenario. The “Always
A” construction results in Qt > Et [Qt+1 ] and Qt is a supermartingale. This can be
seen by plugging in (100) respectively (101) into equation

                                                        cov(t+1 , mt+1 )
                     Et [Qt+1 ] = Qt + Et [t+1 ] −                       ,      (102)
                                                           Et [mt+1 ]

where Et [t+1 ] = 0 by construction. The “Always B” construction results in a sub-
martingale Qt < Et [Qt+1 ]. The “Alternate” construction results in a price process

                                             54
that is neither a supermartingale nor a submartingale.
   These examples were meant to illustrate the possibility, that supermartingales,
submartingales as well as mixed constructions can all arise, starting from the same
assumptions about the fundamentals. To get somewhat closer to that, the following
construction may help. Once again, let θt ∈ {L, H}, but assume now that P (θt =
L) = p < 0.5. Suppose that Pt ≡ 1 and ct ≡ c̄, so that mt is constant and that
Qt must be a martingale. Pick some Q ≥ 0 as well as some Q∗ > Q. Pick some
Q0 ∈ [Q, Q∗ ]. If Qt < Q∗ , let

                                         Qt −pQ
                                     (
                                          1−p
                                                  if θt = H,
                            Qt+1 =
                                         Q        if θt = L.

If Qt ≥ Q∗ , let Qt+1 = Qt . Therefore Qt will be a martingale and satisfies (47). If Q0
is sufficiently far above Q and if p is reasonably small, then typical sample paths will
feature a reasonably quickly rising Bitcoin price Qt , which crashes eventually to Q
and stays there, unless it reaches the upper bound Q∗ first. Further modifications of
this example can generated generate repeated sequences of rising prices and crashes.


D     The No-Bitcoin-Speculation Theorem: A Slight
      Generalization
Note that equation (45) compares marginal utilities of red agents and green agents.
For an interpretation, consider the problem of a social planner, assigning equal welfare
weights to both types of agents. Suppose that this social planner is given an additional
marginal unit of the consumption good at time t, which she could provide to the agent
consuming in period t or to costlessly store this unit for one period and to provide
it to the agent consuming in period t + 1. Condition (45) then says that the social
planner would always prefer to provide the additional marginal unit to the agent
consuming in period t. This interpretation suggests the following generalization of
assumption 3, resulting from distinct welfare weights, implying a slight generalization
of our No-Bitcoin-Speculation Theorem.
Assumption A. 6. Let α > 0. For all even t

                             u0 (yt ) − αβEt [u0 (yt+1 )] > 0,                    (103)

                                             55
while for all odd t
                              αu0 (yt ) − βEt [u0 (yt+1 )] > 0.                      (104)

    For α = 1, one obtains assumption 3. The assumption above arises, when consid-
ering welfare weights of λ on green agents and 1−λ on red agents, where λ = 1/(1+α),
see also subsection 6.1.
Theorem 4. (No-Bitcoin-Speculation Generalized.) Suppose that Bt > 0 and
Qt > 0 for all t. Impose assumption 6. Then in every period, all Bitcoins are spent.

Proof. [Theorem 4] The proof closely parallels the proof of theorem 1. Since all
Dollars are spent in all periods, we have zt > 0 in all periods. Observe that then
either inequality (77) holds, in case no Bitcoins are spent at date t, or equation (40)
holds, if some Bitcoins are spent. Since equation (40) implies inequality (77), (77)
holds for all t. Suppose first that t is an even period. Then
                                                      
 2     0        Qt+2      2               0       Qt+2
β Et [u (ct+2 )      ] = β Et Et+1 u (ct+2 )                  (law of iterated expectation)
                Pt+2                              Pt+2
                                                         
                          2               0       Pt+1 Qt+1
                       ≤ β Et Et+1 u (ct+2 )                      (per equ. (77) at t + 1)
                                                  Pt+2 Pt+1
                                                       
                          2             0          Qt+1
                       ≤ β Et Et+1 [u (ct+2 )]                                 (per ass. 1 )
                                                   Pt+1
                                                
                                    0       Qt+1
                       < αβEt u (ct+1 )                                  (per ass. 6 in t+1)
                                            Pt+1
                                                
                                    0        Pt     Qt
                       ≤ αβEt u (ct+1 )                                (per equ. (77) at t)
                                            Pt+1 Pt
                                            Qt
                       ≤ αβEt [u0 (ct+1 )]                                      (per ass. 1)
                                            Pt
                                  Qt
                       < u0 (ct )                                          (per ass. 6 in t).
                                  Pt



which contradicts the speculative price bound (43) in t. Consequently, bt = Q    t
                                                                                Pt
                                                                                   Bt ,
i.e. all Bitcoins are spent in t. The same calculations obtain, if t is an odd period,
per replacing α with 1/α in the equations above. Since t is either even or odd, all
Bitcoins are spent in every period.




                                             56
E     Implications of the Monetary Policy Scenarios
E.1     Conventional Monetary Policy Scenario
If one were to use a vector autoregression to estimate the impact of monetary policy
shocks in this economy (or, more precisely, a linearized version thereof), one might
wish to order the observable stochastic variables as (yt , Qt , Pt , Dt ). The VAR is then
a vector of four equations. A Cholesky decomposition of the covariance matrix of the
one-step ahead prediction errors would reveal an identity for the forth equation. Put
differently, the innovation in the Dollar quantity ordered last is always identical to
zero, and would not serve well for identifying the monetary policy shock (unless one
wishes to state, that it is always zero indeed). A more fruitful interpretation might
be to instead regard Pt − P̄t as the monetary policy shock, and identify it as the third
shock in this Cholesky decomposition.


E.2     Unconventional Monetary Policy Scenario
If one were to use a four-variable VAR (as already described above) to estimate the
impact of monetary policy shocks in this economy, one might now wish to order the
observable stochastic variables as (yt , Pt , Qt , Dt ) instead. A Cholesky decomposition
of the covariance matrix of the one-step ahead prediction errors would again result
in an identity for the forth equation, and one can now entertain a discussion as
to whether the monetary policy shock should be the shock to the second equation
interpreting the exogenous movements in Pt as a central bank taste shock, or a shock
to the third equation, interpreting Pt as truly exogenous. There is no a priori correct
choice here. It now depends on where one sees the exogenous variations coming from.’
    The unconventional monetary policy scenario delivers some interesting further
implications.
Implication 2. (Bitcoin Price Distribution:)
Suppose that production yt is iid. with distribution function F , yt ∼ F . Assume Pt
is predetermined with, Pt = Et−1 [Pt ], i.e. Pt is known at time t. The distribution
Gt of the Bitcoin price conditional on time t − 1 information and conditional on the
realization of the Dollar supply Dt is then given by

                                                               Bt s + Dt
                  Gt|t−1,Dt (s) = P(Qt ≤ s|t − 1, Dt ) = F (             ).         (105)
                                                                   Pt

                                           57
As a consequence, changes in expected production or production volatility translate
directly to changes in the expected Bitcoin price or price volatility. If Bitcoin quantity
or Dollar quantity is higher, high Bitcoin price realizations are less likely in the sense
of first order stochastic dominance. This holds since F ( Bt s+D
                                                              Pt
                                                                  t
                                                                    ) is increasing in both
Bt and Dt .
    Intuitively, by setting the Dollar quantity, the central bank can control the Bitcoin
price. Further, a growing quantity of Bitcoins calms down the Bitcoin price.
Implication 3. (Bitcoin price and Productivity)
Compare two economies which differ only in terms of their productivity distributions,
F1 vs F2 . Say economy 2 is more productive than economy 1, if the productivity distri-
bution of economy 2 first order stochastically dominates the productivity distribution
of economy 1. Then, as economies become more productive, the Bitcoin price is higher
in expectation. Assume F2 first-order stochastically dominates F1 . Let G2,t and G1,t
be the resulting distributions for Bitcoin prices. Since the Bitcoin price is positive,
                                      Z   ∞
                         E[Qt,2 ] =           x dG2,t (x)
                                      0
                                      Z   ∞
                                 =            (1 − G2,t (x)) dx
                                      0
                                      Z   ∞
                                                  Bt x + Dt
                                 =            (1 − F2 (     )) dx
                                                      Pt
                                   Z0 ∞
                                                  Bt x + Dt
                                 ≥      (1 − F1 (           )) dx
                                    0                 Pt
                                 = E[Qt,1 ].

Note, the application only requires second order stochastic dominance which is implied
by first order stochastic dominance.




                                                 58
