                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     AGE AND HIGH-GROWTH ENTREPRENEURSHIP

                                         Pierre Azoulay
                                         Benjamin Jones
                                          J. Daniel Kim
                                         Javier Miranda

                                      Working Paper 24489
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24489


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2018




We thank Shawn Klimek, Mark Leach, David Robinson, Scott Stern, and participants at the
NBER Summer Institute for helpful comments. We thank PCRI and Josh Lerner for access to the
matched Business Register-PCRI crosswalk. Any opinions and conclusions expressed herein are
those of the author(s) and do not necessarily represent the views of the U.S. Census Bureau or its
staff. All results have been reviewed to ensure that no confidential information is disclosed. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Pierre Azoulay, Benjamin Jones, J. Daniel Kim, and Javier Miranda. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Age and High-Growth Entrepreneurship
Pierre Azoulay, Benjamin Jones, J. Daniel Kim, and Javier Miranda
NBER Working Paper No. 24489
April 2018
JEL No. J24,L26,O51

                                         ABSTRACT

Many observers, and many investors, believe that young people are especially likely to produce
the most successful new firms. We use administrative data at the U.S. Census Bureau to study the
ages of founders of growth-oriented start-ups in the past decade. Our primary finding is that
successful entrepreneurs are middle-aged, not young. The mean founder age for the 1 in 1,000
fastest growing new ventures is 45.0. The findings are broadly similar when considering high-
technology sectors, entrepreneurial hubs, and successful firm exits. Prior experience in the
specific industry predicts much greater rates of entrepreneurial success. These findings strongly
reject common hypotheses that emphasize youth as a key trait of successful entrepreneurs.


Pierre Azoulay                                  J. Daniel Kim
MIT Sloan School of Management                  Massachusetts Institute of Technology
100 Main Street, E62-487                        Sloan School of Management
Cambridge, MA 02142                             100 Main St.
and NBER                                        Building E62-489
pazoulay@mit.edu                                Cambridge, MA 02142
                                                jdkim@mit.edu
Benjamin Jones
Northwestern University                         Javier Miranda
Kellogg School of Management                    U.S. Bureau of the Census
Department of Management and Strategy           Center for Administrative Records Research
2211 Campus Drive                               4600 Silver Hill Road
Evanston, IL 60208                              Washington, DC 20233
and NBER                                        javier.miranda@census.gov
bjones@kellogg.northwestern.edu
                            “Young people are just smarter,” Mark Zuckerberg, founder of Facebook

                   “The cutoff in investors’ heads is 32…after 32, they start to be a little skeptical.”
                                        Paul Graham, venture capitalist and founder of Y Combinator 1


I.      Introduction

        Entrepreneurship has long been heralded as a key driver of rising living standards (Smith
1776, Schumpeter 1942, Lucas 1978), but successful entrepreneurship is rare, with the vast
majority of entrepreneurs failing to provide the major innovations or creative destruction that can
drive economic growth (Glaeser 2009; Haltiwanger, Jarmin and Miranda 2013; Guzman and
Stern 2017; Levin and Rubenstein 2015). In understanding entrepreneurship, and the rarity of
substantial success, a key set of questions surrounds the traits of the entrepreneurs themselves. In
this paper, we provide wide-ranging evidence about one trait often thought to play a central role:
the founders’ age.

        The view that young people are especially capable of producing big ideas – whether in
scientific research, invention, or entrepreneurship – is common and longstanding (see, e.g., Jones
et al. 2014). Famous individual cases such as Bill Gates, Steve Jobs, and Mark Zuckerberg show
that people in their early 20s can create world-leading companies. Meanwhile, venture capital
firms appear to emphasize youth as a key criteria in targeting their investments, which has led to
charges of “ageism” in Silicon Valley. 2 At one extreme, Peter Thiel, the co-founder of PayPal,
has created a prominent fellowship program that provides $100,000 grants to would-be
entrepreneurs so long as they are below age 23 and drop out of school. Among the advantages of
youth in technology and innovation, young people are sometimes argued to be cognitively
sharper, less distracted by family or other responsibilities, and more capable of transformative
ideas – this last in line with “Planck’s Principle”, whereby younger people may be less beholden



1
  Source: Nathaniel Rich, “Silicon Valley’s Start-up Machine,” New York Times, May 2, 2013.
2
  Vinod Khosla, the co-founder of Sun Microsystems and a prominent venture capitalist, has argued that “people
under 35 are the people who make change happen,” and “people over forty-five basically die in terms of new ideas.”
(source: Vivek Wadhwa, “The Case for Old Entrepreneurs,” Washington Post, December 2, 2011). For public
debate around venture capital activity and potential “ageism” see, for example “The Brutal Ageism of Tech”,
,(Scheiber 2014).

                                                        2
to existing paradigms of thought and practice (Planck 1949; Dietrich and Srinivasan 2007,
Weinberg 2006).

         Despite these potential advantages, young entrepreneurs may also face substantial
disadvantages. Older entrepreneurs might access greater human capital, social capital, or
financial capital. Taking a human capital perspective, younger people may lack experience in
running companies, including the effective management of operations, marketing/sales, finance,
human resources, and culture, or lack sector-specific knowledge regarding customer needs,
regulatory constraints, or strategic opportunities – forms of “market knowledge” that may be
important to successful innovation (Kline and Rosenberg 1986). In deeper technological areas,
young people may not have sufficient scientific knowledge to produce or manage effective R&D
(e.g., Jones 2010). 3 Whether such issues impose important constraints in the entrepreneurial
context is less clear, especially to the extent that young entrepreneurs can overcome personal
limitations by assembling effective teams, accessing third-party financing, and tapping social
networks.

         The empirical literature on the characteristics of highly successful entrepreneurs is
limited and mixed. Various studies suggest that mean age for starting companies of all kinds
(i.e., including restaurants, dry cleaners, retail shops, etc.) is in the late 30s or 40s, but the data in
these studies are dominated by small businesses without growth ambitions and do not focus on
the relatively rare start-ups with the potential to drive innovation and economic growth. Other
research suggests that growth-oriented firms and the people who start them have distinct
characteristics (e.g., Guzman and Stern 2017, Levine and Rubinstein 2017). Meanwhile, studies
of technology firms in the U.S. find contrasting results. Wadhwa et al. (2008) use a telephone
survey of 502 technology and engineering firms with at least $1 million in sales and find that the
mean founder age was 39. Ng and Stuart (2016) connect Angel List and CrunchBase data to
individual LinkedIn profiles and find that the founding of tech ventures comes most commonly
only 5 years after college graduation, which is in contrast to Wadhwa et al. (2008), who found a
much larger 17-year delay on average after college graduation in their data. Frick (2014) studies
a sample of 35 venture capital (VC) backed firms from the Wall Street Journal’s Billion Dollar

3
  Indeed, outside of entrepreneurship, studies have repeatedly shown that major scientific research contributions tend
to come from people in their late 30s and 40s as opposed to their 20s (Zuckerman 1977; Stephan and Levin 1993;
Jones 2010).

                                                          3
Startup Club list and finds a mean founder age of 31, echoing the popular view that the most
successful and transformative new ventures come from young people.

        Table 1 further characterizes popular perceptions by looking at founder ages for (a)
annual winners of the TechCrunch awards, (b) lists of “Top Entrepreneurs” and “Entrepreneurs
to Watch” from two leading magazines, and (c) the full sets of new ventures backed by two
prominent venture capital firms. All three of these sources suggest that tech entrepreneurs—and,
especially, successful tech entrepreneurs—are very young, with mean ages at 29 for the award
winners, 31 from the media lists, and the mid-30s for the VC-backed founders. Overall, there is
thus a conflict between views of the peak age for “successful entrepreneurs” and entrepreneurs
more generally, and substantial conflict across datasets of successful entrepreneurs themselves.
Notably, all the studies of successful entrepreneurs produce age information from selected
samples, which might help explain the discrepancies in their findings. 4

        In this paper, we make use of U.S. administrative data to investigate the link between age
and high-growth entrepreneurship in a systematic manner. By linking (a) newly available IRS K-
1 data, which identifies the initial owners of pass-through firms, with (b) U.S. Census Bureau
datasets regarding businesses, employees, and individuals throughout the economy as well as (c)
USPTO patent databases and third-party venture-capital databases, we provide systematic new
facts about founder age and entrepreneurship.

        While we will include results for all new firms, our emphasis is on founders of “growth-
oriented” firms that can have large economic impacts and are often associated with driving
increasing standard of living (Schumpeter 1942, Glaeser 2009). To delineate growth-oriented
start-ups, we use both ex ante and ex post measures. The ex-ante measures include being a
participant in a high tech sector, owning a patent, or receiving VC backing. The ex-post
measures examine growth outcomes directly for each firm: our datasets allow us to develop and




4
 The telephone surveys in Wadhwa et al. (2008) engaged a random sample of 1,800 firms, but the response rate was
28%, which may introduce bias. For Ng and Stuart (2016), individuals with both Angel List and Linkedin profiles
may skew younger than the population of high-growth founders at large. The Frick (2014) study determines founder
age for 71% of the firms in the target list, which the author acknowledges may create bias but, more generally, this
sample focuses on VC-backed firms and thus inherits any age biases of VC investors, who are often thought to
select on supporting (and thus giving high valuations to) start-ups founded by young people.

                                                         4
examine multiple measures of firm growth and success, including firm-level employment and
sales growth, as well as exit by acquisition and exit by initial public offering.

           Our primary finding is that successful entrepreneurs are middle-aged, not young. Taking
numerous measures to identify potentially high-growth firms as well as studying ex-post growth
of each firm, we find no evidence to suggest that founders in their 20s are especially likely to
succeed. Rather, all evidence points to founders being especially successful when starting
businesses in middle age or beyond, while young founders appear disadvantaged. Across the 2.7
million founders in the U.S. between 2007-2014 who started companies that go on to hire at least
one employee, the mean age for the entrepreneurs at founding is 41.9. 5 The mean founder age for
the 1 in 1,000 highest growth new ventures is 45.0. The most successful entrepreneurs in high
technology sectors are of similar ages. So are the most successful founders in the entrepreneurial
regions of the U.S. While the prevalence of the highest growth companies having middle-aged
founders is due in part to the prevalence of entry by the middle-aged, we further find that the
“batting average” for creating successful firms is rising dramatically with age. Conditional on
starting a firm, a 50-year-old founder is 1.8 times more likely to achieve upper-tail growth than a
30-year-old founder. Founders in their early 20s have the lowest likelihood of successful exit or
creating a 1 in 1,000 top growth firm.

           The view that young people produce the highest-growth companies is in part a rejection
of the role of experience: either because experience is not especially valuable or because it
reduces the capacity for novel, transformative ideas. To test this underlying thesis, we further
build employment histories for founders and examine whether the founder comes from outside or
within the start-up’s specific industry. Conditional on starting a firm, we find that prior
employment in the specific sector predicts a vastly higher probability of an upper-tail growth
outcome or successful exit, with success rates rising up to 125%. Moreover, the closer the
industry match, the greater the success rate. This finding appears to reject a central presumption
that motivates perceptions about young people’s advantage.

           The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II of this paper reviews relevant
literature on age and age-related entrepreneurial traits that may explain the rate and quality of


5
    We take all U.S. companies in the non-farm economy and exclude sole proprietors – see Section III.

                                                           5
entrepreneurial ventures. Section III details the newly-integrated administrative datasets that
make this study possible. Section IV presents our core results, showing that the most successful
founders are middle-aged, not young. Section V provides additional discussion regarding
industry experience, age variation within founding teams, entrepreneur outliers, and venture
capital behavior. Section VI concludes.

II.    Literature

       Understanding what makes for a successful firm and identifying the traits associated with
successful founders is the subject of intense interest. Entrepreneurs are often seen as key
protagonists in the process of creative destruction that can advance modern market economies.
Yet entrepreneurship is a risky business (Decker et al. 2014, Kerr et al. 2014), where many new
firms exit quickly and only a small fraction of young firms exhibit very high growth
(Haltiwanger et al. 2013, 2017). Consequently, both public and private investors struggle to
identify new ventures that will succeed. Government polices often promote new firms they see as
winners in an effort to create jobs and promote a stronger and more competitive economy, but
not always with success (Lerner 2012; Howell 2017). Meanwhile, the return on the vast majority
of private venture-capital investments is small or negative (e.g., Kerr et al. 2014). Private
investors struggle to identify new ventures that are worth backing, and considerations of both the
idea (the “horse”) and founder traits (the “jockey”) bear on their investment choices. In this
regard the view that young people are especially capable of producing big ideas is common and
longstanding (see, e.g., the review in Jones et al. 2014). Young people are arguably cognitively
sharper, less distracted by family or other responsibilities, and more open to transformative ideas
(e.g., Planck 1949; Dietrich and Srinivasan 2007; Weinberg 2006). However, many other forces
may influence the life cycle of entrepreneurship. The opportunity for starting a business might
increase with age because many entrepreneurial resources accumulate with age including human
capital, financial capital, and social capital, all of which may promote both the decision to start a
new firm and, conditional on entry, the success of the venture.

       Research on entrepreneurship often emphasizes the role of accumulating resources over
the life-cycle. Theories of entrepreneurship often take human-capital orientations (e.g., Lucas
1978; Kihlstrom and Laffont 1979) and regularly emphasize education and experience dimensions
(e.g., Iyigun and Owen 1998; Lazear 2004, 2005; Amaral et al. 2011). Empirical studies have

                                                  6
found that human capital, including the acquisition of relevant market and technical knowledge,
can predict entrepreneurial success (e.g., Dunn and Holtz-Eakin 2000, Fairlie and Robb 2007,
Gruber et al. 2008, Chatterji 2009, Lafontaine and Shaw 2014). For example, Lafontaine and
Shaw (2014) find that an owner's prior experience at starting a business increases the longevity
of the next business opened even after controlling for person fixed effects. Chatterji (2009) finds
that ventures started by former employees of incumbent firms perform better than other new
entrants, an advantage that appears related to industry-specific market knowledge.

         In high technology areas, human capital that embodies deep technical knowledge may
also be critical. Evidence from Jones (2010) and Jones and Weinberg (2011) indicates that
scientific fields with deeper knowledge accumulation see inventive and scientific breakthroughs
coming from people at greater ages and after longer educational periods. If technical innovations
in deep areas of knowledge are necessary to a high tech venture, then young entrepreneurs might
be at a disadvantage. This prediction is weakened if entrepreneurs can hire technical expertise
(e.g., Elon Musk at SpaceX or Tesla) 6, and more generally teamwork might allow individuals to
overcome their own lack of technical or market knowledge (e.g., Jones 2009).

         Age and experience may also be relevant when accessing financial capital. Models of
entrepreneurship under liquidity constraints suggest younger individuals will have had less time
to build up the capital needed to start a business or may face difficulties borrowing it (e.g., Evans
and Jovanovic 1989; Stiglitz and Weiss 1981). In Evans and Jovanovic (1989) the entrepreneur’s
wealth limits the amounts of funds she can access. Empirical evidence for this mechanism
continues to be debated (e.g., Holtz-Eakin et al. 1994a, 1994b; Hurst and Lusardi 2004; Nielsen
2012; Fort et al. 2013; Adelino et al. 2015). 7 At the same time, models such as Evans and
Jovanovic (1989) and Stiglitz and Weiss (1981) might be more relevant to mainstream firms



6
 See Ryan (2017) for a description of Musk’s approach to hiring.
7
 Holtz-Eakin et al. (1994a, 1994b) find that receiving an inheritance increases the likelihood of entrepreneurship
and the survival of existing businesses. Hurst and Lusardi (2004) however find no strong link between wealth and
entry into self-employment. Andersen and Nielsen (2012) find that a windfall inheritance leads constrained
entrepreneurs to enter but they also find them to be marginal entrepreneurs. These studies overall suggest financial
constraints might only marginally prevent entrepreneurship but are based on worker-level data sets that identify
entrepreneurs who are disproportionally sole proprietors. More recent studies using business data identifying
employer businesses suggest financial constraints are particularly important for startups and young businesses (see
Fort et al. 2014 and Adelino et al. 2015).


                                                          7
accessing private debt markets. 8 Firms with high growth potential might instead rely on equity
markets. Here too the evidence suggests the age of the entrepreneur might be important (Florin et
al. 2003; Gompers et al. 2005, 2010). 9

         Acquiring the right set of skills or financial resources might not be all that facilitates
successful entrepreneurship. Young entrepreneurs might be more optimistic or confident and
might be willing to take more risk. Occupational choice models by Johnson (1978), Jovanovic
(1979), and Miller (1984), imply that individuals will try riskier occupations such as
entrepreneurship when they are younger. However, this choice does not necessarily make them
successful entrepreneurs, and past studies indicate a complex relationship between optimism and
performance. 10

         Ultimately, whether young entrepreneurs are more successful is an empirical question.
Available empirical evidence suggests that the probability of engaging in general forms of
entrepreneurship (i.e., including restaurants, dry cleaners, retail shops, etc.) follows an inverted
U-shape in age, increasing up to the late 40s and decreasing thereafter. 11 There is however little
evidence as to whether this relationship holds for successful entrepreneurs and whether the age
distribution differs for high-tech or high-growth firms, or more generally firms with high growth
potential, and the limited existing empirical evidence is contradictory. Overall, the inconsistent



8
  In Stiglitz and Weiss (1981) solving the asymmetric information problem leads to credit rationing which might
disproportionally affect young entrepreneurs who cannot establish a low risk profile. Over time banks acquire
information reducing the perceived risk. Evidence of the importance of relationship banking is found in Berger and
Udell (1995) and Petersen and Rajan (1994) and more recently in Jiangli et al. (2005) and Degryse and Ongena
(2005) amongst other work.
9
  Florin et al. (2003) show market experience and social capital predict a venture's ability to accumulate financial
capital during its growth stages and after its initial public offering. Gompers et al. (2005, 2010) show that
entrepreneurial learning, networks, and previously demonstrated success appear important in the creation of venture-
backed firms.
10
   Highly optimistic individuals tend to hold unrealistic expectations, discount negative information, and be
overconfident. Given that entrepreneurs appear to be more optimistic than the general population, this tendency
might lead to negative outcomes (Fraser and Greene 2006, Lowe and Ziedonis 2006, Hmieleski et al. 2009). For
example, Fraser and Greene (2006) show that entrepreneurs are more optimistic than employees and both optimism
and uncertainty diminish with experience. Lowe and Ziedonis (2006) show that entrepreneurs continue unsuccessful
development efforts for longer periods of time than do established firms. Hmieleski et al. (2009) find a negative
relationship between an entrepreneur’s optimism and business performance metrics (revenue and employment), with
previous experience creating ventures moderating these effects.
11
   See Kautonen et al. (2014) for a review of this literature. For these general forms of entrepreneurship, further
evidence suggests that the willingness to start a business decreases with age, while the opportunity to do so increases
(Blanchflower et al. 2001; van Praag and van Ophem 1995). Levesque and Minniti (2006) describe a theoretical
model to accommodate this observation.

                                                          8
findings across these studies may not be surprising given the challenges of limited sample sizes,
low response rates, and non-representative sampling frames used.

III.       Data and Measurement

III.A Data Sets

           Our study uses administrative data to identify the demographics of business founders in
the U.S. and to track the performance of their businesses over time. Our primary datasets include
administrative data from the Census Bureau’s Longitudinal Business Database and Schedule K-1
business owners data, while also integrating numerous other datasets. We describe each dataset
in turn.

Business characteristics

           Our starting point for firm-level data is the Census Bureau’s Longitudinal Business
Database (LBD). Sourced from administrative income and payroll filings and enhanced with
Census Bureau collections, the LBD provides basic information on all businesses in the U.S.
with paid employees. It covers all industries in the private non-farm economy and all
geographies except outlying U.S. territories. In addition, we exclude sole proprietorships to focus
on companies with potential growth orientations. The LBD starts in 1976 and currently runs
through 2014. Data items include employment, payroll, industry, location, and legal form of
organization for establishments and firms as long as they are payroll active (see Jarmin and
Miranda 2002 for a description). Importantly, the longitudinal nature of the LBD allows us to
identify business startups and shutdowns, acquisitions and divestitures as well as expansion and
contractions.

Founder characteristics

           Business ownership data are available for partnerships and S-corporations directly from
administrative Schedule K-1 forms. The K-1 is an administrative dataset identifying owners of
“pass-through” businesses, which account for approximately 55% of all new businesses, or 73%
of all new businesses that are not sole proprietorships. “Pass-through” businesses are those that
pay no entity-level tax, so that income from these businesses is taxed as it flows through at the



                                                   9
owner-level. 12 The IRS tracks income for these entities through Schedule K-1 income returns
(Form 1065 for partnerships and Form 1120S for S-corporations), where “pass-through” entities
are required to file one Schedule K-1 for each of its owners (partners or shareholders). The K-1
data detail the income, deductions, and credits that the entity is allocating to each owner. 13

         For the purposes of our study, a key database innovation is the ability to link the K-1
owner identifiers to business-level as well as individual-level characteristics in Census Bureau
resources. In particular, the K-1 forms include both the employer identification number (EIN) of
the business and the social security number (SSN) of the owner. 14 We use the EIN to link K-1
owners to the specific businesses in the LBD at founding, and we use the individual
identification number to link the specific owners to demographic characteristics via the Census
Numident file as well as to their earnings from W-2 records. K-1 data are available starting in
2007 and cover years through 2014. 15

         Because K-1 data does not cover C-corporations, which account for approximately 20%
of all new businesses, we examine the founders of C-corporations using two different datasets,
W-2 records and the Census Bureau’s Annual Survey of Entrepreneurs. The W-2 records
provide earnings information for all employees of a business who receive remuneration for
services performed, including noncash payments of $600 or more for the year. Businesses must
file a Form W-2 for each employee, allowing us to identify all the employees of private-sector
firms in the United States and their annual earnings, including by law owners who actively
manage the business. 16 Using the W-2 records we can thus examine founding teams under the


12
   See Goldschlag et al. (2017) and Cooper et al. (2015) for a detailed description of the data. Previously Bull, Fisher
and Nelson (2009) used K-1 data to match S-corporations to their owners.
13
   “Pass-through” entities are required to allocate the full amount of their income to their owners.
14
   Personal Identifiable Information (PII) including names, addresses, and social security numbers are stripped from
these records immediately upon arrival at the Census Bureau and replaced with a random Protected Identification
Key (PIK). Researchers do not have access to the PII. All data holdings at the Census Bureau are stripped of their
PII. All further matching across databases using individual identification numbers use the replacement PIK.
15
   The Census Numident file is the Census Bureau’s master file of SSN assignments. It is sourced from the IRS
Numident file and enhanced with Census collections.
16
   The IRS requires manager owners to pay themselves a reasonable compensation for their services in the form of
wages so as not to avoid paying employment taxes. See https://www.irs.gov/uac/Wage-Compensation-for-S-
Corporation-Officers. The Internal Revenue Code establishes that any officer of a corporation is an employee of the
corporation for federal employment tax purposes and they should not attempt to avoid paying employment taxes by
having their officers treat their compensation as cash distributions, payments of personal expenses, and/or loans
rather than as wages.


                                                          10
assumption that managing business owners will pay themselves a salary. Separately, while the
above data allows us to examine every C-corporation founded over our sample period, we can
further examine C-corporation owners directly using the Census Bureau’s Annual Survey of
Entrepreneurs (ASE), which has been conducted annually since 2014 and samples approximately
290,000 businesses of any legal form that are operating in the survey year. 17 The ASE provides
age brackets for the owners and, by matching the ASE to the LBD and W-2 data, we can further
determine a sample of C-corporation founders defined as owner-workers, as with the K-1 data.
The specific definitions of founders we use will be detailed below.

Additional datasets

        We expand this data infrastructure further by linking in the Longitudinal Linked Patent-
Business Database (see Graham et al. (forthcoming)). This database tracks patenting firms over
time. 18 Information contained in granted patents between 2000 and 2011 was linked to firms in
the LBD. We use this file as one approach to identify high tech industries, as well as to identify
new firms that are specifically involved in patenting activity and owner-inventors. We
additionally use internally available Census Bureau crosswalks linking the VentureXpert and the
Private Capital Research Institute (PCRI) database to identify industries and firms where venture
capitalists invest. 19 Lastly, when studying the employment histories of each founder (Section V),
we will use the Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics (LEHD) data of the Census
Bureau, which allows the construction of longer employment histories than the more recent
database of W-2 records allows.




17
   The Annual Survey of Entrepreneurs (ASE) is a representative survey of U.S. businesses with paid employees and
receipts of $1,000 or more. The survey provides information on economic and demographic characteristics of
businesses and business owners.
18
   This file was created under a joint effort between the U.S. Census Bureau and the U.S. Patent and Trademark
Office (USPTO).
19
   The PCRI data are broader in scope than either Preqin, Cambridge Associates, or Thomson Reuters. For details,
see http://www.privatecapitalresearchinstitute.org/index.php. The internal Census Bureau crosswalk to these data
and the VentureXpert data are in beta testing and are currently not available for FSRDC use. We thank Josh Lerner
for access to elements of the PCRI data crosswalk.

                                                       11
III.B Defining Startups, Founders, and Measures of Success

         With the above databases we can analyze the demographics of business founders and
track the performance of their firms over time. In this section we define several core measures
for our study.

Identifying New Firms

         We rely on the LBD to identify startup firms. The LBD tracks both establishments and
firms over time through a series of establishment and firm identifiers. Merger and acquisition
activity, reorganizations and data processing idiosyncrasies can result in new firm identifiers
even when activity associated with that firm is not new. We do not want to treat these as startup
firms. We follow Haltiwanger et al. (2013) and use the longitudinal establishment links in the
LBD to define the age of the firm as the age of the oldest establishment present in the firm at
time of first appearance of a new firm identifier. The firm then ages naturally in increments of
one year following the birth year. In other words, startups are identified as de novo firms with no
prior activity at any of its establishments (age zero firms in our data). This approach ensures our
definition of entrepreneurial firms does not include spinoffs from existing firms or new firms that
are the result of the reorganization or recombination of existing business. 20 It is important to
recognize the LBD identifies the startup year of a firm as the year when the business first hires
an employee; as such the LBD startup date might differ from the legal founding date of a
business. 21 As a robustness check, we exclude businesses where the founding date as captured by
the presence of a K-1 form differs from the LBD age by more than two years. All results are
consistent with the main findings from the full sample.

Identifying Founders

         Critical to our effort is the identification of founders. For S-corporations and partnerships,
we use Form K-1 to define owners as individuals who own some portion of the firm at age zero

20
   We also drop age zero firms that have multiple establishments in their birth years. On average, their initial
employment in year zero is unusually high relative to other new firms, suggesting that they are not de novo startups.
Inspection of these startups suggest they are the result of multinational activity as well as newly created professional
employer organizations.
21
   Employment in the LBD is a point in time measure. It describes all employees (part-time or full-time) receiving a
wage by a business during the payroll period covering the week of March 12th.


                                                          12
in the LBD. We then use the W-2 data to define a founder as an owner who also works at the
firm (as opposed to an investor who holds equity in the firm but does not work there). The
identification of these “owner-workers” is very difficult without the administrative dataset we
use. 22

          For C-corporations, we rely on two alternative approaches, as K-1 owner data are not
available. For our primary analysis, we use the W-2 data to define the three highest paid workers
in the first year of the firm’s existence. This is the approach followed by Kerr and Kerr (2017),
who argue that business owners are often among the top three initial earners in the firm. 23 Based
on the S-corporation data, where ownership status can be determined with certainty, 90% of the
owner-workers are in fact among the top three earners in the firm during the first year. 24 This
“initial team” definition of founders can be applied to all firms. Secondarily, we will present
results using the Census Bureau ASE, allowing us to look at a large subsample of C-corps for
whom we can directly determine owners. By connecting these individuals to W-2 records, as
with the K-1 data, we determine owner-workers in the year the firm is founded. In general, we
have analyzed all of our results separately for S-Corporations (K-1 entities), partnerships (K-1
entities), and C-Corporations (non K-1 entities). Because the results are similar for each type, the
main results emphasize the age findings pooled across all U.S. startups. In Section IV, we will
demonstrate robustness across different ways of defining founders and different legal form.

Identifying High-Growth Startups

          We are especially interested in examining growth-oriented startups. We take two
approaches. The first approach considers technology-orientation, which can suggest the potential


22
   For about 20% of new S-corporations, none of the owners work at the firm, which we interpret as businesses
where the equity holders are financing a new business and running it through hired management. These firms are not
included in our analysis below; we will be considering these firms more closely in further work.
23
   Kerr and Kerr (2017) use LEHD data which currently excludes Massachusetts whereas we use more
comprehensive W-2 earnings records. We have separately considered our analysis using LEHD records, including
different definitions of founding team based on quarterly employment data, and find very similar results as in our
W-2 sample.
24
   This approach is thus good at capturing owner-workers in the sense that few are missed. However, examining the
S-Corporation data, the top three earners also typically include individuals who do not have ownership stakes in the
firm. Thus this “initial team” definition of founders is best thought of as a related but distinct way of capturing the
important individuals in the initial life of the firm, as opposed to an exact way of capturing owner-workers. We will
consider distinctions between these approaches below.


                                                          13
for high growth. The second approach considers the actual outcome for the firm, based on the 3,
5, or 7 year time window after founding.

         Noting that there is no commonly accepted definition of “high tech” sectors or firms, we
use three alternative definitions. First, following Hecker (2005), we define the high tech sector as
the industries (4-digit NAICS) with the highest share of technology-oriented workers as defined
by the Bureau of Labor Statistics. 25 Second, we make use of a comprehensive match between the
Census Bureau LBD and the businesses covered by the PCRI and VentureXpert databases to
determine whether a given firm receives venture capital, suggesting that the firm is seen as
having substantial growth potential. Third, we leverage prior research that has comprehensively
matched the USPTO patent database with the LBD (Graham et al. forthcoming) to determine
whether a given firm has received a patent.

         While the above measures attempt to delineate firms with substantial potential for
growth, by virtue of the LBD we are also able to quantify growth outcomes for each firm
directly. Our primary outcome measures include (a) employment growth and (b) sales growth,
while we also consider (c) exit by acquisition and (d) initial public offerings. In the main text, we
will emphasize employment growth, denoting a high-growth new venture as one that achieved a
given threshold of employment 5 years after founding. We examine employment thresholds
based on the Top 10, 5, 1, or 0.1 percentile. 26 Startups can grow and expand to become large
multi-establishment corporations spanning multiple types of activities and locations. For these
startups we calculate total firm employment by aggregating the establishment level records for
each firm-year observation. From these firm-level measures it is straightforward to compute
measures of employment growth by looking at the change in total employment over time. 27


25
   The list of Hecker (2005) includes 46 four-digit NAICS industries. An industry is considered high tech if the share
of technology-oriented workers is at least twice the overall average of 4.9%. Defined by the Bureau of Labor
Statistics, technology-oriented occupations are generally roles that require knowledge of science, engineering,
mathematics, and/or technology typically acquired through specialized higher education.
26
   Analyses to date based on sales growth show results that are extremely similar to the employment-based results
presented here. Details regarding the construction of the revenue dataset (also known as the Revenue Enhanced LBD
or RE-LBD) can be found in Haltiwanger, Jarmin, Kulik, and Miranda (2016). We examine total revenue growth in
a similar manner to employment growth, relying on the revenue-enhanced LBD (RE-LBD) and examining whether a
new venture achieves an upper tail level of sales within a given number of years after founding.
27
   Our analysis includes startups that transition from single-unit to multi-unit firms. We track these transitions by
following the establishment-level activity over time.


                                                         14
         Startups can also become the target of acquisitions by existing firms. For example, the
owner(s) of a successful venture might decide it is in their best interest to sell their idea and the
assets embodied in their firm. In this case the original firm will cease to exist as such after the
acquisition. 28 Some startups will simply fail and shutdown. We separately identify acquisitions
of startups by existing firms as well as shutdowns and classify these events as distinct types of
firm outcomes. 29 Lastly, we use the Compustat-Business Register bridge to identify firms that
enter public equity markets through an IPO. Our measure of “successful exit” below is an
indicator for acquisition or IPO ever occurring within the scope of our databases.

IV.      Results

         We now turn to the analysis of founder age in the universe of U.S. startups delineated
above. Table 2 presents the results. Focusing on the first row, which shows the U.S. as a whole,
and the first column, which considers all new ventures, we see that the mean age at founding is
41.9. This finding is broadly consistent with other population surveys of general types of new
firms. Of course, while the word “startup” may conjure the image of technology entrepreneurs
hard at work in their proverbial Silicon Valley garage, the great bulk of the new ventures that
constitute our universe do not match this archetype. Though our data do not include sole
proprietor businesses, it is still the case that most U.S. firms do not have the ambition and/or the
business model to grow and scale their business (Hurst and Pugsley, 2011).

         To focus on growth-oriented entrepreneurs within our universe of U.S. startups, we will
take several approaches. Our first set of approaches examines the nature of the startup at
founding, based on technology-related criteria. Our second set of approaches examines the
growth performance of the startups themselves. Given the scale of the administrative data, we
can further look at intersections of these criteria to focus on narrow subgroups of firms that both
grow quickly and are in high-technology areas.




28
   In the LBD these firms will cease to exist as such and their establishments will take on the acquiring firms’
identifiers.
29
   In order to distinguish successful acquisitions (i.e., those that generate positive returns for investors) from fire sale
acquisitions, we drop observations in which the total employment after the acquisitions is lower than the initial
employment.

                                                            15
IV.A Ex-Ante Growth-Orientation

       The results for different measures of growth-orientation are found in columns (2)-(4) of
Table 2. They show the mean founder age according to the different high-technology criteria. We
see that focusing on “high-tech” does not substantively affect mean founder age compared to the
overall U.S. sample. Depending on the definition, mean founder age now ranges from 41.9 to
44.6, with founders in high-tech sectors (43.2) and founder of patenting firms (44.6) appearing
somewhat older on average than founders in the U.S. overall.

       To the extent that mean founder age across broad groupings of technology firms may
hide important differences across sectors, where very young founders may occasionally be the
norm, we further examine the oldest and youngest technology sectors by founder age. Table 3
presents these results, grouping technology firms at the NAICS 4-digit level. We see that the
computing-oriented ventures as well as wireless telecom ventures appear to have the youngest
founders. Yet even here the mean founder ages range from 38.5 to 40.8– approximately a decade
older than the entrepreneurs often emphasized in media accounts (see Table 1), which tend to
focus on computing-oriented new ventures. Meanwhile, the oldest five technology sectors by
founder age involve manufacturing as well as oil and gas ventures. These sectors see mean
founder ages from 47.3 to 51.4. Thus there are some substantial differences across sectors in the
mean age of founders. Yet there is no sector, including in computing, where the mean founder
ages are below 38, and only 3 of the 315 NAICS-4 digit sectors show a mean founder age below
40.

       We can further partition the data geographically and consider California, Massachusetts,
and New York separately given that these three states account for a significant portion of high-
growth startup activity in the U.S. (Chen et al. 2010 with respect to VC-backed startups). In
addition, we use more granular geographic variation by identifying regions with the most
entrepreneurial activity at the zip code level. Using the Entrepreneurial Quality Index developed
by Guzman and Stern (2017), we define entrepreneurial hubs as the 50 zip codes with the highest




                                                16
entrepreneurial quality. 30 We also look specifically at Silicon Valley, considering all new
ventures in the zip codes of Santa Clara and San Mateo counties.

         The results appear in Table 2. Taking the overall population of new ventures (column 1),
we see little variation with geography. Even when looking at the zip codes with the most growth-
oriented new ventures, the mean founder age is 40.8, or approximately 1 year younger than the
U.S. population average. One interpretation of this result may be that, even in entrepreneurial
regions, most new firms are not in technology or growth-oriented sectors. However, reading
across columns and rows in the table, we can further examine the intersection of geography with
technology or growth-orientation. Remarkably, we see only modest differences in age. Mean
founder ages rarely dip much below age 40, let alone ages 35, 30, or 25. The only category
where the mean ages appear (modestly) below age 40 is when the firm has VC-backing. The
youngest category is VC-backed firms in New York, where the mean founder age was 38.7.
More generally, across the various narrow cuts in Table 2, the mean age ranges from 38.7 to
45.3. Put another way, even when reducing the set of 2.7 million founders to the 1,900 associated
with firms that are both in entrepreneurial hubs and receive VC backing, the mean age at
founding is 39.5. Meanwhile, founders in high-tech employment sectors tend to be slightly older
than the U.S.-wide average, and founders of patenting firms are the oldest of all, with an average
age of 44.3 in Silicon Valley and 43.8 in the entrepreneurial hubs.

IV.B Ex-Post High-Performance Firms

         It may still be that younger founders produce the highest performance new firms. Our
second approach to looking at founder age thus considers firm-level outcomes, including growth
itself. The capacity to examine actual outcomes draws on the strengths of the LBD, which
provides employees and sales for each firm, as well as indicating exit by acquisition and, via the
Compustat Bridge, initial public offerings. A potential limitation in the intersection of our
databases is that we have a limited time-period in which we can examine firm performance. Here
we will focus on outcomes five years after the hiring of the first employee. 31




30
   Since the Entrepreneurial Quality Index is an average score of all startups in a given region, we exclude zip codes
with fewer than 20 entrepreneurial firms.
31
   Using 3-year windows and 7-year windows shows broadly similar results.

                                                         17
        To delineate “successful” entrepreneurs within the population of new ventures, we focus
on the upper tail of the new venture’s employment growth. Specifically, we examine upper tail
growth performance for firms alternatively in the Top 10%, Top 5%, Top 1%, and Top 0.1% of
growth. We complement these employment-based growth measures with a metric that tracks
whether these ventures ever exited by acquisition or IPO within our sample period.

        Table 4 presents mean founder age for new ventures that prove to be in the Top 5% of
employment growth. The structure of Table 4 repeats the structure of Table 2, allowing easy
comparison with the results for the whole sample. The Top 5% subsample allows sufficient
observation counts to break down founder age by geography, technology-intensiveness, and their
interactions. 32 Examining the first column, we see that the Top 5% firms appears to have
similarly-aged founders, with mean ages in the U.S. as a whole rising from 41.9 (Table 2) to 42.1
(Table 4). Reading down the rows and across the columns, we see that mean founder age can be
slightly higher or slightly lower than for the full population, but the overall founder age
tendencies for these 1 in 20 top growth firms remains similar to the broader population. While
sample sizes become very small, we now see that the 400 founders of high-growth firms with
VC-backing in entrepreneurial zip codes show the youngest mean age, at 39.6. This is the only
case where the mean age drops below 40.

        While a Top 5% growth outcome indicates a quite successful new venture, it may still be
that the extreme upper tail growth successes come from relatively young people. Table 5 thus
examines founder age across a range of upper-tail performance definitions, up to the Top 0.1%
(the 1 in 1,000 upper tail firms). Table 5A displays the results for startups overall and across
geographic areas; Table 5B further considers different typologies of technology firms. Across
these tables, it appears that more successful startups have, if anything, slightly older founders on
average. For example, the 1,700 founders of the fastest growing new ventures (1 in 1,000) in our
universe of U.S. firms had an average age of 45.0 (compared to 43.7 for the top 1% and 42.1 for
the top 5%). Looking across geographies (Table 5A) shows that moving towards extreme-upper
tail growth outliers is associated with older founders, not younger founders, especially for the top
1 in 1,000 firms. Firms that exit by acquisition or IPO also tend to have older founders. The age

32
  Results are similar when looking at firms in the Top 5% of sales growth instead. We focus here on the Top 5%,
rather than the Top 1% or Top 0.1% because this still leaves enough firms to further decompose the sample along
both technology orientation and geographic location.

                                                       18
at founding for these successful exits is 46.7 across the U.S. sample, and is systematically higher
within each region. Looking at technology-intensiveness measures (Table 5B) we also see older
founders as we move toward upper-tail performance, especially for the top 1 in 100 or top 1 in
1,000 firms. This evidence is at odds with the conventional wisdom that successful founders
skew younger.

IV.C Founder Age Distributions

       One limitation of the foregoing discussion is that it only analyzes mean founder age.
While the mean age provides a standard summary statistic, and one that we can compare across
technology-intensity, regions, and outcome measures, investigating the entire age distribution
may reveal particular bands of age where founder activity is especially intense or founders are
especially successful.

       Figure 1 presents the full founder age distribution. We present the age distribution for the
founders of all U.S. firms (blue line) and the age distribution for founders of Top 1% firms by
employee growth after five years (red line). Studying all founders, we see that age distribution is
single peaked, with a relatively flat plateau at ages 37-43. Studying founders of high-growth
firms, we see clearly that the founder age distribution shifts systematically to the right. Thus, the
highest-growth new firms not only appear to come from those in middle-age, but also tend to
come at even older ages than the background age distribution for founders would imply. Below
their late 30s, the frequency of successful founders is well below the frequency of these founders
in the population. Starting in the late 30s, and especially by the mid-to-late 40s, the frequency of
successful founders is substantially greater than the frequency of these founders in the
population. We dig deeper into this result using regressions below.

       Figure 2 explores the founder age distribution further, comparing it against the
underlying workforce age distribution. Figure 2A presents the age distribution of the workforce
in 2010 based on the population of earners from W-2 records. The workforce age distribution
declines slightly from age 20 to age 56 and then falls sharply thereafter. Figure 2B then considers
a normalized founding rate, showing the percentage of founders per worker of each given age.
Compared to Figure 1, the effect of normalizing by workforce size is to make a sharper slope at
younger ages and a flatter slope at older ages. Thus, very young founders now appear even less


                                                 19
common (because young workers appear a bit more often in the workforce) and founders in late
middle age and beyond appear more common (because the workforce at these more advanced
ages is smaller). The peak rate for founding companies now appears at age 38. Finally, Figure 2C
looks at the founding rate of high-tech new ventures as defined by the average STEM
composition of the industry of activity (Hecker 2005) featured in Tables 2, 4, and 5B. We see
that the shape is similar to Figure 2B, although the peak is slightly flatter and the decline with
age is less steep.

IV.D The Likelihood of Success

         Our previous results have demonstrated that growth-oriented start-up founders in the US
economy tend to be middle-aged, not young. Thus, when asking where most high-growth or
technology-intensive firms in the U.S. come from, the answer is “middle aged people.” However,
an equally important question is to ask how the probability of entrepreneurial success changes
with founder age, conditional on starting a new firm. This statistic may be more informative for
an individual considering founding a company or for investors deciding where to place their bets.
For example, if two founders (of two distinct firms) come to pitch their idea to a venture
capitalist, and all the venture capitalist knows is these founders’ ages, which founder would be
more likely to produce an upper-tail growth outcome?

         To examine the relationship between the likelihood of success and age, we run linear
probability models where an indicator for “success” is regressed on a full set of founder age
fixed effects (age 20 and below is the omitted category). We graph each age coefficient and the
associated 95% confidence interval in Figure 3. 33 Our success indicators are (a) exit by
acquisition or IPO and (b) employment in the top 0.1%, both measured here at 5 years from
founding.

         Figure 3A considers successful exits, which occurs for roughly 4,000 (or 0.15%) of the
founders in our universe. We see that the relationship between age and successful exit is
monotonically increasing up until about age 60 and declining slightly thereafter. A founder at
age 50 is approximately twice as likely to experience a successful exit compared to a founder at


33
  The regression calculates robust standard errors, clustered at the new venture level, to account for potentially
correlated errors across the founder ages within a given firm.

                                                          20
age 30. Figure 3B replicates this analysis using Top 0.1% employment growth as the metric of
success. Here again, the relationship between success and age is increasing, though the
individual age coefficients are estimated less precisely. The rate of increase with age is similar as
with exits: a founder at age 50 is approximately twice as likely of achieving upper-tail
employment growth compared to a founder at age 30.

       In interpreting these results one possibility is that older founders tend to enter industries
where acquisitions or large-scale employment is more common. Thus industry effects may
confound the relationship between success and age. Figure 3C therefore adds to the regression
specification a full set of fixed effects for each NAICS-4 industry code. We see that the
steepness of the relationship with age is somewhat attenuated, but otherwise looks similar,
increasing substantially until entrepreneurs reach the age of 60 at the time of founding.

       Overall, we see that younger founders appear strongly disadvantaged in their tendency to
produce the highest-growth companies. That said, there is a hint of some interesting age
thresholds and plateaus in the data. Below age 25, founders appear to do badly (or rather, do well
extremely rarely), but there is a sharp increase in performance at age 25. Between ages 25 and
35, performance seems fairly flat, or even possibly decreasingly slightly. However, starting after
age 35 we see a jump in success probabilities, now outpacing the 25-year-olds. Another large
surge in performance comes at age 46 and is sustained toward age 60.

       Lastly, and given the interest in very young entrepreneurs, Figure 4 considers a broader
range of outcome measures, comparing founders below age 30 with those above. We see that
“failed” ventures, defined as those businesses that cease operations or no longer have employees,
exhibit a somewhat higher failure rate for under-30 founders. Similarly, the likelihood of high-
growth ventures is slightly lower for under-30 founders, when examining Top 10% or Top 5%
firms. As we move to Top 1% growth, Top 0.1% growth, or successful exit as the outcome, the
success rate of under-30 founders is increasingly outpaced by older founders.

IV.E Results by Founder Definition and Legal Form

       We can further consider the results by legal type and across distinct definitions of the
founder team. Figure 5A shows the age distributions for K-1 firms and C-corporations separately
using an “owner worker” definition, where for the C-corporations we use the ASE sample to

                                                 21
isolate owners who work at the firm at founding. We present the overall age distribution as well
as the age distributions for the firms with upper tail growth outcomes. 34 Commensurate with our
earlier findings, we see that the age distribution peaks in middle age for high growth firms and
shifts to yet older ages for the firms with the best growth outcomes. Figure 5B shows the age
distributions for K-1 firms and C-corporations separately using an “initial team” definition,
studying the three highest paid workers in the firm in the year of founding. Here we see broadly
similar findings, although the rightward shift in age with success is even more pronounced, and
especially for the very highest growth firms. Overall, the findings are robust to all these cuts at
the data: regardless of legal form or founding team definition, we see that the highest-growth
firms are started by individuals in middle age and beyond.



V.      Discussion

        Census Bureau data reveal that the fastest growing new firms, including those in
technology sectors or in entrepreneurial hubs, are founded by middle-aged and older
entrepreneurs. This finding appears substantially different from what some prior studies using
selected samples suggested, and remarkably at odds with public perception. At the same time,
the findings are consistent with numerous theories that emphasize the accumulation of
entrepreneurial resources over the entrepreneur’s life cycle. Amidst the many forces outlined in
Section II, the steep gains seen in entrepreneurial success rates with age are consistent with large
net increases in entrepreneurial capabilities as the life cycle proceeds. In this section, we further
explore these findings. First, we consider the role of industry experience. Second, we examine
age variation within founding teams. Third, we focus on extreme cases of entrepreneurial success
that do feature very young founders. Finally, we discuss the behavior of VC investors in light of
our results.




34
  The ASE survey provides data in age brackets, as indicated in the figure. In Figure 5A we also consider growth
outcomes up to the top 1 in 100, rather than the top 1 in 1,000, due to the smaller size of the ASE sample compared
to the administrative data as a whole. To assist visual comparison, we present the K-1 data in Figure 5A in the same
age brackets and growth categories as for the ASE.

                                                        22
V.A Industry Experience

        Young people are often thought to have a creative advantage in producing transformative
ideas. One version of this reasoning, in line with Planck’s principle (Planck 1949; Dietrich and
Srinivasan 2007, Weinberg 2006), is that experience within a paradigm of thought can foreclose
transformative thinking, so that lack of experience can become a specific, creative virtue. We can
examine an important dimension of this perspective by looking at whether work experience
within an industry is positively or negatively predictive of entrepreneurial success in that
industry.

        To proceed, we use the LEHD employment records to link all 2.5 million founders to
their prior employment histories, which collectively encompass 20 million former jobs. 35 We can
then consider, for every founder, whether the individual has prior work experience in the sector
of the start-up. We can measure both (a) how close and (b) how long the individual’s experience
is in the relevant industrial sector and then examine whether industry experience is predictive of
entrepreneurial success. To study “how close”, we group founders according to experience at the
same 2-digit, 4-digit, and 6-digit NAICS industry code of the start-up. 36 To study “how long”,
we group founders according to whether they have never worked in the sector, have worked for
one or two years in the sector, or have worked for at least three years in the sector.

        Table 6 presents the key results. The columns define various success measures by growth
threshold (the top 10, 5, 1, and 0.1 percent) and by successful exit. The rows then group founders
by their industry experience. Each cell presents the percentage of founders of the given type that
achieve the given growth outcome. Panel A considers work experience in the same 2-digit
industry as the start-up. Panels B and C repeat these analyses for experience at the 4-digit and 6-
digit levels.

        Consider 2-digit NAICS first. Reading down the rows in Panel A, we see clearly that
experience in the 2-digit industry predicts higher rates of entrepreneurial success. Moreover,



35
   The LEHD allows for a longer prior work history than W-2 records. In practice, the LEHD prior work sample
goes back in time to at least the early 2000s, with some state level records going back to 1990. Because the LEHD
does not include Massachusetts, we miss some prior employment as well as some founders.
36
   In the 2012 NAICS, there are 24 2-digit NAICS industries, 312 4-digit NAICS industries, and 1,065 6-digit
industries.

                                                        23
conditional on having some prior experience in the 2-digit industry, having longer experience
(three or more years) shows higher success rates than having shorter experience (one or two
years). Reading right across the columns in Panel A, longer experience is strongly predictive of
success for all growth thresholds, as well as for successful exit. For the 1 in 1,000 highest-growth
firms, founders with three or more years of experience in the 2-digit industry see upper tail
success at twice the rate as founders with no experience in the 2-digit industry.

         Now consider increasingly close industrial experience. Comparing across Panels A-C, we
see that success rates rise as the founder’s work experience becomes increasingly closely
matched to the start-up sector. Increasing success rates with increasingly close experience are
seen at all growth thresholds. For achieving a 1 in 1,000 highest-growth firm, having no
experience in the 2-digit level industry leads to a success rate of 0.11%, while having at least
three years of experience in the start-up’s industry shows success rates that rise from 0.22% (2-
digit NAICS experience) to 0.24% (4-digit NAICS experience) to 0.26% (6-digit NAICS
experience). 37,38

         Overall, these findings indicate that founders with both closer and longer experience in
the industry of the start-up see substantially greater success rates. These findings reject the idea
that coming from outside a sector predicts outsized entrepreneurial success, and thus work
against theories of entrepreneurial creativity that emphasize an outsider advantage in producing
transformative ideas—a primary rationale underlying the broader belief that young people will
produce the highest growth firms. More precisely, there might still be some creative advantage in
being such an outsider, but, if so, this advantage is being overwhelmed by other forces positively
linking founder experience with success among the highest growth firms. The findings are
instead consistent with views stressing the importance of market knowledge (Kline and




37
   Note that, for the Top 0.1% case, the baseline rate for founders is above 0.1%. This is because the 0.1% is defined
at the firm level (according to firm performance) and here we are looking at rates at the founder level, where the
most successful firms tend towards somewhat larger founding teams.
38
   One might also wonder if the age effect reflects in part prior entrepreneurial experience (so-called “serial
entrepreneurship”) as well as experience in a specific sector. Because our ability to track founding experience prior
to 2007 is limited, we leave this important question to future research.


                                                         24
Rosenberg 1986) in innovation, which can include both industry-specific human capital and
social capital. 39

V.B Unpacking Age within Founding Teams

         Our results have looked at the age distribution of founders across the population of new
firms in the United States. A related line of inquiry regards the age distribution of founders
within a given firm. To the extent that different members of a founding team play different roles,
it is theoretically possible that the youngest members play outsized roles. To be conservative in
assessing the role of youth in high-growth firms, we may then be additionally interested in the
age of the very youngest founders of these firms. Furthermore, successful firms might feature
founding teams with heterogeneous ages, possibly leveraging advantages of both youth and
experience within a founding team.

         Table 7 explores within team age heterogeneity. We consider two definitions of founders.
In Panel A we consider the “owner-worker” definition, using all K-1 firms. In Panel B, we
consider the “initial team” definition focusing on the top three earners in the first year of the firm
and using all K-1 firms and all C-corporations. The table entries present the minimum and
maximum ages in the founding team, averaging across firms of a given type, as indicated by the
column heading.

         Using the “owner-worker” definition (Panel A), we see that the youngest founder for
each startup averages age 42.7. Looking at growth-oriented firms, the age of the youngest
founder tends to rise for patenting and high-tech employment firms, although it drops to 39.8 for
VC-backed firms. Looking at ex-post success, the top 1 in 1,000 highest-growth firms show a
mean age of the youngest founder of 42.3. Meanwhile, the oldest founder for each firm averages
44.6 in the broad sample, rising to a range of 45.8-47.8 among the growth-oriented firms.
Overall, and compared to the background population of K-1 firms, we see that the age of the



39
   These industry experience results can be further confirmed in regressions that control for founder age. Thus both
the proximity and length of industry experience are not simply proxying for advancing age. At the same time, age
fixed effects in these regressions remain jointly significant for predicting upper-tail success. Thus industry
experience is not the only factor underlying the age advantage established in the main results. This suggests that
general forms of experience, social, and/or financial capital remains as potentially important pieces to understanding
the age relationship and provide avenues for further research.

                                                         25
youngest founder does not show a systematic pattern with growth-orientation but the age of the
oldest founder rises systematically with growth orientation.

         Using the “initial team” definition (Panel B), we find broadly similar results but with
wider age gaps among the initial top three earners in the firms’ first year of operation. Now the
youngest individual averages 35.1 in the broad sample and typically increases with ex-ante
growth-orientation or ex-post growth success, with average minimum age ranging from 35.0-
39.1. The oldest individual now averages 46.0 for the broad sample, and again tends to rise with
growth-orientation, with the age ranging from 45.7-51.4.

         Interestingly, age heterogeneity tends to go up with the ex-post most successful firms.
This tendency is largely due to the rising maximum age. The top 1 in 1,000 highest-growth
firms are populated with the largest maximum founder ages in Panel A (owner-worker
definition) or Panel B (initial team definition). At the same time, the minimum founder ages for
these 1 in 1,000 firms tend to be more middle-of-the-pack in both Panel A and Panel B compared
to other firms. These findings are consistent with advantages of (relative) youth coupled with
experience, although still the youngest founders are typically middle-aged. 40

         Overall, we continue to see little evidence, even looking at the very youngest founder,
that highly-successful firms are populated by especially young founders. The fact that the
youngest founder of each firm is middle-aged, even among the highest-growth firms, indicates
that successful firms are not a marriage between very young and substantially older founders.
Rather middle age remains the rule, while the age of the oldest founder tends to shift to still older
ages for the most successful firms compared to ordinary firms.




40
  Much has been written in the business press about the optimal timing for young start-ups to hire seasoned
executives as a form of “adult supervision” (Adler 2007, Hefferman 2017). Google’s Eric Schmidt and Facebook’s
Sheryl Sandberg are prominent examples in many observers’ minds. However, although such experienced managers
are often offered sizeable equity packages to entice them into joining, they appear to rarely join as soon as the first
year of a firm’s existence. Thus our age findings do not speak to the implications of professional management being
engaged later in the firm’s existence. That said, the finding that highest-growth firms show the highest maximum
ages among the founders is consistent with the idea that seasoned individuals may bring advantages.

                                                          26
V.C Entrepreneur Outliers

         Although we have looked at the Top 0.1% of firms and the rare outcome of successful
acquisition or IPO, a skeptic may still wonder if even more extreme upper-tail outliers are the
province of the very young. More precisely, several cases of extreme entrepreneurial success in
the software and IT sectors have prominently featured very young founders (e.g., Steve Jobs, Bill
Gates, and Mark Zuckerberg). 41 One response to this observation is to balance the ledger by
noting that there are also cases of extraordinary successes featuring older founders. For example,
Herbert Boyer was age 40 when, based on his genetic engineering breakthroughs, he founded
Genentech (which would eventually be acquired for $47 billion), and David Duffield was 64
when he founded Workday (which currently has a market cap of $28 billion). 42

         At the same time, a subtler but perhaps more important response may lie among the
greatest young founders themselves. Namely, the claim that young people are especially good at
starting companies is a within person claim. That is, a given individual is thought to be “better”
when s/he is young (e.g., when s/he may have greater energy, deductive abilities, originality,
etc.). If so, then we would expect great young entrepreneurs to become “worse” when they age.
At a cursory level, this seems doubtful. Elon Musk’s Tesla and SpaceX seem no less visionary or
successful than his earlier ventures, Zip2 and X.com. Steve Jobs and Apple computer appeared
to find their blockbuster innovation with the iPhone, which came decades after the Apple II. Jeff
Bezos and Amazon have moved far beyond selling books online. These examples suggest that
these prominent founders themselves may not have peaked when very young.

         To examine this idea quantitatively, Figure 6 presents the forward 5-year stock price
multiple as a function of founder age for each of Microsoft, Apple, Amazon, and Google. 43 This
analysis allows us to examine whether the additional growth in market valuation tends to decline
as these individuals age. We see no such tendency. In fact, the five-year multiples tend to rise



41
   From public documents.
42
   From public documents.
43
   The stock price multiple is the ratio of the January 1st closing stock price five years in the future to the January 1st
closing stock price in the current year. The stock price series are post IPO (by their nature) and account for
dividends and splits. While Facebook would be a natural addition to this quartet of major information technology
firms, the stock price series is too short as yet to allow such analysis.


                                                            27
toward middle age. The peak for each founder comes at age 48 (Steve Jobs), age 39 (Bill Gates),
age 45 (Jeff Bezos), and age 36 (Sergei Brin and Larry Page). 44

           From this perspective, one may reconcile the existence of great young entrepreneurs with
the advantages of middle age by noting that extremely talented people are also extremely
talented when they are young. That is, there are individual fixed effects that allow some people
to succeed at very young ages, even when people (including these young successes) get better
with age. Thus there is no fundamental tension between the existence of great young
entrepreneurs and a general tendency for founders to reach their peak entrepreneurial potential in
middle age.

V.D Venture Capitalist Behavior

           We also see that venture capitalists tend to bet on relatively young founders. Given that
younger founders have substantially lower batting averages (see Figure 3), the founder age
tendency in VC investments may be surprising. VCs may thus be seen as making bad bets, which
may be consistent with empirical findings elsewhere suggesting that VCs have earned low
returns (Kaplan and Lerner 2010). However, it may also be the case that young founders are
more in need of early-stage external finance, thus leading to this relationship. More subtly, and
noting that VCs are seeking high returns, which is not identical to high growth, it may be that
younger founders tend to sell their equity at lower prices, and thus VCs are making optimal
return decisions. Teasing apart why VCs bet young is an interesting area for further work. We
can say now however that venture capital, a major source of early-stage financing that can help
drive creative destruction and economy-wide growth, does not currently appear allocated to the
firms with the highest growth potential.

VI.        Conclusion

           Researchers, policymakers, investors, and entrepreneurs themselves all strive to
understand entrepreneurial traits that predict the creation of successful new firms. This paper has
focused on founder age, which is often thought to be a key predictor of entrepreneurial success.
We find that age indeed predicts success, and sharply, but in the opposite way that many


44
     Page, who remains as CEO of Alphabet (Google), is 44 today.

                                                        28
observers and investors propose. The highest success rates in entrepreneurship come from
founders in middle age and beyond.

       These findings are consistent with theories in which key entrepreneurial resources (such
as human capital, financial capital, and social capital) accumulate with age. Mechanisms by
which young people are proposed to have advantages (such as energy or originality) may still be
operating, but if so they appear to be overwhelmed by other forces. Popular perceptions that
celebrate youth as a key characteristic for creating high-growth firms appear largely misplaced.
To the extent that venture capital targets younger founders, early-stage finance appears biased
against the founders with the highest likelihood of successful exits or top 1 in 1,000 growth
outcomes.

       Future work can explore how variation in specific founder traits predict entrepreneurial
entry and success, further informing underlying theories for the life cycle of entrepreneurs and
provide additional capacity to predict entrepreneurial success. More broadly, new administrative
datasets linking founder traits and business outcomes promise to further reveal core facts about
the high-growth new ventures that can drive economic growth and the advance of socioeconomic
prosperity.




                                                29
References

Adelino, Manuel and Antoinette Schoar and Felipe Severino (2015), “House prices, collateral,
and self-employment.” Journal of Financial Economics, Volume 117, Issue 2, Pages 288–306.

Adler, Carlye (2007), “Time to Replace Yourself,” CNN-Money, May 8.
http://money.cnn.com/magazines/fsb/fsb_archive/2007/05/01/100003827/

Amaral, A. Miguel, Rui Baptista and Francisco Lima (2011), “Serial entrepreneurship: Impact of
human capital on time to re-entry.” Small Business Economics, 37, 1-21.

Andersen, Steffen and Kasper Meisner Nielsen (2012), "Ability or Finances as Constraints on
Entrepreneurship? Evidence from Survival Rates in a Natural Experiment." The Review of
Financial Studies, Volume 25, Issue 12, 1 December, Pages 3684–3710.

Arrow, Kenneth J. (1962) “The Economic Implications of Learning by Doing.” The Review of
Economic Studies, Vol. 29, No. 3 (Jun., 1962), pp. 155-173.

Bates, Timothy (1990) “Entrepreneur Human Capital Inputs and Small Business Longevity” The
Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 72, No. 4, pp. 551-559.

Berger, Allen N. and Gregory F. Udell (1995), “Relationship Lending and Lines of Credit in
Small Firm Finance.” The Journal of Business, Vol. 68, No. 3, pp. 351-381.

Blanchflower, D. G., Oswald, A., & Stutzer, A. (2001), “Latent entrepreneurship across nations.”
European Economic Review, 45(4-6), 680–691.

Bull, Nicholas, Susan Nelson and Robin Fisher (2009) “Characteristics Of Business Ownership:
Overview For Pass-Through Entities And Evidence On S Corporate Ownership From Linked
Data.” 102nd Annual National Tax Association Conference Proceedings.

Chatterji , Aaron K (2009) “Spawned with a Silver Spoon? Entrepreneurial Performance and
Innovation in the Medical Device Industry.” Strategic Management Journal, Vol. 30, No. 2 (Feb.,
2009), pp. 185-206.

Chen, Henry, Paul A. Gompers, Anna Kovner, and Josh Lerner (2010), "Buy Local? The
Geography of Successful Venture Capital Expansion." Journal of Urban Economics 67:1.

Cooper, Michael, John McClelland, James Pearce, Richard Prisinzano, Joseph Sullivan, Danny
Yagan, Owen Zidar, Eric Zwick (2015), “Business In The United States: Who Owns It And How
Much Tax Do They Pay?” NBER Working Paper 21651.

Decker, Ryan, John Haltiwanger, Ron Jarmin, and Javier Miranda (2014) “The Role of
Entrepreneurship in US Job Creation and Economic Dynamism.” Journal of Economic
Perspectives—Volume 28, Number 3—Summer 2014—Pages 3–24.

                                              30
Degryse, Hans and Steven Ongena (2005), “Distance, Lending Relationships, and Competition.”
The Journal of Finance, Vol. 60, No. 1, pp. 231-266.

Dietrich, Arne. and Narayanan Srinivasan (2007), "The Optimal Age to Start a Revolution."
Journal of Creative Behavior, 41:1, 54-74.

Dunn, Thomas A, and Douglas J. Holtz-Eakin. 2000. "Financial Capital, Human Capital, and the
Transition to Self-Employment: Evidence from Intergenerational Links." Journal of Labor
Economics, Vol. 18, No. 2, pp. 282-305.

Evans, David S. and Boyan Jovanovic (1989), “An Estimated Model of Entrepreneurial Choice
under Liquidity Constraints.” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 97, No. 4 pp. 808-827.

Fairlie, Robert W., and Alicia M. Robb. 2007. "Families, Human Capital, and Small Business:
Evidence from the Characteristics of Business Owners Survey," (with Alicia Robb), Industrial
and Labor Relations Review, 60(2): 225-245.

Florin, Juan, Michael Lubatkin and William Schulze (2003), “A Social Capital Model of High-
Growth Ventures.” The Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 46, No. 3 (Jun., 2003), pp. 374-
384.

Fort, Teresa C., John C. Haltiwanger, Ron S. Jarmin and Javier Miranda (2013), “How firms
respond to business cycles: The role of firm age and firm size.” IMF Economic Review 61 (3),
520-559.

Fraser, S., & Greene, F. J. 2006. “The effects of experience on entrepreneurial optimism and
uncertainty.” Economica, 73: 169-192.

Frick, Walter (2014) “How Old Are Silicon Valley’s Top Founders? Here’s the Data.” Harvard
Business Review.

Glaeser, Edward L. (2009), “Entrepreneurship and the City”. In Entrepreneurship and Openness:
Theory and Evidence, edited by David B. Audretsch, Robert Litan, Robert J. Strom.

Goldschlag, Nathan, J. Daniel Kim, and Kristin McCue (2017), "Just Passing Through:
Characterizing U.S. Pass-Through Business Owners." Working Papers 17-69, U.S. Census
Bureau Center for Economic Studies Working Paper No. 17-69.

Gompers, Paul, Josh Lerner and David Scharfstein (2005) “Entrepreneurial Spawning: Public
Corporations and the Genesis of New Ventures, 1986 to 1999.” The Journal of Finance, Vol. 60,
No. 2, pp. 577-614.

Gompers, Paul, Anna Kovner, Josh Lerner and David Scharfstein (2010), "Performance
persistence in entrepreneurship." Journal of Financial Economics, Volume 96, Issue 1, April,
Pages 18-32.
                                               31
Graham, Stuart J. H., Cheryl Grim, Tariqul Islam, Alan C. Marco and Javier Miranda
(forthcoming), “Business Dynamics of Innovating Firms: Linking U.S. Patents with
Administrative Data on Workers and Firms.” Journal of Economics and Management Strategy.

Gruber, Marc, Ian MacMillan and James Thompson (2008) “Look Before You Leap: Market
Opportunity Identification in Emerging Technology Firms.” MANAGEMENT SCIENCE Vol.
54, No. 9, September 2008, pp. 1652-1665.

Guzman, Jorge and Scott Stern (2017), “Nowcasting and placecasting entrepreneurial quality and
performance” Chapter in NBER book Measuring Entrepreneurial Businesses: Current
Knowledge and Challenges, pages 11-62 National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc., John
Haltiwanger, Erik Hurst, Javier Miranda, and Antoinette Schoar, editors.

Haltiwanger, J., Jarmin, R. and Miranda, J. (2013), "Who Creates Jobs? Small vs. Large vs.
Young." Review of Economics and Statistics, 95:2, 347-361.

Haltiwanger, John, Ron S. Jarmin, Robert Kulick, Javier Miranda (2016) “High Growth Young
Firms: Contribution to Job, Output, and Productivity Growth.” Chapter in NBER book
Measuring Entrepreneurial Businesses: Current Knowledge and Challenges, pages 11-62
National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc., John Haltiwanger, Erik Hurst, Javier Miranda, and
Antoinette Schoar, editors.

Hecker, D. E. (2005), "High-Technology Employment: a NAICS-Based Update," Monthly Lab.
Rev., 128, 57.

Heffernan, Margaret (2017), “When a Start-up Should Hire a Corporate Executive,” Inc.com.
https://www.inc.com/margaret-heffernan/when-a-start-up-should-hire-a-corporate-
executive.html

Hmieleski, Keith M. and Robert A. Baron (2009) “Entrepreneurs' Optimism and New Venture
Performance: A Social Cognitive Perspective.” The Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 52,
No. 3, pp. 473-488.

Holtz-Eakin, Douglas and David Joulfaian and Harvey Rosen (1994a), "Entrepreneurial
Decisions and Liquidity Constraints." RAND Journal of Economics, vol. 25, issue 2, 334-347.

Holtz-Eakin, Douglas and David Joulfaian and Harvey Rosen (1994b), "Sticking It Out:
Entrepreneurial Survival and Liquidity Constraints." Journal of Political Economy, 1994, vol.
102, issue 1, 53-75.

Howell, Sabrina T. (2017), “Financing Innovation: Evidence from R&D Grants.” The American
Economic Review, Forthcoming.

Hurst, Erik, and Benjamin Wild Pugsley (2011) “What Do Small Businesses Do?” Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity, no. 2, pp. 73–142.
                                               32
Hurst, Erik, and Annamaria Lusardi (2004), “Liquidity Constraints, Household Wealth, and
Entrepreneurship.” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 112, no. 2, pp. 319–347.

Iyigun, Murat F. and Ann L. Owen “Risk, Entrepreneurship, and Human-Capital Accumulation.”
The American Economic Review, Vol. 88, No. 2, Papers and Proceedings of the Hundred and
Tenth Annual Meeting of the American Economic Association (May, 1998), pp. 454-457.

Jarmin, Ron and Javier Miranda (2012), “The Longitudinal Business Database”. Center for
Economic Studies, CES-WP-02-17.

Jiangli, Wenying, Haluk Unal, and Chiwon Yom (2005), “Relationship Lending, Accounting
Disclosure, and Credit Availability during the Asian Financial Crisis.” Journal of Money, Credit
and Banking, Vol. 40, No. 1, pp. 25-55.

Johnson, William R. (1978), "A Theory of Job Shopping." Quarterly Journal of Economics 92,
pp. 261-78.

Jones, Ben F (2009), “The Burden of Knowledge and the “Death of the Renaissance Man”: Is
Innovation Getting Harder?” The Review of Economic Studies, Volume 76, Issue 1, 1 January
2009, Pages 283–317.

Jones, Ben F (2010), “Age and Great Invention” The Review of Economics and Statistics 2010
92:1, 1-14.

Jones, Ben F, Reedy, EJ & Weinberg, BA (2014), Age and Scientific Genius. in DK Simonton
(ed.), The Wiley Handbook of Genius. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., pp. 422-450.

Jones, Ben F, & Weinberg, BA (2011), “Age dynamics in scientific creativity.” Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences Nov 2011, 108 (47) 18910-18914; DOI:10.1073/pnas.
1102895108.

Jovanovic, Boyan (1979), "Job Matching and the Theory of Turnover." Journal of Political
Economy, Vol. 87, no. 5, pt. 1, pp. 972-90.

Kaplan, Steven N. and Josh Lerner (2010), “It Ain’t Broke: The Past, Present, and Future of
Venture Capital.” Journal of Applied Corporate Finance, 22(2), pp. 36-47.

Kautonen, T., Down, S. & Minniti, M. (2014), "Ageing and entrepreneurial preferences." Small
Bus Econ (2014) 42: 579.

Kerr, William R., Ramana Nanda, and Matthew Rhodes-Kropf (2014), “Entrepreneurship as
Experimentation.” Journal of Economic Perspectives—Volume 28, Number, 25–48.




                                               33
Kerr, Sari P. and William R. Kerr (2017), “Immigrant Entrepreneurship.” Chapter in
forthcoming NBER book Measuring Entrepreneurial Businesses: Current Knowledge and
Challenges, John Haltiwanger, Erik Hurst, Javier Miranda, and Antoinette Schoar, editors.

Kihlstrom, Richard E. and Jean-Jacques Laffont (1979), "A General Equilibrium Entrepreneurial
Theory of Firm Formation Based on Risk Aversion." Journal of Political Economy vol 87:4,
719-748.

Kline, Stephen and Nathan Rosenberg (1986), “An Overview of Innovation,” in R. Landau and
N. Rosenburg (eds) The Positive Sum Strategy: Harnessing Technology for Economic Growth,
National Academy Press, Washington D.C.

Lafontaine, Francine and Kathryn Shaw (2014) “Serial Entrepreneurship: Learning by Doing?”
NBER Working Paper No. 20312.

Lazear, E. P. (2004) “Balanced skills and entrepreneurship.” American Economic Review,
Papers & Proceedings, 94, 208-11.

Lazear, Edward P. (2005) “Entrepreneurship.” Journal of Labor Economics, 2005, vol. 23, no. 4

Lerner, Josh. (2012) Boulevard of Broken Dreams: Why Public Efforts to Boost
Entrepreneurship and Venture Capital Have Failed–and What to Do About It. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.

Lévesque, Moren and Maria Minniti (2006), "The effect of aging on entrepreneurial behavior."
Journal of Business Venturing, Volume 21, Issue 2, March, Pages 177-194.

Levine, Ross, & Rubinstein, Yona (2017). Smart and illicit: who becomes an entrepreneur and
do they earn more?. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132(2), 963-1018.

Lowe, R. A., & Ziedonis, A. A. (2006), “Overoptimism and the performance of entrepreneurial
firms.” Management Science, 52: 173-186.

Lucas, Robert E. “On the Size Distribution of Business Firms.” The Bell Journal of Economics,
vol. 9, no. 2, 1978, pp. 508–523.

Miller, Robert A. (1984) "Job Matching and Occupational Choice." J.P.E. 92, pp. 1086-1120.

Ng, Weiyi and Toby E. Stuart (2016), “Of Hobos and Highflyers: Disentangling the Classes and
Careers of Technology-based Entrepreneurs.” Working paper, UC Berkeley.

Parker, Simon C. and C. Mirjam Van Praag (2006) “Schooling, Capital Constraints, and
Entrepreneurial Performance: The Endogenous Triangle.” Journal of Business & Economic
Statistics, Vol. 24, No. 4, pp. 416-431.



                                              34
Petersen, M. and Rajan, R. (1994), 'The benefits of firm-creditor relationships: evidence from
small business data', Journal of Finance, vol. 49, pp. 3-37.

Planck, Max (1949) "The Meaning and Limits of Exact Science." Science 30 Sep 1949: Vol.
110, Issue 2857, pp. 319-327.

Polvoknichenko, V. (2003) “Human Capital and the Private Equity Premium.” Review of
Economic Dynamics, 6, 831-45.

Rich, Nathaniel (2013), “Silicon Valley’s Start-up Machine,” New York Times, May 2.

Ryan, Kevin (2017), “6 Interview strategies Elon Musk Uses to Hire at SpaceX and Tesla”,
Inc.com, March 22. https://www.inc.com/kevin-j-ryan/how-to-hire-like-elon-musk.html

Scheiber, Noam (2014), “The Brutal Ageism of Tech: Years of experience, plenty of talent,
completely obsolete.” The New Republic, March 23, 2014.

Schoar, Antoinette (2010), “The Divide between Subsistence and Transformational
Entrepreneurship.” In Innovation Policy and the Economy, vol. 10, edited by Joshua Lerner and
Scott Stern, pp. 57–81. National Bureau of Economic Research.

Schumpeter, Joseph A. (1942) "Creative Destruction" From Capitalism, Socialism and
Democracy (New York: Harper, 1975) [orig. pub. 1942]

Smith, Adam (1776), The Wealth of Nations. W. Strahan and T. Cadell, London.

Stephan, Paula and Sharon Levin (1993), "Age and the Nobel prize revisited" Scientometrics
28:3, 387-399.

Stiglitz, Joseph E., and Andrew Weiss (1981), “Credit Rationing in Markets with Imperfect
Information.” The American Economic Review, vol. 71, no. 3, pp. 393–410.

Van Praag, C. M., & van Ophem, H. (1995), “Determinants of willingness and opportunity to
start as an entrepreneur.” Kyklos, 48(4), 513–540.

Wadhwa, Vivek (2011), “Over the Hill at 40.” ASEE Prism 21 (1), 32-32.

Wadhwa, Vivek , Richard Freeman and Ben Rissing (2008), “Education and Tech
Entrepreneurship.” Kauffman Foundation Brief.

Weinberg, Bruce A. (2006). “Which labor economists invested in human capital? Geography,
vintage, and participation in scientific revolutions.” Working Paper, Ohio State University
mimeo.

Zuckerman, Harriet (1979), Scientific elite: Nobel laureates in the United States. New York:
Free Press.

                                               35
                               Figure 1: Founder Age Distribution:
                           All Startups and High Performance Startups




Source: Authors calculations based on W-2 earnings records, form K-1 and Longitudinal Business
Database.
Notes: This set of kernel density plots shows the age distribution of startup founders (at year of founding)
in the US. Each bin represents an age cohort. Ages between 20 and 65 are incorporated in the plots. The
blue (left) plot incorporates all founders of new C-corporations, S-corporations, and Partnerships with
employees founded between 2007 and 2014 as identified in the Longitudinal Business Database (LBD).
The red (right) plot represents founders of the top 1% growth firms founded over the 2007-2009 period.
Top 1% employment growth threshold value is calculated for each yearly cohort based on the raw
employment figures from the LBD in the five years after the birth of the firm.




                                                     36
                                 Figure 2: Founder Rates by Age

       Fig. 2A: Size of Workforce by Age               Fig. 2B: Founders per Worker, by Age




                            Fig. 2C: Tech Founders per Worker, by Age




Source: Authors calculations based on W-2 earnings records, form K-1, and Longitudinal Business
Database between 2007 and 2014.
Notes: These figures show the number of wage earners, founders, and high-tech founders in the US. Each
bin represents an age cohort. Ages between 20 and 65 are incorporated in the plots.




                                                  37
Figure 3: Likelihood of Extreme Success, Conditional on Starting a Firm


  Fig. 3A: Probability of Successful Exit Fig.          3B: Probability of Top 0.1% Employment
          (IPO or acquisition), by Age                           at 5 Years, by Age




   Fig. 3C: Probability of Top 0.1% Employment at 5 Years, Conditional on Industry, by Age




Source: Authors calculations based on W-2 earnings records, form K-1, Longitudinal Business Database
and Compustat for firms founded over the 2007-2009 period.
Notes: OLS regression coefficients from estimating the likelihood of extreme firm success on a series of
age indicators are shown. Ages 19 and below are grouped as 19 while ages 66 and above at grouped as 66.
IPO data are sourced from Compustat. Acquisitions are based on firm ownership changes in the
Longitudinal Business Database (LBD). Top 0.1% employment outcome is calculated based on five-year
employment growth in the LBD.




                                                  38
        Figure 4: Entrepreneurial Outcomes for Founders Above and Below Age 30
                                 Fig. 4A: Firm Death, High Growth




                        Fig. 4B: Extremely High Growth or Successful Exit




Source: Authors calculations based on Longitudinal Business Database and Compustat firms founded
over the 2007-2009 period.
Notes: To track firm dynamics over a five year window for each cohort, all startup firms born between
2007-2009 in the Longitudinal Business Database (LBD) are included in the sample. For each yearly cohort
of new firms, top growth thresholds are calculated based on five-year employment growth in the
Longitudinal Business Database (LBD). Successful exits include Initial Public Offering based on
Compustat data and acquisitions based on firm ownership changes in the LBD.




                                                  39
                    Figure 5: Results by Founder Definition and Legal Form
                      Fig. 5A: Owner-Worker, C-Corporation and K-1 Firms




                   Fig. 5B: Initial Top 3 Earners, C-Corporation and K-1 Firms




Source: Authors calculations based on Longitudinal Business Database and Annual Survey of
Entrepreneurs.
Notes: Startup firms born between 2007 and 2012 in the Annual Survey of Entrepreneurs (ASE) are
included for the left panel of Figure 5A. Growth outcomes are calculated over a three-year window for
each cohort and the top 1%, 5% and 10% is identified from the distribution. The rest of the figures
include all new C-corporations, S-corporations, and Partnerships in the Longitudinal Business Database
(LBD) born between 2007 and 2011. Growth outcomes are calculated over a three-year window for each
cohort and the top 0.1%, 1%, 5% and 10% is identified from the distribution. The left panel of Figure 5A
is based on founders of C-corporation firms in the Annual Survey of Entrepreneurs. The right panel of
Figure 5A is based on founders of S-corporations and partnerships in the K-1 database. Figure 5B is
based on imputed founders (first-year joiners who are among top three earners) using W-2 wage-records.




                                                   40
                                                          Figure 6: Forward Stock Multiples as the Founder Ages:
                                                                   Apple, Microsoft, Amazon, and Google

                                                           Apple, Steve Jobs                                                                                               Microsoft, Bill Gates




                                                                                                                                      20
                      20




                                                                                                                    Forward 5 Year Stock Price Multiple
    Forward 5 Year Stock Price Multiple




                                                                                                                                               15
                               15




                                                                                                                                   10
                   10




                                                                                                                        5
        5




                                                                                                                                      0
                      0




                                          20   24    28    32        36         40        44   48    52   56                                              20   24    28    32        36         40        44   48    52   56
                                                                          Age                                                                                                             Age



                                                           Amazon, Jeff Bezos                                                                                             Google, Brin and Page


                                                                                                                                      3.5
                      6




                                                                                                                    Forward 5 Year Stock Price Multiple
    Forward 5 Year Stock Price Multiple




                                                                                                                                                 3
                           4




                                                                                                                               2       2.5
            2




                                                                                                                      1.5             1
                      0




                                          30        34          38                   42         46        50                                              24        28          32                   36         40        44
                                                                          Age                                                                                                             Age



Source: Authors calculations based on public data.
Notes: The vertical red line indicates the founders’ age in the year of the firm’s founding. The x-axis then
presents the age of the indicated founder as time passes. The forward stock-price series begins in the year
of the initial public offering for each firm. For Google, Brin and Page were born in the same year (1973).
Historical share prices are sourced from Bloomberg.




                                                                                                               41
           Table 1: Founder Age – Perceptions from Media & Two Prominent VCs

                                            Inc. and
                       TechCrunch                                                      Matrix
                                          Entrepreneur           Sequoia
                         Awards                                                        Partners
                                           Magazines

      Mean                 31.0               29.1                33.9                   36.5
     Median                 30                 27                  33                     36
    (St. Dev.)             (7.1)              (7.0)               (8.7)                  (8.6)
   Observations            232                 51                  415                    246
      Period            2008-2016             2015             1969-2014              1948-2014
                       Education,                                                     Networks,
                                          Technology,       Semiconductors,
                     Software, Social                                                Applications,
                                         Retail, Media,      Networks, Task
  Sectoral Focus         Media,                                                  Commerce, Platform/
                                           Consumer           Mgmt. Apps,
      (top 5)           Consumer                                                    Infrastructure,
                                         Goods, Food            Website
                       Electronics,                                                Semiconductors/
                                           Delivery         Compilers, Cloud
                      e-Commerce                                                      Materials
Source: Own calculations from public data.
Notes: TechCrunch gives annual awards to the “most compelling startups, internet and technology
innovations of the year”. Inc. magazine and Entrepreneur magazine provided “Entrepreneurs to Watch”
lists in 2015. The founder ages for new ventures backs by the two venture capital firms (Sequoia Capital
and Matrix Partners) were obtained by the authors through researching all the companies listed on their
respective websites.




                                                      42
         Table 2: Founder Age – Averages across U.S. and by Technology Definition


                                                   High Tech          VC-Backed          Patenting
                                All Startups
                                                  Employment            Firms              Firms

 US (entire)                        41.9                43.2              41.9               44.6
                                    (12)              (11.5)            (10.6)             (11.3)
                                 2,658,000           334,000            11,000             10,000
    California                      41.7                42.1              39.6               43.9
                                    (12)              (11.3)              (10)               (11)
                                  374,000             61,700             4,000              3,000
    Massachusetts                   41.7                43.2              42.3               45.3
                                   (11.8)             (11.2)             (9.8)             (10.6)
                                   52,000              8,100              900                400
    New York                        41.4                41.8              38.7               42.7
                                   (11.6)             (11.6)            (10.1)             (11.4)
                                  276,000             22,600              800                600
    Silicon Valley                  41.6                41.5              40.2               44.3
                                   (11.4)             (10.3)             (9.7)              (9.8)
                                   32,000             11,700             1,700               900
    Entrepreneurial hubs            40.8                40.5              39.5               43.8
                                   (11.3)             (10.6)             (9.8)             (10.2)
                                   23,000              9,300             1,900               700
Source: Own calculations from the Longitudinal Business Database (LBD).
Notes: Mean founder age is shown in the first row, standard deviation in parentheses, and observation
count in the third row. Data incorporates all C-corporations, S-corporations, and Partnerships founded
over 2007-2014. Based on the LBD, only new firms from each year are included. High tech sectors in
column 2 are defined at 4-digit NAICS level (see text). Column 3 represents firms that ever receive
venture capital, which is sourced from Private Capital Research Institute. Column 4 represents firms that
are ever granted a patent, which is derived from the Longitudinal Linked Patent-Business Database.
Silicon Valley is defined as zip codes in Santa Clara and San Mateo counties. Entrepreneurial hubs are
defined as zip codes with the highest entrepreneurial quality as defined by Guzman and Stern (2017).
Counts are rounded to comply with disclosure rules.




                                                   43
               Table 3: Founder Age — Oldest and Youngest Technology Sectors

                              Panel A: Technology Sectors, Youngest 5

    NAICS Code                                 Sector                                N       Mean
        5172          Wireless Telecommunications Carriers (except Satellite)      1,500      38.5
        5182              Data Processing, Hosting, and Related Services           6,100      39.7
        5112                           Software Publishers                         3,600      39.8
        5415              Computer Systems Design and Related Services            100,000     40.1
                          Electronic and Precision Equipment Repair and
        8112                                                                       4,900      40.8
                                           Maintenance


                               Panel B: Technology Sectors, Oldest 5

    NAICS Code                                 Sector                                 N       Mean
        4862                     Pipeline Transportation of Natural Gas                 50      51.4
        3251                         Basic Chemical Manufacturing                      700      47.9
        3255                 Paint, Coating, and Adhesive Manufacturing                400      47.5
        2111                             Oil and Gas Extraction                       3,100     47.5
                        Engine, Turbine, and Power Transmission Equipment
        3336                                                                           400      47.3
                                             Manufacturing
Source: Own calculations from the Longitudinal Business Database (LBD).
Notes: Sector is shown in the first column, observation counts of founders in the second column, and
mean founder age in the third column. Sectors are defined at the 4-digit NAICS level. Only new firms are
included. Counts are rounded to comply with disclosure rules. Sample is all new businesses in the U.S.
from 2007-2014 based on the LBD.




                                                  44
              Table 4: Founder Age — Top 5% Firms by Employment at 5 Years


                                                    High Tech         VC-Backed         Patenting
                                 All Startups
                                                     Sectors            Firms             Firms

    US (entire)                     42.1                 42.3            42.5              44.6
                                   (11.5)               (10.5)          (10.1)             (9.9)
                                   62,000               7,800           2,000             1,300
     California                      41.6                41.4            40.3              43.6
                                   (11.7)               (10.3)           (9.9)             (9.9)
                                    9,700               1,500             700               400
     Massachusetts                   41.5                42.2            41.3              43.5
                                   (10.7)                (10)            (9.1)             (8.6)
                                    1,400                 400             200                80
     New York                        41.8                41.2            40.3              42.6
                                   (11.5)               (10.4)           (9.6)            (10.5)
                                    4,300                 400              80                60
     Silicon Valley                  41.4                42.0            40.6              43.2
                                   (10.7)                (9.3)           (9.2)              (9)
                                    1,200                 500             300               200
     Entrepreneurial hubs            40.6                41.3            39.6              42.3
                                   (10.5)               (10.2)           (9.6)             (9.4)
                                    1,000                 500             400               200
Source: Own calculations from the Longitudinal Business Database (LBD).
Notes: Notes: Mean founder age is shown in the first row, standard deviation in parentheses, and
observation count in the third row. Data incorporates all C-corporations, S-corporations, and Partnerships
founded over 2007-2009 as identified in the LBD. Only new firms from each year are included.
Employment growth is measured using a 5-year window. Sectors are defined at the 4-digit NAICS level.
Column 3 represents firms that ever receive venture capital, which is sourced from Private Capital
Research Institute. Column 4 represents firms that are ever granted a patent, which is derived from the
Longitudinal Linked Patent-Business Database. Silicon Valley is defined as zip codes in Santa Clara and
San Mateo counties. Entrepreneurial hubs are defined as zip codes with the highest entrepreneurial quality
as defined by Guzman and Stern (2017).




                                                   45
              Table 5: Founder Age and Success — Upper Tail Growth or Acquisition

                  Panel A: Comparisons across Region and in Entrepreneurial Centers

                                                                                                 Successfully
                          All Startups   Top 10%        Top 5%        Top 1%       Top 0.1%         Exited
                                                                                                   Startups
 US (entire)                  41.8          41.6          42.1          43.7          45.0           46.7
                             (11.9)       (11.5)        (11.5)        (11.1)         (10.7)         (10.6)
                           1,079,000     126,000        62,000        13,000         1,700          4,000
 California                   41.4          41.4          41.6          42.3          43.5           46.6
                             (12.1)       (11.7)        (11.7)        (11.3)         (10.1)         (10.3)
                            154,000       20,000         9,700         1,900           200            400
 Massachusetts                41.7          41.5          41.5          42.8          43.2           47.7
                             (11.6)       (10.9)        (10.7)        (10.3)         (10.6)          (9.5)
                             20,000        2,700         1,400          300             60            100
 New York                     41.5          41.4          41.8          42.5          44.2           46.2
                             (11.4)       (11.5)        (11.5)        (11.2)         (10.5)         (11.5)
                            104,000        9,400         4,300          800            110            300
 Silicon Valley               41.7          41.8          41.4          41.9          44.3           47.2
                             (11.4)       (10.9)        (10.7)          (10)          (9.8)          (8.1)
                             12,000        2,100         1,200          300             40             60
 Entrepreneurial hubs         41.2          40.9          40.6          40.9          42.6           46.7
                             (11.3)       (10.7)        (10.5)         (9.7)         (10.1)          (9.7)
                             8,400         1,600         1,000          300             50             80
Source: Own calculations from the Longitudinal Business Database (LBD).
Notes: Mean founder age is shown in the first row, standard deviation in parentheses, and observation
count in the third row. See notes to Table 2 for row definitions. Data incorporates all C-corporations, S-
corporations, and Partnerships founded over 2007-2009 as identified in the LBD. Columns restrict sample
to different employment growth thresholds, as indicated, based on employment five years after founding.
To examine five years after founding, the sample period is restricted to 2007-2009. The success
thresholds, in 2007 for example, are as follows: Top 10% is 9 employees; Top 5% is 16 employees; Top
1% is 56 employees; Top 0.1% is 904 employees. The final column considers exit by IPO (sourced from
Compustat) or acquisition (derived from the LBD based on firm ownership changes).




                                                   46
                                      Panel B: Technology Firms

                                                                                              Successfully
                       All Startups    Top 10%         Top 5%      Top 1%        Top 0.1%        Exited
                                                                                                Startups

  US (entire)              41.8            41.6          42.1         43.7         45.0           46.7
                          (11.9)         (11.5)        (11.5)       (11.1)        (10.7)         (10.6)
                        1,079,000       126,000        62,000       13,000        1,700          4,000
  Tech Employment          43.2            42.1          42.3         43.6         45.9           48.4
                          (11.3)         (10.5)        (10.5)         (10)         (9.6)          (9.8)
                         132,000         13,000         7,800        2,200          400          1,100
  VC-Backed Firms          42.4            42.3          42.5         43.3         43.4           47.9
                          (10.3)         (10.1)        (10.1)         (10)        (10.1)          (9.5)
                          6,600           2,500         2,000         800           140            180
  Patenting Firms          44.4            44.4          44.6         45.0         46.2           49.3
                          (11.1)         (10.4)         (9.9)        (9.2)         (9.7)         (10.1)
                          7,000           1,900         1,300         500            90            200
Source: Own calculations from the Longitudinal Business Database (LBD).
Notes: Mean founder age is shown in the first row, standard deviation in parentheses, and observation
count in the third row. Data incorporates all C-corporations, S-corporations, and Partnerships founded
over 2007-2009 as identified in the LBD, for which we can observe 5 years of performance data after
founding. Only new firms from each year are included. Employment growth is measured using the 5-year
window. Tech Employment consists of NAICS-4 sectors with high shares of STEM-trained workers.




                                                  47
          Table 6: Industry-Specific Experience and Growth Outcomes

Panel A: Founders with Work Experience in Startup’s 2-Digit Industry Classification

                                                                                 Successful
                              Top 10%       Top 5%      Top 1%      Top 0.1%        Exit
NAICS-2 Experience
Never                           8.6%         4.1%         0.9%        0.11%        0.13%
1-2 years                      10.1%         4.8%         1.0%        0.11%        0.10%
>= 3 years                     15.0%         7.7%         1.7%        0.22%        0.20%



Panel B: Founders with Work Experience in Startup’s 4-Digit Industry Classification

                                                                                 Successful
                              Top 10%       Top 5%      Top 1%      Top 0.1%        Exit
NAICS-4 Experience
Never                           9.1%         4.5%         1.0%        0.12%        0.14%
1-2 years                      11.6%         5.6%         1.1%        0.14%        0.12%
>= 3 years                     16.8%         8.5%         1.7%        0.24%        0.20%


Panel C: Founders with Work Experience in Startup’s 6-Digit Industry Classification

                                                                                 Successful
                              Top 10%       Top 5%      Top 1%      Top 0.1%        Exit
NAICS-6 Experience
Never                             9.4%        4.6%         1.0%         0.12%       0.13%
1-2 years                        12.6%        6.0%         1.2%         0.15%       0.13%
>= 3 years                       17.7%        9.0%         1.8%         0.26%       0.21%
  Source: Own calculations from the Longitudinal Business Database (LBD).
  Notes: Data incorporates all C-corporations, S-corporations, and Partnerships founded over 2007-
  2009 as identified in the LBD, for which we can observe 5 years of performance data after
  founding. Growth outcome is determined by employment growth, using the 5-year window after
  founding.




                                            48
                  Table 7: Minimum and Maximum Ages within Founder Teams

                       Panel A: Owner-Worker Definition of Founders (K-1)

                                    High-       VC-
                          All                            Patenting     Top       Top      Successful
                                    Tech      backed
                        Startups                         Startups      1%        0.1%        Exit
                                   Startups   Startups
 Within Startup
 Min Founder Age          42.7      44.0       39.8        43.6       40.9       42.3        43.3
 Max Founder Age          44.6      45.5       47.8        46.9       45.6       47.8        47.1



                     Panel B: Initial Team Definition (K-1 and C-Corporations)

                                    High-       VC-
                          All                            Patenting     Top       Top      Successful
                                    Tech      backed
                        Startups                         Startups      1%        0.1%        Exit
                                   Startups   Startups
 Within Startup
 Min Founder Age          35.1      39.1       36.5        37.8       35.0       37.4        38.5
 Max Founder Age           46.0        45.7       47.3        48.4       50.1        51.4       51.4
Source: Own calculations from the Longitudinal Business Database (LBD).
Notes: Panel A incorporates all S-corporations and Partnerships founded over the 2007-2014 period as
identified in the LBD, except for the Top 1% and Top 0.1% columns, which include those firms founded
over the 2007-2009 period for which we can observe 5 years of employment data after founding. Panel B
incorporates all S-corporations, Partnerships, and C-corporations founded over the 2007-2014 period,
except for the Top 1% and Top 0.1% columns, which include those firms founded over the 2007-2009
period for which we can observe 5 years of performance data after founding.




                                                  49
