NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

LONDON FOG: A CENTURY OF POLLUTION AND MORTALITY, 1866-1965
W. Walker Hanlon
Working Paper 24488
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24488

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2018, Revised October 2018

I thank Eva Arceo, Vellore Arthi, Alastair Ball, Brian Beach, David Cutler, Tatyana Deryugina,
Casper Worm Hanson, Stephan Heblich, Richard Hornbeck, Maggie Jones, David Molitor,
Matthew Neidell, Felix Pretis, Edson Severnini, Katherin Sudol and seminar participants at
Bristol, CIDE, Simon Fraser, UCLA, the University of Illinois, the University of Chicago and the
Economic History Society for helpful comments. I am grateful to Shmuel San and Anna Sudol
for excellent research assistance. Funding for this project was provided by National Science
Foundation CAREER Grant No. 1552692. The views expressed herein are those of the author and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by W. Walker Hanlon. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

London Fog: A Century of Pollution and Mortality, 1866-1965
W. Walker Hanlon
NBER Working Paper No. 24488
April 2018, Revised October 2018
JEL No. I15,N3,Q53
ABSTRACT
This study provides new evidence on the impact of air pollution in a high-pollution highmortality setting: London over the century from 1866-1965. I identify pollution effects by
comparing detailed new weekly mortality data to the timing of London's famous fog events,
which trapped emissions in the city. My results show that acute pollution exposure due to fog
events accounted for at least one out of every 200 deaths in London during this century. I also
provide the first well-identified evidence that the presence of two infectious diseases of the
respiratory system, measles and tuberculosis, increased the mortality effects of pollution. As a
result, success in reducing the disease burden in London in the 20th century lowered the impact
of pollution exposure and shifted the distribution of pollution effects across age groups. These
interactions have implications for developing countries, where both diseases remain important.

W. Walker Hanlon
Department of Economics
NYU Stern School of Business
Henry Kaufman Management Center
44 West Fourth Street
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
walker.hanlon@gmail.com

1

Introduction

For over a century London experienced some of the highest sustained levels of air pollution
in the world. Today, as modern industrial cities struggle with their own pollution problems,
London’s experience has the potential to offer useful insights into the cost of high levels of
air pollution and how these costs evolve as cities develop. Yet our current understanding
of this experience remains limited, due largely to the scarcity of direct pollution measures
prior to the mid-20th century. The lack of direct pollution observations has posed a serious
impediment to studying air pollution over long periods of time and in developing settings.
This study focuses on understanding the short-run impact of exposure to high-levels of
pollution in London over the century from 1866 to 1965. Studying London, particularly
during the 19th century, allows me to extend our evidence on air pollution into a setting
with a very high diseases burden, comparable to the poorest modern developing countries.
This setting is much less healthy than the modern middle-income locations, such as Mexico
City, from which our best current estimates of pollution effects in developing economies
come.1 The results not only show that the impact of pollution differs in important ways
when we look at a setting with a high disease burden, they also help us understand some
of the mechanisms behind these differences. In particular, I provide new evidence that
the presence of two infectious diseases of the respiratory system, measles and tuberculosis
(TB), substantially increase the mortality effects of pollution. As a result of this interaction,
progress toward eliminating these diseases in London after WWI substantially reduced the
mortality effects of acute air pollution exposure. To my knowledge this is the first study
to draw a clear causal link between pollution exposure and mortality from these diseases.2
Identifying these interactions matters for modern developing countries, since both diseases
remain prevalent. TB, in particular, remains the largest single-organism killer, accounting
for more deaths in 2016 than HIV/AIDS.3
This study also provides a novel assessment of the overall effect of acute exposure to high
levels of air pollution in a highly polluted city over a long period of time. My results show
that at least one out of every 200 deaths across the century I study is directly attributable to
acute air pollution exposure, which I define as deaths occurring within four weeks of exposure
to highly elevated pollution levels. This corresponds to just over 39,000 deaths. In addition,
I estimate that the acute effects of fog events caused over 1,000 additional stillbirths, while
in utero exposure in the first trimester led to at least 1,400 infant deaths and an additional
1

See Arceo et al. (2016).
Appendix A.1 reviews a set of existing public health studies showing correlations between TB risk and
pollution and argues that it is difficult to draw causal conclusions from the existing evidence.
3
(World Health Organization, 2017).
2

1

3,500 stillbirths. Thus, air pollution was a substantial contributor to overall mortality in
London during this century.
Two new elements allow me to overcome the lack of direct measures of air pollution during
most of this period in order to generate these results. First, I take advantage of London’s
famous fog events to infer the timing of weeks with elevated pollution exposure. While
individual fog events have been studied in previous work, this study uses newly constructed
data tracking every occurrence of fog across over 4,500 weeks. These events allow me to
consider the effects of pollution across a much longer period than is possible when relying on
direct pollution measures. Second, I draw on a newly digitized data set describing mortality
in London at the weekly level, over a consistent geographic area, and broken down by age
group and cause of death.
Together, these data sets allow an analysis strategy that uses weekly variation in pollution levels due to fog events to assess the acute impact of pollution exposure on mortality.
Leverage this relatively high-frequency variation helps me avoid a number of potential identification concerns. In the main analysis, identification relies on the fact that the formation
of fog depends on the complex interaction of several climatic conditions, including temperature, humidity, wind speed and cloud cover. To strengthen identification, I also offer an
instrumental variables strategy that uses the interaction of weather conditions to predict the
timing of fog events, while controlling for each individual weather variable. This helps me
deal with concerns about the endogeneity of fog formation to pollution levels as well as the
possibility that the criteria for reporting fog events may have changed over time.
I conduct a number of tests to verify that my identification strategy is working well.
For example, I show that the largest effects of pollution occur in exactly the cause-of-death
categories suggested by the modern literature: respiratory diseases such as bronchitis and
pneumonia as well as cardiovascular causes. In contrast, I find no interaction with many
other causes of death, such as digestive diseases, where we would not expect acute pollution
exposure to matter. I also conduct a check using heavy rainfall, which shares many features
of fog–it is damp, causes people to stay indoors and impedes transport–but which differs
from fog in that it acts to clean pollution from the air, rather than trap it. If my main
identification strategy is working well then we should expect estimates based on rainfall to
deliver roughly mirror-image effects. This is largely what I find. These checks help ensure
that my estimates are not being driven by other channels, such as changes in behavior, access
to medical care, increased accidents or crime, etc.
One may be concerned that many of these deaths were simply due to the harvesting of
people who otherwise would have died soon after. To assess this concern, I estimate the

2

impact of fog events up to one year after the acute effect window, which I call medium-run
effects. If the acute effects were driven by harvesting, then I would expect to see fog events
associated with reduced mortality in the medium run. Instead, I estimate that fog events
were associated with elevated medium-run mortality. This suggests that either harvesting
was not large, or that any harvesting effects were overwhelmed by the medium-run impact
of pollution exposure. While not as well identified as the acute effect, the magnitude of the
medium-run effect is large, accounting for 1.8% of all deaths in London during the study
period, or about 78,000 dead.
In addition to my main results, I also provide novel evidence on the distribution of
pollution effects across age groups and how this distribution is modified by the disease
environment. My results differ from the findings of the existing literature in two mains
ways. First, while most deaths were concentrated among the elderly, I also find substantial
impacts among teenagers and prime-age adults, groups that are not typically thought to
suffer substantial mortality effects from short-run pollution exposure. Deaths in these age
groups are particularly costly from an economic perspective. I show that the impact of
pollution on these populations depends heavily on the presence of measles and TB, which
were major killers withing these age categories. Second, I find that infant deaths are far less
important. This finding most likely reflects the much higher levels of infant mortality and
stillbirths in the setting I study, relative to the settings considered in most existing work,
which likely reduced the population of infants susceptible to pollution effects. Overall, these
results suggest that focusing only on the impacts of pollution on infants and the elderly, as
is done in many studies, may be missing an important part of the overall effect when looking
at settings with high baseline mortality levels.
This study contributes to a broader literature analyzing the historical impact of pollution.
Much of the work in this area has focused on water pollution.4 A small but growing set of
studies address air pollution, including Barreca et al. (2014), Clay et al. (2016), Beach
& Hanlon (Forthcoming), and Bailey et al. (2016).5 This study has a particularly close
connection to a paper by Clay et al. (2015) which shows that pollution can interact with
influenza to increase mortality. While I find similar interactions (though with different
diseases), I go beyond their results by looking across many ages and time periods while
drawing on a different identification strategy. More importantly, I offer new evidence on how
4

See, e.g., Cutler & Miller (2005), Ferrie & Troesken (2008) and Alsan & Goldin (Forthcoming).
An older set of papers in this area focus on individual air pollution events such as the famous episode in
Danora, PA (Townsend, 1950), the Great London Fog of 1952 (Logan, 1953; Bell & Davis, 2001; Ball, 2015),
the Muesse Valley fog in the 1930s (Nemery et al., 2001), and a pollution incident in New York City in the
1950s (Greenburg et al., 1962). Another related paper looking at fog events is Troesken & Clay (2011) which
uses historical sources and aggregate mortality patterns to identify the frequency of polluted fogs in London.
5

3

changes in the disease burden caused the cost of pollution to evolve over time.
This study also contributes to work using modern data to assess the health effects of
pollution.6 Despite substantial work on this topic, evidence from developing settings with
high disease burdens remains very limited (Greenstone & Jack, 2015). This is an important
limitation, since these are often the locations facing the highest levels of pollution exposure.
The closest existing study to this paper is Arceo et al. (2016), which uses temperature
inversions to study the impact of pollution on infant mortality in Mexico City.7 The use
of temperature inversions to identify acute pollution effects is similar to using fog events,
which were often accompanied by inversions.8 Arceo et al. (2016) provides some of the
best available evidence on the acute impact of pollution on infant mortality outside of the
U.S. and Europe. However, it is important to recognize that their setting is substantially
healthier, and appears to be less polluted, than the setting I study. For example, infant
mortality in Mexico City during the period they study was 19.9 per thousand births, well
below the current global average. In the setting I consider there were 96.7 infant deaths
per 1,000 births, a value that is more similar to the levels observed in the very poorest
countries today. London during the period for which I have pollution data also appears to
have been more polluted than Mexico City during the period studied by Arceo et al. (2016),
more closely resembling the most highly polluted developing cities today.9 Thus, in terms
of both the level of pollution and the underlying disease environment, this study extends
our knowledge far beyond the range for which rigorous estimates are currently available.
It also differs in that I study effects across all age groups. Perhaps most importantly, this
paper sheds new light on the mechanisms that cause the impact of pollution to differ in less
developed settings.
The next section describes the empirical setting, followed by the data, in Section 3.
Section 4 outlines the empirical strategy and discusses the main threats to identification.
A preliminary analysis of the relationship between fog events and pollution is conducted in
Section 5, followed by the main analysis in Section 6 and concluding remarks in Section 7.
6

Useful reviews of this literature include Currie (2013), Graff Zivin & Neidell (2013) and Rückerl et al.
(2011). Recent studies looking at developing settings include (Jayachandran, 2009; Foster et al., 2009;
Almond et al., 2009; Chen et al., 2013; Greenstone & Hanna, 2014; Rangel & Vogl, 2016), though research
from highly-polluted settings remains limited. This study is also similar to work that focuses on the effects
of acute air pollution exposure (Pope, 1989; Schlenker & Walker, 2016; Knittel et al., 2016; Jia & Ku, 2017).
7
Another related paper is Hanna & Oliva (2015).
8
In fact, the temperature inversions in Mexico City that they study are often accompanied by fog
(Gonzalez-Viveros et al., 2018).
9
The data used by Arceo et al. (2016) have a weekly average of maximum 24-hour pollution levels of
67 µg/m3 of PM10, equivalent to roughly 122 µg/m3 of TSP (this calculation uses the conversion ratio
of PM10=0.55*TSP from their study). In London from 1951-62, the weekly average of daily maximum
pollution levels is 260 µg/m3 of TSP.

4

2

Setting

London’s struggles with air pollution date back at least to the 17th century, when coal replaced wood as the main domestic fuel, but the problem grew in intensity after the Industrial
Revolution due to population growth, rising incomes, cheaper access to coal, and industrialization (Brimblecombe, 1987). Though direct pollution measures were unavailable during
the 19th and early 20th century, contemporary reports indicate that air pollution levels in
London were high. For example, an observer in 1866 wrote,10
Here were are in the Metropolis breathing coal-smoke, begrimed by
coal-smoke, and sometimes involved in that ‘pitchy cloud of infernal
darkness’ through which we see the sun dimly as a fiery red ball...
Starting in the middle of the 20th century we begin to have direct pollution measures.
Direct pollution measures for 1951-1962, which I describe in more detail in Section 3, show
a weekly average of daily maximum total suspended particulate (TSP) levels of 260 µg/m3
and a weekly average of daily mean TSP levels of 140 µg/m3 .11 Levels over 1000 µg/m3
were observed in five different weeks during this decade, including during the Great London
Fog of 1952. As a point of comparison, the first standards set by the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency in 1971 specified that the annual average of daily maximum pollution
levels should not exceed 75 µg/m3 and the maximum on the worst day in a year should not
exceed 260 µg/m3 .
The main source of pollution during the study period was residential coal use for home
heating and cooking.12 Residential pollution remained largely unregulated until the Great
London Fog of 1952 motivated action by the government, leading to the Clean Air Acts of
1956. This began the slow process of pushing households to convert to smokeless fuels or
alternative energy sources such as electricity.13
The highest levels of pollution in London occurred during periods of fog. Radiation
fogs, the most common type in London, form when humid low-lying air is cooled below
10

Little’s The Living Age, 26 May, 1866.
Modern pollution measures generally focus on more specific particulate sizes such as PM10 or PM2.5,
rather than TSP. However, for the period I study these more detailed measures are not available.
12
Automobiles may have been an important contributor towards the end of the study period. One reason
for the importance of domestic pollution was that, relative to other British cities, London’s industrial structure was concentrated in less polluting sectors such as government, banking, and services (Beach & Hanlon,
Forthcoming). Another reason was that regulation had made some progress in reducing industrial pollution
sources. Regulation was much less successful in addressing domestic pollution, which was both more onerous
to police and more difficult politically (Thorsheim, 2006).
13
One consequence of the importance of residential pollution related to home heating is that temperature
exerted a strong influence on emissions, a pattern that will be visible in the available pollution data from the
1950s and 1960s presented later. This means that temperature will be an important control in my analysis.
11

5

the dew point by contact with the ground. If there is sufficient moisture in the air then
this cooling causes the water in the air to condense, forming very small suspended water
droplets. For radiation fog to occur, the temperature of the air and the ground must be
in the right range, the air must contain sufficient moisture, and the air must be relatively
stable so that it is in contact with the ground for long enough to cool.14 Radiation fog also
requires fairly clear skies, so that the sun can warm the ground during the day, which then
cools through radiation at night. Often, fogs were accompanied by temperature inversions,
where colder air above traps warm air below. Under these calm conditions, any emitted
pollution remains close to the source and near ground level.15 Thus, fog events provide
a way of identifying periods during which pollution concentrations increased. Later I will
show that pollution levels during fog events were much higher than in nearby weeks. During
the worst events, TSP levels could reach as high as 1,400-1,600 µg/m3 , far above modern
guidelines and comparable to the levels observed in the most polluted modern cities (Bell &
Davis, 2001).
Fog itself, being composed merely of small water droplets suspended in air, is not naturally harmful to health. The coal pollution trapped by the weather conditions that accompanied dense fogs, however, contained a variety of harmful substances. This included
suspended particulates of various sizes, sulfur dioxide, nitrogen oxide, carbon monoxide and
various metallic compounds such as lead and mercury. These compounds affect human health
in many ways. Existing work has highlighted negative effects on infants (Chay & Greenstone,
2003; Currie & Neidell, 2005; Currie et al., 2009) and older adults (Chay et al., 2003). The
most pronounced effects operate through the respiratory and cardiovascular systems (Samet
et al., 2000; Rückerl et al., 2011). There is also limited evidence that pollution effects may
interact with infectious diseases to increase mortality (Clay et al., 2015).

3

Data

All of the data used in this study come from the Weekly Reports generated by the Registrar
General’s office. The Registrar General’s data were collected by trained local registrars.
Demographers such as Woods (2000) praise the overall quality of the Registrar’s mortality
data, even in the 19th century, which he calls “the shining star of Victorian civil registration.”
14

Meetham et al. (1981, p. 172-173).
The effects of these calm conditions were further exacerbated by London’s bowl-like topography. London
is situated on low flat ground along the Thames river surrounded by higher ground in all directions except in
the East, where the Thames estuary opens into the North Sea. This topography had the effect of trapping
pollution in the city, though on most days the predominant southwest wind pushes pollution out toward the
sea.
15

6

The mortality data appear to be particularly accurate in London.16
The Registrar’s weekly reports include both information on mortality in London during
the previous week as well as weather information. The data were collected from original
reports stored in the British Library, the LSE Library, and the New York Public Library.17
The hard copy data were photographed, entered by hand, and the checked for quality. The
resulting database covers 4,539 weeks, with between 51 and 53 weeks in each year.18 A small
number of observations are missing because I was unable to find them in the collections of
any library or due to factors such as printing errors (though these are quite rare). In total
the mortality data include over 350,000 observations. Summary statistics for the main data
series are available in Appendix Table 8.
One advantage of this setting is that the geographic area from which the mortality data
were drawn, the County of London, remained stable across the study period. After 1965, the
County of London was replaced by the much larger Greater London administrative area. To
avoid this discontinuity, I end the study period in 1965. Another reason to end the study at
this point is that after 1965, rising temperatures mean that there were fewer and fewer fogs
in London, weakening my ability to leverage fog events in order to study pollution effects.
While some weekly mortality statistics were reported for cities outside of London, or for
neighborhoods within London, to my knowledge the level of detail used in this study is only
available for London as a whole. This motivates my use of London as a whole as the unit of
analysis.
The mortality data are reported by both age category and cause of death. Typically,
the age categories separately identify infants as well as age groups spanning 5 to 15 years,
with some changes to the reported age groups across the study period. In order to analyze
the impact on different age categories across the study period, I construct the following
set of age-group mortality series. For infants aged 0-1 and children 1-5, I have consistent
mortality data from 1876-1965. For other ages, changes over time in reporting categories
generate some inconsistencies. My analysis will use the following age groupings: a “young”
age category which includes deaths in ages 5-20 for 1870-1921 and 5-25 for 1922-1965; an
“adult” category that includes ages 20-40 from 1870-1910, ages 20-45 from 1911-1921, and
25-45 for 1922-1965; a “middle age” category that includes adults aged 40-60 from 1870-1910
and ages 45-65 from 1911-1965; an “elderly” age category that includes those over 60 from
1870-1910 and those over 65 from 1911-1965.
16

See, e.g., the discussion in (Woods, 2000, Ch. 2).
Alone, none of these libraries has a fully comprehensive set of the weekly reports.
18
It is worth noting that at the end of years the data in some weeks appear to cover less than a full seven
days.
17

7

The weekly reports also include data on stillbirths starting in 1927. The number of
stillbirths is substantial. In the data starting in 1927 I observe that there were two-thirds
as many stillbirths as total deaths of infants aged 0-1.19 I have also collected information
on the number of births. This variable provides a useful control because of the high level of
infant mortality, particularly early in the study period.
The mortality data also include a substantial amount of cause-of-death (COD) information. The COD categories can be useful, but also come with important limitations. There
were substantial changes in both the COD categories reported and the accuracy of COD diagnosis across the period that I study. To obtain more consistent series, I combine the COD
categories into 23 aggregated groups that show fairly consistent patterns over time. A table
describing these groups and their subcomponents is available in Appendix A.3.4. Among
the available cause-of-death categories, common infectious diseases like measles, scarlet fever,
whooping cough, diphtheria, and smallpox are likely to be particularly accurately measured
because they were common and present with clear distinguishing symptoms. Because of
substantial changes in classifications after WWII, my analysis of the cause-of-death data
focuses on the period from 1870-1939.
Most of the deaths reported in the Registrar General’s reports would have been registered
within 2-3 days of their occurrence.20 This is an important fact to keep in mind when looking
at the lag structure of the impacts of fog events. In particular, even if fog events cause
mortality very rapidly, some of the deaths associated with events occurring late in a week
may have been registered in the following week.
To identify weather events, we manually reviewed the daily weather notes contained in
the Registrar General’s Weekly reports for roughly 31,500 days. Two examples of these
notes, one from 1880 and another from the week of the famous Great London Fog of 1952,
are available in Appendix A.3.2. These show how similar the format and content of the daily
notes remained across the century covered by this study. From the daily notes, we identified,
for each week, the number of days in which a heavy fog day occurred, i.e., a day in which
fog was reported with any indicator of intensity, such as “thick”, “heavy”, or “dense” fog.
This method identifies 932 heavy fog days and 582 weeks in which at least one heavy fog
event occurred. Appendix Figure 11 describes the frequency of fog weeks and fog days over
the study period.
One important change took place in the weather reports used in this study. Prior to
1950, the weather reports were taken at the Royal Observatory in Greenwich, southeast of
19

Specifically, my data record 47,787 stillbirths in the years for which those data are available and 71,920
infant deaths in the same time period.
20
See (Ministry of Health, 1954, p.11).

8

Central London along the River Thames. Starting in 1951, the available weather reports
come from Kew Gardens which is located just west of London, a bit further from the city
center than Greenwich. It is important to keep in mind that this switch may generate a
discontinuity in the relationship between fog events and pollution. Because of this change, I
will refer to the period starting in 1950 as the “Kew Gardens Period.” Appendix Figure 11
shows that the number of reported fog weeks and fog days increased substantially when the
reporting moved from Greenwich to Kew Gardens in 1951. It will be important to take this
discontinuity into account in the analysis.21
Seasonality is an important feature of both mortality and fog events. Figure 12 in the
Appendix provides a plot of the number of fog events as well as the share of total deaths
across weeks of the year. This shows that fog events were more likely to occur in the winter
and that overall mortality was higher in the winter as well.22 Thus, I will include controls
for week of the year and temperature when estimating the impact of fog events.
Additional weather data describing weekly mean temperature, humidity, barometric pressure and precipitation were gathered from the Registrar General’s reports. These data will
provide useful control variables. They will also allow me to generate a quantitative prediction of fog events that will be consistent over time. It is worth noting that these values are
from Greenwich Observatory for years before 1951 and from Kew Gardens starting in 1951.
A limited set of data on pollution levels are also available from the Registrar General’s
reports starting in 1951. These data are available in a consistent way through the 21st
week of 1962.23 The reported values include the weekly average of the daily maximum and
mean pollution levels in units that correspond to the total suspended particulate (TSP)
values commonly reported during this period.24 These data show that pollution was highly
seasonal and generally declining from 1951-1962.

21

It is not clear if Kew Gardens really experienced more fog or if there were reporting differences across
the two locations.
22
The seasonality of fog events did not change substantially across the study period.
23
The pollution measures were obtained from a device, called the Owens Smoke Meter, in which a fixed
amount of air was passed through a filter paper which captured the particles suspended in the air. The
stains left on the filter paper were then compared to a calibrated set of stain ratings. This provided an
early direct measure of air pollution. I only use data up to 1962 because it is clear that at that point there
was a structural break in the accuracy of the reported values that generates an inconsistency. In particular,
from 1951-1962 the readings come in fairly large discrete levels, while after 1962 they become finer. This,
discontinuity, which is related to the initiation of the “National Survey” of air quality, has a substantial
impact on the consistency of the series which I want to avoid.
24
This was before pollution measures identified levels of particles of particular sizes, such as PM10 or
PM2.5, which are the measures commonly used today.

9

4
4.1

Methodology and identification
Overview and identification concerns

Figure 1 describes the basic relationships at work in this study. Ideally I would like to identify
the impact of pollution exposure on mortality and how this effect is modified by changes in
other factors, such as public health infrastructure and medical advances. However, pollution
is not directly observable over such a long period.
Figure 1: Relationships considered in this study

Relying on fog events helps me work around the lack of direct pollution measures in order
to study effects over a long period. One primary contribution of this study is estimating
the impact of acute pollution effects due to fog events on mortality across the study period.
I am also interested in how these effects evolved as the city developed. There are three
factors that will influence how the impact of fog events on mortality changes over time.
First, this relationship may be modified by factors, such as public health improvements,
that affect the relationship between pollution exposure and mortality. This relationship is of
primary interest. In addition, the relationship between fog events and mortality will depend
on changes in emission levels, which are not observable.25 Finally, the criteria for reporting
fog events may shift over time. This last concern can be addressed by using quantitative
weather variables to predict the timing of fog events, but it is not possible to fully separate the
influence of changing emissions levels from other factors. However, it is possible to isolate
one factor that changed the effect of pollution exposure on health: the infectious disease
environment. Specifically, by estimating the interaction of pollution exposure with mortality
due to specific infectious diseases, and then applying these estimates to the changing disease
environment in London across the study period, it is possible to isolate the influence of
changes in the infectious disease environment on the mortality costs of pollution. While the
25

While there is some data on coal use in London, the type of coal and how it was burned had an important
impact on how much pollution was released. This surely changed across the study period in unobservable
ways.

10

infectious disease environment is only one factor that affected how the relationship between
fog events, pollution exposure, and health evolved across the study period, it turns out to
be an important part of the story.
There are several identification concerns that must be addressed in this study. One of
these, represented by the dotted line in Figure 1, is that higher levels of emissions may make
fog events more likely. More particulates in the air makes it easier for water to condense,
forming fog. This possibility raises a concern because emissions are likely to be related
to factors, such as income or the price of home heating, that might also influence health.
There are several pieces of evidence suggesting that short-run changes in emissions levels
are unlikely to be determining the timing of fog events.26 However, to be sure that this
is not driving my results I will use data on underlying weather conditions to predict the
timing of fog events. These conditions are not affected by emissions levels, so this will deal
with endogeneity concerns. To satisfy the exclusion restriction, I will take advantage of the
fact that fog formation results from the complex interaction of several weather conditions,
including temperature, humidity, cloud cover and wind speed. As discussed below, this
allows me to predict the timing of fog formation while controlling flexibly for underlying
weather conditions.
Another potential concern is that fog events may have affected mortality through channels
other than pollution exposure. One potential channel is accidents or crime, which may have
been more likely on foggy days. I will assess this channel directly by separating deaths due
to accidents or homicide from deaths due to other cause. Another potential channel is that
fog may have made it harder for people to reach the hospital or for doctors to reach their
patients, though during much of the study period medical care was rudimentary and often
counterproductive (McKeown, 1976; Floud et al., 2011).27 One way to address this issue is to
study whether the effects of fog events are concentrated in causes of death which we know are
associated with air pollution, such as diseases of the respiratory or cardiovascular systems.
If fog is increasing mortality by making it harder for people to reach medical care, rather
than through air pollution exposure, then we should not expect the mortality effects to be
concentrated in the diseases typically associated with pollution exposure. Comparing across
causes of death is an approach that has been used in several existing studies of the impact
26

For example, Figure 11 shows that changing pollution levels were not a primary driver of fog events,
since there is no reduction in the number of fog events in the late 1950s and 1960s despite the consistent
decline in pollution levels across that period. I will also provide evidence that pollution levels were not higher
in the week before fog events occur, as one would expect if the timing of fog events was driven by changes
in pollution levels.
27
Medical care during most of the study period was particularly ineffective for TB and measles, two diseases
that play a central role in my results.

11

of pollution on mortality, including Galiani et al. (2005), Alsan & Goldin (Forthcoming),
Beach & Hanlon (Forthcoming) and Jia & Ku (2017).
Another concern is that fog may have caused people to stay indoors which could have
increased mortality by facilitating the spread of disease.28 However, staying indoors also
reduces exposure to people outside of the household, which may have actually reduced infectious disease transmission.
As a check on all of the results obtained from the analysis of fog events I conduct a
second analysis focused on the effect of heavy rain. Heavy rainfall is similar to fog in a
number of ways: it is damp, causes people to stay indoors, and can disrupt transportation.
However, unlike fog, rain is known to reduce pollution levels by “washing” particulates and
other pollutants from the air.29 Thus, rainfall provides a useful check on the fog results. If
the mortality effects of fog are being driven by factors like people staying indoors, increased
moisture in the air, or transportation disruptions, then the effects for fog should look similar
to those obtained for heavy rain. If instead, the effect of fog events that I estimate are
reflecting the impact of pollution, then the estimates for heavy rain should look like a mirror
image of the fog effects. In fact, that is exactly what I find. This identification check is
discussed in more detail in Appendix A.11.

4.2

Estimation procedure

This study applies a simple time-series analysis approach that relies on random variation
in the week-to-week timing of fog events driven by climatic factors. My baseline regression
specification is:
0

ln(M ORTt ) = α +

τ
X

βs F OGt+s + Xt0 γ + Yt + W Dt + et

(1)

s=−τ

where M ORTt is the number of deaths in London in week t , F OGt is the number of fog days
in week t, Yt is a set of year effects, W Dt is a full set of week-of-the-year by decade effects,
and Xt is a vector of control variables. The year effects in this specification absorb changes
in mortality patterns over time. The week-of-the-year effects absorb seasonal factors that
28

Staying indoors may have also exposed people to higher levels of indoor air pollution. Since this is just
another channel through which fog increases pollution exposure it does not pose a major concern for my
identification strategy.
29
Note that a previous version of this paper reported no strong impact of rainfall on pollution levels. That
result was obtained from regressions that controlled for humidity levels, which are strongly correlated with
rain. Once humidity is omitted as a control, the data show a clear reduction in pollution associated with
rain, as described in Appendix A.11. A second important difference between fog events and heavy rain,
which I discuss in the Appendix, is that rain can affect water quality and increase digestive diseases.

12

affect mortality. Allowing these to vary by decade deals with the fact that the seasonality
of mortality is likely to change across such a long study period.30 The dependent variable in
this regression is log mortality in London, either total or for a specific age group or causeof-death. The main set of dependent variables is the number of fog days in a week, as well
as leads and lags of that variable.
The most important control variable is temperature. Both high and low temperatures
increase mortality, while low temperatures can also affect pollution levels because much of
the pollution in London was due to coal burning for home heating. Temperature also plays
an important role in fog formation. Thus, in addition to controlling flexibly for temperature
in a week I also include controls for leads and lags of temperature and temperature squared.
This ensures that, for example, lagged fog effects are not picking up the lagged effect of
temperature.31 The regressions also include controls for other weather variables – pressure,
humidity and precipitation – and squared values of these terms. These do not have as strong
an impact as the temperature controls, so I don’t include a full set of leads and lags of these
variables, though leads and lags are included in some robustness exercises. I also include
log births as a control in most regressions to account for the high level of infant mortality
in much of the study period. This is strongly related to mortality but the inclusion of this
variable has no impact on any of the main results.32
After establishing the lag structure of the fog effects, I also consider a second specification,
ln(M ORTt ) = α + βF OGt,t−3 + X 0 γ + Yt + W Dt + et

(2)

where the main explanatory variable is the number of fog days in week t and the three
30

Barreca et al. (2016) suggests that, at least in the U.S., there were dramatic changes in the seasonality
of mortality across the 20th century. It is worth noting that 1949 is included as part of the decade of the
1950s when constructing the week-by-decade effects, since that is the only year in the 1940s for which data
are available.
31
I also explore results including additional quadratic temperature terms. These are typically not statistically significant and have no meaningful impact on the results, so I do not include them my preferred
specification.
32
The log births variable should be interpreted with some caution because it will also reflect two other
factors. First, this variable may be partially capturing population change within a year that is not soaked up
by the year effects. Second, log births may also capture the effect of changes in the number of days included
in some weeks at the end of years, when it appears that a week may include fewer than seven days. One may
be concerned that the births may be a bad control because they could be affected by fog events. However,
in Appendix A.7 I show that there is no evidence of substantial direct or lagged relationship between births
and fog events. Consistent with this, the estimated coefficients on pollution or fog events change very little
depending on whether births are included as a control. While I do provide evidence that stillbirths increase
as a result of fog events, these are rare relative to total births. This, together with the possibility that many
stillbirths may occur weeks before the due date explains why I observe effects for stillbirths but not strong
effects for live births.

13

previous weeks. This specification, which is motivated by the lag structure identified using
Eq. 1, is useful for simplifying the results so that they can be broken down by age group
and cause-of-death in a manageable way.
These specifications generate results in terms of percentage changes in the number of
deaths. These can be interacted with baseline mortality to obtain expected changes in the
number of deaths. I will, however, avoid looking at changes in death rates because these
require population data, which are only observed once every decade (in census years).
One standard concern in an analysis based on time-series data is serial correlation. To
account for this, I use Newey-West standard errors that allow for correlation across observations falling within a certain number of weeks of each other. An analysis of the residuals
from regressions looking at total mortality using Eq. 2 suggests that serial correlation is a
concern in these regressions but that this correlation dies out rapidly (within 1-3 weeks).33
To be conservative, I allow correlation across windows that are somewhat larger than this –
six weeks – except in a few cases where series show no evidence of serial correlation, in which
case I calculate robust standard errors. I have also tested the series for stationarity. Standard tests strongly reject the null hypothesis of a unit root either for both total mortality
and mortality within each age category.

4.3

Modeling fog formation

To strengthen identification, this study uses weather conditions – temperature, humidity,
pressure and precipitation – in order to predict fog weeks. Modeling the formation of fog accurately is notoriously difficult, even with detailed modern weather data, due to the complex
set of interactions involved.34 However, the historical weather series available in this study
can be used to generate a rough prediction of fog formation at the week level. Using this
predicted model has two main advantages. First, it provides a proxy for fog formation that
is independent of pollution levels, addressing potential endogeneity concerns. Second, by
using quantitative weather variables to predict fog formation I can generate a measure that
does not rely on fog reports being consistent over time. However, the fog event predictions
based on weather data are somewhat imprecise and, as a result, in some cases the instrument
does not provide sufficient power when cutting the data into particular periods or focusing
on particular ages or causes of death. This section briefly summarizes the fog model while
further detail is available in Appendix A.4.
I model the conditions that permit fog formation as satisfying a series of necessary con33
34

See Appendix A.6.1 for further details.
See, e.g., Gultepe (2007).

14

ditions characterized by sufficiently low temperature, high humidity, high atmospheric pressure, and low precipitation. Low temperature reduces the amount of moisture that air can
hold before condensation occurs. Thus, at a given moisture content the condensation needed
for fog formation is more likely when the temperature is lower. Conditional on temperature,
higher relative humidity indicates that there is more water in the air that may condense.
High atmospheric pressure is associated with fog formation because it typically signals the
type of relatively calm conditions needed for radiation fog formation. Precipitation is related
to fog formation because high levels of precipitation indicate more and denser cloud cover,
while the formation of radiation fog requires clear skies. Thus, the key variable predicting
fog formation, denoted P redF OGt , is an interaction of four indicator variables based on the
four available weather series, while the model includes as controls each of the component
indicator variables as well as quadratic controls for each the underlying weather variables.
Conditional on choosing appropriate cutoff values, the interaction of the four indicator
variables can provide a sufficiently strong predictor of fog occurrence in a week. However,
the choice of appropriate cutoff values involves a trade-off between type I and type II errors.
There is no obvious criteria for choosing the weighting between these error types so I explore
a variety of alternative cutoff values. In the main text I present results in which fog formation
is predicted when all of the following conditions hold in a week: temperature is below 55,
humidity is above 85, pressure is above 29.9 and weekly precipitation is below 0.5. These
cutoff values do a reasonably good job of predicting fog formation across the full sample
period and in several sub-periods as well as pollution levels when direct pollution measures
are available. I explore alternative cutoff values in robustness exercises.
It is important to note that the weather variables used to predict fog are based on weekly
averages, or a weekly total in the case of precipitation. Even when the weekly averages do
not satisfy the conditions for fog formation, the conditions may exist on some subset of days.
As a result, despite modeling fog formation using a set of necessary conditions, we should
not be surprised that heavy fog events still occur weeks when, on average, these conditions
are not satisfied. Similarly, even when all conditions are satisfied, other factors may preclude
the occurrence of fog.
It is possible to use the P redF OGt variable as an instrument for fog events, but it is
important to note that doing so departs somewhat from the standard instrumental variables
strategy. In particular, while the occurrence of a heavy fog day is discrete, this masks
differences in the intensity of fog events. Because the predicted fog variable identifies the
conditions most conducive to fog formation, it is likely to correspond to the most severe fog
events. The more restrictive the cutoff values used to generate the P redF OGt variable, the

15

stronger the set of fog events that this variable identifies. This means that when P redF OGt
is used as an instrument for fog events the resulting coefficients will not reflect the impact of
an average fog event, and these coefficients will increase as more restrictive criteria are used
to predict fog events.35
It is interesting to study how the number of predicted fog weeks in a year changes across
the study period. This pattern is plotted in Appendix Figure 20. This graph shows a peak
in reported fog events in the 1890s followed by a substantial drop in the early 20th century.
There has been some speculation that the reduction in the early 20th century may reflect
falling pollution levels.36 However, I find that the same pattern appears in the P redF OGt
variable. This tells us that in fact the reduction in the number of fog events in the early
20th century, relative to the late 19th century, was due to weather conditions that were less
favorable for fog formation.

5

Preliminary analysis

As a preliminary step in the analysis, this section uses data from 1951-1962, when consistent
direct pollution measures are available, to establish the link between fog events, pollution
levels, and mortality.37 To estimate the relationship between pollution and fog events I use,
0

P OLt = α +

τ
X

βs F OGt+s + Xt0 γ + Yt + Wt + t

(3)

s=−τ

where P OLt is the level of pollution in week t (either the mean or maximum), F OGt is a
measure of fog events such as the number of heavy fog days in week t, Xt is a set of control
variables (temperature, temperature squared, etc.), Yt is a set of year effects, and Wt is a set
of week-of-the-year effects.38 This specification looks at how leads and lags of fog events are
related to pollution levels within the range [−τ, τ 0 ]. An analysis of the residuals provides no
evidence of serial correlation, so I use robust standard errors in this specification.
Figure 2 presents results comparing the pollution level to leads and lags of the number
35

This is similar to, but not quite the same as, the more standard impact of instruments on coefficients in
the presence of measurement error.
36
See, e.g., Troesken & Clay (2011).
37
In Appendix A.5.1 I plot weekly pollution levels from 1951-1952 against heavy fog days as well as
predicted fog weeks. These figures show that the highest pollution levels occurred during weeks in which
heavy fog was reported. The weeks with the most severe fog events, as well as the highest pollution levels,
were also weeks when P redF OGt predicts fog formation. It is worth noting that the P redF OGt variable
captures mainly the most severe fog events.
38
Given the shorter time period over which these data are available I do not allow the week-of-the-year
effects to vary by decade in this specification.

16

of fog days in a week. These results show that pollution levels were substantially elevated
in weeks in which heavy fog occurred, while there is no evidence of higher pollution levels
either in the weeks before or the weeks after a heavy fog week. The fact that there is no
evidence of higher pollution levels in the weeks before fog events suggests that the onset of
fog in a particular week was not driven by underlying emission levels, providing support for
my identification strategy. Appendix Figure 18 shows that similar results are also obtained
when I use P redF OGt as the explanatory variable in place of actual fog events.
Figure 2: Estimated relationship between fog and pollution levels
Results from regressions of pollution levels on heavy fog days

Pollution measures are averages of the maximum daily values reported in the week.
Regression includes controls for temperature and temperature squared as well as a
full set of year and week-of-the-year effects. Confidence intervals are based on robust
standard errors. The Durbin-Watson statistic for these regressions is 1.475, suggesting
that serial correlation is not likely to be an important concern.

Next, I consider the impact of pollution, as predicted by fog events, on mortality. The
first column of Table 1 presents results from a naive regression comparing the maximum
pollution values in each week to total mortality.39 I include two leads and several lags of
the pollution variable to study lagged effects as well as to evaluate whether endogeneity
is likely to be a concern. I find that elevated pollution levels were associated with higher
mortality across most of the four subsequent weeks. In addition, there is some evidence of a
statistically significant negative relationship between mortality and future pollution levels,
which suggests that endogeneity may be a concern when pollution is used as the explanatory
variable.
In Column 2 of Table 1 I replace pollution levels with the number of fog days in a week.
This is the approach that will be used in the main analysis since direct pollution measures
are not available for most of the study period. These regressions suggest that fog events
39

Similar results are obtained if instead I use mean weekly pollution levels.

17

were associated with increased mortality across the next four weeks. Importantly, unlike the
results in Column 1, the estimates show no evidence of a relationship between mortality and
future fog events. This suggests that fog events can help deal with the endogeneity concerns
that may be present when using pollution as the explanatory variable.

Table 1: Effect of pollution and fog days on mortality, 1951-1961

OLS
Using max
pollution
as the
explanatory
variable
(1)

DV: Log total mortality
Reduced form
IV
Using
Using fog
fog days
days as an
as the
instrument
explanatory
for pollution
variable
(2)
(3)
(4)

Future events
Pollution or
fog days in t+2
Pollution or
fog days in t+1

-0.0535
(0.0396)
-0.105**
(0.0424)

0.000902
(0.00440)
-0.00190
(0.00475)

Contemporaneous
Pollution or
fog days in t

-0.0102
(0.0394)

0.00692
(0.00472)

Past events
Pollution or
fog days in t-1

0.0930*
(0.0561)

Pollution or
fog days in t-2

Pred. Fog
Using
predicted
fog as the
explanatory
variable
(5)

0.0510
(0.0708)
0.00408
(0.0705)

0.0257
(0.0258)
0.0328
(0.0253)

0.129
(0.0924)

0.146
(0.104)

0.0111
(0.0316)

0.0148**
(0.00697)

0.217**
(0.0964)

0.224**
(0.101)

0.0443*
(0.0251)

0.0628*
(0.0353)

0.0172***
(0.00504)

0.235***
(0.0649)

0.236***
(0.0668)

0.0607**
(0.0261)

Pollution or
fog days in t-3

0.0222
(0.0539)

0.00426
(0.00605)

0.0778
(0.0861)

0.0887
(0.0910)

0.0616*
(0.0354)

Pollution or
fog days in t-4

0.101**
(0.0465)

0.0140**
(0.00662)

0.200**
(0.0850)

0.199**
(0.0839)

0.0224
(0.0330)

Pollution or
fog days in t-5

0.0258
(0.0426)

-0.00318
(0.00435)

-0.0134
(0.0637)

-0.00712
(0.0647)

0.00539
(0.0287)

494

11.41
494

5.71
494

494

IV f.s. F-stat
Observations

494

*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Newey-West standard errors allowing correlation across observations up to six weeks
apart in parenthesis. Regression also includes controls for temperature, temperature squared, two leads and five lags
of these variables, log births, pressure, pressure squared, precipitation, precipitation squared, humidity, humidity
squared, year effects and week-of-the-year effects. In addition to the controls included in the other regressions, the
results in Column 5 include controls for two leads and five lags of the temperature, pollution, precipitation and
pressure indicator variables that were interacted to produce the predicted fog event variable. Regressions run on
data from the second week of 1951 until the 22nd week of 1962. There are some gaps in the data over weeks in
which no pollution data were reported. Pollution values are maximum daily values averaged across each week.

18

Columns 3-4 present results from an IV regression where contemporaneous and lagged
fog days are used to instrument for contemporaneous and lagged pollution levels. In Column
3 I omit leading values in order to increase the strength of the instrument, while Column
4 includes both leading and lagged values. These results show patterns that are similar to
the reduced form estimates; higher pollution increases mortality contemporaneously across
the next four weeks and this effect fades away by the fifth week. Note that, relative to the
results in Column 1, the IV estimates imply a much stronger relationship between pollution
levels and mortality. This suggests that either higher pollution levels were endogenously
related to other factors that reduced mortality, such as cheap coal prices or higher incomes,
or that using fog events as instruments corrects for some measurement error in the pollution
variable. Finally, Column 5 presents results that compare the predicted fog event variable
to mortality. The results here are fairly similar, with mortality increasing in the three weeks
following a fog event. Again, there is no evidence of elevated mortality in the weeks before
predicted fog events.40
Overall, the results in Figure 2 and Table 1 suggest that fog events are associated with
increased pollution levels and that this pollution raised mortality in a window of roughly
three to four weeks after each event. Importantly for the remainder of this study, the reduced
form regressions using fog events appear to do a reasonably good job of capturing the pattern
of impact of pollution on mortality. In addition, there is no evidence that the week-to-week
timing of fog events was endogenously affected by changes in pollution levels.

6

Main analysis

The main analysis looks at the impact of acute exposure to elevated levels of pollution due to
fog events on mortality across the full 1866-1965 period. I begin by studying total mortality
before looking at separate age groups and causes of death.

6.1

Total mortality

The first set of results looking at the impact of fog events on total mortality, in Figure 3, are
based on the specification from Eq. 1. The figure describes coefficients and 95% confidence
intervals for estimates obtained using the full set of available data.41 The key explanatory
40

I do not present results using the predicted fog variable as an instrument for pollution because this
instrument is not strong enough across the relatively short period for which pollution data are available.
41
It is worth noting that this analysis covers fog events in both the Greenwich period and the Kew Gardens
period, which introduces some inconsistency. However, the results are similar if I consider only the period

19

variable in the top panel is the number of fog days in a week, though very similar results are
obtained if I use an indicator for whether any fog event was reported in the week. In the
bottom panel the explanatory variable is predicted fog events.
The most obvious feature in Figure 3 is the sharp jump in mortality in the week in which
a fog day occurs followed by a peak in mortality in the next week.42 There is evidence that
mortality remains elevated for 2-3 weeks after a fog event. There is no evidence that mortality
was higher in the weeks just before a fog event occurs. This provides some confidence in the
identification strategy. Instead, in the weeks leading up to fog events the data show a clear
downward trend in mortality. The cause of this downward trend is not clear, though a likely
explanation is that the typically mild weather conditions under which fog events formed
were relatively healthy.43 This pattern suggests that the estimated effects documented in
this paper may mildly understate the true impact of pollution exposure. Note that the
downward trend disappears when using fog events that are predicted based on underlying
weather conditions.
The next set of results, in Table 2, summarize the overall magnitude of the effect of fog
events on mortality in the event week and the following three weeks using the specification
from Eq. 2.44 Focusing on this four-week window is motivated by the results in Figure 3. I
use this approach in many of the subsequent tables because it provides a simple summary
of the acute impact of pollution exposure. In Columns 1-2 the key explanatory variable is
the number of fog days in a week and the three previous weeks. In Column 3 I instead use
an indicator for whether a fog event happened in the week or in any of the three previous
weeks. In Column 4 I use predicted fog weeks as the main explanatory variable. In Columns
5-6 I use predicted fog weeks as instruments for fog days or fog weeks, respectively, in the
four-week window.

during which observations come from Greenwich.
42
Temperature controls (not reported) show a strong but non-linear relationship to mortality in these
results, with both high and low temperatures associated with increased mortality. Leading values of temperature have no relationship to mortality. Lagged values suggest that temperature continued to affect mortality
for several weeks, with both low and high temperatures associated with increased mortality. Log births are
positively related to mortality but the inclusion of this control has little impact on the results.
43
Appendix A.3.6 presents some evidence showing that weather conditions such as temperature and pressure were trending mildly in the run-up to fog events. Of course, I control for temperature and pressure,
but the trends in those variables suggests that there may be trends in other related weather conditions that
I cannot observe.
44
Appendix A.6.2 presents results obtained using windows of different lengths ranging from two to five
weeks.

20

Figure 3: Estimated effect of fog events on total mortality, 1866-1965
Using fog days as the key explanatory variable

Using predicted fog event weeks as the key explanatory variable

Coefficient estimates and confidence intervals for a regression of log total mortality on the number of fog
days in a week (top panel) or on weeks with predicted fog events (bottom panel). Confidence intervals
are based on Newey-West standard errors allowing correlation across observations within 6 weeks of each
other. The regression includes controls for temperature, temperature squared, four leads and five lags of
temperature and temperature squared, log births, pressure, pressure squared, precipitation, precipitation
squared, humidity, humidity squared, a full set of year effects and a full set of week-of-the-year by decade
effect. The bottom panel also includes the temperature, pressure, humidity and precipitation indicator
variables used to construct the P redF OG variable as well as leads and lags of these variables. Data cover
1866-1965. N=4,479.

21

Table 2: Effect of fog events on total mortality in four week windows

Fog days
(4 week window)

OLS
(1)
0.0130***
(0.00281)

DV: Log total mortality
OLS
OLS
OLS
IV
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
0.00845***
0.0298***
(0.00234)
(0.00782)

Fog week ind.
(4 week window)
Pred. fog weeks
(4 week window)
Additional controls
IV f.s. F-stat
Observations

0.0167**
(0.00688)

4,479

IV
(6)

0.137***
(0.0381)

Yes

Yes

0.0214**
(0.00947)
Yes

4,479

4,479

4,464

Yes
114.6
4,464

Yes
54.7
4,464

*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Newey-West standard errors allowing correlation across observations up
to six weeks apart in parenthesis. Regressions run on the full set of available observations from 1866-1965.
All regressions include year effects and week-of-the-year by decade effects. Regression in Columns 2, 4
and 6 include controls for log births, humidity, humidity squared, pressure, pressure squared, precipitation,
precipitation squared, temperature, temperature squared, and five lags of temperature and temperature
squared. Column 6 also includes as controls the temperature, pressure, precipitation and humidity indicator
variables used to produce the predicted fog variable, as well as five lags of each of these variables. The
inclusion of these lagged terms causes a small reduction in the number of observations.

Results looking at the impact of fog days and including controls, in Column 2, indicate
that a fog day raised mortality by 0.845 percent across a four-week window starting in the
fog event week. I can use these estimates to quantify the total share of mortality that can
be directly attributed to the acute effects of pollution exposure generated by fog events. In
particular, across the study period there were 932 heavy fog days and an average of 1247
deaths in a week. Given the results in Column 2, this implies an additional 39,448 deaths
in London across the years studied. There were a total of 5.65 million deaths in London in
the weeks covered by these data. Thus, these results suggest that 0.7 percent of all deaths
experienced in London during the years covered by this study are directly attributable to the
acute effect of heavy fog events. The magnitude is slightly larger (48,887 deaths) if I focus
instead on the results using the fog week indicator in Column 3.45 The effects implied by
the results in Column 4 are somewhat smaller, despite the fact that the estimated effect of
a predicted fog event is larger, because there are just 282 of these. The estimates in Column
4 imply that fog events led to 30,425 deaths or 0.54 percent of all deaths in London during
the study years. In Columns 5-6 I estimate results using predicted fog events to instrument
for actual fog events. When the coefficient in Column 5 is applied to the 282 predicted fog
45

Similar magnitudes are also obtained if I use estimates from each individual lagged fog day variables,
such as those shown in Figure 3.

22

events I estimate 42,548 deaths, or 0.75 percent of all deaths. Thus, I conclude that at least
one out of every 200 deaths in London during the years covered by my data, and probably
more, are associated with acute effect of fog events.
One way to put these magnitudes into context is to compare the deaths associated with
acute pollution effects to totals from other important causes of death for the period before
1940, when consistent cause-of-death series are available. Applying the approach in Table 2
to data ending in 1939, I estimate that the acute effects of fog events caused 26,000-35,000
deaths in that period. Thus, the acute effects of pollution were similar in size to total deaths
due to suicide (30,400), venereal disease (23,891), or smallpox (23,366), and roughly half as
large as the total impact of important infectious diseases like diphtheria (56,848 deaths) or
scarlet fever (56,216 deaths), but quite a bit smaller than the most important causes (which
air pollution contributed to) such as TB (561,583 deaths), cardiovascular diseases (549,812),
pneumonia (331,956), or measles (360,756).
The estimated effects of the control variables (not reported) show reasonable patterns.
By far the most important control variables are temperature and temperature squared, which
show a clear non-linear relationship, with more deaths at both high and low temperatures.
These effects appear both contemporaneously and for several lagged weeks. Mortality is
greater in weeks with more births and there is some evidence that humidity also affects
mortality.46
In Appendix A.6.4 I present some additional robustness results using the approach in
Table 2. These show that the main findings are robust to excluding the births control or to
including additional temperature quadratic terms. I also look for non-linearity in the effect
of fog days, by estimating separate coefficients depending on the number of days in a week.
These results, in Appendix A.6.3, show that the contemporaneous or one-week lagged effect
of fog are fairly linear in the number of fog days, but that longer lagged effects are driven
primarily by the worst fog weeks, those with four or more fog days. Other results show that
including several lags of the other weather variables (pressure, humidity, precipitation and
squared values of these variables) has little impact on the results. Also, in Appendix Table
17, I explore more non-parametric controls for temperature and show that including these
does not affect the main results.
The most interesting results in Appendix A.6.4 show that when fog days are interacted
with temperature I see a significant negative coefficient on the interaction term. Because
home heating was a primary driver of air pollution emissions, these interactions tell us that
fog days had a more severe impact in weeks in which emissions levels were higher. This
46

The relationship between humidity and mortality is studied by Barreca (2012).

23

makes sense given that the primary effect of the weather conditions that accompanied fog
events was to trap in the pollution emitted in the city. In terms of magnitudes, these results
suggest that when the temperature was ten degrees (F) lower, the impact of a fog day on
mortality increased by 16-18%.47
It is also possible to look at how these effects evolved over time, which is done in Appendix
A.8. These results suggest that the impact of fog events as a percentage of total mortality
was relatively stable over time, with some evidence of a mild (not statistically significant)
decline.
Next, I study how these effects were distributed across age groups. This analysis follow
the same empirical approach applied to total mortality, but with dependent variables that
reflect death within particular age groups. As discussed in Section 3, the age groups I
consider aim to provide fairly consistent series despite changes in the age categories reported
across time. My main analysis focuses primarily on results looking across four-week windows
using the specification in Eq. 2.
Table 3 presents estimates of the impact of fog days on mortality by age group.48 These
results show that fog days had a substantial effect on mortality across all age groups except
for infants (a group I return to later), with the largest effects, in terms of the percentage
increase in mortality, occurring among children aged 1-5. The most important age group
in terms of overall number of deaths associated with fog events was older adults, with over
40 percent of fog event deaths occurring among the elderly (those aged over 60 or 65). The
most puzzling finding in Table 3 concerns infants, a group where modern results would lead
us to expect strong pollution effects. Before considering the causes of this surprising pattern,
it is useful to consider the lag structure of the results, shown in Figure 4.

47

This feature helps explain some of the worst fog events. During the Great London Fog of 1952, for
example, temperatures hovered in the mid-30s F. As a point of comparison, a similar number of fog days
occurred in late 1953, but with temperatures generally above 50 F the impact on mortality was relatively
modest. The increased impact of fog events during periods in which temperatures were low is noted in
contemporary sources such as Ministry of Health (1954).
48
Results using fog week indicator variables are similar. I do not present results obtained using the
predicted fog events because using the relatively imprecise fog even predictions together with the noisier
data on mortality by age group generates results with standard errors that are too large to draw clear
conclusions, though the coefficient estimates are generally similar to those shown in Table 3.

24

Table 3: Mortality effects by age group

Age group:
Fog days
(4 week window)

0-1

1-5

-0.000596
(0.0104)

0.0154**
(0.00639)

DV: Log mortality
Young
Adult
Middle age
0.0102***
(0.00336)

0.00632***
(0.00231)

0.00917***
(0.00220)

Elderly
0.00983***
(0.00254)

Number of additional deaths due to a fog day over a four week period
7.87
2.76
3.60
9.63
16.30
Age group share of deaths associated with a fog event
0.20
0.07
0.09
0.24

Observations

3,905

7,289
3,888

Total implied deaths by age group
2,560
3,338
8,920
4,192
4,192
4,192

0.41
15,098
4,192

*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Newey-West standard errors allowing correlation across observations up to six weeks
apart in parenthesis. All results include controls for temperature, temperature squared, four lags of temperature
and temperature squared, five lags of temperature and temperature squared, log births, pressure, pressure squared,
precipitation, precipitation squared, humidity, humidity squared and a full set of year effects and a week-by-decade
effects. The results in Column 1-2 use data from 1876-1965 but a small number of observations are dropped in
Column 2 because they have zero deaths. The other columns use data from 1870-1965. The implied number of
deaths is calculated by applying the estimated percentage increase in deaths based on the regression coefficient and
the average number of deaths in a week in each age group multiplied by four to reflect the four-week window over
which effects occur.

Figure 4 provides further detail on the by-age results. For each age category, this figure
presents the estimated effect of fog events, including leads and lags, on mortality. Results
are also reported for regressions using heavy rainfall in place of fog events. As discussed
above, if the fog analysis is performing well, then we should expect the rainfall check to
provide mirror image results. For most age categories we see that the rainfall check confirms
the results obtained using fog events. The main difference between the rainfall and fog event
results is in the week in which the event occurred. As discussed in Appendix A.11, this
difference is due to an increase in digestive diseases in weeks in which heavy rain occurred.
We can see this most clearly in the statistically significant increases in deaths in the 0-1 age
group, the category most affected by digestive diseases, in weeks when heavy rainfall occurs.
This effect provides a strong reason to prefer the fog event results over the rainfall check
results, since fog events have no similar impact on digestive deaths.
25

Figure 4: Results by age group including the rainfall check

Each graph presents results for two regressions. The dotted lines describe coefficient estimates for how the occurrence
of any fog day in a week affects mortality in each age group. For comparability to the rainfall results I focus on an
indicator variable for any heavy fog event, rather than the number of fog days. The solid lines describe coefficient
estimates for how the occurrence of heavy rainfall affects mortality. All results include controls four leads and four
lags of temperature and temperature squared as well as a full set of year and week-of-the-year fixed effects. The fog
results also include controls for pressure, pressure squared, humidity, humidity squared, rainfall and rainfall squared.
Confidence intervals are generated using Newey-West standard errors allowing correlation across observations up to
six weeks apart.

The fact that in both Table 3 and Figure 4 I observe no evidence of an increase in infant
mortality associated with fog events is very surprising given existing results from developed
and middle-income countries. There are two plausible and related explanations for this
difference. It may be the case that births which are considered viable today were instead
treated as stillbirths in the period that I study. Indeed, when I do observe statistics on
stillbirths, starting in 1927, there is evidence of increases associated with fog events. Results
in Appendix 18 show that fog days led to a statistically significant increase in stillbirths
across a four-week period equal to 0.7 percent, or about 15.7 stillbirths per 100,000 live
births. If I apply these estimates across all the years covered by my study, they suggest
26

that acute exposure due to fog days caused 1,143 additional stillbirths.49 Alternatively, it
maybe that the much higher levels of infant mortality observed across most of my study
period, compared to the settings considered in existing work, resulted in the culling of many
of those infants that would have been at risk of dying as a result of exposure to pollution
during heavy fog events.
In Appendix A.8 I provide additional results looking at how the distribution of effects
across age groups evolved over time. The most striking finding from these results is that there
was a substantial decline in the share of deaths associated with fog events accounted for by
those from 1-20 years old after 1900. This decline suggests that there was some change that
caused a reduction in the impact of pollution exposure on this age group relative to other
ages. Later, when I come to the cause-of-death results, I will provide evidence suggesting
that a change in the infectious disease environment can account for this shift.
I have also looked for evidence of the effects of in utero exposure to fog events. While the
data are generally not well suited for looking at in utero effects, because deaths cannot be
linked to birth dates, this is possible for two types of deaths. One of these is deaths due to
fetal underdevelopment, which typically occur close to the date of birth.50 This allows me to
roughly infer exposure in earlier trimesters. The second is stillbirths which, conditional on
occurring near the end of a regular term, can also allow me to infer first-trimester exposure.
In Appendix A.9 I analyze how these series are related to previous fog events. For both
series, I observe a strong positive relationship to fog events 25-36 weeks earlier, or roughly in
the first trimester. In terms of magnitudes, the estimated impact of first-trimester exposure
to fog events on deaths due to fetal underdevelopment imply 1,436 additional infant deaths
across the study period. The first-trimester effect on stillbirths imply an additional 3,509
stillbirths in the years covered by this study.
To summarize, the results in this subsection show that the effect of acute pollution
exposure associated with fog events on health in London was substantial and that these
49

Using the estimated relationship between fog events and pollution levels from the period in which I have
pollution data, it is possible to produce a rough comparison between my results and the estimates from
Mexico City reported by Arceo et al. (2016). Their results suggest that a one-unit increase in TSP raised
infant mortality by 0.42 deaths per 100,000 births. Using the relationship between fog events and stillbirths
I estimate using data after 1927, my results imply that a one-unit increase in TSP raises stillbirths by 0.27
per 100,000 births. If I combine stillbirths and infant deaths during this period, then my estimates suggest
that a one-unit increase in TSP raises the combination of these by 0.57 per 100,000 births. Thus, once I
include stillbirths the magnitude of the effects on infant mortality appear roughly similar to previous work.
This suggests that part of the difference between my results and those observed in existing work may be due
in part to stillbirths.
50
These are labeled “prematurity” in the Registrar General’s data, but because it would have been hard
for contemporaries to establish the pregnancy term during much of the study period, this most likely includes
a broader set of deaths due to fetal underdevelopment than what we would label prematurity today.

27

effects were felt across a broad set of age categories. However, we may worry that these
deaths simply reflected the harvesting of individuals who otherwise would have died soon
after. If this were true, then the larger number of deaths associated with fog events may not
indicate a large loss in years of life. In the next subsection I address this possibility.

6.2

Medium-run effects and harvesting

This section considers the medium-run effects – up to one year – of the high levels of pollution
exposure generated by fog events. The analysis follows the same basic approach used in the
previous sections, but adds in a variable capturing the number of fog events in the past year.
One reason to look for evidence of these medium-run effects is to see whether fog events have
some additional consequences not picked up by the analysis of acute effects in the previous
sections. A second motivation is that I can look at whether harvesting might be an issue,
i.e., whether the acute effect of fog events is simply reflecting mortality of individuals who
would have died soon after anyway. If there is a substantial harvesting effect, then I should
see that fog events are associated with reductions in mortality in the medium-term.
The identification issues faced when looking at medium-run effects are more substantial
than those present when looking only at acute effects. In particular, people may move
between cities over the course of a year, which may partially obscure the effect of fog exposure.
However, this source of bias is unlikely to be large since a relatively small fraction of the
population of a city like London moves in any given year. In addition, there is greater
concern that the frequency of fog events in the past year may be correlated with higher
baseline emissions levels that are related to other factors that influence mortality. These
caveats should be kept in mind when evaluating the results in this section. However, as I
will discuss in Section 6.3, the breakdown of medium-run effects by cause of death looks
reasonable, which suggests that these identification concerns are not too substantial.
To implement the medium-run analysis I include in my preferred regression specification
(Eq. 2) an additional variable reflecting the number of fog days reported in a 52-week period
starting just prior to the four-week period that I use to identify acute effects. I look across
a full year in order to eliminate the possibility that seasonal variation in the recent past can
drive the results. Also, in order to exploit variation at this level it is necessary to replace
the year effects in Eq. 2 with decade effects. Finally, this analysis focuses only on data up
to WWII, because after the war the larger number of fog events observed at Kew Gardens
will substantially influence the medium-run effect variable.
Table 4 presents results looking at medium-run effects across all age groups. In Column
28

1 I include both my standard measure of acute pollution effects (over a four-week window)
and a second variable reflecting the sum of all fog days in the 52 weeks prior to that window.
Both of these show a positive and statistically significant relationship to mortality. The fact
that fog exposure in the recent past does not reduce later mortality runs counter to the
idea of harvesting, or at least suggests that any harvesting effects are overwhelmed by the
medium-term effect of pollution exposure.51 In terms of magnitude, the impact of a single
fog event on mortality within a week is several times larger if the event occurred in the
past four weeks rather than in the 52 weeks before that. However, the overall impact of the
estimated medium term effect is about three times as large as the direct acute effect because
the acute effects occur across only four weeks while the medium-term effect is spread across
a full year. In total, the estimates in Table 4 imply that acute effects account for 24% of
the total mortality impact of fog events while the medium-term impact accounts for 76%,
ignoring any longer-term effects occurring outside of one year. In terms of magnitude, the
results in Column 1 suggest that the medium-run effects of fog events accounted for 1.8% of
all deaths in London during the period up to WWII.
Column 2 adds in an interaction between contemporaneous and past fog events in order
to look at whether having more fog events in the recent past reduces the contemporaneous
population at risk of mortality due to fog exposure. The coefficient term on this interaction
is very close to zero, so there is no evidence that fog events in the recent past reduced the
population at risk of dying from later fog events. This provides a second and even stronger
form of evidence suggesting that harvesting is not driving my results.

51

This results is also consistent with Bell & Davis (2001), which link the Great London Smog in December
1952 to high levels of mortality that persisted through February 1953.

29

Table 4: Medium-run results for mortality in all age groups

Fog days - acute effects (4 week window)
Fog days - medium run (next 52 weeks)

(1)
0.0102***
(0.00335)

DV: Log mortality
(2)
0.0110*
(0.00567)

0.00246**
(0.00103)

0.00252**
(0.00102)

Fog days (4 weeks) × fog days in
recent past

-8.68e-05
(0.000747)

*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. N=3,275. Newey-West standard errors allowing correlation across observations up to six weeks apart in parenthesis. All regressions include controls for temperature and temperature
squared, five lags of these variables, log births, pressure, pressure squared, humidity, humidity squared,
precipitation, precipitation squared and a full set of week-by-decade effects. The data cover 1870-1939 but
data from 1870 and 1919 are dropped from the analysis due to the need to construct one year lagged fog
event counts. For consistency I avoid using data after WWII, when the larger number of fog events affects
the variation in the medium-run explanatory variable.

Some interesting patterns appear when these medium-run effects are broken down by
age group, in Table 5. In particular, while I do not observe strong acute effects for infants
(ignoring stillbirths), there is evidence of substantial medium-run impacts. These may be
due at least in part to in utero exposure as shown in Appendix A.9. For children aged 1-5,
I find no evidence of medium-run effects. This contrasts with the clear evidence of acute
effects. For older adults, both acute and medium-run exposure are associated with increased
mortality. Next, I use information on causes of death to shed light on these patterns.

Table 5: Medium-run results by age group

Age group:
Fog days
(4 week window)
Fog days in
medium run
Observations

0-1

1-5

-0.000850
(0.00450)
0.00324**
(0.00152)
3,039

0.0148*
(0.00827)
-0.00142
(0.00250)
3,039

DV: Log mortality
Young
Adult
Middle age
0.000492
(0.00535)
-0.000460
(0.00177)
3,091

0.00637
(0.00405)
0.00130
(0.00133)
3,091

0.0138***
(0.00390)
0.00278**
(0.00114)
3,091

Elderly
0.0133***
(0.00435)
0.00369***
(0.00137)
3,091

*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Newey-West standard errors allowing correlation across observations up
to six weeks apart in parenthesis. All regressions include controls for temperature, temperature squared,
five lags of these variables, log births, pressure, pressure squared, humidity, humidity squared, precipitation,
precipitation squared, and a full set of week-of-the-year by decade effects. The data in Columns 1-2 cover
1876-1939 while those in the remaining columns cover 1875-1939.

30

6.3

Effects by cause of death

To study how acute pollution exposure interacted with the disease environment it is useful
to break the effects down by cause of death (COD). This section examines results for 23
aggregated cause of death categories that appear to be fairly consistent over time. I do not
examine one category, maternal mortality, which is investigated in more detail in a separate
paper (Hanlon & Sudol, 2017).52 The cause-of-death data cover 1870 to 1939.
Table 6 presents coefficient estimates for regressions comparing weekly mortality in each
COD category to the number of fog days in that week and the previous three weeks. The
first few rows describe mortality in a set of causes of death related to the respiratory and
cardiovascular systems, the categories most clearly linked to the impact of air pollution in
modern studies.53 Consistent with existing results, all of these categories show increases
during or just after fog events. Bronchitis deaths show the strongest increase, rising by
3.5% with each additional fog day. In terms of total deaths, this category alone explains
more than one-third of all of the deaths associated with fog events during the period covered
by the cause-of-death data. Cardiovascular diseases and pneumonia also show large effects.
Respectively, these explain 10.0 and 22.2 percent of deaths associated with fog events. Other
respiratory causes-of-death, a basket of diseases which includes asthma and influenza, also
show a positive association with fog events, though this result is not statistically significant.54
Together, the four respiratory and cardiovascular categories at the top of Table 6 account
for more than two-thirds of the deaths associated with fog events. Outside of fog days these
causes account for less than one-third of total mortality.
The next group of major infectious diseases show mixed effects. Diseases affecting the
respiratory system, such as measles and tuberculosis, show increases associated with fog
events, as does scarlet fever. Diphtheria, another disease of the throat also shows a positive
association with fog events which is marginally statistically significant.
It is interesting to note that many other infectious diseases, such as digestive diseases
(diarrhea, cholera and typhoid), smallpox, a viral skin disease, or the “other” infectious
diseases, do not show increases during fog events. Others, such as diphtheria and typhus,
show weak effects that disappear in many specifications. These findings are useful because
52

Our motivation for offering a separate analysis of the impact of pollution on maternal mortality is that
this is an area where the link to pollution has not been previously established in the literature. This calls
for a deeper analysis that considers the physiological channels through which pollution may be affecting
mothers’ health.
53
See, e.g., the review by Rückerl et al. (2011).
54
The impact of fog events through respiratory diseases is statistically significant if I focus only on the
period before WWI. In the inter-war period there are large outbreaks of influenza which make the data in
this category very noisy.

31

many of these diseases are highly contagious and at least some of these diseases show very
clear symptoms and were therefore relatively easy to diagnose, even in the 19th century.
The fact that I see no effect for these infectious diseases provides additional evidence that
the increase in mortality associated with fog events is not likely to have been caused by an
increased spread of disease as people crowded together indoors on foggy days.
The next grouping contains a miscellaneous assortment of diseases. Here it is comforting
to see that fog events are not positively associated with deaths due to factors such as cancer
or neurological diseases. These are causes where, a priori, we would not expect acute air
pollution exposure to play a major role, though chronic exposure may be an important
factor, such as in the development of lung cancer.55 Deaths due to old age, a category that
is somewhat vague, do increase during fog events, though the coefficient is not statistically
significant. Fetal underdevelopment (e.g., prematurity), one of the most important causes
of death among infants, does not appear to increase as a result of acute exposure. However,
results in Appendix A.9 show that deaths due to fetal underdevelopment are affected by in
utero exposure in the first trimester.
The last group of causes includes accidents, violence, and suicide. Classic stories of
fogs during the Victorian era emphasize their contribution to crime and accidental deaths.
The results in Table 6 do not show a statistically significant effect of fog events on deaths
due to accident or homicide across a four-week period. However, results using separate
leads and lags of fog events show strong evidence of an increase deaths due to accidents or
violence reported in the week following fog events, consistent with contemporary reports.
The magnitude of these effects, however, means that accidents and violence cannot be a
primary driver of the impact of fog events on overall mortality.
When running this many regressions there is always a worry that one could find statistically significant results simply by random chance. As a check on this concern, Appendix
A.11 presents results examining the relationship between heavy rain events and mortality
in different cause of death categories. In almost all cases the results based on heavy rain
support the patterns identified in Table 6. The one exception is scarlet fever, which does not
appear to be impacted by heavy rain events. This suggests that the scarlet fever result may
be due to random chance. The scarlet fever result also disappears in some of my robustness
exercises, as discussed below. Thus, I interpret this estimate at a spurious result.

55

In fact, cancer is sometimes used as a placebo category when looking at acute pollution effects, as in Jia
& Ku (2017).

32

Table 6: Mortality effects by reported cause of death
DV: Log all-age mortality within disease category
Cause of death
Coefficient
Respiratory & Cardiovascular
Bronchitis
0.0349 ***
Cardiovascular
0.0082 ***
Pneumonia
0.0298 ***
Misc. respiratory
0.00467

(0.00447)
(0.00237)
(0.00402)
(0.00683)

Infectious diseases
Digestive dis.
Diphtheria
Measles
Scarlet Fever
Smallpox
Tuberculosis
Typhus
Whooping cough
Infectious, other

-0.0042
0.0135
0.0791
0.0349
-0.00355
0.00615
0.0340
-0.00158
0.00022

(0.00373)
(0.00743)
(0.0137)
(0.00805)
(0.0321)
(0.00214)
(0.0179)
(0.0101)
(0.0073)

Other diseases
Cancer
Neurological dis.
Old age
Fetal underdevelopment
Venereal diseases
Other misc. causes

0.00134
-0.0021
0.0041
-0.00053
-0.0021
0.00076

(0.00238)
(0.00215)
(0.00367)
(0.00389)
(0.00793)
(0.00162)

Other causes of death
Accidents/violence
0.0022
Alcoholism
0.00832
Homicide†
-0.0074
Suicide
-0.00151

(0.00359)
(0.00941)
(0.0122)
(0.00837)

All causes

0.00970

*
***
***
***
*

***

S.E.

(0.00211)

No. deaths due to a
fog day in 4 week window
18.9
5.3
11.7

10.6
2.3
4.0

52.8

Estimated coefficients and robust standard errors on the impact of fog events in a week or in the previous
three weeks on mortality within each cause-of-death category. Robust standard errors are used because
many of the series do not show evidence of serial correlation. For the series where there is evidence of serial
correlation (define as a Durbin-Watson statistic under 1.5), results using Newey-West standard errors are
available in Appendix Table 25. For those categories that show clear increases during fog events, the last
column presents the number of deaths resulting from a fog day across a four-week period. All regressions
include controls for temperature, temperature squared, five lags of each of these variables, log births, pressure,
pressure squared, precipitation, precipitation squared, humidity, humidity squared, and a full set of year and
week-of-the-year by decade effects. Data cover 1870 to 1939. † Homicide data are only separately available
from 1870-1921. Homicide deaths are also included in the accidents and violence category.

We can draw two main lessons from the results in Table 6. First, the fact that the effect
of fog events was concentrated in respiratory and cardiovascular diseases, while I find no
effect for other causes of death that are unlikely to be associated with pollution exposure
– digestive diseases, neurological diseases, venereal diseases, and alcoholism, for example –
33

indicates that the identification strategy is working well. If the effects of fog events were due
to factors other than pollution exposure, such as difficulty reaching medical care, then we
would not expect to see the effects so concentrated in respiratory and cardiovascular diseases.
Second, these results show that fog events interacted with a specific set of infectious
diseases of the respiratory system in a way that increased mortality from these diseases.
Together, these diseases – measles and TB – account for 28 percent of the total deaths
associated with fog events.56 While a number of studies, discussed in Appendix A.1, show
a correlation between pollution exposure based on location of residence and TB mortality,
to my knowledge this is the first study to draw a clear causal link between pollution and
TB or measles mortality. The channels through which pollution increases infectious disease
mortality are not currently well-understood, but the timing of the results I provide can help
shed some light on this connection. In particular, the typical period between infection and
death for TB and measles tells us that the acute effects of pollution documented in my
main results are unlikely to be due to an increase in disease transmission due to pollution
exposure. Instead, it must be the case that pollution increases the probability of death of
individuals that already have the disease.
In Appendix A.10 I present some additional results looking at causes of death. One set
of results use an alternative analysis approach in which I estimate the effect of fog days
across a four-week window starting in the week in which the fog occurred and then compare
these estimates to the effect in a four-week window just before the fog day. These results
are generally similar to those shown in Table 6 except that I no longer find statistically
significant effects operating through scarlet fever. This provides further evidence that the
scarlet fever result estimated in Table 6 is spurious. In another set of results, I use the
predicted fog variable to instrument for the timing of fog events. This also generates similar
results.
The cause-of-death results can help us understand the distribution of fog event mortality
across age groups. In Appendix A.3.4 I provide tables showing the share of mortality in
each age group broken down by cause of death. This table shows that the most important
causes of death for infants are digestive diseases and fetal underdevelopment. From Table
6 we can see that these causes are not positively associated with the acute effects of fog
events. These patterns may help explain why I do not see a strong acute effect of fog events
on infant mortality. For children aged 1-5, the most important causes of death are infectious
diseases, including measles, pneumonia, tuberculosis, whooping cough and bronchitis (in
that order). Deaths from all of these, other than whooping cough, increase during fog
56

These diseases account for 14 percent of deaths overall.

34

events. This explains the strong effect of fog events on mortality for the 1-5 age group
shown in Table 3. For the young group and prime age adults, the most important cause
of death by far was tuberculosis, which accounted for 23% and 39% of mortality in these
age groups, respectively. This, together with the connection between tuberculosis mortality
and fog events documented in Table 6, helps explain why I find a substantial effect of fog
events on adult mortality. Importantly, this also suggests that the impact of pollution on
adults in modern developed countries is likely to be weaker, since TB is much less common
in developed countries today. However, it remains common in the developing world. For
older adults, the most important causes of death were cardiovascular diseases and bronchitis
while pneumonia was also important. For those in the 40s to 60s, tuberculosis was also an
important factor. All of these are linked to fog events in Table 6.
One implication of the results shown in Table 6 is that the presence of infectious diseases
increased the costs of pollution exposure. As an example of this point, consider the impact
of fog events on children aged 1-5, a group that I find to be strongly affected by pollution
events.57 In the 19th and early 20th century, this group faced substantial mortality risk
from infectious diseases, particularly measles, which accounted for 14% of deaths in this age
group. Table 7 presents estimates of the impact of fog events on this age group using data
from 1875-1914 including all cause of death (Column 1) and excluding measles mortality
(Column 2). We can see that once measles deaths are excluded the impact of fog events
on children aged 1-5 drops by half. A similar story holds for prime-aged adults and TB,
which accounted for 39% of mortality among that age group. The next two columns of the
table show the estimated impact of fog events on adults aged 20-40 including all causes of
death, in Column 3, and all deaths excluding TB, in Column 4. Columns 5-6 show the effect
of excluding these causes of death when looking at all-age mortality. This shows that the
estimated effect of pollution on overall mortality drops by roughly one-quarter when deaths
due to these two diseases are excluded from the analysis.

57

I study the impact of measles on the 1-5 age group because that was the group where that disease was
most important. I study the impact of TB on the 20-40 age group for the same reason.

35

Table 7: Effect of certain infectious diseases on mortality by age group

Dependent
variable:
Fog days
(4 week window)
Observations

Ages 1-5
All
Excluding
deaths
measles
0.0208***
(0.00702)
2,023

0.00962*
(0.00579)
2,023

Ages 20-40
All
Excluding
deaths
TB
0.00564**
(0.00253)
1,878

0.00378
(0.00300)
1,878

All Ages
Excluding
measles
and TB
0.00907**
0.00676*
(0.00361)
(0.00371)
1,878
1,878
All
deaths

*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Newey-West standard errors allowing correlation across observations up to six
weeks apart in parenthesis. Data in Columns 1-3 cover 1875-1914. Data in Columns 4-5 cover 1875-1910 because
age categories change in 1911. Data in Columns 5-6 cover 1875-1911 to keep the results comparable to the previous
columns. Regressions include controls for temperature, temperature squared, five lags of each of these variables, log
births, pressure, pressure squared, humidity, humidity squared, precipitation, precipitation squared, and a full set
of year and week-of-the-year by decade effects.

Further analysis (available upon request) shows that the medium-run increase in mortality is being driven by deaths due to bronchitis, cardiovascular deaths, whooping cough,
and other respiratory deaths. These patterns seem reasonable and the medium-run increase
in other respiratory deaths, which includes influenza, is consistent with the results found by
Clay et al. (2015). There is also evidence of an increase in neurological deaths, a common
cause of death for infants. Only three major COD categories show medium-run reductions
associated with fog events: cancer, scarlet fever, and the undefined “old age” category. This
suggests that there may have been some harvesting effects among the very old or among
young children, but they appear to be more than offset by the medium-run increase in mortality in other categories. There is no evidence of harvesting effects for deaths due to TB
or measles. All of the primary cause-of-death patterns discussed above survive when the
regressions also account for medium-run effects.
The cause-of-death results can also help us understand the medium-run estimates by
age group in Table 5. For example, the results in Table 5 show that children aged 1-5
were affected only by acute and not by medium-run pollution exposure. Since measles was a
primary driver of mortality in the 1-5 age group and I find no evidence of medium-run effects
on measles deaths, this explains why this group does not show positive medium-run effects.
In contrast, bronchitis and cardiovascular deaths are increasing in both acute and mediumrun pollution exposure. This can explain why both acute and medium-run exposure increase
mortality among older adults, where these two causes of death are particularly important.
Pneumonia deaths, on the other hand, were only influenced by acute pollution exposure.
The connection between pollution exposure and infectious diseases implies that improvements in medical knowledge, public health technologies, or other factors that reduced in36

fectious disease mortality, also have the potential to reduce the health effects of pollution.
This effect is described for measles in Figure 5. The top part of the figure describes the
sharp change in measles deaths from around 42 per week from 1870-1914 to under 11 per
week from 1919-1939. This decline appears to have been due to a variety of factors, including reductions in overcrowding in dwellings, improved nursing care, better nutrition, and
changing disease virulence (Woods, 2000). A measles vaccine was not introduced until after
this period. At the bottom of the figure I calculate the impact that this change had on the
mortality effects associated with fog events. Using data up to 1914, I estimate that a fog
day increased measles deaths by 9% across a four-week period. This relationship, together
with the fall in underlying measles prevalence, implies that a fog event in 1919-39 led to 12
fewer deaths than one occurring in the 1870-1914 period. This explains 50.6 percent of the
reduction in the number of deaths associated with a fog day in 1919-39 compared to the
pre-WWI period. A similar calculation shows that reductions in TB rates account for an
additional 12% of the reduction in deaths due to fog events after WWI.58

Figure 5: Effect of falling measles mortality on effect of fog events

58

TB deaths fell from 201 per week before 1914 to 83 per week in the inter-war period, most likely due
to improved public health measures (the TB vaccine BCG only came into widespread use after WWII.)
Applying coefficient estimates from data before 1914 to this change implies that the reduction in TB deaths
is associated with a 5% reduction in the mortality associated with fog events and accounts for 12.6% of the
reduction in mortality due to fog events after WWI.

37

7

Conclusions

This paper provides evidence on the impact of acute pollution exposure associated with fog
events on mortality patterns in London across the century from 1866-1965. The richness of
the available data and the repeated nature of the events that I use for identification allow
me to generate a wide variety of results, including tracking the impact of acute exposure
across different age groups and the interaction of these effects with other causes of death.
This paper presents only a small subset of the results that can be generated from this rich
dataset. These data should provide fertile ground for further research aimed at improving
our understanding of the long-run evolution of health in London.
One of the interesting results reported in this study is that mortality is increased by
the interaction of pollution exposure with a specific set of infectious diseases that primarily
affect the respiratory system. One implication of this type of interaction is that the health
effects of pollution will be modified across contexts depending on the disease environment.
For example, the same level of pollution may generate higher levels of mortality in a place
where certain infectious diseases are common than in a place where infectious diseases are
rare. This implies that even holding constant the level of pollution, one should be careful in
extrapolating from the mortality effects observed in one context. A second implication is that
reductions in infectious disease mortality will reduce the health impact of pollution, which
in turn will alter the benefits we should expect from pollution regulation. These results also
raise the possibility that interventions that improve the disease environment may be able to
reduce the health costs of pollution more cheaply than direct pollution abatement. Assessing
this possibility is an interesting avenue for future research.
My results point to two infectious diseases, measles and TB, as showing particularly
strong interactions with pollution exposure. This is an important finding because these
diseases continue to be important causes of mortality today. The WHO reports that there
were 6.3 million new cases of TB in 2016 with 1.3 million TB deaths.59 This made TB
the ninth leading cause of death and the most important single infectious diseases (ranking
above HIV/AIDS). Measles, while easily preventable, also remains important, killing 89,780
children in 2016, the first recorded year in which global deaths from this disease fell below
100,000.60 Thus, public health improvements, and particularly progress against these two
diseases, offers an avenue for reducing the health costs of pollution.

59

Statistics from See World Health Organization (2017). The 1.3 million deaths figure includes only deaths
among HIV-negative people.
60
The measles statistics are from http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs286/en/.

38

References
Ahrens, CD. 2007. Meteorology Today. Ninth edn. Brooks/Cole, Cengage Learning.
Almond, Douglas, Chen, Yuyu, Greenstone, Michael, & Li, Hongbin. 2009. Winter Heating or Clean Air?
Unintended Impacts of China‘s Huai River Policy. American Economic Review, 99(2), 184–90.
Alsan, Marcella, & Goldin, Claudia. Forthcoming. Watersheds in Child Mortality: The Role of Effective
Water and Sewerage Infrastructure, 1880-1920. Journal of Political Economy.
Arceo, Eva, Hanna, Rema, & Oliva, Paulina. 2016. Does the Effect of Pollution on Infant Mortality Differ
Between Developing and Developed Countries? Evidence from Mexico City. Economic Journal, 126(591),
257–280.
Bailey, R., Hatton, T., & Inwood, K. 2016. Atmospheric Pollution and Child Health in Late Nineteenth
Century Britain. CEPR Discussion Paper No. 11702.
Ball, Alastair. 2015 (November). The Lifelong Costs of Urban Smogs. MPRA Working Paper No. 63229.
Barmpadimos, I, Keller, J, Oderbolz, D, Hueglin, C, & Prévôt, ASH. 2012. One decade of parallel fine
(PM 2.5) and coarse (PM 10–PM 2.5) particulate matter measurements in Europe: trends and variability.
Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics, 12(7), 3189–3203.
Barreca, A., Clay, K., Deschenes, O., Greenstone, M., & Shapiro, J.S. 2016. Adapting to Climate Change:
The Remarkable Decline in the U.S. Temperature-Mortality Relationship over the 20th Century. Journal
of Political Economy, 124(1), 105–159.
Barreca, Alan, Clay, Karen, & Tarr, Joel. 2014 (February). Coal, Smoke, and Death: Bituminous Coal and
American Home Heating. NBER Working Paper No. 19881.
Barreca, Alan I. 2012. Climate change, humidity, and mortality in the United States. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 63(1), 19–34.
Beach, B., & Hanlon, W.W. Forthcoming. Coal Smoke and Mortality in an Early industrial Economy.
Economic Journal.
Bell, M.L., & Davis, D.L. 2001. Reassessment of the lethal London fog of 1952: Novel indicators of acute
and chronic consequences of acute exposure to air pollution. Environmental Health Perspectives, 109(3),
389–394.
Brimblecombe, Peter. 1987. The Big Smoke: A History of Air Pollution in London Since Medieval Times.
Methuen.
Chay, Kenneth, Dobkin, Carlos, & Greenstone, Michael. 2003. The Clean Air Act of 1970 and Adult
Mortality. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 27(3), 279–300.
Chay, Kenneth Y., & Greenstone, Michael. 2003. The Impact of Air Pollution on Infant Mortality: Evidence from Geographic Variation in Pollution Shocks Induced by a Recession. The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 118(3), pp. 1121–1167.
Chen, Yuyu, Ebenstein, Avraham, Greenstone, Michael, & Li, Hongbin. 2013. Evidence on the impact of
sustained exposure to air pollution on life expectancy from Chinas Huai River policy. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 110(32), 12936–12941.
Clay, K, Lewis, J., & Severnini, E. 2015 (October). Pollution, Infectious Disease, and Mortality: Evidence
from the 1918 Spanish Influenza Pandemic. NBER Working Paper No. 21635.
Clay, Karen, Lewis, Joshua, & Severnini, Edson. 2016 (April). Canary in a Coal Mine: Impact of Mid-20th
Century Air Pollution Induced by Coal-Fired Power Generation on Infant Mortality and Property Values.
NBER Working Paper No. 22115.
Currie, J. 2013. Pollution and Infant Health. Child Development Perspectives, 7(4), 237–242.

39

Currie, Janet, & Neidell, Matthew. 2005. Air Pollution and Infant Health: What Can We Learn from
California’s Recent Experience? The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(3), pp. 1003–1030.
Currie, Janet, & Walker, Reed. 2011. Traffic Congestion and Infant Health: Evidence from E-ZPass. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 3(1), 65–90.
Currie, Janet, Neidell, Matthew, & Schmieder, Johannes F. 2009. Air pollution and infant health: Lessons
from New Jersey. Journal of Health Economics, 28(3), 688 – 703.
Cutler, D, & Miller, G. 2005. The Role of Public Health Improvements in Health Advances: The TwentiethCentury United States. Demography, 42(1), 1–22.
Deschênes, Olivier, & Greenstone, Michael. 2011. Climate change, mortality, and adaptation: Evidence
from annual fluctuations in weather in the US. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 3(4),
152–185.
Feng, Xinyuan, & Wang, Shigong. 2012. Influence of different weather events on concentrations of particulate
matter with different sizes in Lanzhou, China. Journal of Environmental Sciences, 24(4), 665–674.
Ferrie, Joseph P., & Troesken, Werner. 2008. Water and Chicago‘s mortality transition, 1850-1925. Explorations in Economic History, 45(1), 1 – 16.
Floud, R., Fogel, R.W., Harris, B., & Hong, S.C. 2011. The Changing Body: Health, Nutrition and Human
Development in the Western World since 1700. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Foster, Andrew, Gutierrez, Emilio, & Kumar, Naresh. 2009. Voluntary Compliance, Pollution Levels, and
Infant Mortality in Mexico. American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 99(2), 191–97.
Galiani, S, Gertler, P, & Schargrodsky, E. 2005. Water for Life: The Impact of the Privatization of Water
Services on Child Mortality. Journal of Political Economy, 113(1), pp. 83–120.
Gonzalez-Viveros, P, Caetano, E, & Garcia-Garcia, F. 2018. Characterization and Modeling of Fog in the
Mexico Basin. Aerosol and Air Quality Research, 18, 79–90.
Graff Zivin, Joshua, & Neidell, Matthew. 2013. Environment, Health, and Human Capital. Journal of
Economic Literature, 51(3), 689–730.
Greenburg, L, Jacobs, MB, Drolette, BM, Field, F, & Braverman, MM. 1962. Report of an air pollution
incident in New York City, November 1953. Public Health Reports, 77(1), 7.
Greenstone, Michael, & Hanna, Rema. 2014. Environmental Regulations, Air and Water Pollution, and
Infant Mortality in India. American Economic Review, 104(10), 3038–72.
Greenstone, Michael, & Jack, B. Kelsey. 2015. Envirodevonomics: A Research Agenda for a Young Field.
Journal of Economic Literature, 53(1), 5–42.
Gultepe, Ismail. 2007. Fog and Boundary Layer Clouds: Introduction. Pure and Applied Geophysics, 164,
1115–1116.
Hanlon, W Walker, & Sudol, Katherin. 2017 (February). Pollution and Maternal Mortality: Evidence from
the London Fog. Mimeo.
Hanna, Rema, & Oliva, Paulina. 2015. The Effect of Pollution on Labor Supply: Evidence from a Natural
Experiment in Mexico City. Journal of Public Economics, 122, 68–79.
Jayachandran, Seema. 2009. Air Quality and Early-Life Mortality: Evidence from Indonesias Wildfires.
Journal of Human Resources, 44(4), 916–954.
Jia, R., & Ku, H. 2017 (January). Is China’s Pollution the Culprit for the Choking of South Korea? Evidence
from the Asian Dust. Working Paper.
Knittel, C. R., Miller, D. L., & Sanders, N. J. 2016. Caution, drivers! Children present: Traffic, pollution,
and infant health. Review of Economics and Statistics, 98(2), 350–366.

40

Logan, W.P.D. 1953. Mortality in the London fog incident, 1952. The Lancet, 261(6755), 336–338.
McKeown, Thomas. 1976. The Modern Rise of Population. New York: Academic Press.
Meetham, A.R., Bottom, D.W., Crayton, S., Henderson-Sellers, A., & Chambers, D. 1981. Atmospheric
Pollution: Its History, Origins and Prevention. Fourth edn. Oxford: Pergamon Press.
Ministry of Health. 1954. Mortality and Morbidity during the London fog of December 1952. Tech. rept.
Ministry of Health, London. Reports on Public Health and Medical Subjects No. 95.
Nemery, B, Hoet, PHM, & Nemmar, A. 2001. The Meuse Valley fog of 1930: An air pollution disaster.
Lancet, 357(9257), 704–708.
Pope, CA. 1989. Respiratory disease associated with community air pollution and a steel mill, Utah Valley.
American Journal of Public Health, 79(5), 623–628.
Rangel, M.A., & Vogl, T. 2016 (December). Agricultural Fires and Infant Health. NBER Working Paper
No. 22955.
Rückerl, R, Schneider, A, Breitner, S, Cyrys, J, & Peters, A. 2011. Health Effects of Particulate Air Pollution:
A Review of Epidemiological Evidence. Inhalation Toxicology, 23(10), 555–592.
Samet, Jonathan M., Dominici, Francesca, Curriero, Frank C., Coursac, Ivan, & Zeger, Scott L. 2000. Fine
Particulate Air Pollution and Mortality in 20 U.S. Cities, 1987-1994. New England Journal of Medicine,
343(24), 1742–1749. PMID: 11114312.
Schlenker, Wolfram, & Walker, W Reed. 2016. Airports, Air Pollution and Contemporaneous Health. Review
of Economic Studies, 83(2).
Seinfeld, John H., & Pandis, Spyros N. 2016. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics : From Air Pollution to
Climate Change. John Wiley & Sons.
Siddika, Nazeeba, Balogun, Hamudat A, Amegah, Adeladza K, & Jaakkola, Jouni JK. 2016. Prenatal
ambient air pollution exposure and the risk of stillbirth: systematic review and meta-analysis of the
empirical evidence. Occup Environ Med, 73(9), 573–581.
Thorsheim, Peter. 2006. Inventing Pollution. Athens, Ohio: Ohio University Press.
Townsend, James G. 1950. Investigation of the Smog Incident in Donora, Pa., and Vicinity. American
Journal of Public Health, 40(2), 183–189.
Troesken, W, & Clay, K. 2011. Did Frederick Brodie Discover the World’s First Environmental Kuznets
Curve? Coal Smoke and the Rise and Fall of the London Fog. In: Libecap, G., & Steckel, R. H. (eds),
The Economics of Climate Change: Adaptations Past and Present. University of Chicago Press.
Woods, Robert. 2000. The Demography of Victorian England and Wales. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
World Health Organization. 2017. Global Tubercolosis Report. Tech. rept.

41

A
A.1

Appendix
Discussion of public health studies linking TB and pollution

This section offers a discussion of existing studies in the medical and public health literature
examining the link between pollution and TB. This discussion is included in the Appendix
rather than the main text because the analysis approach used in these studies is likely to
struggle to identify causal effects.
There exists a relatively small set of public health studies that study association between
the mortality of those with TB and their level of pollution exposure. A typical example of
studies of this type is Blount, et al. (2017, “Traffic-Related Air Pollution and All-Cause
Mortality during Tuberculosis Treatment in California,” Environmental Health Perspectives,
125:9) which looks at mortality among 32,875 patients being treated for active TB in California from 2000-2012. Mortality patterns among this population are compared to traffic
volumes and densities in buffers around the residence of each patient. They find that mortality risk increases with nearby traffic. This suggests a link between pollution exposure and
TB mortality. While the study does include controls for demographic and socioeconomic
factors, a natural concern with this approach is that patients who live in high-traffic areas
differ from those living in low-traffic areas on dimension which cannot be observed or controlled for. As a result, while the evidence from this study is suggestive, it is difficult to
draw strong causal conclusions.
A very similar approach is applied by Peng, et al. (2016, “Long-term exposure to ambient
air pollution and mortality in a Chinese tuberculosis cohort,” Science of the Total Environment, 580, p. 1483-1488) to a cohort of TB patients in China, which are observed from
2003-2013. As in the Blount, et al. study, Peng, et al. compare mortality rates to annual
average pollution measures using patient’s residence location. Similar to the previous study,
they find evidence that those TB patients who lived in locations with more pollution had
higher overall mortality and TB mortality.
A different set of public health studies argues that air pollution exposure may be associated with increased TB prevalence. One example in this area is Jassal, Bakman & Jones
(2013, “Correlation of ambient pollution levels and heavily trafficked roadway proximity
on the prevalence of smear-positive tuberculosis,” Public Health, 127, p. 268-274), which
uses medical records from Los Angeles County and compares the TB diagnosis to pollution
exposure. As in the studies discussed above, pollution exposure is inferred from patient’s
residential location, which raises concerns that those living in more-polluted locations may
differ in meaningful ways from those living in less-polluted locations. Their results indicate
42

that air pollution exposure is correlated with TB risk.
A similar methodology is applied by Lai, et al. (2016, “Ambient air pollution and risk of
tuberculosis: a cohort study,” Occup Environ Med, 73, p. 56-61) using a cohort of patients in
Taiwan tracked from 2005-2012. They also find evidence of a correlation between pollution
exposure, based on residential address, and the chance that a patient was diagnosed with
TB.
An earlier study, Smith, et al. (2014, “Particulate air pollution and susceptibility to
the development of pulmonary tuberculosis disease in North Carolina: an ecological study,”
International Journal of Environmental Health Research, 24:2, p. 103-112) uses data covering
all residents of North Carolina. Instead of residential location, this study uses county of
residence to infer pollution exposure and then looks at whether those living in counties with
higher pollution levels were more likely to be diagnosed with TB.
You, et al. (2016, “On the association between outdoor PM2.5 concentration and the
seasonality of tuberculosis for Beijing and Hong Kong,” Environmental Pollution, 218, p.
1170-1179) differs from other studies in this area in that they compare the seasonality of TB
and air pollution. Their study shows that the seasonality of TB notifications is positively
correlated with the seasonality of pollution levels. It is not clear if this reflects an increase
in the number of people who acquire TB or whether it is instead due to more people seeking
medical care for respiratory distress which leads to an increase in TB diagnoses. A fairly
similar approach is taken by Zhu, et al. (2018, “Ambient air pollutants are associated with
newly diagnosed tuberculosis: A time-series study in Chengdu, China,” Science of the Total
Environment, 631-632, p. 47-55) using data from Chengdu, China.
To summarize, there are a number of studies suggesting that TB prevalence and TB
mortality risk are positively correlated with air pollution exposure. However, it is difficult
to draw strong causal conclusions from this literature because pollution exposure is almost
universally based on location of residence, and those who choose to live in more polluted
locations are likely to differ from those living in less polluted locations along a range of
unobservable dimensions which may affect exposure to TB or TB mortality.

43

A.2

Population and mortality in London

The area of London covered by this study is depicted in Figure 6. This area stretches from
Islington and Hampstead in the North down to Camberwell and Wandsworth in the South.
East to West it covers an area running from the western border of Kensington past the edge
of Greenwich. This area, now called Inner London, roughly covers the central districts of
Greater London today.
Figure 6: Area of London covered by this study

This map is from the 1851 Census of Population.

Figure 7 plots the population of the area of London covered by this study. The population
data are from the census, which took place every ten years, and begin with the census of
1871. The population of this area of London peaked in the early 20th century and then
began declining as more people moved to the suburbs. The figure also plots annual deaths
averaged across the four years starting with each census year. Four-year averages are used
to reduce the effect of epidemics. Deaths peaked in the late 19th century and then began
falling dramatically at the beginning of the 20th century. This reduction was due mainly to
reductions in infectious disease mortality, such as the declines shown in Figure 14. Figure
8 plots the raw death rate in London (without age adjustment) implied by the number of
deaths and the population data. The death rate fell by more than half from the beginning
of the study period into the inter-war period. If anything this understates the true decline
44

because of the effect of population aging after the demographic transition, which began in
Britain in the 1870s.
Figure 7: Population and average annual deaths in London across the study period

Population data are from the census. Deaths data are summed from the Registrar General’s
weekly reports used in the main analysis. Deaths are average annual deaths across the four
years following each census year.

Figure 8: Death rates in London

Population data are from the census. Deaths data are summed from the Registrar General’s
weekly reports used in the main analysis. Deaths are average annual deaths across the four
years following each census year.

45

A.3

Data appendix

A.3.1

Summary statistics

Table 8 presents summary statistics for the data used in the main analysis, covering 18661965 (except 1915-18 and 1940-48).
Table 8: Summary statistics for weekly observations
Variable
Total deaths
Deaths age 0-1
Deaths age 1-5
“Young” deaths
“Adult” deaths
“Middle age” deaths
“Elderly” deaths
Infant MR (per 100,000 births)
Fog days
Fog week indicator
Pred. fog week
Avg. max daily pollution
Avg. mean daily pollution
Temperature
Pressure
Precipitation
Humidity
Births
Stillbirths

Mean Std. Dev.
1251.139
407.433
217
174
127
113
67
36
142
70
261
68
413
151
9693
6299
0.207
0.636
0.129
0.335
0.063
0.243
0.269
0.201
0.122
0.095
50.022
9.438
29.79
0.241
0.456
0.489
78.782
8.012
1963.887
581.87
31.948
12.399

46

Min. Max.
N
524
3761 4479
11
1107 3905
0
593
3905
3
216
4192
20
610
4192
130
828
4192
181
1666 4192
1044
47380 3905
0
6
4479
0
1
4479
0
1
4479
0.038 1.437 574
0.006 0.732 737
22.4 73.900 4479
28.824 30.76 4479
0
4.71 4479
52
99
4479
609
3308 4479
10
71
1499

A.3.2

Weather report examples

Figures 9 and 10 present examples of weather reports from 1880 and 1952 for weeks in which
heavy fog occurred.

Figure 9: Example weather report from February 7, 1880

Figure 10: Example weather report from the 50th week of 1952

47

A.3.3

Graphs of the fog event data

Figure 11: Fog weeks and fog days, 1865-1965

Figure 12: Fog events and total mortality share by week of the year

48

A.3.4

Cause-of-death data

The cause of death data are reported in a wide variety of categories that change over time.
Table 13 provides an overview of how these diseases are grouped to obtain the categories
used in the analysis.
Figure 13: Components of the cause of death categories

49

Table 9 describes the share of mortality in each age category accounted for by each cause
of death.

Table 9: Share of age group mortality accounted for by each COD

50

A.3.5

Cause of death graphs

Figure 14: Deaths in London in select infectious disease categories
Pneumonia

Bronchitis

Tuberculosis

Cardiovascular dis.

51

A.3.6

Relationship between fog events and other weather conditions

Figure 15 presents regressions of the available weather variables–temperature, pressure, humidity and rainfall–on fog events. This is useful because it allows us to look at whether
there appear to be trends in weather in the weeks leading up to fog events, which may help
explain the downward trend in mortality observed in Figure 3.
Figure 15: Estimated relationship between fog events and leads and lags of weather variables
Temperature

Pressure

Humidity

Rainfall

Coefficient estimates and confidence intervals for a regression of weather variables on the
number of fog days in a week. Confidence intervals are based on Newey-West standard
errors allowing correlation across observations within 6 weeks of each other. The regression
includes controls for a full set of year and week-of-the-year by decade effect. Data cover
1866-1965. N=4,479.

52

A.4

Using weather data to model fog formation

This appendix describes the use of weather data to model fog formation. The formation of fog
is a complex event that depends on a number of climatic conditions, including temperature,
humidity, wind speed and turbulence, ground temperature, precipitation, radiation, etc.61
In an attempt to predict the formation of heavy fog I have gathered weather data capturing
some of the most important factors. The available data present weekly average levels of
mean daily temperature, humidity, and barometric pressure and total weekly precipitation.
Table 8 provides summary statistics for the available climate variables using data from all
of the years covered by this study.
Figure 16 presents time-series graphs of each of the variables. These show some important patterns; there is clear evidence that temperature rose and humidity fell across the
study period. The fall in humidity is in part a natural response to the rise in temperature.
This is because humidity in this study is relative humidity, which is defined as the ratio of
water in the air to the total holding capacity of water in the air. Warmer air holds more
water, so rising temperature mechanically increases the denominator and thus mechanically
leads to lower relative humidity. However, note that while the humidity measure partially
reflects temperature, it also contains additional information. The correlation between the
temperature and humidity variables is -0.51.
There is also some evidence that barometric pressure may have increased, while precipitation appears to have remained fairly steady. Note that we must be somewhat careful in
interpreting these patterns because, like the fog reports, the weather data for the years after
WWII come from Kew Gardens rather than the Greenwich Observatory.
Figure 17 presents histograms of the climate variables comparing weeks in which fog
events did or did not occur. Consistent with the science behind fog formation, these show
that fog was more likely to form when temperatures were lower and when humidity was
higher. Fog formation was also associated with high pressure, which often signals calm
conditions and with lower levels of precipitation, which signals less cloud cover.

61

See, e.g., Ahrens (2007).

53

Figure 16: Time-series graphs of climate variables

54

Figure 17: Histograms of climate variables in weeks with and without fog
Temperature

Humidity

Pressure

Precipitation

Histogram plots of weather variables for weeks with our without heavy fog events reported.
These graphs only include data up to 1951 to avoid any changes due to the shift of weather
reporting from Greenwich to Kew Gardens.

As a simplified way of modeling these interactions I think of the formation of heavy fog
as an outcome that occurs when a series of necessary conditions are satisfied. In particular,
heavy fog is modeled as forming under conditions in which temperature is sufficiently low,
humidity in the air is sufficiently high, atmospheric pressure is sufficiently high and precipitation is sufficiently low. Lower temperature means that air can hold less water, making
condensation more likely. Conditional on temperature, higher humidity indicates that there
is more water in the air which means that condensation is more likely to occur. The type
of clear and relatively calm conditions under which fog is mostly likely to form are typically
associated with atmospheric high-pressure systems. Precipitation is included here because
the presence of rain indicates cloud cover which blocks sunlight from reaching the ground.
Thus, the inputs into my simple fog model are a series of indicator variables:
T empCU Tt = 1[T emperature < T̃ ]
55

P resCU Tt = 1[P ressure > P̃ ]

HumCU Tt = 1[Humidity > H̃]

RainCU Tt = 1[P recipitation < R̃]
The interaction of these indicator variables yields:
P redF OGt (T, P, H, R) = T empCutt ∗ P resCU Tt ∗ HumCU Tt ∗ RainCU Tt
This interaction term provides a way of predicting whether or not conditions within
a week favored the formation of heavy fog. However, it is still necessary to determine
appropriate cutoff points for each variable. The cutoff points used in the main text – T̃ = 55,
P̃ = 29.9, H̃ = 85 and R̃ = 0.5 – were chosen because the resulting interaction does a
reasonable job of predicting fog events. This is shown in Table 10, which compares several
leading and lagged values of the predicted fog variable to the number of heavy fog days
reported in a week.
Table 11 describe the number of correct predictions as well as counts of type I and type
II errors obtained using this prediction. This shows that, while the P redF OG variable
predicts heavy fog events, there are still many predicted fog weeks when no heavy fog event
was reported (type II errors) and many heavy fog events when no fog event was predicted.
It is worth noting that if we compare the predicted fog events to any fog (not just heavy fog
events) there are far fewer type II errors; of the 282 predicted fog weeks only 32 had no fog
reported at all.

56

Table 10: Regressions of fog days on the P redF OG variable with leads and lags
DV: Number of heavy fog days in a week
All
1866189019191951years
1889
1914
1939
1965
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
PredFOG t+4
-0.0815
-0.0910
0.0435
-0.0902
-0.276
(0.0540)
(0.0751)
(0.0898)
(0.0840)
(0.244)
PredFOG t+3
0.0145
-0.129*
0.103
0.0445
-0.00824
(0.0573)
(0.0777)
(0.0999)
(0.0967)
(0.257)
PredFOG t+2
0.0947*
0.0689
0.00381
0.0317
0.211
(0.0563)
(0.0792)
(0.0981)
(0.102)
(0.236)
PredFOG t+1
-0.0342
-0.126
0.0645
-0.0116
0.0315
(0.0590)
(0.0776)
(0.123)
(0.0993)
(0.243)
PredFOG t
0.389***
0.221**
0.371*** 0.347***
0.814***
(0.0777)
(0.110)
(0.140)
(0.123)
(0.300)
PredFOG t-1
0.0362
0.0424
0.0931
-0.0399
-0.210
(0.0602)
(0.0935)
(0.105)
(0.0906)
(0.253)
PredFOG t-2
-0.0264
-0.0165
0.0872
-0.150*
-0.159
(0.0549)
(0.0759)
(0.0926)
(0.0872)
(0.252)
PredFOG t-3
0.0236
0.0112
0.100
0.106
-0.203
(0.0548)
(0.0713)
(0.0943)
(0.0984)
(0.240)
PredFOG t-4
-0.0165
0.0751
-0.0603
-0.0373
-0.219
(0.0527)
(0.0782)
(0.0891)
(0.0942)
(0.220)
PredFOG t-5
0.0848
0.0306
0.165*
-0.0846
0.171
(0.0538)
(0.0681)
(0.0868)
(0.0846)
(0.255)
Observations
4,479
1,246
1,253
1,066
777
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Robust standard errors, in parenthesis, are
used because the data show no evidence of serial correlation (Durbin-Watson
statistics are around 1.9). Regressions include controls for pressure, pressure
squared, humidity, humidity squared, precipitation, precipitation squared,
and four leads and five lags of temperature, temperatures squared, and the
temperature, humidity, pressure and precipitation cutoffs. Temperature cutoff is 55 degrees f. Pressure cutoff is 29.9. Relative humidity cutoff is 85.
Precipitation cutoff is 0.5 inches per week. Regressions also include a full set
of year and week-of-the-year by decade effects.

Figure 18 shows that the P redF OG variable also does a good job of predicting increases
in actual pollution levels, using the direct pollution measures available from 1951-1961.

Table 11: Table showing accuracy of fog week predictions
Period
All years
1866-1889
1890-1914
1919-1939
1951-1965

Heavy fog
week
577
125
132
82
229

No. pred.
fog events
282
96
85
55
42

Correct
prediction
144
39
40
29
33

Type I
errors
433
86
92
53
196

Type II
errors
138
57
45
26
9

Note that the four periods do not add up to the total for all years because when I focus
on the period-by-period results I exclude 1949-1950 from the data since those years differ
from the other post-WWII years because the data are based on observations from Greenwich
rather than Kew Gardens.

57

Figure 18: Results from regressions of pollution levels on predicted fog weeks

Pollution measures are averages of the maximum daily values reported in the week. Regression includes controls for temperature and temperature squared as well as a full set of year
and week-of-the-year effects. Confidence intervals are based on robust standard errors. The
Durbin-Watson statistic for these regressions is 1.406, suggesting that serial correlation is
not likely to be an important concern.

Figure 19 shows the relationship between total mortality and fog events using predicted
fog events as an instrument for the number of fog days. This result looks fairly similar to
those obtained when using fog events directly, i.e., mortality tends to increase in the week
or two just after fog events occur with some evidence of elevated mortality levels for up to
three weeks.
Figure 19: Estimated effect of fog events on total mortality, 1866-1965
Using predicted fog event weeks as an instrument for fog days

Coefficient estimates and confidence intervals for a regression of log total mortality on predicted fog events.
Confidence intervals are based on Newey-West standard errors allowing correlation across observations within
6 weeks of each other. Both regressions include controls for temperature, temperature squared, four leads
and five lags of temperature and temperature squared, log births, pressure, pressure squared, precipitation,
precipitation squared, humidity, humidity squared, a full set of year effects and a full set of week-of-theyear by decade effect. The regression also includes leads and lags of the temperature, humidity, pressure
and precipitation indicator variables that are interacted to generate the predicted fog variable. Data cover
1866-1965. N=4448.

58

Table 12 presents results using four alternative sets of cutoff values to predict fog event
weeks. Columns 1-2 use values that are less restrictive than the set used for the results in
the main text while Columns 3-4 use more restrictive values. All of these alternatives can
predict the occurrence of heavy fog weeks.
Table 13 presents results from regressions of log mortality on predicted fog events using
four week windows as in Eq. 2. All of the alternatives predicted fog event variables are
associated with increased mortality. However, note that as I move towards more restrictive
cutoff values the effect of a predicted fog event tends to increase. This tells us that predictions
based on more restrictive conditions are picking up more severe fog events. As described in
the main text, this feature poses a problem if we want to use these predictions to instrument
for fog events. In IV regressions, as I use more restrictive fog event prediction variables, the
estimated coefficient on the relationship between fog events and mortality tends to increase
because the variation picked up by the instrument is increasingly focused on more severe fog
events. This makes is impossible to compare the coefficients on the fog variable obtained
from IV regressions to those obtained from the OLS regressions.
At the bottom of the table I describe the number of deaths associated with predicted fog
events given the estimated coefficients and the number of predicted events (from table above)
for each set of parameters. Despite the fact that the estimated effect of a predicted fog event
increases as the criteria become more restrictive, the overall number of deaths implied falls
because there are fewer events.
It is also interesting to consider the pattern of changes in the number of predicted fog
events over time. In Figure 20 I plot of the share of weeks with heavy fog events reported in
each decade up through the 1930s. Predicted fog events show a peak in the 1890s followed
by a sharp drop in the early 20th century. Thus, after 1900 underlying weather conditions
became much less conducive to fog formation. The driving force behind this appears to be
increases in temperature and commensurate reductions in relative humidity after 1900 (see
Appendix Figure 16). Thus, changing climate conditions meant that London in the early
20th century was naturally less foggy than it had been in the second half of the 19th century.

59

Table 12: Exploring fog event predictions using alternative cutoff values
DV: Number of heavy fog days in a week
Less restrictive
More restrictive
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Temperature cutoff:
60
57.5
50
45
Pressure cutoff:
29.8
29.8
29.9
30
Humidity cutoff:
80
82.5
87.5
90
Precipitation cutoff:
0.7
.6
0.4
0.3
PredFOG t+4
0.00640
0.00650
-0.123*
0.0405
(0.0364) (0.0414) (0.0676)
(0.0947)
PredFOG t+3
0.0293
0.0234
0.00789
(0.110)
(0.0376) (0.0430) (0.0653)
0.105
PredFOG t+2
-0.0553
-0.0577
0.00497
(0.115)
(0.0357) (0.0403) (0.0713)
0.0596
PredFOG t+1
-0.0174
-0.0400
0.0564
(0.119)
(0.0373) (0.0407) (0.0708)
0.0289
PredFOG t
0.197*** 0.243*** 0.333***
0.489***
(0.0430) (0.0504) (0.0995)
(0.180)
PredFOG t-1
-0.0349
-0.0123
-0.0249
-0.00223
(0.0381) (0.0433) (0.0644)
(0.122)
PredFOG t-2
-0.0445
-0.0364
-0.0979
-0.168*
(0.0382) (0.0413) (0.0640)
(0.0996)
PredFOG t-3
-0.00716 -0.00229
0.0187
0.0671
(0.0368) (0.0402) (0.0650)
(0.123)
PredFOG t-4
-0.0229
-0.0192
-0.0531
0.0751
(0.0378) (0.0415) (0.0617)
(0.0887)
PredFOG t-5
-0.0120
0.0334
0.0331
0.0267
(0.0373) (0.0399) (0.0578)
(0.0933)
Number of weeks with predicted fog events
741
572
168
50
Predicted fog weeks with heavy fog events (correct)
248
220
92
34
Type I errors
329
357
485
543
Type II errors
493
352
76
16
Observations
4,479
4,479
4,479
4,479
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Robust standard errors, in parenthesis, are
used because the data show no evidence of serial correlation (Durbin-Watson
statistics are around 1.9). Regressions include controls for pressure, pressure
squared, humidity, humidity squared, precipitation, precipitation squared,
and four leads and five lags of temperature, temperatures squared, and the
temperature, humidity, pressure and precipitation cutoffs used to construct
the P redF OG variable in each regression. Regressions also include a full set
of year and week-of-the-year by decade effects.

60

Table 13: Alternative fog event predictors and mortality using four week windows

Temp. cutoff:
Pres. cutoff:
Humid. cutoff:
Precip. cutoff:
PredFOG

DV: Number of heavy fog days in a week
Less restrictive
More restrictive
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
60
57.5
50
45
29.8
29.8
29.9
30
80
82.5
87.5
90
0.7
.6
0.4
0.3
0.0121**
0.0106*
0.0215***
0.0323**
(0.00525) (0.00582) (0.00773)
(0.0130)
Implied deaths due to predicted fog events
45,139
30,501
18,270
8,213

Observations

4,479

4,479

4,479

4,479

*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Robust standard errors, in parenthesis, are
used because the data show no evidence of serial correlation (Durbin-Watson
statistics are around 1.9). Regressions include controls for pressure, pressure
squared, humidity, humidity squared, precipitation, precipitation squared,
and four leads and five lags of temperature, temperatures squared, and the
temperature, humidity, pressure and precipitation cutoffs used to construct
the P redF OG variable in each regression. Regressions also include a full set
of year and week-of-the-year by decade effects.

Figure 20: Actual and predicted share of weeks with fog by decade

This graph shows the share of weeks with heavy fog events reported in each decade and
the share of weeks with predicted fog events in each decade. Predicted fog events use the
following cutoffs: temperature < 55, pressure >29.9, humidity > 85, precipitation < 0.5.

61

A.5
A.5.1

Preliminary analysis appendix
Graphs comparing pollution and fog events

The left-hand panel of Figure 21 plots pollution levels against fog events for 1951-52, the first
two years for which pollution levels are reported. This graph shows a clear correspondence
between fog events and pollution levels, with the highest pollution levels obtained during
major fog events. It is worth pointing out that the spike at the far right of the chart is
the Great London Fog of 1952, but similar pollution levels were measured during earlier fog
events. The right-hand panel plots pollution levels against predicted fog weeks. We can see
that the predicted fog weeks correspond to the highest pollution levels as well as the more
severe fog events. The predicted fog variable is clearly more restrictive than the actual data
on heavy fog events and identifies the most severe events.
Figure 21: Fog events and reported pollution levels in 1951-52
Compared to fog events

Compared to predicted fog events

Pollution measures are calibrated values from the Owens Smoke Filter. All data are from
the Registrar General’s Weekly Reports. Predicted fog weeks are based on the interaction
of indicator variables for temperature below 55 degrees, humidity above 80, pressure above
29.9 and precipitation below 0.4.

62

A.6
A.6.1

Appendix to analysis of total mortality
Analysis of serial correlation in total mortality data

Table 22 presents results describing autocorrelation patterns up to ten lags for the residuals
from a regression based on Eq. 1. These results suggest that the partial autocorrelation
values essentially disappear after two lags, while even the autocorrelation values disappear
after five weeks of lags. This suggests that allowing serial correlation up to six lags is a
reasonable approach to dealing with the serial correlation found in the data.
Figure 22: Autocorrelation structure of total mortality regression residuals

This table describes the autocorrelation structure of the residuals from a regression based on Eq. 1. AC stands for autocorrelation, i.e., a regression of
the residual on separate lags of the residual. PAC indicates the partial autocorrelation, i.e., results from a regression of the residual on all of the lagged
values of the residual together. Controls included in the regression are temperature, temperature squared, four leads and five lags of these variables, pressure,
pressure squared, humidity, humidity squared, precipitation and precipitation
squared.

63

A.6.2

Results using alternative treatment windows

Table 14 presents regression results showing the effect of fog days over windows starting with
the week in which the event occurred and stretching from two to five weeks later. Note that
the result in Column 3, which uses a four-week window, corresponds to the specification
used in the main text. At the bottom of the table I present the number of deaths implied by
each approach. These are calculated accounting for both the estimated coefficient and the
number of weeks across which the coefficient is applied.
Table 14: Estimates using effect windows of different lengths

Fog days
(2 week window)

(1)
0.0127***
(0.00298)

Fog days
(3 week window)

DV: Log total mortality
(2)
(3)

(4)

0.0105***
(0.00252)

Fog days
(4-week window)

0.00845***
(0.00234)

Fog days
(5 week window)

0.00712***
(0.00230)

Implied deaths

29,804

36,920

39,575

41,655

Observations

4,479

4,479

4,479

4,479

*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Newey-West standard errors allowing correlation across
observations up to six weeks apart in parenthesis. Regressions run on the full set of available observations from 1866-1965. All regressions include year effects and week-of-the-year
by decade effects. Regression in Columns 2, 4 and 6 include controls for log births, humidity, humidity squared, pressure, pressure squared, precipitation, precipitation squared,
temperature, temperature squared, and five lags of temperature and temperature squared.

64

A.6.3

Non-parametric estimates of fog effects

This appendix presents estimates of fog effects where I bin weeks based on the number of
fog days and then estimate separate effects, including leads and lags, for each level of fog
days in a week. This is useful for looking at whether the effects are non-linear in the number
of fog days in a week. I estimate results for weeks with one, two, three, or four or more fog
days. The latter category is used because there are not enough weeks with five, six, or seven
fog days to obtain separate estimates for that groups.
The estimated effect of fog days for up to three leads and five lags are presented in Figure
23.62 The first three panels present leading effects, i.e., the estimated relationship between
fog days in a week and mortality in previous weeks. These estimates are close to zero and
there is no clear gradient with the number of fog days in a week. This suggests that the
identification strategy is working well. The fourth panel presents the effects of fog days on
the weeks in which they occurred, while the lower five panels estimate effects in the following
weeks. The contemporaneous and one-week lagged effects show a fairly linear increase in
mortality associated with the number of fog days in a week. Interestingly, for later lags, this
linearity disappears and we see that it is only the worst fog weeks, those with four or more
days of fog reported, that exhibit these longer-lagged effects on mortality. By the fifth week
after the fog event, even this longer-lagged effect weakens.

62

Figure 23 presents coefficient estimates and confidence intervals for a regression of log total mortality
on fog days, with separate effects estimated for weeks with one, two, three, or four or more fog days. The
number of fog days in a week is on the x-axis while the y-axis documents the size of the estimated coefficients.
Confidence intervals are based on Newey-West standard errors allowing correlation across observations within
6 weeks of each other. The regression includes controls for temperature, temperature squared, four leads
and five lags of temperature and temperature squared, log births, pressure, pressure squared, precipitation,
precipitation squared, humidity, humidity squared, a full set of year effects and a full set of week-of-the-year
by decade effect. The data cover 1866-1965 and N=4,479.

65

Figure 23: Estimated effect by number of fog days in a week

See footnote 62 for table notes.

66

A.6.4

Total mortality analysis robustness results

Table 15 presents regressions assessing the robustness of the total mortality results. I focus
on variations in my preferred total mortality specification – Column 2 of Table 2 – which
looks at the effect of fog events across four-week windows.
Column 1 presents results excluding the log births control. Excluding this control has
very little impact on the results. Column 2 includes additional temperature quadratics,
temp3 and temp4 and five lags of each of these variables. These additional controls are
not statistically significant and including them has little impact on the main results. This
motivates my decision to exclude these controls from my main specifications. In Column 3
I look at whether fog days have a non-linear effect on mortality by including the squared
number of fog days across the four-week window in the regression. The coefficient on this
term is negative but also small and not statistically significant. Thus, I don’t find evidence of
a clear non-linear relationship between fog days and total mortality. In Column 4 I include
controls for five lagged values of pressure, pressure squared, humidity, humidity squared,
precipitation and precipitation squared.
Table 15: Additional total mortality regression results using four-week windows

Fog days (4-week window)
Fog days squared
(4-week window)
Observations

Excluding
log births
(1)
0.00833***
(0.00232)

4,479

DV: Log total mortality
Temperature
Fog days
Lagged
quadratics
squared
weather vars.
(2)
(3)
(4)
0.00837***
0.0118***
0.00709***
(0.00231)
(0.00411)
(0.00242)
-0.000469
(0.000484)
4,479
4,479
4,464

*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Newey-West standard errors allowing correlation across observations up
to six weeks apart in parenthesis. All regressions include a full set of year effects and week-of-the-year by
decade effects as well as controls temperature, temperature squared, pressure, pressure squared, precipitation,
precipitation squared, humidity, humidity squared and five lags of temperature and temperature squared.
Column 2 includes controls for temperature3 and temperature4 and five lags of both of these variables.
Column 4 also includes controls for five lags of humidity, humidity squared, pressure, pressure squared,
precipitation and precipitation squared. Data cover the full set of available observations from 1865-1965.

The results in Table 16 examine the interaction between fog days and temperature. Since
home heating was one of the primary drivers of pollution during the study period, these
interactions reveal whether fog events had more impact during periods in which pollution
emission levels were high. In this regression I interact the number of fog days over the
four-week window with the mean of the average weekly temperatures observed during the
67

same period. The results show evidence of a negative relationship between fog events and
temperature. This pattern indicates that fog events raised mortality more when temperatures
were lower and thus emissions levels were higher. This makes sense given that the main
impact of weather events associated with fog was to trap emitted pollution in the city. In
terms of magnitude, these results suggest that a ten-degree (F) reduction in temperature
causes the impact of a fog event to increase by 16-18%.

Table 16: Results interacting temperature and fog days
DV: Log total mortality
Fog days (4-week window)

0.0437**
(0.0207)
-0.000771*
(0.000419)
4,479

Fog days × mean avg. weekly temp
(4-week window)
Observations

*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Newey-West standard errors allowing correlation across observations up to
six weeks apart in parenthesis. Regressions run on the full set of available observations from 1866-1965. Both
regressions include controls for year effects, week-of-the-year by decade effects, temperature, temperature
squared, five lags of temperature and temperature squared, log births, pressure, pressure squared, humidity,
humidity squared, precipitation, and precipitation squared.

The next set of results allow more flexible temperature controls. Existing work by Deschênes & Greenstone (2011) has highlighted the fact that extreme temperatures can have
large effects. We may worry that the simple temperature quadratics included in the main
specification are not sufficiently flexible to deal with this, though it is important to note
that London has a much milder climate than most of the U.S., which is what Deschênes &
Greenstone (2011) study. To examine this issue, I bin the average temperature in each week
into five-degree bins–below 35, 35-40, 40-45, and so on–with 55-60 as the excluded category.
I then include these temperature bin indicator variables as controls. These are included not
just contemporaneously but also for four leads and five lags. The results, shown in Table 17,
are similar but slightly stronger than those reported in the main text.
68

Table 17: Effect of fog events on total mortality with binned temperature controls

Fog days
(4 week window)

DV: Log total mortality
OLS
OLS
IV
(1)
(2)
(3)
0.00898***
0.0313***
(0.00237)
(0.00793)

Fog week ind.
(4 week window)

0.0178**
(0.00704)

Additional controls
IV f.s. F-stat
Observations

Yes

Yes

4,479

4,479

IV
(4)

0.149***
(0.0408)
Yes
113.73
4,464

Yes
49.95
4,464

*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Newey-West standard errors allowing correlation across observations up
to six weeks apart in parenthesis. Regressions run on the full set of available observations from 1866-1965.
All regressions include year effects and week-of-the-year by decade effects as well as log births, humidity,
humidity squared, pressure, pressure squared, precipitation, precipitation squared and four leads and five
lags of binned temperature effects. Columns 3-4 also include as controls the pressure, precipitation and
humidity indicator variables used to produce the predicted fog variable, as well as five lags of each of these
variables. The inclusion of these lagged terms causes a small reduction in the number of observations.

There are too many temperature controls included in these regressions to display in Table
17. Instead, I present a selection of these estimates graphically in Figure 24. These come from
the specification shown in Column 1 of Table 17. As a check on the identification strategy,
the top panel presents the effect of temperature in a week on mortality in the week before.
The fact that the results show no positive effect suggests that the identification strategy
is working well. The second panel looks as the effect of average temperature in a week on
mortality in that week while the remaining panels show the lagged effect of temperature.
We can see that both high and low temperatures are associated with increased mortality
in the week in which the temperature is observed as well as in the following weeks. The
effect peaks in the week after the temperature is observed and then dies out slowly over the
following weeks. It is also interesting to note that high temperatures appear to have a more
rapid effect on mortality than low temperatures but also die out more slowly. When looking
at the lagged effects of temperature, it is important to keep in mind that these reflect the
estimated effect of temperature in previous weeks on mortality this week while controlling
for temperature this week.
69

Figure 24: Estimated effect of temperature on mortality

See table notes for Table 17.

70

A.7

Stillbirths and births

Table 18 presents results showing the impact of fog days on stillbirths. Column 1 shows that
fog days did increase the number of stillbirths, by about 0.7 percent. Column 2 looks at
the ratio of stillbirths to total births in the past year. This suggests that fog days increased
stillbirths by over 15 deaths per 100,000 live births. These results are consistent with modern
public health studies that find that pollution increases stillbirths (see Siddika et al. (2016)
for a review of this literature).
If I take the magnitude of the estimated increase in stillbirths due to a fog day from
Column 2 and apply it to the number of births per week and the number of fog days
observed in the full study period then this implies that the acute effects of heavy fog events
led to 1,143 additional stillbirths during the full study period, or 1.23 deaths per fog day. Of
course, this result is based on the assumption that the relationship between pollution and
stillbirths remained constant across the study period, which may not be reasonable.
Table 18: Effects on infant mortality accounting for stillbirths
Dependent
variable:

Log
stillbirths

Fog days (4-week window)

0.00700*
(0.00373)

Stillbirths
/total
births
15.72**
(7.991)

1,499
2.05

1,488
2.04

Observations
DW stat

*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Robust standard errors are presented because the Durbin-Watson statistics do not provide evidence that serial correlation is a major concern. All results include controls for temperature,
temperature squared, five lags of temperature and temperature squared, pressure, pressure squared, precipitation, precipitation squared, humidity, humidity squared and a full set of year effects and a week-by-decade effects. Column
1 also includes a control for log births. Data start in the 41st week of 1927
and continue through 1965 with a break during WWII. Results in Column 3
are per 100,000 births.

The next set of results looks at whether births were affected by fog days. The analysis
follows the approach used for total mortality in Section 6.1. The first set of results, in Figure
25, compare log births to the number of fog days as well as leads and lags of that variable.
These results provide no evidence that birth were affected by fog events. Table 19 provides
some additional results looking at the effect across four-week windows, as in Table 2 in the
main analysis. Again, I find no evidence that births were affected by fog events. This may
seem surprising given that stillbirths were affected. However, stillbirths are only a small
71

fraction of overall births, about 2.5% in the years in which stillbirths are reported.
Figure 25: Estimated effect of fog days on log births, 1866-1965

Coefficient estimates and confidence intervals for a regression of log births on the number of fog days in a
week. Confidence intervals are based on Newey-West standard errors allowing correlation across observations
within 6 weeks of each other. The births data do not show any evidence that serial correlation is an issue
(Durbin-Watson statistics are around 1.94), but for consistency I follow the approach used in the main
analysis. Regressions include controls for temperature, temperature squared, four leads and lags of these
variables, as well as a full set of year effects and week-of-the-year by decade effect. Data cover 1866-1965.
N=4,479.

Table 19: Effect of fog events on births in four week windows

Fog days (4-week window)

(1)
-0.000824
(0.000996)

Fog indicator (4-week window)
Observations

4,479

DV: Log births
(2)

0.00380
(0.00351)
4,479

*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Newey-West standard errors allowing correlation across
observations up to six weeks apart in parenthesis. Regressions run on the full set of available
observations from 1865-1965. Regressions include controls for temperature, temperature
squared, five lags of these variables, pressure, pressure squared, humidity, humidity square,
precipitation, precipitation squared and a full set of year effects and week-of-the-year by
decade effects.

72

A.8

Changes over time

This section looks at how the effect of fog events on mortality changed across the study
period. However, it is important to recognize that it is not possible to identify the extent
to which these changes are due to changes in emission levels vs. changes in other conditions
that influence the relationship between pollution and mortality.
Before estimating the impact of fog events on mortality in different time periods, it is
useful to look at whether the reporting of these events appears to have changed over time.
One way to do this is to look at the relationship between fog events and the quantitative
weather variables in different periods. Table 20 presents averages of the weather variables
on weeks in which heavy fog was reported broken down by different time periods. The
notable feature here is that the characteristics of fog weeks was reasonably stable in the first
three periods but changed in the last period (when fog reports came from Kew Gardens).
The biggest change appears for temperature, which was typically in the low 40s during fog
weeks in the late 19th and early 20th century but averaged 47.5 in the 1950s-60s. Similarly,
average humidity during weeks with fog was much lower in the last period than in the three
preceding periods. The main take-away from this table is that the relationship between
fog events and underlying weather conditions appears to have been reasonably stable up to
WWII but changed after that.
Table 20: Average weather conditions in weeks with heavy fog reported

Avg.
Avg.
Avg.
Avg.

temp.
humidity
pressure
precipitation

1865-1889
42.9627
86.55556
29.89972
0.28328

1890-1914
44.09621
85.43939
29.91818
0.3246212

1918-1939
41.32805
86.40244
29.89161
0.3332927

1951-1965
47.53863
81.82764
29.8425
0.4115006

Next, I estimate the effect of fog events in different time periods. I break the sample
up into three sub-periods: 1866-1899, 1900-1939 and 1951-1965. The first two periods are
chosen to be roughly equal with a natural break at 1900, while last period covers the years for
which weather observations are obtained from Kew Gardens rather than Greenwich. Note
that this analysis does not include 1949-1950. Data are available for these years, but I do
not want to include these with observations after 1951 because the weather observations for
these years come from Greenwich, while these observations are separated from the second
period by the long break in the data from 1939-1949.
Table 21 presents results examining the evolution of the effect of fog events over time.
73

The top panel looks at how the impact of reported fog days changed over time. The results
for the period before WWII show evidence that the impact of fog events, as a percentage
of total mortality, was stable or slightly decreasing over time. In the bottom panel I use
predicted fog events as an instrument for the number of fog days. These results show a similar
pattern over time. The IV results are particularly useful when looking at the impact over
time, since the instrument is derived from quantitative weather variables that were measured
in a fairly consistent way across the study period. Note that the coefficients obtained in the
IV regressions are larger than those in the OLS regressions. The most likely explanation for
this is that the predicted fog weeks tend to identify the most severe fog events.
Table 21: Estimated mortality effects for different time periods
DV: Log total mortality
A. Using fog days as the key explanatory variable
1866-1899 1900-1939
1951-1965
Fog days (4-week window)
No weeks:
No. of fog days
Avg. fog days per week
Total implied deaths
Share of all deaths due to fog

0.0121***
(0.00381)

0.0101*
(0.00517)

0.00869***
(0.00298)

1763
304
0.172
23,033
0.0084

1835
179
0.098
8,512
0.00396

777
429
0.552
12,090
0.0193

B. Using predicted fog weeks as an instrument for fog days
1866-1899 1900-1939
1951-1965
Fog days (4-week window)
Observations

0.0420***
(0.0120)

0.0329*
(0.0173)

0.0302***
(0.00789)

1,763

1,835

767

*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Newey-West standard errors allowing correlation across
observations up to six weeks apart in parenthesis. All results include a full set of year effects and a week-of-the-year by decade effects as well as controls for log births, temperature,
temperature squared, five lags of temperature and temperature squared, pressure, pressure
squared, precipitation, precipitation squared, humidity and humidity squared. The regressions in the bottom panel also include controls for the temperature, pressure, humidity and
precipitation indicator variables used to construct the predicted fog variable as well as five
lags of these variables.

For the top panel I have also included calculations showing the number of deaths implied
by the estimates in each period as well as the share of all deaths that these represent.63 The
number of deaths associated with fog events was greatest in the 19th century and then fell
63

It is not realistic to do this with the coefficients estimated in the bottom panel. This is because if the
predicted fog event instrument is identifying the most severe fog events then it is unrealistic to attribute this
coefficient to all fog days and then use that to estimate the overall impact of fog events.

74

over time, due in part to a reduction in the number of fog events and in part to a reduction
in the overall number of deaths occurring in London. As a share of total deaths in London,
however, the impact of fog events was greatest in the last period. This reflects the fact
that by this time London had become much healthier and other major causes of death,
particularly infectious diseases, had become much less important.64
The next set of results look at how the distribution of effects across age groups evolved
over time. These results split the available data into two periods, using 1900 as the cutoff,
and focus on age groups over one. Before 1900, I find statistically significant effects across
all age groups over age one, with particularly strong effects among children aged 1-5 and
older adults. After 1900, I observe weaker effects for young and prime-age adults.
Table 22: Changes in the effects by age group over time

Age group:
Fog days
(4-week window)
Observations
Age group:
Fog days
(4-week window)
Observations

DV: Log mortality
Estimates from 1866-1899
Young
Adult
Middle age

0-1

1-5

-0.000898
(0.00486)
1,252

0.0212**
(0.00866)
1,252

0-1

1-5

0.00496
(0.00674)
1,840

0.0254*
(0.0136)
1,840

0.00945**
(0.00403)
1,539

0.00640*
(0.00358)
1,539

0.0113***
(0.00364)
1,539

Estimates from 1900-1939
Young
Adult
Middle age
0.000115
(0.00444)
1,840

0.00474
(0.00575)
1,840

0.0131**
(0.00535)
1,840

Elderly
0.0133***
(0.00418)
1,539
Elderly
0.0116*
(0.00695)
1,840

*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Newey-West standard errors allowing correlation across observations up
to six weeks apart in parenthesis. The results for children ages 5 and below use data from 1876-1965.
Results for other age groups use data from 1870-1965. All regressions include controls for temperature,
temperature squared, five lags of each of these variables, log births, pressure, pressure squared, humidity,
humidity squared, precipitation, precipitation squared, and a full set of year and week-of-the-year by decade
effects. The number of deaths in the bottom row is calculated by applying the estimated percentage increase
in deaths based on the regression coefficient and the average number of deaths in a week in each age group
multiplied by four to reflect the four-week window over which effects occur.

One potential issue with the results in Table 22 is the impact of fog days as a percentage
of total mortality may increase simply because mortality due to other causes fell. If mortality
fell differentially across age groups, then this can make it difficult to make comparisons across
age groups using this approach. As an alternative, Table 23 presents the impact of fog days
on the share of overall deaths accounted for by each age group. These results suggest that
in the period up to 1900, children aged 1-5 were relatively more susceptible to the effect
of fog events compared to other age groups while infants and adults were relatively less
64

See Appendix A.2 for a discussion of the changing mortality rate in London during the study period.

75

susceptibility. After 1900 this changes: both children aged 1-5 and young adults aged 5-20
become much less susceptible to the effect of fog events, relative to other populations, than
they were before 1900. This pattern suggests that something changed in the period after
1900 that reduced the impact of fog events on ages 1-20 more than on other populations.
This is consistent with the effect of reductions in infectious diseases that particularly affected
children and teenagers – measles and TB – which reduced the impact of fog events for these
populations.
Table 23: Changes in the share of fog deaths in each age group over time

Age group:
Fog days
(4-week window)
Observations
Age group:
Fog days
(4-week window)
Observations

DV: Log mortality
Estimates from 1866-1899
Young
Adult
Middle age

0-1

1-5

-0.0022***
(0.0007)
1,252

0.00196**
(0.00097)
1,539

0-1

1-5

-0.00067
(0.00096)

0.00035
(0.00062)

-5.92e-05
(0.00026)
1,539

-0.00065*
(0.00035)
1,539

-1.15e-05
(0.0004)
1,539

Estimates from 1900-1939
Young
Adult
Middle age
-0.00046**
(0.0002)

-0.00055
(0.0004)

0.00069
(0.00045)

Elderly
0.00046
(0.00061)

Elderly
0.00064
(0.0011)

*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Newey-West standard errors allowing correlation across observations up to
six weeks apart in parenthesis. The results for children ages 5 and below use data from 1876-1965. Results
for other age groups use data from 1870-1965. All regressions include controls for temperature, temperature
squared, five lags of each of these variables, log births, pressure, pressure squared, humidity, humidity squared,
precipitation, precipitation squared, and a full set of year and week-of-the-year by decade effects. The number
of deaths in the bottom row is calculated by applying the estimated percentage increase in deaths based on the
regression coefficient and the average number of deaths in a week in each age group multiplied by four to reflect
the four-week window over which effects occur.

76

A.9

In utero exposure

A broad set of existing research shows that pre-natal exposure can increase infant mortality
as well as impacting health later in life (see Currie (2013) for a review of this literature). In
general, my data are not well suited for assessing the impact of pre-natal exposure because I
do not observe the date of birth of those who die. This makes it impossible to identify when
they were in utero. However, it is possible to partially overcome this challenge by focusing
on two series that allow me to roughly infer the period of birth. The first series that I
consider is deaths due to fetal underdevelopment, which generally occurred soon after birth.
In fact, this series is called prematurity in the data, though this description is probably
somewhat misleading given the difficulty of identifying term length in the past, so I use the
terminology fetal underdevelopment instead. By using the week of death as a proxy for the
week of birth I am able to roughly identify the period in which each child who died of fetal
underdevelopment was in utero. I also consider the impact of in utero exposure on stillbirths,
many of which would have been near the time of birth.
Results looking at the impact of in utero exposure are presented in Table 24. Column 1
looks at the impact of the number of fog days on deaths due to fetal underdevelopment in
each previous twelve-week period. The main finding is that fog events occurring 25-36 weeks
in the past, roughly the first trimester, are associated with increased infant mortality due to
fetal underdevelopment. One likely channel is through prematurity, which has been linked
to pollution exposure by a number of studies, including Currie & Walker (2011), though
that study does not examine how the effect of exposure varies across trimester. In Column
2 I study the impact on stillbirths. Here I see effects from both very recent fog events and
fog events in roughly the first trimester. These results are consistent with modern public
health studies. A recent meta-analysis by Siddika et al. (2016) suggests that pollution has
substantial effects on stillbirths, and particularly exposure in the first and third trimesters.
Note also that for both series, fog events more than 36 weeks in the past, as well as those in
the period roughly corresponding to the second trimester, did not have any strong effects.
In terms of magnitude, these results suggest that an additional fog day in the first
trimester increased the number of deaths due to fetal underdevelopment by 0.74 percent.
On average, there were 1.67 fog days in each twelve-week period for the years covered by the
cause-of-death data, so on average in utero fog exposure in the first trimester increased mortality due to fetal underdevelopment by about 1.23%. Fetal underdevelopment accounted
for 13.3% of deaths among those aged 0-1 during the period for which cause-of-death data
are available, so this implies that deaths due to fetal underdevelopment because of in utero
exposure to fog events account for 1.6 out of every 1000 infant deaths during the years cov77

ered by this data series (1,352 deaths in total up to 1939). Put another way, this comes to
16.2 deaths per 100,000 live births. If I apply this figure to the number of births observed
in all years covered by my data, assuming the same effect holds across the full study period,
then I estimate that in utero exposure to fog events led to 1,436 additional infant deaths
due to fetal underdevelopment.
During the period covered by the stillbirth data, which begins in 1927, there were on
average 2.47 fog events in each 12 week period. This suggests that fog events raised the total
number of stillbirths by 1.55%, equivalent to 750 deaths during the period covered by this
series. Put another way, fog events led to 39.6 stillbirths for every 100,000 live births during
the years from 1927 covered by my data. Applying the same figure to births across the full
study period I estimate that first-trimester in utero exposure led to around 3,509 additional
stillbirths in the years covered by this study.
Table 24: Evidence of in utero exposure
Dep. Var.:

Log mortality
from prematurity
1866-1939 (except 1915-18)
-0.00191
(0.00946)

Log
stillbirths
1927-65 (except 1939-49)
0.00354
(0.00857)

Fog events 1-12
weeks ago

0.00391
(0.00243)

0.00423*
(0.00237)

Fog events 13-24
weeks ago

0.00105
(0.00268)

0.00277
(0.00233)

Fog events 25-36
weeks ago

0.00738***
(0.00284)

0.00629***
(0.00233)

Fog events 37-48
weeks ago

0.00281
(0.00291)

0.000787
(0.00238)

Years:
Fog events
this week

Durbin-Watson stat.
1.93
1.98
Observations
3,283
1,452
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Robust standard errors in parenthesis. Robust
standard errors are used because these data do not show strong evidence of serial
correlation, as suggested by the Durbin-Watson statistics at the bottom of the table.
All regressions include controls for temperature and temperature squared, five lags of
these variables, pressure, pressure squared, humidity, humidity squared, precipitation,
precipitation squared and a full set of year effects and a week-of-the-year by decade
effects. The data on premature births cover 1870-1939 (except 1915-1919). The data
on stillbirths run from 1927-1965 (except 1940-49).

78

A.10

Additional cause of death results

Table 25 presents cause-of-death results using Newey-West standard errors allowing serial
correlation across observations within six weeks of each other for those series that show
evidence of serial correlation, which I define conservatively as a Durbin-Watson statistic
below 1.5.
Table 25: Cause of death results with Newey-West standard errors
Cause of death
Coefficient
S.E.
Bronchitis
0.0349 ***
(0.00690)
Measles
0.0791 ***
(0.0219)
Pneumonia
0.0298 ***
(0.00590)
Respiratory, other
0.00467
(0.0106)
Scarlet Fever
0.0349 ***
(0.0106)
Smallpox
-0.00355
(0.0475)
Whooping cough
-0.0158
(0.0150)
Estimated coefficients and Newey-West standard errors with 6
week lag lengths for the impact of fog events in a week or in the
previous three weeks on mortality within each cause-of-death category. All regressions include controls for temperature, temperature squared, five lags of both of these variables, log births, pressure, pressure squared, humidity, humidity squared, precipitation,
precipitation squared and a full set of year and week-of-the-year
by decade effects.

Table 26 presents additional cause of death results. In these results, I run regressions
that include one variable reflecting the number of fog days in a week or the previous three
weeks, as in the main results, and a second variable reflecting the number of fog days in the
next four weeks (i.e., in the future). If fog events increase mortality due to a particular cause
of death, then we should see this increase in weeks during or after the occurrence of a fog
event but not weeks just before a fog event. Thus, these results account for the possibility
that mortality in some causes of death may be elevated even in weeks just before fog events
(e.g., because of associated weather conditions). Table 26 presents the difference between
the coefficient reflecting the impact of a fog event that has happened and the impact of a
fog event up to four weeks in the future. The next two columns present test statistics from
a Wald test for equality of these two coefficients.
Overall, results obtained using this approach are similar to the results shown in the
main text. In particular, I find evidence that fog events were associated with substantial
increases in mortality due to bronchitis, pneumonia, cardiovascular diseases, measles, and
TB. The main difference, relative to the results in the main text, is that I no longer find
79

statistically significant evidence that fog events raised mortality due to scarlet fever while I
do find evidence of elevated mortality from old age.
I have also generated cause-of-death results using the P redF OGt variable to construct
an instrument for the number of fog days (available upon request). These results look fairly
similar to those reported in the main text. The main differences are that the impact on deaths
due to cardiovascular diseases is no longer statistically significant, though the coefficient is
still positive, while there is evidence of a positive effect of fog events on mortality due to
whooping cough.
Table 26: COD results comparing estimates from weeks just before and just after fog events
Coefficient
Cause of death
difference
All causes
0.013
Respiratory & Cardiovascular
Bronchitis
0.039
Pneumonia
0.027
Cardiovascular
0.009
Other respiratory
0.011

Testing significance of difference
p-value
F-statistic
0.000
22.95
0.000
0.000
0.011
0.227

42.61
22.88
6.43
1.46

Infectious diseases
Digestive
Diphtheria
Measles
Scarlet fever
Smallpox
Tuberculosis
Typhus
Whooping cough

0.006
-0.005
0.035
0.007
0.051
0.009
0.019
0.006

0.249
0.563
0.074
0.559
0.236
0.003
0.444
0.688

1.33
0.33
3.19
0.34
1.41
8.66
0.59
0.16

Other diseases
Cancer
Neurological
Old age
Fetal underdevelopment
Venereal diseases
Other infectious dis.

-0.002
0.002
0.011
0.007
0.010
-0.009

0.656
0.464
0.049
0.280
0.390
0.393

0.20
0.54
3.88
1.17
0.74
0.73

Other causes of death
Accidents & violence
Alcoholism
Homicide†
Suicide
Other misc. CODs

0.000
0.018
0.010
0.004
0.001

0.978
0.201
0.576
0.762
0.669

0.00
1.64
0.31
0.09
0.18

See text for a description. † Homicide data are only separately available from
1870-1921. Homicide deaths are also included in the accidents and violence
category.

80

A.11

Impact of heavy rain

This section takes an alternative approach to examining the health effects of pollution, using
heavy rain as a source of exogenous variation in pollution levels. Rain is useful because it
is similar to fog in a number of respects. It can disrupt or slow down transportation, cause
people to stay indoors, and is associated with damp weather. However, rain differs from fog
in one crucial way. Unlike fog, which increases pollution levels, rain decreases pollution. This
occurs because, as raindrops fall, along the way they pick up particulate matter, removing it
from the air.65 This washing effect has been documented in a number of modern studies.66
This means that studying the mortality effects of rainfall can provide a check on whether the
mortality effects associated with fog events are driven by pollution or other factors. If the
fog effects documented in the main text were driven by pollution, then we should observe the
opposite effects for rainfall. However, if the fog effects were driven by other factors, such as
difficulty in getting to medical care, or the transmission of infectious diseases because people
stayed indoors, then the effect of rainfall should be similar to the effects estimated for fog.
I focus on the impact of weeks with heavy rain, which I define as those with more than
0.5 inches of rain, though it is possible to use other values. London being a fairly rainy
place, this identifies about one-third of weeks as having substantial amounts of rain. I then
look at how mortality in infectious disease causes-of-death are influenced by heavy rain,
including leads and lags of the heavy rain variable. I include all of my standard controls
except controls for rainfall (of course), as well as pressure and humidity. It is important to
omit the pressure and humidity variables because these are closely associated with rainfall,
so if they are included as controls they absorb much of the relationship between rainfall and
pollution.67
As a starting point it is useful to establish that the rainfall washing effect is present in
the setting I consider. Figure 26 presents estimates showing the response of pollution to rain
using the period from 1951-1962 when consistent pollution data are available. In the top
panel, the key explanatory variable is an indicator for heavy rain in a week (>0.5 inches)
while in the bottom panel I use a continuous rainfall measure. This figure shows that rainfall
has a strong negative effect on pollution in the week in which it occurs. No effect is observed
in the following weeks. There is some limited and not statistically significant evidence that
65

Seinfeld & Pandis (2016).
See, e.g., Barmpadimos et al. (2012) and Feng & Wang (2012).
67
In a previous version of the paper, I reported results suggesting that rainfall had no statistically significant
relationship with pollution. This was due to the inclusion of the pressure and humidity variables, which are
closely related to rainfall (particularly humidity). These soaked up most of the relationship between pollution
and rainfall when using the simple 0.5-inch cut-off for heavy rain days.
66

81

pollution is lower in the week just before a heavy rain when using the discrete explanatory
variable. This is because weeks of heavy rain are typically preceded by weeks with lighter
rain, which is why no similar effect is observed when using the continuous measure.

Figure 26: Relationship between pollution levels and heavy rain
Using an indicator for heavy rain (>0.5 inch in a week)

Using continuous rainfall (in inches)

The graphs present coefficients and 95% confidence intervals for regressions of weekly average of maximum
daily pollution levels on leads and lags of the heavy rain week indicator variable. Robust standard errors.
Data cover 1951-1962. I include controls four leads and four lags of temperature and temperature squared
as well as a full set of year and week-of-the-year fixed effects. Robust standard errors are used since there
is no evidence of serial correlation in the data.

Next, I consider the impact of heavy rain on overall mortality. These results, in Figure 27,
show that there was no relationship between heavy rainfall and mortality in the preceding
weeks but that heavy rainfall was associated with reduced mortality for several following
weeks. It is interesting to note that, unlike fog events, we do not see an effect in the week
in which heavy rain occurred. Later, we will see that this null effect is due to the fact that
heavy rainfall was associated with an increase in digestive disease deaths in the week in
which rain occurred, which offset the reduction in deaths due to diseases associated with
pollution.
82

Figure 27: Impact of heavy rain on total mortality

Coefficient estimates and confidence intervals for a regression of log total mortality on the number of fog
days in a week (top panel) or on weeks with predicted fog events (bottom panel). Confidence intervals are
based on robust standard errors. The regression includes controls for temperature, temperature squared,
four leads and five lags of temperature and temperature squared, log births, a full set of year effects and a
full set of week-of-the-year by decade effect. Data cover 1866-1965. N=4,479.

Table 27 allows us to compare the estimated effect of heavy rainfall on mortality in
different causes of death to the effect of fog events. Note that the magnitudes are not directly
comparable, since the rainfall cutoff level of 0.5 inches per week is arbitrary, but the patterns
are instructive. We can see that the results obtained using the rainfall check are broadly
similar to what we observe when using fog days (though of course in the opposite direction).
For example, there are substantial effects on mortality due to bronchitis, cardiovascular
diseases, pneumonia, measles and TB. There are, however, some differences that are worth
considering.
An important factor in the rainfall results, which is not a concern with fog days, is that
rainfall causes an increase in deaths due to digestive diseases in the week in which heavy
rain occurs, as shown in Figure 28. This is most likely due to the fact that heavy rain may
cause water sources to become contaminated. While the impact of heavy rainfall on digestive
deaths shown in Figure 28 appears small in percentage terms, this represents a substantial
number of deaths because digestive diseases were a major killer. As a result, this effect
causes the impact of rainfall on mortality in the week in which rainfall occurred to be less
comparable to the cleaner estimates generated using fog events. Another consequence of these
rapid digestive deaths is that they may have reduced deaths from other causes in the following
weeks by reducing the at-risk population. This effect is likely to be particularly important
for infants, where digestive deaths were particularly important. This likely explains why, in
Table 27, we see that heavy rainfall was associated decreases in mortality in causes of death
that were concentrated in the 0-1 age group, such as neurological diseases, whooping cough,
83

and the “other miscellaneous causes of death” category. With many young children killed by
digestive diseases, fewer would have been at risk of dying from other cause. This feature also
highlights why the fog analysis is likely to produce cleaner results than the rainfall analysis.

Table 27: Comparing fog event and rainfall effects by cause of death
DV: Log all-age mortality within disease category
Fog days
Cause of death
Coefficient
S.E.
Respiratory & Cardiovascular
Bronchitis
0.0349 ***
(0.00447)
Cardiovascular
0.0082 ***
(0.00237)
Pneumonia
0.0298 ***
(0.00402)
Misc. respiratory
0.00467
(0.00683)
Infectious diseases
Digestive dis.
Diphtheria
Measles
Scarlet Fever
Smallpox
Tuberculosis
Typhus
Whooping cough
Infectious, other

-0.0042
0.0135
0.0791
0.0349
-0.00355
0.00615
0.0340
-0.00158
0.00022

Other diseases
Cancer
Neurological dis.
Old age
Fetal underdevelopment
Venereal diseases
Other misc. causes

Heavy rainfall flag
Coefficient
S.E.
-0.0718
-0.0261
-0.0808
-0.0988

(0.00373)
(0.00743)
(0.0137)
(0.00805)
(0.0321)
(0.00214)
(0.0179)
(0.0101)
(0.0073)

0.00430
0.000828
-0.121
-0.0246
0.163
-0.0255
-0.0322
-0.0685
0.0106

0.00134
-0.0021
0.0041
-0.00053
-0.0021
0.00076

(0.00238)
(0.00215)
(0.00367)
(0.00389)
(0.00793)
(0.00162)

-0.00936
-0.0149
-0.0267
-0.00654
-0.0189
-0.0123

Other causes of death
Accidents/violence
0.0022
Alcoholism
0.00832
Homicide†
-0.0074
Suicide
-0.00151

(0.00359)
(0.00941)
(0.0122)
(0.00837)

-8.01e-05
-0.0265
-0.0175
-0.0173

(0.00211)

-0.0323

All causes

0.00970

*
***
***
***
*

***

***
***
***
***

***
**
***
***

***
***

***

(0.0111)
(0.00522)
(0.00917)
(0.0178)
(0.0106)
(0.0178)
(0.0345)
(0.0206)
(0.0702)
(0.00519)
(0.0509)
(0.0227)
(0.0192)
(0.00604)
(0.00555)
(0.00929)
(0.0101)
(0.0210)
(0.00421)
(0.00859)
(0.0246)
(0.0356)
(0.0185)

***

(0.00481)

Estimated coefficients and robust standard errors on the impact of fog events in a week or in the previous
three weeks on mortality within each cause-of-death category. Robust standard errors are used because
many of the series do not show evidence of serial correlation. For the series where there is evidence of serial
correlation (define as a Durbin-Watson statistic under 1.5), results using Newey-West standard errors are
available in Appendix Table 25. All regressions include controls for temperature, temperature squared, five
lags of each of these variables, log births, and a full set of year and week-of-the-year by decade effects.
. The fog effects also include controls for pressure, pressure squared, precipitation, precipitation squared,
humidity, an humidity squared. Data cover 1870 to 1939. † Homicide data are only separately available
from 1870-1921. Homicide deaths are also included in the accidents and violence category.

84

Figure 28: Impact of heavy rain on deaths due to digestive diseases

This graph present coefficients and 95% confidence intervals for regressions of deaths due to digestive diseases
on leads and lags of the heavy rain week indicator variable. Robust standard errors. The regressions include
controls four leads and four lags of temperature and temperature squared as well as a full set of year and
week-of-the-year fixed effects.

85

