                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  FRAMING EFFECTS, EARNINGS EXPECTATIONS, AND THE DESIGN OF STUDENT
                      LOAN REPAYMENT SCHEMES

                                    Katharine G. Abraham
                                      Emel Filiz-Ozbay
                                       Erkut Y. Ozbay
                                       Lesley J. Turner

                                      Working Paper 24484
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24484


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    April 2018




We are grateful to Thomas Hegland for his research assistance and to Heath Witzen and the
University of Maryland Office of Institutional Research, Planning, and Assessment for assistance
with survey administration. We thank the Russell Sage Foundation Behavioral Economics
program for funding and Raj Darolia and seminar participants at Georgia State University, the
IZA, Sogang University, the University of Michigan, the 2016 Association for Public Policy and
Management meeting, the 2017 NBER Summer Institute, and the 2018 Association for Education
Finance and Policy meeting for helpful feedback and comments. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Katharine G. Abraham, Emel Filiz-Ozbay, Erkut Y. Ozbay, and Lesley J. Turner. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Framing Effects, Earnings Expectations, and the Design of Student Loan Repayment Schemes
Katharine G. Abraham, Emel Filiz-Ozbay, Erkut Y. Ozbay, and Lesley J. Turner
NBER Working Paper No. 24484
April 2018
JEL No. D14,D82,H52,H81,I22

                                         ABSTRACT

Income-driven student loan repayment (IDR) plans provide protection against unaffordable loan
payments and default by linking loan payments to borrowers’ earnings. Despite the advantages
IDR would offer to many borrowers, take-up remains low. We investigate how take-up is affected
by the framing of IDR through a survey of University of Maryland undergraduates. When the
insurance aspects of IDR are emphasized, students are significantly more likely to participate,
while participation is significantly lower when costs are emphasized. IDR framing interacts with
expected labor market outcomes. Emphasizing the insurance aspects of IDR has larger effects on
students who anticipate a higher probability of not being employed and/or low earnings at
graduation. In contrast, when costs are emphasized, IDR take-up is uncorrelated with students’
expected labor market outcomes. Simulation results suggest that a simple change in the framing
of IDR could generate substantial reductions in loan defaults with little cost to long-run federal
revenue.

Katharine G. Abraham                            Erkut Y. Ozbay
Department of Economics and                     Department of Economics
Joint Program in Survey Methodology             University of Maryland
University of Maryland                          College Park, MD 20742
1218 LeFrak Hall                                erkut.ozbay@gmail.com
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER                                        Lesley J. Turner
kabraham@umd.edu                                Department of Economics
                                                University of Maryland
Emel Filiz-Ozbay                                3115E Tydings Hall
Department of Economics                         College Park, MD 20742
University of Maryland                          and NBER
3114 Tydings Hall                               turner@econ.umd.edu
College Park, MD 20742
filizozbay@econ.umd.edu




A online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w24484
1       Introduction

At the end of 2017, outstanding U.S. student loan debt exceeded $1.38 trillion (Federal Reserve Bank of New

York 2018). Concerns over growing debt, delinquency, and defaults have stimulated proposals for expanding

loan repayment options that link loan payments to borrowers’ earnings.1 Broadly defined, such “income-

driven repayment” (IDR) schemes provide insurance against unaffordable loan payments due to unanticipated

earnings shocks. Despite considerable outreach efforts on the part of the Department of Education and the

increasing generosity of available options, borrowers’ take-up of IDR remains low.

     In this paper, we use data from a survey of University of Maryland (UMD) undergraduates to explore the

factors that influence students’ selection into IDR, focusing on the role of the framing of IDR and expected

labor market outcomes. Framing significantly affects students’ choices. Students randomly assigned to

treatment arms that emphasize the insurance aspects of IDR are significantly more likely to choose IDR

over the standard repayment plan in a hypothetical scenario and report a significantly higher willingness to

pay (as percentage of their income) for IDR. We find the opposite effect for students randomly assigned to

treatment arms with framing more similar to that of existing IDR plans, which emphasize the potential for

a longer repayment period and higher total interest payments over the life of the loan.

     Furthermore, our findings suggest that the current framing of available IDR options may discourage

borrowers who would most value the insurance aspect of IDR from participating in these plans. On av-

erage, students who anticipate a higher probability of not working or having low earnings at graduation

are significantly more likely to prefer IDR. In treatment arms that emphasize the costs of IDR, however,

this relationship does not hold, and students’ expected labor market outcomes are uncorrelated with their

reported preferences for IDR. Simulated effects of IDR framing on aggregate payments and defaults suggest

that a simple change in the framing of IDR could generate substantial reductions in loan defaults with little

cost to long-run federal revenue.

     Our survey of University of Maryland (UMD) undergraduates presented participants with hypothetical

scenarios in which they were told to assume that they had borrowed a specified amount for college and

needed to choose a loan repayment plan. In each case, the loan repayment options included the standard

“mortgage-style” loan repayment plan and a variant of IDR. Using information on expected future labor

market outcomes together with students’ stated preferences over the plans they were offered, we test how the

framing of IDR affects students’ choices, the extent to which expected labor market outcomes are correlated

with plan choice, and whether labor market expectations interact with IDR framing to minimize or reinforce

selection into IDR.
    1 E.g.,   Dynarski and Kreisman (2013), Asher, Cheng and Thompson (2014), and Boatman, Evans and Soliz (2014).




                                                              2
   IDR framing has large and significant effects on students’ choices, both in absolute terms and relative to

the effects of other plan parameters. Compared to students presented with an IDR plan that was neutrally

framed, those randomly assigned to the framing that emphasized IDR costs were 50 percent less likely to

choose IDR, while those randomly assigned to the insurance frame were over 60 percent more likely to choose

IDR. In comparison, a $10,000 increase in hypothetical student loan debt generated an approximately 2 to

3 percentage point increase in the probability of choosing IDR over the standard plan.2

   We also provide evidence that students’ expectations about their future labor market outcomes at gradua-

tion are correlated with their preferences for IDR. Conditional on expected outcomes at graduation, however,

students do not appear to take into account their expected growth in earnings or expected likelihood of low

or no earnings at later points in life. Even at graduation, only the expected probability of having low or

no earnings influences repayment plan choice. Labor market expectations significantly interact with IDR

framing. The expected probability of a poor labor market outcome only influences the choices of students

randomly assigned to the neutral or insurance frames. As IDR payments will be less than payments under

the standard plan only when annual earnings are very low, risk averse students with a higher probability

of experiencing this bad outcome should place higher value on the insurance provided by IDR. Our results

suggest that an emphasis on the costs of IDR reduces selection into the plan for students who would place

the highest value on the insurance it offers.

   We simulate how altering the framing of IDR would affect aggregate payments, defaults, and selection

into IDR at the national level by reweighting our sample of UMD survey respondents to match the charac-

teristics of bachelor’s (BA) degree-seeking borrowers nationwide, then drawing a sequence of earnings and

nonemployment probabilities from a parameterized experience-earnings profile generated based on the stu-

dents’ elicited labor market expectations.3 For payment rates that fall within the range of the parameters

of currently available IDR options, relative to the current emphasis on IDR costs, the lifetime risk of loan

default falls substantially when IDR is framed as insurance. The reduction in defaults is obtained at minimal

cost to the government over the long-run. For IDR payment rates that are similar to those offered by current

IDR plans (e.g., 10-15 percent of disposable income), the present discounted value of total payments after

20 years is virtually the same across the three alternative frames.

   Finally, we simulate the degree of adverse selection into IDR by calculating the difference between the

average present value of the IDR payments the government would have received from students who chose the

standard plan had they instead chosen IDR and the average present value of the payments made by students
   2 Students were randomly assigned to hypothetical loan balances of either $30,000 or $60,000 and estimated effects of loan

size come from a linear interpolation of the effect of shifting debt between these two values.
   3 This exercise involves a number of assumptions, most importantly, that students’ expected labor market outcomes are,

on average, an accurate measure of their realized labor market outcomes. We discuss these assumptions and the steps of the
simulation exercise in more detail in Section 6.



                                                             3
who did choose IDR. Standard economic theory suggests that, all else the same, income-driven repayment

schemes will be most attractive to borrowers who expect to have low or variable earnings. Theoretical

work by Findeisen and Sachs (2016) suggests that, in the presence of information asymmetries, repayment

plans that include IDR at low levels of earnings and constant payments (in dollar amounts) above a certain

income level are socially optimal.4 We contribute to this literature by providing empirical evidence on the

importance of labor market expectations in borrowers’ decisions to take up IDR.Our results indicate that

small decisions around the framing of IDR can have large effects on the types of borrowers who select into

IDR, but that differences in selection into IDR by frame are small when payment rates are similar to those of

existing IDR plans. This is the case even though take-up is much higher under the insurance frame. While

selection into IDR under the insurance frame is highly correlated with the expected risk of low earnings at

graduation, it is relatively uncorrelated with expected labor market outcomes over the longer-run.

    Income driven repayment (in the form of a “graduate tax”) was first proposed by Friedman (1955) as a

solution to a key failure in the market for higher education. Potential borrowers cannot use their human

capital as collateral in exchange for loans in the private market, undermining private lenders’ willingness to

provide funds to prospective students. As a result, individuals who would benefit from higher education will

have lower attainment than in a setting with complete credit markets. Similar to the sorting that can occur

in other insurance markets, if borrowers have private information about the path of their future earnings,

those who expect to have low lifetime earnings may adversely select into IDR (Sheets and Crawford 2014),

potentially undermining the financial viability of voluntary IDR schemes.

    In the United States, the vast majority of student loan aid is provided by the federal government.

Although the first federal IDR plan was introduced in 1994, the default (and most popular) repayment

plan is a “mortgage style” repayment schedule with fixed payments over a 10 year period. In contrast,

numerous countries have implemented IDR plans that are universal or cover a substantial share of borrowers

(Chapman 2006; Lochner and Monge-Naranjo 2015).5 Existing government-run IDR plans both in the

U.S. and abroad only require payments until the borrower has repaid the original principal plus accrued

interest (with the remaining balance discharged after a specified number of years). In contrast to such “fixed

amount” IDR plans, “fixed length” IDR plans (often referred to as “income-share agreements” or “human

capital contracts”) require payments for a set period of time, regardless of the total amount paid. Though
   4 Lochner and Monge-Naranjo (2015) show that in the presence of limited repayment enforcement, moral hazard, and costly

verification of borrowers’ labor market outcomes, efficient student loan programs link payments to earnings but the amount of
insurance provided will depend on the extent to which lenders can verify income and enforce contracts.
   5 These countries include Sweden (IDR introduced in 1989), Australia (1989), New Zealand (1992), Chile (1994), South Africa

(1996), UK (1997), Hungary (2001), and South Korea (2010). As examples, IDR is mandatory in Australia and the United
Kingdom. In the Australian plan, students repay 4 to 8 percent of their income in excess of approximately A$55,000 until
the loan is repaid with interest. In the United Kingdom, students repay 9 percent of their income in excess of approximately
£17,500 until the loan is repaid with interest or the balance is forgiven after 25-35 years.




                                                              4
no broadly-available fixed-length IDR plans have been implemented to date, they have been explored by

several state legislatures (Harnisch 2014). A small number of individual colleges and private lenders also

have started to experiment with offering such policies in addition to or in place of traditional student loans,

but there is little empirical evidence on how the design of fixed-length IDR programs affects participation.

We fill this gap by providing evidence that take-up of fixed length IDR - while lower than fixed amount IDR

- is also affected by framing.

    Furthermore, our results contribute to the growing evidence that individuals’ economic choices, including

decisions about borrowing and repayment, may depend on how they are framed.6 Marx and Turner (2017)

and Marx and Turner (2018) show that nonbinding student loan “offers” affect take-up. Holding constant

loan eligibility, students who receive a $0 loan recommendation borrow less and have lower educational

attainment than those who receive a nonzero offer. Caetano, Palacios and Patrinos (2011) measure Latin

American students’ preferences over alternative means for financing higher education and provide evidence

that students are willing to pay a premium to avoid a contract labeled as a loan (but similar in all other

ways to the alternative contract).7 Field (2009) provides evidence on the differences in employment decisions

made by law school graduates who, at entry, received equivalent financial aid offers framed alternately as

loans that would be forgiven if the student worked in public interest law versus tuition assistance that would

have to be repaid if the student did not end up in public interest law.

    The remainder of this paper proceeds as follows: In Section 2, we describe existing IDR options available

to student borrowers in the U.S. We describe our survey of UMD undergraduates and resulting analysis

sample in Section 3, while Section 4 details our methodology. In Section 5, we present estimates of the

correlations between IDR preferences and expected labor markets and explore the impact of IDR framing

on preferences. Section 6 reports on simulations that make use of students’ plan preferences and earnings

expectations to assess whether and to what extent making an IDR option available affects the present

discounted value of loan payments and default rates. Section 7 concludes.



2     Income Driven Repayment in the United States

U.S. college students with federal loan debt have access to five IDR options that limit borrowers’ payments

to a certain fraction of earnings (e.g., 15 percent) and allow for debt forgiveness after a certain period of time
    6 Agents’ financial decisions around investment, savings, retirement plan contributions, and credit card payments also are

affected by factors such as the default option presented to them (Madrian and Shea 2001; Choi et al. 2006; Chetty et al. 2014;
Bernheim, Fradkin and Popov 2015) and other information that anchors the available options (Keys and Wang 2016). Other
educational investment decisions have been shown to be distorted by requirements to complete a complex application (e.g.,
Dynarski and Scott-Clayton 2006; Bettinger et al. 2012) and self control issues (Cadena and Keys 2013).
    7 Evans, Boatman and Soliz (2016) replicate this exercise and find similar effects of labeling among U.S. high school and

college students.




                                                              5
(e.g., 20 years).8 Under these plans, borrowers with temporarily low income pay less in the current period,

while accruing additional interest and extending the length of repayment, while those with permanently low

incomes pay less each period and ultimately will have much or all of their debt forgiven.9 Borrowers who

do not actively select a repayment plan are automatically enrolled in the standard “mortgage style” plan,

under which they make fixed monthly payments for ten years.

    Despite considerable efforts by the U.S. Department of Education (hereafter, ED) to make student bor-

rowers aware of IDR options – including targeted emails to borrowers and a partnership with TurboTax to

automatically notify qualified borrowers who use the software that they are IDR-eligible – only a minority

of borrowers have chosen IDR. As of the fourth quarter of 2017, just 28 percent of the 23 million borrowers

with federal Direct Loans who had entered repayment were enrolled in one of the five available IDR options

(U.S. Department of Education 2017).10

    Low take-up is not due to a lack of eligibility. Until the introduction of the Revised Pay-As-You-Earn

plan (REPAYE) at the end of 2015, IDR enrollment was limited to students with current incomes such that

their IDR payment would be less than their payment under the standard plan, but once enrolled, borrowers

could continue in IDR even if their incomes subsequently rose. Department of the Treasury estimates show

that, as of 2012, 51 percent of borrowers in repayment would have been eligible for IDR based on their

current incomes (U.S. Government Accountability Office 2015). Perhaps more relevant, since anyone who

enrolls in IDR can remain there even if their income later rises, Hershbein et al. (2014) estimate that as

of 2012, given median student loan debt of $26,500, 99 percent of borrowers would have qualified for IDR

in their first year of repayment. As of the last quarter of 2016, 16 percent of borrowers in repayment had

defaulted on their debt (U.S. Department of Education 2016), an outcome that is less likely under IDR, as

required loan payments are set to zero when earnings are sufficiently low.11
   8 See U.S. Government Accountability Office (2016) for an overview of repayment plans that are currently available to federal

student loan borrowers in the United States. The five IDR options have payments ranging from 10 to 20 percent of borrowers’
discretionary income and offer debt forgiveness after 20 to 25 years of repayment. All but one of the available IDR plans
caps payments at the amount that the borrower would have paid had they entered into the standard repayment plan or some
lesser amount. Borrowers employed by nonprofit or public sector employers are eligible for the Public Service Loan Forgiveness
(PSLF) program, in which federal loan balances are forgiven after 10 years of payments, whether under an IDR plan or a
combination of years under an IDR and the standard plan.
   9 The Promoting Real Opportunity, Success, and Prosperity through Education Reform (PROSPER) Act, which was recently

introduced as a bill to reauthorize of the Higher Education Act, would eliminate forgiveness of principal for borrowers in IDR
plans while capping interest payments at the amount accrued over 10 years under the standard plan.
  10 See         http://www.ed.gov/news/press-releases/us-department-education-announces-additional-efforts-inform-student-
borrowers-repayment-options and http://www.ed.gov/news/press-releases/us-departments-education-and-treasury-announce-
collaboration-intuit-inc-raise-awareness-about-income-driven-repayment-options-students-loans for more information on the
ED outreach efforts.
  11 While it is possible to default on a student loan while participating in an IDR plan, U.S. Government Accountability Office

(2016) reports that less than 1 percent of borrowers enrolled in an IDR plan between 2010 and 2014 defaulted on their loans,
while 14 percent of borrowers enrolled in the standard 10-year repayment plan entered into default over this period.




                                                               6
2.1     Current IDR framing emphasizes costs and minimizes benefits

There are several reasons why borrowers who could benefit from IDR might not choose this option. First,

borrowers who do not actively choose a repayment plan are defaulted into the 10-year standard plan. The

choice of default has been shown to have a large effect on decisions made in other contexts, such as decisions

about contributions to retirement savings plans (e.g., Madrian and Shea 2001; Choi et al. 2006; Chetty et al.

2014; Bernheim, Fradkin and Popov 2015). Second, borrowers may be deterred by hassle costs associated

with IDR take-up. Borrowers must re-certify their income each year to continue to be eligible for IDR and

some loan servicers have been found to be unresponsive to borrowers seeking to take up IDR (Dynarski

2014).12 Third, borrowers may not be well-informed about IDR options. Based on informal feedback from

borrowers, ED has reported that many borrowers lack awareness of IDR options or how they operate (U.S.

Government Accountability Office 2015).13 A related factor is a lack of knowledge about the cost of defaulting

on federal loans, which would lead to an undervaluing of IDR.14

    To address this information gap, in recent years, ED has conducted a number of outreach efforts and de-

veloped online tools to help borrowers understand the differences between standard and alternate repayment

plans. A borrower who enters information on debt, earnings and family structure using ED’s “Repayment

Estimator” is provided with a comparison of the length of repayment, monthly payments, projected loan

forgiveness, and total interest paid across the various plans.15 Importantly, this tool assumes steady growth

in earnings of 5 percent per year, and thus it emphasizes the increased interest payments and repayment

length under IDR, rather than illustrating the extent of any protection against permanently low income or

negative income shocks under the other plans.

    Figure 1 displays the comparison of available repayment plans generated for a hypothetical unmarried

individual with a $30,000 unsubsidized loan at a 5 percent interest rate and a starting salary of $30,000

per year. The output includes the size of the borrower’s first and last monthly payment, total amount paid

(principal plus interest) over the lifetime of the loan, the projected amount of loan forgiveness, and the length

of repayment. Even though payments under IDR plans are spread out over a longer period, the tool simply

adds up all of the nominal payments across the life of the loan, effectively assuming a discount rate of zero

and making the IDR options appear more costly.

    Given that borrowers must actively select into IDR, the limited knowledge of available options, and the
   12 Experimental evidence on the importance of hassle costs in a related context is provided by Bettinger et al. (2012), who

show that the complexity of the federal application for student aid reduces college enrollment among low-income students
eligible for student aid.
   13 Evans and Boatman (2016) find that less than half of a sample of low-income high school seniors who were prompted to

think about college costs reported being aware of IDR.
   14 Only half of bachelor’s degree recipients surveyed by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York could correctly describe the

consequences of student loan default (Zafar et al. 2014).
   15 Available at: https://studentloans.gov/myDirectLoan/mobile/repayment/repaymentEstimator.action.




                                                              7
emphasis on (undiscounted) total payments and length of repayment in ED’s loan comparison tool, it is

perhaps not surprising that existing IDR plans are underutilized. Qualitative evidence from focus groups is

consistent with the hypothesis that the desire to avoid accruing additional interest or extending the length

of repayment leads some borrowers who could benefit from reduced payments not to take up IDR (Delisle

and Holt 2015; Fishman and Love 2015). Our research builds on this idea and tests the effects of framing

on students’ views of IDR.


2.2     Income-share agreements as “fixed length” IDR

Our study also explores students’ views of an alternate type of IDR scheme that are generally known as

an “income-share agreements.” Income-share agreements represent a version of IDR in which the length of

repayment (rather than the amount of principal to be repaid with interest) is fixed.16 In general, a student

would enter into an income-share agreement with a college, a state, or the federal government. In exchange

for postsecondary funding (either as cash to pay for college costs or in-kind access to public institutions),

the student would contract to pay a fixed percentage of her income over a set number of years.

    To date, the only U.S. income-share agreement that has been studied is a program for Yale graduates

in the 1970s, which was characterized by a high degree of adverse selection and ultimately was ended with

remaining debt forgiven. Recently, state-wide income share agreements have been considered in more than

20 state legislatures (Harnisch 2014).17 In fall 2016, Purdue University introduced the new “Back a Boiler”

income-share agreement as an alternative to private student loans for rising sophomores, juniors or seniors

who had exhausted their federal loan eligibility.18 Finally, a number of private companies currently offer

income-share agreements, primarily to students in highly remunerative professional programs.



3     Data and Sample

Our data come from an online survey of UMD undergraduate students linked to student-level administrative

data records. In this section, we describe the core content of the survey and the experiments embedded in

it, the data collection process, and our measures of IDR preferences, labor market expectations, and other

relevant student characteristics.
  16 For discussions of recent income-share agreement proposals in the U.S., see Asher, Cheng and Thompson (2014) and

Boatman, Evans and Soliz (2014).
  17 Under the typical plan, students would attend public colleges at no cost in exchange for a pledge to pay a set percentage

of income for specified number of years.
  18 See http://purdue.edu/backaboiler/ for details.




                                                              8
3.1     Survey questionnaire

The survey’s core content included questions regarding students’ expectations about future earnings and their

preferences over hypothetical loan repayment options. In addition, the survey included questions designed

to assess students’ risk aversion and financial literacy and collected information on major, graduate school

plans, experiences with debt, gender, and age.

   To learn about preferences over different loan repayment options, each survey respondent was presented

with two simple scenarios in which some amount of borrowing was assumed and a choice was offered between a

standard loan repayment plan versus an income-based repayment plan. Under the standard plan, the student

would pay a fixed amount every month for 10 years, with the monthly payment based on the amount borrowed

and an interest rate of 5 percent. We distinguish between IDR plans that resemble the options currently

available to the typical undergraduate borrower and hypothetical income-share agreements by labeling the

former “fixed amount” IDR and the latter “fixed length” IDR. Half of the sample was randomly assigned to

a “fixed amount” IDR plan, with monthly payments set as a percentage of income in excess of $1,000 per

month and continuing until the loan balance is paid in full. Under this IDR plan, in any month in which

the income-based payment falls below the amount of interest accrued over the month, the unpaid interest

is added to the loan balance. Any unpaid balance remaining after 20 years is forgiven. The remainder of

participants were given the choice between the standard 10-year plan and a “fixed length” IDR plan, under

which monthly payments also are set as a fixed percentage of income in excess of $1,000 per month but

payments continue for 20 years regardless of how much the student has paid in total. Figures 2 and 3 show

how the standard plan and the alternative plan were presented in the survey for the fixed amount and fixed

length repayment plans, respectively.

   To measure the sensitivity of students’ choices to the share of income paid under IDR, this percentage

was varied across the two scenarios each student saw. It was set to either 15 or 20 percent in the “fixed

amount” scenarios and to 6 or 10 percent in the “fixed length” scenarios.19 Further, each student was asked

to indicate the percentage payment that would make her indifferent between the standard plan and the

specific alternative plan.

   Three additional features of the scenarios were randomly assigned: (1) the framing of IDR as compared

to the standard loan repayment plan; (2) the amount the student had borrowed ($30,000 or $60,000); and

(3) the order in which the student saw the two income payment percentages associated with the IDR plan.

The size of the monthly payment under the standard plan was determined by the amount borrowed ($318
  19 The fixed amount IDR payment percentages were chosen to mirror payments under existing IDR plans. The fixed length

IDR low payment percentage was set such that, if all U.S. college graduates were to be enrolled in the plan, principal plus
interest would be fully repaid for the group as a whole after 20 years.




                                                            9
for the $30,000 debt treatment arm and $636 for the $60,000 debt treatment arm), as was the total amount

of interest paid over the life of the loan under the standard plan ($8,184 and $16,367 for the $30,000 and

$60,000 treatment arms, respectively). We tested three separate framings of the IDR option: a “neutral”

frame that simply described the two plans; a “cost” frame emphasizing that, under IDR, a borrower could

make higher total payments and, in the case of fixed length IDR, spend longer in repayment over the life

of the loan; and an “insurance” frame emphasizing the protection against payments that are unaffordable

during periods of low earnings that IDR provides to borrowers. The exact wordings associated with each

of the three framings are shown in Figure 4. A total of 24 separate treatments were randomly assigned (2

types of alternative repayment plan, 3 plan framings, 2 amounts borrowed, and 2 orderings for the percent

of income paid under the alternative plan); Appendix A describes these treatment arms.

    The survey elicited students’ expectations regarding their earnings at three different points in the future

and their degree of certainty about those anticipated earnings. This was done by asking students how much

they expected to earn in the first full calendar year after graduation, at age 30 and at age 40, as well their

expected likelihood of having no earnings, earnings of $35,000 or less, earnings between $35,001 and $75,000,

or earnings of more than $75,000 at each of those points in time.

    Finally, the survey included questions designed to measure risk aversion and financial literacy. We

measured risk aversion by student’s self reported willingness to take risk on a scale from 0 to 10.20 The

financial literacy questions included in the survey were adapted from Lusardi and Tufano (2009). Students’

answers to these questions allow us to gauge how likely it is that respondents fully understood the implications

of the choices they were asked to make between the standard and the alternative repayment plan. The full

questionnaire with the fixed length IDR scenarios, neutral framing, a $30,000 loan and the lower income

percent for the IDR plan presented first is included in Appendix B.


3.2     Data collection

The population of interest for our survey was undergraduates enrolled at the University of Maryland aged

18 to 29 years who were U.S. citizens or permanent residents.21 We were provided with access to admin-

istrative data containing considerable information about students’ demographic characteristics, academic

performance, and financial circumstances. In order to ensure the comparability of students assigned to

different treatment arms, we first stratified the sample by whether the student had declared a major and

whether SAT or ACT scores were available for the student. Then, within each of these explicit strata,
  20 A second question intended to measure risk aversion, which asked students how much they would be willing to pay for a

lottery ticket that offered a 50 percent chance of winning $500 and a 50 percent chance of winning $1000, did not yield usable
responses.
  21 Students who are neither citizens or permanent residents are not eligible for federal student aid (including loans).




                                                             10
we employed the serpentine ordering process described by Chromy (1979) to implicitly stratify the sample

by class standing (new transfer, freshman, sophomore, junior or senior), gender, and those with science,

technology, engineering, math (i.e., STEM), economics, or business majors versus those with other majors

versus undeclared, and percentile within the SAT/ACT math test score distribution (when available). As

we discuss in the following subsection, students in our analysis sample assigned to each of the 24 different

treatment groups were similar along all of these dimensions.

    The survey was administered for us by UMD’s Office of Institutional Research, Planning, and Assessment

(IRPA) to all undergraduate students at the email address they provided for communications from the

university. Past research has found that offering the chance to win a prize in a lottery has a positive effect on

the response rates to web surveys of college students (e.g., Heerwegh 2006; Laguilles, Williams and Saunders

2011). Students asked to participate in our survey were given the chance to enter a lottery to win one of

three iPad Air 2 tablets. The invitation to participate in the survey was sent on February 17, 2016 at 8pm

EST; three reminder emails were sent on February 23, February 29, and March 8, 2016 (all at 8pm EST).

The text of the invitation and reminder emails is reproduced in Appendix C.


3.3     Sample selection and student characteristics

A total of 25,435 Maryland undergraduates were invited to participate and 5,500 (22 percent) started the

survey. We focus our analyses on students who provided usable answers to “core” survey questions on

expected earnings and preferences over loan repayment plans and who were expected to be under the age

of 30 at graduation. This yielded a sample size of 4,399 students (17 percent of those invited to take the

survey).22

    Table 1 displays the relationship between selected predetermined student characteristics – the core vari-

ables used for stratified random assignment – and the assignment of treatment parameters in our analysis

sample.23 Only one of the 45 coefficients representing the correlation between treatment parameters and the

variables used for stratification is statistically significant and in no case does the test for joint significance

of the treatment parameters yield a test statistic significant at conventional levels. Estimates for other

characteristics are contained in Appendix Table D.1. Of the 21 characteristics examined, the test for the

joint significance of the treatment parameters yields a test statistic that is marginally significant at conven-

tional levels in only one case (Maryland residency, with p = 0.092). We interpret these findings as strongly
  22 927 individuals opened the survey but failed to answer all of the “core” survey questions. An additional 38 respondents

gave clearly nonsensical responses (e.g., earnings at graduation of $123, earnings at age 30 of $456, and 100 percent probability
of unemployment at every age). Students who were expected to be 30 or older at graduation (N = 136) were excluded from
our main sample because only two of the three questions on expected labor market outcomes are applicable. Our results are
robust to including respondents in these latter two categories.
  23 Appendix Tables D.2 and D.3 display characteristics of students within each of the 24 treatment arms.




                                                               11
supportive of our assumption of random assignment of treatment parameters in our analysis sample.24


3.4     Construction of key variables

We measure students’ “willingness to pay” for IDR with the reported payment as a percentage of income

that would make the respondent indifferent between the standard plan and the version of IDR presented to

the student. We classify students as irrational if they report a willingness to pay of 0 percent, 100 percent,

or an amount inconsistent with answers to the two prior hypothetical loan repayment scenario questions

(e.g., the student reports preferring the standard plan when IDR payments equal 15 percent of discretionary

income but lists their willingness to pay for IDR as 20 percent of discretionary income). We exclude irrational

students when examining effects of plan parameters on students’ willingness to pay for IDR.

    Respondents are classified as financially literate if they answer either of the two financial literacy ques-

tions correctly. Skipped questions are considered to have been answered incorrectly. “More risk averse”

respondents are those who chose a value of 4 or less on a scale of 0 to 10, where 0 is “not willing to take

risks” and 10 is “very willing to take risks.”25 UMD borrowers are those who received loans during their

time attending UMD, regardless of the outstanding balance.


3.5     Evaluating the validity of respondents’ labor market expectations

To assess whether students’ expectations of future labor market outcomes are reasonable, we compare average

expected earnings among those in our sample in broad major categories to average realized earnings in the

American Community Survey’s nationally representative sample within the same broad major categories.

Appendix Figure D.1 displays this relationship, assuming that students in our sample expect to graduate at

age 23. In general, students in the analysis sample expect to have higher earnings than averaged realized

earnings nationwide for individuals with the same major. UMD is more selective than the average higher

education institution, but survey respondents also may be overly optimistic about their earnings prospects.

The federal College Scorecard reports the average earnings of former Maryland students who received federal

aid, 10 years after entry, to be $60,500.26 Assuming that most UMD students graduate in four years, this
   24 As shown in Appendix Table D.4, students in the analysis sample have different characteristics than other UMD students.

These differences do not affect the internal validity of our results, as our key parameters of interest are randomly assigned.
Appendix Table D.5 shows that several characteristics are predictive of the likelihood that a student who has opened the
survey meets the criteria for inclusion in our analysis sample. Among students who opened the survey, younger students,
STEM/econ/business majors, upperclassmen who are not new transfers, Maryland residents, and first generation students are
significantly more likely to belong to the analysis sample, while female students and black students are significantly less likely
to belong (Panel A). Importantly, none of the treatment parameters are significantly related to the probability that a student
is included in the analysis sample and we can reject the hypothesis of joint significance across the 5 treatment parameters with
p = 0.624 (Panel C).
   25 Analyses using this measure of risk aversion are robust to varying this threshold (e.g., value of 5 or less on scale or value

of 3 or less on scale).
   26 See https://collegescorecard.ed.gov/school/?163286-University-of-Maryland-College-Park.




                                                                12
should be when students are approximately 30 years old. In our sample, federal aid recipients expected to

earn approximately $85,000 at age 30.27

    We also estimate auxiliary regressions of respondents’ labor market expectations on population moments

and respondents’ observable characteristics (Appendix Table D.6). To construct the population moments, we

use data from the American Community Survey (ACS) to generate analogues to the labor market outcome

measures for which we elicit expectations in the survey within broad major categories. Respondents’ expected

earnings at graduation are highly correlated with major-specific population earnings at age 23, with a

$0.85 increase in expected earnings for each $1 increase in population earnings. The relationship between

respondents’ expectations and population average earnings at age 30 is quite weak, while average earnings

for 23 year olds and average earnings for 40 year olds within the same earnings category remain significantly

correlated with respondents’ expected earnings at age 30. Age 40 population earnings are significantly

correlated with expected earnings at age 40, with a $0.40 increase in expected earnings for every $1 increase

in population earnings. We find a strong correlation between the expected likelihood of having $0 earnings

and the expected probability of having positive but low earnings (less than $35,000) with the corresponding

population moments at all ages except in the case of the expected probability of low earnings at age 40

(Appendix Tables D.7 and D.8). Taken together, these estimates suggest that students’ beliefs have a strong

basis in realized labor market outcomes for graduates with similar fields of study.



4     Empirical Framework

Our main specification is an ordinary least squares (OLS) regression of the form:


                                            Y = a + β T TreatT + γX +                                                  (1)


where Y is the outcome of interest (the probability of choosing the income-driven repayment plan over the

standard plan or percentage of income required for indifference), TreatT is a vector of treatment indicators

(e.g., loan size, IDR payment as a percentage of income, framing), X is a vector of the predetermined

observable student characteristics used for stratification, and  represents the error term. We estimate all

models separately for fixed length versus fixed amount IDR plans, as the expected stream of payments is

not directly comparable between these plans, even for students with the same labor market expectations.
  27 Betts (1996) finds that students’ beliefs about average earnings in the national population within their own major are

biased downwards but that students with less time left before graduation have more accurate expectations. Wiswall and Zafar
(2015) find that New York University students overestimate average earnings within broad major categories and update beliefs
about their own expected earnings towards national averages when provided with accurate information on mean earnings for
their major nationwide.




                                                            13
    Additional specifications allow for interactions between students’ expected labor market outcomes and

treatment parameters:



                          Y = a + β T TreatT + δ T f (earnings, TreatT ) + γX +                           (2)


In equation (2), f (earnings, TreatT )captures general interactions between treatment parameters and ex-

pected future labor market outcomes (e.g., earnings at graduation, the probability of zero earnings at grad-

uation or annual earnings growth). We focus primarily on interactions between randomly assigned IDR

framing and labor market expectations to test whether the impact of framing on preferences for income-

driven repayment varies with expected earnings and/or the expected risk of low or no earnings.



5     Results

To preview our results, we present graphical evidence of students’ willingness to pay for IDR based on the

framing of the IDR plan and their expected probability of low or no earnings at graduation. Figures 5 and 6

display cumulative distribution functions (CDFs) of the IDR payment as a percentage of income that would

make a respondent indifferent between IDR and the standard plan. We plot CDFs separately by loan size

($30,000 versus $60,000) and type of IDR plan (fixed amount versus fixed length).

    Figure 5 shows large differences in students’ willingness to pay for IDR between frames. The distribution

of willingness to pay for IDR among students assigned to the insurance frame stochastically dominates the

distribution for students assigned to alternative frames for both types of IDR and loan amounts. To give an

example, the 50th percentile of willingness to pay for fixed amount IDR under the insurance frame is twice

as large as the 50th percentile of willingness to pay under the cost frame (17 percent versus 8 percent for

small loans and 18 percent versus 9 percent for large loans).

    A comparison of Panel A (fixed amount IDR) and Panel B (fixed length IDR) shows that willingness to

pay for fixed amount IDR is greater than willingness to pay for fixed length IDR at almost every point in

the distribution. This is what we would expect if students are interpreting the descriptions of the two plans

and their implications correctly, given that fixed length IDR requires payments for 20 years regardless of the

amount already paid, whereas payments under fixed amount IDR stop when the loan principal and interest

have been repaid. Loan size appears to have a very modest effect on willingness to pay for IDR.

    We find smaller differences in willingness to pay by the expected probability of having low earnings at

graduation (Figure 6). Nonetheless, the distribution for students with the highest expected probability of

a poor labor market outcome at graduation stochastically dominates the CDF for students with the lowest



                                                     14
expected probability of having low earnings for each size of loan and type of IDR plan. As was the case

for our examination of willingness to pay by IDR framing, we find evidence that, conditional on loan size

and the expected probability of low or no earnings, students presented with fixed amount IDR viewed that

choice as more favorable than students presented with fixed length IDR.


5.1    IDR framing has large effects on preferences

We first examine the main effects of framing, loan size, and IDR payment rate on students’ preferences for

IDR over the standard plan. Table 2 displays estimates from linear probability models of the effect of plan

parameters on the probability a student reports preferring or strongly preferring IDR over the standard plan.

In addition to the plan parameters, these models also include controls for the variables used for stratification

(major, gender, class standing, missing SAT scores, and SAT scores) and whether the higher-cost IDR option

was presented first. Framing generates sizable effects on students’ preferences. Relative to the neutral frame,

under the cost framing that emphasizes the increased payment length and interest payments associated with

IDR, the probability of choosing fixed amount IDR decreases by 14 percentage points (51 percent) and the

probability of choosing fixed length IDR falls by 12 percentage points (59 percent). When the insurance

aspects of IDR are emphasized, students are 19 percentage points (66 percent) more likely to choose fixed

amount IDR and 18 percentage points (91 percent) more likely to prefer fixed length IDR.

   Estimated effects of the amount of student loan debt and “price” of IDR (i.e., IDR payment as a per-

centage of income) go in the expected directions. All else equal, students with larger loans are more likely

to prefer IDR, whereas students who face a higher IDR payment are less likely to prefer IDR. Based on the

estimated coefficients on the loan size variable, which are identified based on the differences in preferences

between those assigned $60,000 in loans versus those assigned $30,000 in loans, a $10,000 increase in out-

standing debt results in a 2 percentage point increase in the probability of choosing fixed amount IDR and

a 3 percentage point increase in the probability of choosing fixed length IDR. Similarly, the coefficients on

the payment as a percent of income variables, which are identified based on the differences in preferences

between the scenarios with the higher versus the lower of the two payment rates associated with the given

IDR plan type, imply that a 1 percentage point increase in the IDR payment as a percent of disposable

income results in a 1.1 percentage point reduction in the probability of preferring fixed amount IDR and a

1.4 percentage point decrease in the likelihood of choosing fixed length IDR. Relative to the effect of varying

these objective plan parameters, IDR framing generates substantial changes in students’ reported preferences

for IDR. To put the estimated effects of framing into context, emphasizing the costs of IDR (relative to the

neutral frame) is equivalent to an approximately 13 percentage point increase in the price of fixed amount



                                                      15
IDR and an approximately 8 percentage point increase in the price of fixed length IDR.

   As shown in Table 3, the estimated effects of framing on preferences for IDR are robust to a variety of

specifications and sample restrictions.The first column displays estimates from models that exclude all con-

trols except treatment parameters, while column 2 contains estimates from models that include the standard

set of controls for random assignment strata (which are included in all of the remaining specifications) and

additional controls from administrative data. T he models in column 3 include controls for risk aversion

(willingness to take risks on a scale from 0 to 10), financial literacy (number of questions answered correctly),

self reported debt (student loans, auto loans, credit card balances, loans from family, and other unsecured

debt), and indicators for having skipped the risk aversion and self reported debt questions. The sample for

the models in column 4 is limited to students who provided “rational” answers to the questions on their

preferences for loan repayment plans. The column 5 models exclude students with low financial literacy,

while the column 6 models limit the sample to students who have borrowed during their time at UMD. The

models in column 7 restrict the sample to those who spent at least 5 minutes completing the survey and the

column 8 models drop observations for which expected earnings at any age were below the 1st percentile or

above the 99th percentile of responses provided for expected (unconditional) earnings at graduation, age 30,

or age 40. Results are consistent across specifications.

   Table 4 reports estimates of the effect of framing on the willingness to pay for IDR (the payment for

IDR is defined as the percentage of disposable income that would make a student indifferent between the

specific version of IDR in the assigned treatment arm and the standard plan). Sample sizes in these models

are smaller than in the specifications reported in Table 2, both because the Table 4 models include only one

observation per person and because we have excluded students that did not answer the survey question about

the percentage of income that would make them indifferent between IDR and the standard plan, provided a

rate that conflicted with earlier answers, or stated that a payment of 0 percent or 100 percent would make

them indifferent. The estimates imply that the cost framing reduces willingness to pay for IDR by 2 to

4 percent of income and that the insurance framing raises willingness to pay for IDR by 4 to 6 percent.

Appendix Table D.9 provides results concerning the sensitivity of these effects to the controls included and

sample restrictions applied. As was the case for the estimates of framing effects on preferences for IDR, the

estimates are very consistent across specifications.


5.2    Correlations between labor market expectations and preferences for IDR

While those selecting into existing IDR plans appear to have low earnings at entry (U.S. Government

Accountability Office 2015) and carry higher-than-average loan balances (Baum et al. 2016; U.S. Government



                                                       16
Accountability Office 2015), little is known about the evolution of these borrowers’ earnings over the longer

run. Table 5 explores the associations between UMD survey respondents’ labor market expectations and

their preferences for IDR. Neither the expected level of earnings at graduation nor expected earnings at later

points in life, conditional in both cases on being employed, are significantly associated with the likelihood

that the student prefers IDR. The expected likelihood of having zero earnings at graduation has a significant

positive association with preferences for fixed amount IDR and the expected likelihood of having low earnings

at graduation has a significant positive association with preferences for both fixed amount and fixed length

IDR. In contrast, the expected probabilities of having zero or low earnings at age 30 or age 40 are not

significantly correlated with IDR preferences.28

    There are good reasons for the risk of an especially negative labor market outcome following graduation

to be associated with stronger preferences for IDR. It is exactly during periods of zero or low earnings that

IDR’s advantages are realized and newly graduated borrowers who have had no opportunity to accumulate a

precautionary savings would be especially vulnerable in the event of a negative earnings shock. Among new

graduates with better labor market outcomes, provided earnings are above some threshold, having somewhat

higher or somewhat lower earnings could well have little effect on preferences for IDR.

    The lack of correlation between expected labor market outcomes at age 30 or age 40 and preferences

for IDR is perhaps more surprising. One possible explanation is that students are myopic, applying a

high discount rate to future financial outcomes. It also is possible that, in contrast to their expectations

about the distribution of potential outcomes at graduation, which presumably are informed by observing the

experiences of recent graduates, students may have less certainty in their assessments of the range of potential

outcomes they will face 10 or 20 years in the future. This could lead them to disregard those assessments in

making their decisions. Whatever the explanation, among the labor market expectation measures we have

examined, only the expected probability of low or zero earnings at graduation is predictive of loan repayment

plan preferences.


5.3     Heterogeneity in framing effects by labor market expectations

Next, we test whether students’ expected labor market outcomes interact significantly with the framing of

IDR. We focus on interactions between framing and students’ expectations of the likelihood of having low

or no earnings at graduation. We do not examine interactions with expected labor market outcomes beyond

graduation because expectations about these later outcomes are uncorrelated with students’ preferences for
  28 These patterns are robust to a variety of specifications and sample restrictions including: using standardized measures of

students’ expected earnings profiles (µ = 0, σ = 1), not conditioning expected earnings on employment, dropping respondents
who spent less than 5 minutes on the survey, and dropping respondents with outlier expected earnings (above the 99th percentile
or below the 1st percentile). These results can be found in Appendix Table D.10.




                                                              17
IDR once outcomes at graduation are taken into account (Table 5).

    Table 6 displays estimates from specifications in which IDR framing is fully interacted with students’

expected probability of having earnings below $35,000 in the year of graduation.29 We find evidence of

significant interactions between the expected probability of a bad labor market outcome and the neutral and

insurance frames, but not between the probability of a bad labor market outcome and the frame emphasizing

IDR costs. To put these effects into context, consider what they imply about the decisions of a student with

an expected probability of low or no earnings at graduation equal to 50 percent and the decisions of a student

whose expected probability is 25 percent (holding all other characteristics constant). When the costs of IDR

are emphasized, these students are equally likely to choose IDR over the standard plan, as the expected risk

of a bad labor market outcome is uncorrelated with IDR take-up. Under the neutral frame, a student who

expects a 50 percent risk of low or no earnings is roughly 3.5 percentage points more likely to choose IDR

than the student who expects a 25 percent risk of low or no earnings, while under the insurance frame, the

difference in their IDR take-up is 6 to 7 percentage points.

    A natural question is whether the estimates displayed in Table 6 are robust to allowing for possible

nonlinearities in the interaction effects between framing and the probability of a bad labor market outcome.

To address this concern, we estimate local linear regressions of the probability of preferring IDR over the

standard plan on the expected probability of having earnings less than $35,000 (either zero earnings or low

positive earnings); these estimates are displayed in Figure 7. The short-dashed gray line corresponds to the

density of observations by expected probability of low earnings to illustrate the region that represent the

support of the data. The figure confirms that the linearity assumption underlying the Table6 regressions is

reasonable as well as the conclusions drawn from those regressions.


5.4     Other correlates of heterogeneity in framing effects

In addition to varying with students’ labor market expectations, the sensitivity of preferences to the framing

of loan repayment plans also could vary with other student characteristics. The first three columns of Table

7 provide evidence on whether the groups of students we would expect to be more capable of assessing

available repayment plans objectively are less affected by the framing of those options. We augment our

baseline model - shown in equation (1) - by fully interacting the plan framing variables with an indicator for

being in a STEM, economics or business major; financial literacy (i.e., having answered at least one of the
  29 In Appendix Table D.11, display results from two additional specifications. The first allows for separate interactions between

framing and expected earnings at graduation, the probability of no earnings at graduation, and the probability of low earnings
at graduation. The second allows for separate interactions between framing and separate terms for the probability of no earnings
and the probability of low earnings at graduation. Framing does not significantly interact with expected earnings. Framing
significantly interacts with both the probability of low earnings and the probability of no earnings in the fixed amount IDR
treatment arm. For fixed length IDR, estimated interactions with framing and the expected probability of no earnings are
positive but not statistically significant at conventional levels.


                                                                18
two financial literacy questions correctly); and having taken out a student loan while at UMD, respectively.

STEM, business and economics students’ preferences for IDR are significantly less sensitive to the insurance

framing than the preferences of students in other (or undecided) majors. STEM students’ smaller response

to the insurance framing could be driven by their higher earnings expectations rather than their quantitative

reasoning skills, but the finding is robust to controlling for students’ labor market expectations, suggesting

that students in these majors may simply be better able to assess the value of IDR and thus less sensitive

to framing. The results in column (2) provide suggestive evidence that students with lower financial literacy

may be more sensitive than other students to the framing of available loan repayment options, but we cannot

reject equality of the framing-financial literacy interactions at conventional significance levels. Finally, the

insurance frame has larger effects on students who have borrowed while at UMD for those assigned to fixed

payment length IDR, but this is not the case for students presented with the option of fixed amount IDR.

Overall, these findings provide only weak support for the idea that more capable or more knowledgeable

students are less susceptible to framing effects.

    We next explore whether students who are more risk averse are more susceptible to changing their

views based on the risks that a framing emphasizes. Consistent with this idea, in both the fixed payment

amount and fixed payment length models, more risk averse students exhibit greater sensitivity to framing

(Table 7, column 4). Risk averse students are less likely to choose the IDR plan when given information

that emphasizes the possibility that IDR will carry higher costs and more likely to choose IDR when given

information that emphasizes the plan’s insurance aspect.30

    With the results presented in the final three columns of Table 7, we explore whether framing effects vary

with student gender, status as an underrepresented minority, and status as a first-generation college student.

Among undergraduate borrowers who were enrolled during the 2011-12 academic year, 60 percent were

female, 42 percent were Black, Hispanic, or Native American, and 43 percent were first generation college

students.31 Thus, UMD students in our analysis sample (and as a whole) are less likely to be female and less

likely to be in an underrepresented minority group than the typical college student and they are more likely

to have college educated parents. If anything, it appears that the effects we document are stronger among

the demographic groups that are under-represented in our sample, with the difference in effects of framing

being most pronounced for female students.
  30 Students who report being less willing to take risks also expect to have lower earnings and a higher probability of low or

no earnings at graduation, which makes it difficult to disentangle the heterogeneous effects of framing by student risk aversion
from heterogeneity in effects by expected labor market outcomes.
  31 Authors’ analysis of the 2012 National Postsecondary Student Aid Study using PowerStats (available at:

https://nces.ed.gov/datalab/). First generation college students in the NPSAS are those whose parents do not have college
degrees and have never attended college.




                                                              19
6     Simulated Effects of IDR Framing on Government Revenue and

      Borrower Defaults

This section describes how we estimate the effect of changes in IDR payment rates and framing on selection

into IDR, aggregate payments, and defaults. We focus our discussion on the simulated effects of changing

the parameters of fixed-amount IDR as similar repayment programs already exist. Appendix E discusses the

simulated effects of varying the parameters of fixed length IDR.

    To simulate the effect of varying the “price” of IDR, we use students’ response to the survey question that

asks what IDR payment, as a percentage of income, would make the student indifferent between the standard

loan repayment plan and IDR. Thus, for the purposes of the simulation exercise, our sample is limited to

students who answered this particular survey question. Of the students who answered this question, an

additional 17 percent are excluded due to an inability to fit a parameterized age-earnings profile (discussed

below).32 The resulting sample includes 2,618 survey respondents.

    Our approach requires several assumptions. Most importantly, we assume that students’ expected labor

market outcomes are, on average, an accurate measure of their ex post labor market outcomes. Within broad

major categories, survey respondents’ age-specific expected labor market outcomes and appear to be highly

correlated with actual labor market outcomes of college graduates in the ACS (see Appendix Figure D.1,

Appendix Tables D.6, D.7, and D.8). Furthermore, Wiswall and Zafar (2016) provide evidence that New

York University students’ expectations of their earnings and labor force participation at age 30 are quite

similar to their realized outcomes, suggesting that, on average, college students can predict their future labor

market outcomes with reasonable accuracy.

    Second, we abstract from the effects of student loan debt on graduate school enrollment, marriage, and

child-bearing, all of which could affect both the choice of repayment plan and repayment outcomes.33 Finally,

we use the parameters of IDR plans presented to students within the survey’s hypothetical scenarios, which

differ from the features of currently available IDR options in two important ways. Most (but not all) currently

available IDR plans cap payments at the standard plan payment amount. In addition, borrowers are allowed

to leave IDR, although any additional interest accrued while enrolled in IDR still must be repaid.34
  32 This group primarily includes students who reported expected annual earnings that were inconsistent with their expected

probabilities of earning less than $35,000, between $35,000 and $75,000, and more than $75,000. For example, a student who
reported their expected earnings at age 30 to be $100,000 and a 100 percent probability of earning less than $35,000 would be
excluded.
  33 To our knowledge, the effects of student loan debt on marriage and child-bearing have not been studied, but Fos, Liberman

and Yannelis (2017) show that increases in undergraduate debt reduce the probability of graduate school attendance. Whether
enrollment in IDR would strengthen or attenuate this relationship is unclear.
  34 Borrowers participating in extant U.S. IDR plans must "recertify" their income and family size at least once a year. Failure

to recertify will pause IDR participation and a borrower’s future payments will depend on the version of IDR initially chosen. For
borrowers in REPAYE, those who don’t recertify will be removed from the REPAYE Plan and placed on an alternative repayment
plan in which the required monthly payment is equal to the amount necessary to repay the loan in full by the earlier of (a) 10



                                                               20
6.1     Simulation procedure

We first generate frequency weights via raking to match characteristics of bachelor’s degree-seeking borrow-

ers in the nationally representative 2012 National Postsecondary Student Aid Study (NPSAS). Students in

our sample are matched to NPSAS borrowers based on observable characteristics including indicators for

eligibility for the maximum Pell Grant (i.e., students with an expected family contribution of $0), eligibility

for a Pell Grant less than the maximum (versus ineligible), class standing (lower level versus upper level),

missing SAT score, race (Asian, Black, Hispanic, White, or Other), first generation student, in-state student,

11 major categories (science and math, business and economics, computer and information sciences, edu-

cation, engineering, general studies, social sciences excluding economics, humanities, applied health-related,

other applied field, or undecided), gender, and age (less than 20 years old versus 20 and older). We also

match based on outstanding debt assigned to survey respondents in the hypothetical loan repayment sce-

narios. Given that our hypothetical scenarios only provide us with two different loan amounts ($30,000 and

$60,000), we use the midpoint between these amounts ($45,000) to generate a dichotomous indicator for

large estimated loans at graduation.35 Weights were restricted to values between 1 and 8,000. As shown

in Appendix Table D.12, the reweighted analysis sample matches the NPSAS sample along all dimensions

used to generate the weights. The reweighted sample of UMD students is also similar to the nationally

representative sample in terms of parental income and SAT scores. However, the reweighed sample of UMD

survey respondents is younger and has higher EFCs than bachelor’s degree-seeking borrowers nationwide.

    Following Wiswall and Zafar (2015), we estimate parameters for each sample member’s potential experience-

earnings profile, assuming that a borrower with potential experience a has earnings equal to earna ∼

N (µa , σa ), µa = µ0 + µ1 exp + µ2 exp2 , and σa = σ0 + σ1 exp.36                   We estimate the parameter vector

θ = {µ0 , µ1 , µ2 , σ0 , σ1 } via simulated method of moments, weighting by the inverse variance of sample

moments. Finally, we interpolate the expected probability of zero earnings for each student across the three

reported expected probabilities (at graduation, age 30, and age 40).

    Next, for each sample member, we draw a sequence of earnings and nonemployment probabilities from
years from the date the borrower began repayment under the alternative repayment plan, or (b) the ending date of the 20- or 25-
year repayment period. The borrower can choose to leave the alternative repayment plan and repay under any other repayment
plan for which they are eligible. For borrowers in other IDR plans (PAYE, IBR, ICR), those who don’t recertify will remain on
the same IDR plan, but monthly payments will no longer be based on the borrower’s income. Instead, payments will be set equal
to the amount the borrower would pay under the 10-year standard repayment plan had they chosen the standard plan when
first entering repayment. Borrowers in REPAYE, PAYE, IBR who fail to recertify will have any unpaid interest capitalized (i.e.,
added to the principal balance). See https://studentaid.ed.gov/sa/repay-loans/understand/plans/income-driven for details.
   35 For NPSAS sample members, we predict outstanding debt at graduation by multiplying current debt by 4 for freshmen, 2

for sophomores, and 34 for juniors. Approximately 16 percent of borrowers attending four-year institutions in 2012 are projected
to have debt at or above $45,000 when entering repayment (versus approximately 50 percent of survey respondents in the
unweighted sample).
   36 Age is measured at the beginning of the academic year. We assume that seniors’ age at graduation is their current age

plus one year, juniors are two years older at graduation, sophomores are three years older at graduation, and freshmen are four
years older at graduation. We use new transfer students’ self-reported class level and the above logic to generate an age at
graduation for transfer students.



                                                              21
their parameterized experience-earnings profile and interpolated nonemployment profile, setting earnings to

zero if the sample member is not employed at age a. The number of draws for a given sample member is

determined by their raked frequency weight, so that the final data set has a distribution of characteristics

that matches those of all bachelor’s degree-seeking borrowers.

    Once we have generated this sample of borrowers, we allow each borrower’s choice of repayment plan to

be determined by the price of IDR. For instance, if a student reports that a 6 percent payment rate would

make them indifferent between IDR and the standard plan, we assume that for any rate below 6 percent,

they would choose IDR and for any rate at or higher than 6 percent, they would choose the standard plan.

Payments are calculated following the description of each plan in Section 3.1. At a given point in time after

entering repayment, a student is assumed to default on their loan if their payment exceeds 50 percent of

their income for two years in a row. Students who choose IDR never enter into default.

    For each payment rate and IDR frame, we calculate the IDR take-up rate, average total payments over

the 10 and 20 year periods following entry into repayment, and the share of borrowers who ever default on

their loan in the 20 years after entering repayment (almost all defaults occur within the first 10 years of

repayment). We provide a measure of the degree of adverse selection into IDR by calculating the difference

between average total IDR payments that the government would have received had the students who chose

the standard plan instead chosen IDR and the average total payments received by students who did choose

IDR. We use a student loan interest rate of 5 percent (as stated in the hypothetical survey scenarios). We

set the government’s discount rate to 3 percent.37

    Under a universal standard repayment plan, the present discounted value of payments over the first 10

years of repayment by borrowers with average debt of approximately $35,000 at graduation is $36,200 over

the first 10 years of repayment; the present discounted value of payments over the first 20 years of repayment

is $37,500. We project that approximately 34 percent of these borrowers would default on their loan at some

point during the 20 years following entry into repayment if only the standard repayment plan was available

(with the vast majority of defaults occurring in the first 9 years of repayment). While the projected share

of students ever defaulting is much larger than the average three-year cohort default rates reported by the

federal government in recent years, it is reasonably consistent with the five-year default rate of 28 percent for

students in the 2008-09 repayment cohort reported by Looney and Yannelis (2015), especially since actual

default rates include the substantial minority of borrowers who are enrolled in IDR and thus face little risk

of default. It is also important to note that our measure represents the share of borrowers who we project

to default on their loan at any point in the 20 years after leaving college, and is substantially larger than
  37 The Federal Credit Reform Act of 1990 requires that estimated net payments on federal loans be discounted at a rate equal

to the interest rate for U.S. Treasury securities of the same maturity as the loan (between 1.5 and 3 percent for 10-20 year
Treasury notes in recent years).



                                                             22
the share of borrowers that we predict will default in any given year.


6.2     Simulation results for fixed amount IDR

Figure 8 displays the simulated IDR take-up rate by IDR frame and price. At every price, simulated take-up

is substantially higher under the insurance frame, although differences are smaller at lower, more generous

IDR payment rates. There is little difference in take-up between the neutral and cost frames.38

    As described above, we measure the degree of adverse selection into IDR using the difference between the

present discounted value of payments students who chose the standard plan would have made under IDR

and the present discounted value of payments made by students who chose IDR. If borrowers adversely select

out of IDR based on their expected cost of participation, this difference should be positive. Conversely, if

borrowers who select into IDR are those who would expect to pay more under this plan, this difference will

be negative, representing advantageous selection (from the government’s perspective). As shown in Figure

9, across all three frames, we find relatively little selection into IDR. At most, borrowers who opt-out of

IDR in favor of the standard plan would have paid $4,000 more in present value terms under IDR than

borrowers who chose IDR. At payment rates below 6 percent, both the cost and neutral frames generate

adverse selection into IDR, while the insurance frame generates advantageous selection into IDR. At higher

payment rates, there is essentially no selection into IDR, suggesting that at payment rates in the range of

those available to actual borrowers (e.g., 10 to 15 percent of disposable income), adverse selection into IDR

may not be a large concern for borrowers with average debt levels.39 While this finding may seem to be

at odds with the fact that students who expect to have low or no earnings are more likely to choose IDR

when assigned to the insurance frame (e.g., Table 6), it is not necessarily inconsistent; in our sample, the

expected risk of a poor labor market outcome at graduation is relatively uncorrelated with expected labor

market outcomes at later points.

    Next, we examine the simulated effect of IDR framing and payment rates on government revenue when

borrowers are allowed to choose their repayment plan. Figure 10 displays the present discounted value

(PDV) of payments received over the first 10 (Panel A) or 20 (Panel B) years of repayment. For students

with average debt levels, any IDR payment rate above 5 percent generates essentially the same eventual

revenue as universal participation in the standard plan (indicated by the horizontal dashed line).40 However,

when we examine aggregate payments over the 10 year time horizon used by the standard plan, the IDR rate

must exceed 12 percent for revenue to be approximately equal to that received under a universal standard
  38 As shown in Appendix Figure D.2, this pattern does not hold for borrowers with above average debt. In this group, take-up

under the neutral frame exceeds take-up under the cost frame at every rate.
  39 Patterns are fairly similar when we compare borrowers with below and above average debt (Appendix Figure D.3), although

differences in selection between frames for borrowers with above average loans are larger in magnitude and less precise.
  40 For borrowers with above average debt, this pattern holds for any IDR rate above 12 percent (Appendix Figure D.5).




                                                             23
plan (Figure 10). For borrowers with $60,000 in debt, allowing students to select into IDR leads to revenue

losses over the 10-year horizon for every IDR rate we examine, although losses are small when the IDR

payment rate exceeds 18 percent (Appendix Figure D.4).

    Finally, we simulate how changes to the price and framing of IDR would affect aggregate default rates.

Under a given IDR payment rate and frame, the reduction in defaults will be driven by the IDR take-up

rate and the degree of selection into IDR. Even with a payment rate of 22 percent - the highest we examine -

when IDR is framed as providing insurance, the share of borrowers who default falls substantially relative the

share defaulting when the costs of IDR are emphasized (Figure 11). The reduction in the share of borrowers

ever defaulting due to moving them from the cost frame to the insurance frames is largest for IDR rates

between 10 and 14 percent. Switching from the cost to a neutral frame has much smaller effects on lifetime

default rates.41 Taken together with the simulated effects on federal revenue (Figure 10), Figure 11 suggests

that a simple change in the framing of IDR could generate substantial reductions in loan defaults with

minimal loss of federal revenue. Outside of very low IDR payment rates, which would generate substantial

amounts of debt forgiveness for many students, we project that the vast majority of students who borrow

while attending a four-year institution will repay their debt within 20 years. While the revenue collected

from students with loans of above-average size will be lower over the 10-year horizon used in the standard

plan, in the case of borrowers with average levels of debt, revenue losses at 10 years following the start of

repayment are relatively minor.



7     Conclusion

We show that the framing of IDR options has large effects on the stated preferences of UMD undergraduate

students presented with hypothetical loan repayment scenarios. When the potential for higher interest

payments and longer repayment periods is emphasized, as is the case with existing tools intended to help

borrowers choose among repayment plans, students are significantly less likely to choose IDR over the

standard plan, even when their expected labor market outcomes suggest that they would stand to benefit

from the protection against unaffordable loan payments. In contrast, when the insurance aspects of IDR

are emphasized, students are significantly more likely to choose IDR. Moreover, the increased take-up of

IDR is driven by those students who stand to benefit the most from this type of insurance - those who

anticipate a high probability of unemployment or relatively low earnings and those who would pay more

under the standard plan based on their expected earnings at graduation. We provide evidence of similar

framing effects for borrowers’ take-up of fixed length IDR options, a class of policies that have attracted
  41 For students with below average loans, default rates are essentially the same under the cost and neutral frames, while the
lifetime default rate is lower under the neutral frame for borrowers with above average debt (Appendix Figure D.6).


                                                              24
increasing attention in recent years but have yet to be implemented on a large scale or studied empirically.

   Simulation results provide supporting evidence that adverse selection into IDR based on earnings over

the entire repayment period is limited, even when the insurance aspect of IDR is emphasized. Our findings

imply that under the IDR options currently available to U.S. student borrowers, default rates of bachelor’s

degree-seeking borrowers could be lowered substantially with little long-term cost to the federal government

by emphasizing the fact that IDR provides insurance against unaffordable loan payments.


References
Asher, Lauren, Diane Cheng, and Jessica Thompson. 2014. Should All Student Loan Payments be Income-
 Driven? Trade-offs and Challenges. The Institute for College Access and Success White Paper.

Baum, Sandy, Jennifer Ma, Matea Pender, and Meredith Welch. 2016. Trends in Student Aid 2016. https:
 //trends.collegeboard.org/sites/default/files/2016-trends-student-aid_0.pdf, The College Board.

Bernheim, B. Douglas, Andrey Fradkin, and Igor Popov. 2015. The Welfare Economics of Default Options
 in 401(k) Plans. American Economic Review, 105(9): 2798–2837.

Bettinger, Eric P., Bridget Terry Long, Philip Oreopolous, and Lisa Sanbonmastu. 2012. The Role of
 Simplification and Information in College Decisions: Results from the H&R Block FAFSA Experiment. Quarterly
 Journal of Economics, 127(3): 1205–1242.

Betts, Julian R. 1996. What Do Students Know About Wages? Evidence from a Survey of Undergraduates. Journal
 of Human Resources, 31(1): 27–56.

Boatman, Angela, Brent Evans, and Adela Soliz. 2014. Applying the Lessons of Behavioral Economics to
 Improve the Federal Student Loan Programs: Six Policy Recommendations. Lumina Foundation Report.

Cadena, Brian C., and Benjamin J. Keys. 2013. Can Self-Control Explain Avoiding Free Money? Evidence
 from Interest-Free Student Loans. Review of Economics and Statistics, 95(4): 1117–1129.

Caetano, Gregorio, Miguel Palacios, and Harry Anthony Patrinos. 2011. Measuring Aversion to Debt: An
 Experiment among Student Loan Candidates. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 5737.

Chapman, Bruce. 2006. Income Contingent Loans for Higher Education: International Reforms. In Handbook of
 the Economics of Education, Volume 2, ed. Eric A. Hanushek and Finis Welch. Elsevier.

Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, Søren Leth-Petersen, Torben Heien Nielsen, and Tore Olsen. 2014.
 Active vs. Passive Decisions and Crowd-Out in Retirement Savings Accounts: Evidence from Denmark. Quarterly
 Journal of Economics, 129(3): 1141–1219.

Choi, James J., David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Andrew Metrick. 2006. Optimal Defaults and
 Active Decisions. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(4): 1639–1674.

Chromy, James R. 1979. Sequential Sample Selection Methods. In 1979 Proceedings of the Section on Survey
 Research Methods.Washington, DC: American Statistical Association.

Delisle, Jason, and Alexander Holt. 2015. Why Student Loans are Different: Findings from Six Focus Groups
 of Student Loan Borrowers. New America Foundation report.

Dynarski, Susan. 2014. An Economist’s Perspective on Student Loans in the United States. Economic Studies
 Working Paper. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution.

Dynarski, Susan, and Daniel Kreisman. 2013. Loans for Educational Opportunity: Making Borrowing Work
 for Today’s Students. Hamilton Project Discussion Paper 2013-05.

Dynarski, Susan M., and Judith E. Scott-Clayton. 2006. The Cost Of Complexity In Federal Student Aid:
 Lessons From Optimal Tax Theory And Behavioral Economics. National Tax Journal, 59(2): 319–356.


                                                     25
Evans, Brent J., and Angela R. Boatman. 2016. Understanding how Information Affects Loan Aversion: A
  Randomized Control Trial of Providing Federal Loan Information to High School Seniors. Working paper.

Evans, Brent J., Angela R. Boatman, and Adela Soliz. 2016. Framing and Labeling Effects in the Decision
  to Borrow for Postsecondary Education: An Experimental Analysis. Working paper.

Federal Reserve Bank of New York. 2018. Quarterly Report on Household Debt and Credit, 2017: Q4. New
  York, NY: Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

Field, Erica. 2009. Educational Debt Burden and Career Choice: Evidence from a Financial Aid Experiment at
  NYU Law School. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 1(1): 1–21.

Findeisen, Sebastian, and Dominik Sachs. 2016. Education and Optimal Dynamic Taxation: The Role of
  Income-Contingent Student Loans. Journal of Public Economics, 138: 1–21.

Fishman, Rachel, and Ivy Love. 2015. Understanding Student Loan Debt. Washington, DC: New America
  Foundation.

Fos, Vyacheslav, Andres Liberman, and Constantine Yannelis. 2017. Debt and Human Capital: Evidence
  from Student Loans. Working paper.

Friedman, Milton. 1955. The Role of Government in Education. Rutgers University Press.

Harnisch, Thomas L. 2014. The "Pay It Forward" College Financing Concept: A Pathway to the Privatization
 of Public Higher Education. http://www.aascu.org/policy/publications/policy-matters/PayItForward.pdf,
 American Association of State Colleges and Universities Higher Education Policy Brief.

Heerwegh, Dirk. 2006. An Investigation of the Effect of Lotteries on Web Survey Response Rates. Field Methods,
 18(2): 205–220.

Hershbein, Brad, Benjamin H. Harris, , and Melissa S. Kearney. 2014. Major Decisions: Graduates’ Earnings
 Growth and Debt Repayment. Hamilton Project report.

Keys, Benjamin J., and Jialan Wang. 2016. Minimum Payments and Debt Paydown in Consumer Credit Cards.
 NBER working paper 22742.

Laguilles, Jerold S., Elizabeth A. Williams, and Daniel B. Saunders. 2011. Can Lottery Incentives Boost
  Web Survey Response Rates? Findings from Four Experiments. Research in Higher Education, 52: 537–553.

Lochner, Lance, and Alexander Monge-Naranjo. 2015. Student Loans and Repayment: Theory, Evidence, and
  Policy. NBER working paper 20849.

Looney, Adam, and Constantine Yannelis. 2015. A Crisis in Student Loans?: How Changes in the Characteristics
  of Borrowers and in the Institutions They Attended Contributed to Rising Loan Defaults. Brookings Papers on
  Economic Activity, 1–89.

Lusardi, Annamaria, and Peter Tufano. 2009. Debt Literacy, Financial Experiences and Over-Indebtedness.
  NBER working paper 14808.

Madrian, Brigitte C., and Dennis F. Shea. 2001. The Power of Suggestion: Inertia in 401(k) Participation and
 Savings Behavior. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(4): 1149–1188.

Marx, Benjamin M., and Lesley J. Turner. 2017. Student Loan Nudges: Experimental Evidence on Borrowing
 and Educational Attainment. NBER working paper 24060.

Marx, Benjamin M., and Lesley J. Turner. 2018. Borrowing Trouble? Student Loans, the Cost of Borrowing,
 and Implications for the Effectiveness of Need-Based Grant Aid. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics.

Sheets, Robert G., and Stephen Crawford. 2014. From Income-Based Repayment Plans to an Income-Based
  Loan System. Lumina Foundation Report.

U.S. Department of Education. 2016. Direct Loan and Federal Family Education Loan Portfolio by Loan Sta-
  tus. https://studentaid.ed.gov/sites/default/files/fsawg/datacenter/library/PortfoliobyLoanStatus.
  xls, Washington, DC.



                                                     26
U.S. Department of Education. 2017. Direct Loan Portfolio by Repayment Plan. https://studentaid.ed.gov/
  sa/sites/default/files/fsawg/datacenter/library/DLPortfoliobyRepaymentPlan.xls, Washington, DC.

U.S. Government Accountability Office. 2015. Federal Student Loans: Education Could Do More to Help
  Ensure Borrowers Are Aware of Repayment and Forgiveness Options. http://www.gao.gov/assets/680/672136.
  pdf, GAO-15-663. Washington, DC.

U.S. Government Accountability Office. 2016. Federal Student Loans: Education Needs to Improve its Income-
  Driven Repayment Plan Budget Estimates. http://www.gao.gov/assets/690/681064.pdf, GAO-17-22. Washing-
  ton, DC.

Wiswall, Matthew, and Basit Zafar. 2015. Determinants of College Major Choice: Identification using an
 Information Experiment. Review of Economic Studies, 82(2): 791–824.

Wiswall, Matthew, and Basit Zafar. 2016. Human Capital Investments and Expectations about Career and
 Family. NBER working paper 22543.

Zafar, Basit, Zachary Bleemer, Meta Brown, and Wilbert van der Klaaw. 2014. What Americans
  (Don’t) Know about Student Loan Collections. http://libertystreeteconomics.newyorkfed.org/2014/06/
  what-americans-dont-know-about-student-loan-collections.html, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Lib-
  erty Street Economics.




Figures and Tables

           Figure 1: Output from the Department of Education Repayment Plan Comparison Tool




Notes:        Output     from     the     Department       of    Education’s     Repayment       Estimator    (available   at:
https://studentloans.gov/myDirectLoan/mobile/repayment/repaymentEstimator.action).            Calculations are for a $30,000
unsubsidized loan with 5 percent interest for a single individual with an initial adjusted gross income equal to $30,000. The
estimator assumes a zero discount rate, income growth of 5 percent per year, and no risk of unemployment.




                                                             27
                       You will graduate from the University of Maryland this May. You have borrowed $60,000 at an interest
                       rate of 5% per year to pay for your education. You will not be required to begin making payments until
                       December 2016.

                       You will need to choose one of the following repayment plans:
                    Figure 2: Hypothetical Loan Repayment Scenarios: Fixed Payment Amount
                                            Plan A                                Plan B

                                                                       You will make monthly payments
                                                                       on your loan for up to the next 20
                                                                       years. Your payments will stop
                            You will pay back the money you
                                                                       once you have paid off your loan.
                            owe over the next 10 years.
                                                                       Any money that you still owe after
                                                                       20 years will be forgiven.




                                                                       You will not make payments in
                                                                       any month in which your income
                                                                       is less than $1,000 (in 2016
                                                                       dollars).

                                                                       In months when your income
                            You will make a fixed monthly              exceeds $1,000, your payments
                            payment of $636 per month,                 will equal 20% of the amount you
                            which will cover both the interest         earn above $1,000.
                            that you owe and your loan
                            principal.                                 If you make no payment or if your
                                                                       payment isn't enough to cover the
                                                                       interest you owe, any unpaid
                                                                       interest will be added to your loan
           UMD Loan Repayment Survey                                   balance.       https://umdsurvey.umd.edu/jfe/previewForm/SV_2lrmQqHRThWSqgd



Notes: Loan repayment scenario from the student survey treatment with a fixed payment amount IDR plan, high loan amount,
high IDR payment amount, and neutral framing. See Figure 3 for a sample fixed-length IDR scenario, Figure 4 for additional
language used in the non-neutral framing scenarios, and Appendix A for a list of all treatment arms.
                       You will graduate from the University of Maryland this May. You have borrowed $60,000 to pay for your
                       education. You will not be required to begin making payments until December 2016.

                       You will need to choose one of the following repayment plans:
                    Figure 3: Hypothetical Loan Repayment Scenarios: Fixed Payment Length
                                            Plan A                                Plan B

                                                                       Your student loan debt will be
                                                                       replaced with a contract requiring
                                                                       you to make monthly payments
                            You will pay back the money you            over the next 20 years.
                            owe over the next 10 years.                Regardless of how much you end
                                                                       up paying, you will be required to
                                                                       make payments for the full
                                                                       20-year period.


                                                                       You will not make payments in
                                                                       any month in which your income
                            You will make a fixed monthly
                                                                       is less than $1,000 (in
                            payment of $636 per month,
                                                                       2016 dollars).
                            which will cover both the interest
           1 of 1           that you owe (calculated at 5%                                                                       5/26/2016 7:08 AM
                                                                       In months when your income
                            per year) and your loan principal.
                                                                       exceeds $1,000, your payments
                                                                       will equal 10% of the amount you
                                                                       earn above $1,000.


Notes: Loan repayment scenario from the student survey treatment with a fixed repayment length IDR plan, high loan amount,
high IDR payment amount, and neutral framing. See Figure 2 for a sample fixed-length IDR scenario, Figure 4 for additional
language used in the non-neutral framing scenarios, and Appendix A for a list of all treatment arms.
                        Which of these repayment options would you prefer?

                          Strongly prefer Plan A

                          Slightly prefer Plan A

                          Indifferent between Plan A and Plan B

                          Slightly prefer Plan B                  28
                          Strongly prefer Plan B
                                             Working draft. Not for citation.


                                      Figure 2C: Alternative Repayment Plan Framing
                                  Figure 4: Alternate Repayment Plan Framing

           Framing                   Standard Plan                                     IDR Plan

            Neutral              No additional language.                         No additional language.


                                                                       With this plan, you could end up paying
                                                                       substantially more than you would pay under
                                                                       Plan A and you could be required to make
                                                                       payments for a longer period of time. [fixed
                         With this plan, you know exactly how
                                                                       amount IDR]
                         much you will have to pay each month
                         for the next 10 years. Over the life of the
         Emphasis on                                                   or
                         loan, in addition to repaying the amount
           Costs
                         you borrowed, you will pay a total of
                                                                       With this plan, you could end up paying
                         $8,184 (or $16,367) in interest.
                                                                       substantially more over the 20-year duration
                                                                       of the contract than you would pay under
                                                                       Plan A and you will be required to make
                                                                       payments for a longer period of time. [fixed
                                                                       length IDR]


                         With this plan, you will be required to
                         make the monthly payment of $318 (or
                                                                       With this plan, you will be protected against
                         $636) for the next ten years even in
         Emphasis on                                                   having to make unaffordable payments when
                         months when your income is low. You
          Insurance                                                    your income is low and you will be protected
                         could face the risk of defaulting on your
                                                                       from the risk of default.
                         loan if you cannot make the required
                         monthly payment.


Notes: Additional language included in hypothetical loan repayment scenarios by framing treatment arm.




                                                              29
                         Figure 5: Willingness to Pay for IDR by Framing and Loan Size

                                                                          A. Fixed Amount IDR
                                                                   $30K                                   $60K




                                               1
                                               .9
                                               .8
                          Cumulative Density
                                               .7
                                               .6
                                               .5
                                               .4
                                               .3
                                               .2
                                               .1
                                               0




                                                    0   10    20          30   40    50   0     10   20          30   40   50

                                                             IDR Payment as a % of Income for Indifference
                                                                     Cost             Neutral             Insurance




                                                                           B. Fixed Length IDR
                                                                   $30K                                   $60K
                                               1
                                               .9
                                               .8
                          Cumulative Density
                                               .7
                                               .6
                                               .5
                                               .4
                                               .3
                                               .2
                                               .1
                                               0




                                                    0   10    20          30   40    50   0     10   20          30   40   50

                                                             IDR Payment as a % of Income for Indifference
                                                                     Cost             Neutral             Insurance




Notes: Each figure displays the CDF of students’ reported percentage of income as payment that would make them indifferent
between IDR and the standard loan repayment plan. Students who reported a willingness to pay equal to 0 percent, 100 percent,
or an amount inconsistent with answers to the two hypothetical loan repayment scenario questions are excluded.




                                                                                    30
       Figure 6: Willingness to Pay for IDR by Expected Probability of Low Earnings and Loan Size

                                                                                A. Fixed Amount IDR
                                                                         $30K                                          $60K




                                               1
                                               .9
                                               .8
                          Cumulative Density
                                               .7
                                               .6
                                               .5
                                               .4
                                               .3
                                               .2
                                               .1
                                               0




                                                    0      10       20          30   40     50    0       10      20          30   40      50

                                                                    IDR Payment as % of Income for Indifference
                                                        Pr(Earn<$35K) < 0.2          Pr(Earn<$35K) in [0.2,0.6)          Pr(Earn<$35K) >= 0.6




                                                                                 B. Fixed Length IDR
                                                                         $30K                                          $60K
                                               1
                                               .9
                                               .8
                          Cumulative Density
                                               .7
                                               .6
                                               .5
                                               .4
                                               .3
                                               .2
                                               .1
                                               0




                                                    0      10       20          30   40     50    0       10      20          30   40      50

                                                                    IDR Payment as % of Income for Indifference
                                                        Pr(Earn<$35K) < 0.2          Pr(Earn<$35K) in [0.2,0.6)          Pr(Earn<$35K) >= 0.6




Notes: Each figure displays the CDF of students’ reported percentage of income as payment that would make them indifferent
between IDR and the standard loan repayment plan. Students who reported a willingness to pay equal to 0 percent, 100 percent,
or an amount inconsistent with answers to the two hypothetical loan repayment scenario questions are excluded.




                                                                                           31
                   Figure 7: Share Choosing IDR by Framing and Expected Probability of Low Earnings at Graduation

                                       A. Fixed Amount                                                                                                            B. Fixed Length




                                                                                                 .01




                                                                                                                                                                                                           .01
              .6




                                                                                                                                   .6
              .5




                                                                                                                                   .5
                                                                                                 .008




                                                                                                                                                                                                           .008
              .4




                                                                                                                                   .4
Prefers IDR




                                                                                                                     Prefers IDR
                                                                                                    Density




                                                                                                                                                                                                              Density
              .3




                                                                                                                                   .3
                                                                                                 .006




                                                                                                                                                                                                           .006
              .2




                                                                                                                                   .2
              .1




                                                                                                                                   .1
                                                                                                 .004




                                                                                                                                                                                                           .004
              0




                                                                                                                                   0
                   0       20            40                       60       80              100                                          0             20            40              60   80          100
                                         Pr(Earn < $35K)                                                                                                           Pr(Earn < $35K)

                                Cost               Neutral                 Insurance                                                                       Cost           Neutral        Insurance



              Notes: Each figure displays local linear regressions of the probability of preferring IDR on the probability of having low earnings
              (less than $35,000) at graduation, separately by framing. The short-dashed gray line represents the density of observations with
              respect to the probability of low earnings (corresponding to the right y-axis).




                                         Figure 8: Fixed Amount IDR Take-up by Frame and Payment Rate
                                                             1
                                                             .8
                                               IDR take-up
                                                             .6
                                                             .4
                                                             .2
                                                             0




                                                                   0   2        4      6            8         10      12                    14   16        18     20     22
                                                                                                              IDR rate

                                                                                       Cost                        Neutral                            Insurance



              Notes: Simulated take-up of IDR by payment rate and framing (see Section 6 for details). Payment rate is the IDR payment
              as a percent of disposable income.




                                                                                                              32
                                                          Figure 9: Selection into Fixed Amount IDR by Frame and Payment Rate




                                                                                                              4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Adverse selection




                                                                  Difference in IDR Payments:
                                                                                                Prefers standard v. prefers IDR
                                                                                                -2             0              2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Advantageous selection
                                                                                                              -4




                                                                                                                                   0        2        4           6        8    10         12                                 14       16        18          20   22
                                                                                                                                                                               IDR rate

                                                                                                                                                                 Cost               Neutral                                                Insurance



                              Notes: Simulated difference in average payments borrowers who chose the standard plan would have made had they chosen IDR
                              and average payments made by borrowers who chose IDR, by payment rate and framing (see Section 6 for details). Payment
                              rate is the IDR payment as a percent of disposable income.




                                       Figure 10: Present Discounted Value of Payments by Frame and Fixed Amount IDR Payment Rate

                                                       A. After 10 years                                                                                                                                                                             B. After 20 years

                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Universal standard plan
                              40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    40




                                   Universal standard plan
PDV payments after 10 years




                                                                                                                                                                                      PDV payments after 20 years
                              30




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    30
                              20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    20
                              10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    10
                              0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0




                                   0     2      4     6       8                         10                                        12   14       16       18          20   22                                             0        2        4         6       8   10     12      14   16       18      20   22
                                                                                         IDR rate                                                                                                                                                                IDR rate

                                                       Cost                                                           Neutral                        Insurance                                                                                       Cost             Neutral             Insurance


                              Notes: Simulated average present discounted value of loan payments after 10 and 20 years, by payment rate and framing, using
                              a 3 percent discount rate (see Section 6 for details). Payment rate is the IDR payment as a percent of disposable income.




                                                                                                                                                                               33
Figure 11: Share of borrowers defaulting within 20 years by Frame and Fixed Amount IDR Payment Rate
                                                                      Universal standard plan




                                                                .35
                           Share of borrowers ever defaulting
                                                                .3
                                                                .25
                                                                .2
                                                                .15
                                                                .1
                                                                .05
                                                                0




                                                                      0     2      4      6      8   10     12      14   16       18      20   22
                                                                                                     IDR rate

                                                                                          Cost            Neutral             Insurance



Notes: Simulated probability of defaulting within 20 years of entering repayment, by payment rate and framing (see Section
6 for details). A borrower defaults if her required loan payment exceeds 50 percent of her income for two consecutive years.
Students choosing IDR are assumed never to default. Payment rate is the IDR payment as a percent of disposable income.




                                                                                                     34
                                   Table 1: Correlations between Selected Predetermined Characteristics and Treatment Parameters
                                              (1) STEM      (2) Other                 (4) SAT (5) Missing
               Dependent variable:                                      (3) Female                        (6) Fresh.        (7) Soph.    (8) Junior   (9) Senior
                                                major         major                  percentile   SAT

               Sample mean                       0.559        0.337        0.497        82.5        0.133        0.193        0.163        0.244        0.318
               Fixed payment length              0.022        -0.010       0.018         0.1         -0.013       -0.013      0.015        -0.016       0.006
                                                (0.015)      (0.014)      (0.015)       (0.6)       (0.010)      (0.012)     (0.011)      (0.013)      (0.014)
               Framing (rel. to neutral)
                 Cost                            0.026        -0.004       0.036         0.7         -0.008       0.004       -0.001       -0.015       0.006
                                                (0.018)      (0.018)     (0.019)+       (0.7)       (0.013)      (0.015)     (0.014)      (0.016)      (0.017)
                 Insurance                       -0.007       0.017        0.014         1.5         -0.012       -0.004      0.012        0.003        0.000
                                                (0.018)      (0.017)      (0.018)      (0.7)*       (0.012)      (0.014)     (0.014)      (0.016)      (0.017)
               Low payment in 1st scenario       -0.020       0.001        0.017         -0.6        0.009        0.005       0.002        0.011        -0.016
                                                (0.015)      (0.014)      (0.015)       (0.6)       (0.010)      (0.012)     (0.011)      (0.013)      (0.014)
               Loan amount = $60,000             0.003        -0.007       -0.002        0.8         -0.006       -0.003      0.012        -0.005       -0.001
35




                                                (0.015)      (0.014)      (0.015)       (0.6)       (0.010)      (0.012)     (0.011)      (0.013)      (0.014)
               Test of joint sig. (p -val.)      0.182        0.788        0.232       0.162        0.627        0.886        0.509        0.549        0.910
     Notes: Analysis sample (N = 4,399); column (4) specification limited to students with nonmissing math SAT scores (N = 3,813). Regression of specified characteristic on
     treatment parameters. Robust standard errors in parentheses; ** p<0.01, * p<0.05, + p<0.1. See Appendix Table D.1 for correlations between treatment parameters and
     additional predetermined variables.
                           Table 2: The Effect of IDR Framing on Student Preferences
                                                           (1) Fixed payment      (2) Fixed payment
                                                                 amount                 length

                         Mean | neutral framing                    0.279                0.197
                         Framing (rel. to neutral)
                           Cost                                  -0.141                 -0.116
                                                               (0.019)**              (0.015)**
                           Insurance                             0.185                  0.179
                                                               (0.022)**              (0.020)**
                           Test of eq. (p-val)                     <0.001              <0.001

                         Loan size ($10k)                        0.020                  0.026
                                                               (0.006)**              (0.005)**
                         Payment as % of income                  -0.011                 -0.014
                                                               (0.002)**              (0.002)**

                         Observations                              4,440                4,358
Notes: Dependent variable: prefers or strongly prefers IDR plan. Survey respondents were assigned a loan size of either $30,000
or $60,000; payment as a percent of income was assigned to be either 15% or 20% for fixed amount IDR and either 6% or 10%
for fixed length IDR. All regressions also include controls for major (STEM/business/economics versus other), gender, class
standing (freshman, sophomore, junior, senior, or new transfer), an indicator for missing SAT scores, SAT math percentile, and
whether the high cost IDR option was presented first. See Figure 4 for description of framing treatments. Robust standard
errors, clustered at the student level in parentheses; ** p<0.01, * p<0.05, + p<0.1.




                                                              36
                                                                      Table 3: Robustness of IDR Framing Effects
                                                            (1) No        (2) Adtl. (3) RA, debt,   (4) Drop     (5) Drop low   (6) UMD     (7) At least 5   (8) Drop
                                                           controls     admin conts      FL         irrational        FL        borrowers      minutes        outliers
                                A. Fixed amount
                                  Framing
                                    Cost                     -0.139        -0.140       -0.139        -0.147        -0.117        -0.136       -0.152          -0.136
                                                           (0.019)**     (0.019)**    (0.019)**     (0.024)**     (0.026)**     (0.028)**    (0.021)**       (0.020)**
                                   Insurance                 0.186         0.185        0.186         0.215         0.175         0.176        0.188           0.191
                                                           (0.022)**     (0.022)**    (0.022)**     (0.029)**     (0.030)**     (0.031)**    (0.024)**       (0.023)**
                                   Test of eq. (p-val.)    <0.001         <0.001       <0.001       <0.001         <0.001        <0.001       <0.001         <0.001

                                 Loan size ($10K)            0.020         0.020        0.020         0.024          0.015        0.018        0.019           0.021
                                                           (0.006)**     (0.006)**    (0.006)**     (0.007)**      (0.008)+     (0.008)*     (0.006)**       (0.006)**

                                 Payment as % of income      -0.011        -0.011       -0.011        -0.020        -0.013        -0.011       -0.012          -0.010
                                                           (0.002)**     (0.002)**    (0.002)**     (0.002)**     (0.002)**     (0.002)**    (0.002)**       (0.002)**
                                 Observations               4,440         4,440         4,440        2,566          2,422         2,188        3,844          4,064
                                B. Fixed length
                                  Framing
                                    Cost                     -0.118        -0.114       -0.117        -0.123        -0.107        -0.144       -0.115          -0.111
37




                                                           (0.015)**     (0.015)**    (0.015)**     (0.020)**     (0.020)**     (0.023)**    (0.016)**       (0.016)**

                                   Insurance                 0.181         0.177        0.180         0.168         0.153         0.179        0.185           0.188
                                                           (0.020)**     (0.020)**    (0.020)**     (0.027)**     (0.027)**     (0.029)**    (0.022)**       (0.021)**
                                   Test of eq. (p-val.)    <0.001         <0.001       <0.001       <0.001         <0.001        <0.001       <0.001         <0.001

                                 Loan size ($10K)            0.026         0.026        0.026         0.032         0.024         0.048        0.028           0.029
                                                           (0.005)**     (0.005)**    (0.005)**     (0.007)**     (0.006)**     (0.007)**    (0.005)**       (0.005)**

                                 Payment as % of income      -0.014        -0.014       -0.014        -0.028        -0.016        -0.013       -0.016          -0.013
                                                           (0.002)**     (0.002)**    (0.002)**     (0.002)**     (0.002)**     (0.003)**    (0.002)**       (0.002)**
                                 Observations               4,358         4,358         4,358        2,496          2,400         2,178        3,762          3,986
     Notes: Dependent variable: prefers or strongly prefers IDR plan. All regressions except column 1 include controls for major, gender, class standing, missing SAT scores, SAT
     math percentile, and whether the high cost IDR option was presented first. Column 2 specification controls for race (white, underrepresented minority, other), first generation
     student, any borrowing at UMD, in-state student, missing GPA, 2015-16 FAFSA completion, and continuous measures of age, total loans received at UMD, total grants
     received at UMD, 2015-16 EFC (zero if no FAFSA filed), and GPA (0 for freshmen and new transfers). Column 3 specification controls for number of correct financial literacy
     questions, willingness to take risks (1-10), any UMD student loans, total UMD student loans, any credit card debt, any auto loans, any loans from family members, any other
     unsecured debt, any other secured debt, and indicators for skipping risk aversion and debt questions. Column 4 specification drops respondents with inconsistent responses
     to the hypothetical loan scenario questions and/or stated percentage of income that would make them indifferent between the standard plan and IDR. Column 5 specification
     drops respondents who answered both financial literacy questions incorrectly. Column 6 specification limits the sample to respondents who have taken out student loans while
     at UMD. Column 7 specification limits the sample to respondents who spent at least 5 minutes completing the survey. Column 8 specification drops respondents who reported
     expected earnings above the 99th percentile or below the 1st percentile at graduation, age 30, or age 40. Robust standard errors, clustered at the student level in parentheses;
     ** p<0.01, * p<0.05, + p<0.1.
                           Table 4: The Effect of Framing on Willingness to Pay for IDR
                                                            (1) Fixed payment      (2) Fixed payment
                                                                  amount                 length

                         Mean | neutral framing                     15.66                 7.15
                         Framing (rel. to neutral)
                           Cost                                    -3.77                  -2.07
                                                                 (0.76)**               (0.43)**
                           Insurance                               5.82                   4.08
                                                                 (0.88)**               (0.66)**
                           Test of eq. (p-val)                      <0.001               <0.001

                         Loan size ($10k)                          0.76                   0.69
                                                                 (0.23)**               (0.16)**
                         Number of students                         1,283                 1,248
Notes: Dependent variable: payment as a percentage of income that would make student indifferent between standard plan
and IDR. Students reporting willingness to pay that conflicts with earlier answers or a payment equal to 0 or 100 percent are
excluded. Survey respondents were assigned a loan size of either $30,000 or $60,000. All specifications also include controls for
major, gender, class standing, missing SAT scores, SAT math percentile, and whether the high cost IDR option was presented
first. Robust standard errors in parentheses; ** p<0.01, * p<0.05, + p<0.1.




                                                               38
         Table 5: Correlations between Expected Labor Market Outcomes and Preferences for IDR

                                                                (1) Fixed amount      (2) Fixed length

                        Expected earnings | employment ($10k)
                          At graduation                                0.002               0.002
                                                                      (0.003)             (0.003)
                          Age 30                                      -0.002               -0.000
                                                                      (0.002)             (0.002)
                          Age 40                                       0.001               -0.001
                                                                      (0.002)             (0.001)
                        Probability of $0 earnings
                          At graduation                                0.170               0.039
                                                                     (0.043)**            (0.035)
                          Age 30                                       0.075               0.038
                                                                      (0.174)             (0.143)
                          Age 40                                      -0.003               -0.058
                                                                      (0.162)             (0.125)
                        Probability of earnings in ($0, $35k]
                          At graduation                                0.111               0.134
                                                                     (0.038)**           (0.037)**
                          Age 30                                       0.132               0.144
                                                                      (0.098)             (0.096)
                          Age 40                                      -0.017               0.027
                                                                      (0.124)             (0.127)
                        Framing (rel. to neutral)
                          Cost                                         -0.138              -0.116
                                                                     (0.019)**           (0.015)**
                          Insurance                                     0.187              0.180
                                                                     (0.022)**           (0.020)**
                        Loan size ($10k)                               0.020               0.025
                                                                     (0.006)**           (0.005)**
                        Payment as % of income                         -0.011              -0.014
                                                                     (0.002)**           (0.002)**

                        Observations                                  4,440                4,358
Notes: Dependent variable: prefers or strongly prefers IDR plan. All regressions also include controls for major, gender, class
standing, missing SAT scores, SAT math percentile, and whether the high cost IDR option was presented first.. Robust standard
errors, clustered at the student level in parentheses; ** p<0.01, * p<0.05, + p<0.1.




                                                                39
         Table 6: Effects of Framing by Expected Probability of Low or No Earnings at Graduation

                                                                  (1) Fixed      (2) Fixed
                                                               payment amount payment length

                           Framing (rel. to neutral)
                            Cost                                     -0.098            -0.054
                                                                   (0.028)**          (0.021)*
                            Insurance                                0.137              0.138
                                                                   (0.033)**         (0.029)**
                           Pr(earnings < $35k)
                             ˟ Cost framing                          0.047             -0.019
                                                                    (0.036)            (0.026)
                            ˟ Neutral framing                        0.144             0.135
                                                                   (0.046)**         (0.039)**
                            ˟ Insurance framing                      0.261             0.232
                                                                   (0.046)**         (0.046)**
                              Test of equality (p-value)             0.001            <0.001

                           Observations                              4,440              4,358
Notes: Dependent variable: prefers or strongly prefers IDR plan. All regressions also include controls for major, gender, class
standing, missing SAT scores, SAT math percentile, and whether the high cost IDR option was presented first.. Robust standard
errors, clustered at the student level in parentheses; ** p<0.01, * p<0.05, + p<0.1.




                                                              40
                                                                   Table 7: Heterogeneity in the Effects of Framing
                                                       (1) Major =         (2) Low        (3) Has UMD   (4) More risk                                  (7) First gen.
                             Interaction term:                                                                          (5) Female      (6) URM
                                                          STEM           financial lit.        loan         averse                                        student

                      A. Fixed payment amount
                        Cost framing                      -0.147            -0.121           -0.143        -0.076         -0.096          -0.141          -0.131
                                                        (0.028)**         (0.026)**        (0.026)**      (0.032)*      (0.026)**       (0.021)**       (0.021)**
                        Insurance framing                 0.250             0.173            0.194         0.171          0.152           0.162           0.178
                                                        (0.032)**         (0.030)**        (0.031)**     (0.035)**      (0.030)**       (0.025)**       (0.025)**
                        Interaction term
                          ˟ Interest framing              0.016             -0.048           0.024         -0.063         -0.022          -0.004           -0.030
                                                         (0.026)           (0.023)*         (0.023)       (0.026)*       (0.024)         (0.029)          (0.027)
                          ˟ Neutral framing               0.006             -0.003           0.019         0.032           0.067          -0.005           0.012
                                                         (0.032)           (0.030)          (0.030)       (0.031)        (0.030)*        (0.036)          (0.036)
                          ˟ Insurance framing             -0.114            0.022            0.001          0.075         0.132            0.097           0.041
                                                        (0.034)**          (0.032)          (0.032)       (0.034)*      (0.032)**        (0.039)*         (0.038)
                           Test of eq. (p-value)          0.003             0.169            0.841         0.003         <0.001           0.069           0.260
                        Observations                      4,440             4,440            4,440         4,058          4,440           4,440           4,440
41




                      B. Fixed payment length
                        Cost framing                      -0.163            -0.107           -0.085        -0.093         -0.101          -0.104          -0.112
                                                        (0.025)**         (0.020)**        (0.020)**     (0.025)**      (0.021)**       (0.017)**       (0.017)**
                        Insurance framing                 0.175             0.156            0.179         0.148          0.135           0.179           0.170
                                                        (0.032)**         (0.027)**        (0.028)**     (0.032)**      (0.027)**       (0.023)**       (0.023)**
                        Interaction term
                          ˟ Interest framing              -0.013            -0.015           0.017         -0.029         -0.012          0.003            0.014
                                                         (0.020)           (0.018)          (0.017)       (0.019)        (0.017)         (0.023)          (0.023)
                          ˟ Neutral framing               -0.093            0.004            0.078         -0.004         0.015            0.054           0.026
                                                        (0.029)**          (0.027)         (0.025)**      (0.026)        (0.026)         (0.033)+         (0.032)
                          ˟ Insurance framing             -0.087            0.058             0.076         0.075         0.104           0.053            0.064
                                                        (0.033)**         (0.032)+          (0.031)*      (0.033)*      (0.032)**        (0.038)         (0.038)+
                           Test of eq. (p-value)          0.015             0.125            0.064         0.023          0.005           0.288           0.506
                        Observations                      4,358             4,358            4,358         3,958          4,358           4,358           4,358
     Notes: Dependent variable: prefers or strongly prefers IDR (relative to standard plan). All regressions also include controls for major, gender, class standing, missing SAT
     scores, SAT math percentile, and whether the high cost IDR option was presented first.. More risk averse are students who chose value of 4 or less on a scale of 0 to 10 where
     0 is “not willing to take risks” and 10 is “very willing to take risks.” Students who did not answer risk aversion question are excluded from column 4 specification. Financially
     literate are students who answered at least one of the two financial literacy survey questions correctly (skipped questions are considered incorrect answers). Robust standard
     errors, clustered at the student level in parentheses; ** p<0.01, * p<0.05, + p<0.1.
