                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 IMMIGRANT ENTREPRENEURSHIP IN AMERICA:
          EVIDENCE FROM THE SURVEY OF BUSINESS OWNERS 2007 & 2012

                                        Sari Pekkala Kerr
                                         William R. Kerr

                                       Working Paper 24494
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w24494


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                             April 2018, Revised July 2019




We study immigrant entrepreneurship in 2007 and 2012 using the Survey of Business Owners.
First-generation immigrants create about 25% of new firms in America, but this share exceeds
40% in some states. Immigrant-owned firms tend to create fewer jobs than native-owned firms,
have comparable pay levels, offer fewer benefits, and engage more in international activities.
Immigrant-founded firms in high-tech sectors more closely resemble native-founded firms than in
low-tech sectors. Prominent tech clusters display quite pronounced shares of immigrant
entrepreneurs, with stronger high-tech immigrant entrepreneurs being especially present. Second-
generation immigrants tend to show intermediate firm traits indicative of business assimilation.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Sari Pekkala Kerr and William R. Kerr. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Immigrant Entrepreneurship in America: Evidence from the Survey of Business Owners 2007
& 2012
Sari Pekkala Kerr and William R. Kerr
NBER Working Paper No. 24494
April 2018, Revised July 2019
JEL No. F22,J15,J44,J61,L26,M13,O31,O32,O33,R12

                                         ABSTRACT

We study immigrant entrepreneurship and firm ownership in 2007 and 2012 using the Survey of
Business Owners (SBO). The survival and growth of immigrant-owned businesses over time
relative to native-founded companies is evaluated by linking the 2007 SBO to the Longitudinal
Business Database (LBD). We quantify the dependency of the United States as a whole, as well
as individual states, on the contributions of immigrant entrepreneurs in terms of firm formation
and job creation. We describe differences in the types of businesses started by immigrants and the
quality of jobs created by their firms. First-generation immigrants create about 25% of new firms
in the United States, but this share exceeds 40% in some states. In addition, Asian and Hispanic
second-generation immigrants start about 6% of new firms. Immigrant-owned firms, on average,
create fewer jobs than native-owned firms, but much of this is explained by the industry and
geographic location of the firms. Immigrant-owned firms pay comparable wages, conditional on
firm traits, to native-owned firms, but are less likely to offer benefits.


Sari Pekkala Kerr
Wellesley College
106 Central Street
Wellesley, MA 02481
skerr3@wellesley.edu

William R. Kerr
Harvard Business School
Rock Center 212
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
wkerr@hbs.edu
1        Introduction

Immigrant entrepreneurship plays an important role in the American economy. Immigrants
start about 25% of all U.S. …rms in the Survey of Business Owners data during 2008-2012, and
this share rises to above 40% in states like California and New York. These immigrant-founded
…rms provide jobs and innovations, impacting the lives of natives. Immigrant entrepreneurs
frequently show up in popular press business narratives, legislation and lobbying discussions,
and the founding histories of many prominent …rms. Among Fortune 500 companies, about
40% were founded by …rst- or second-generation immigrants (Partnership for a New American
Economy 2011).
        The prominence of immigrant entrepreneurs, aided by expanding economic data sets for
research, has yielded a burgeoning academic literature. Many early studies establish that
immigrants are more likely to enter self-employment and other forms of entrepreneurship than
natives.1 A few recent studies also identify some important properties of these …rms, such
as Wang and Liu (2005) showing that U.S. …rms with immigrant owners are more likely to
export goods and services and have operations abroad. Brown et al. (2018) document a
greater patenting/innovation rate for immigrant-founded …rms.2 Yet, this comparison between
immigrant- and native-founded …rms remains incomplete, and relatively little is known about
the broader impacts of immigrant entrepreneurs in terms of job creation and economic growth.3
Given that over a quarter a new …rm births are connected to immigrant entrepreneurs— a
share that is continually rising— an accurate characterization of these inputs is important for
enhanced business and economic analysis.
        Such a depiction would be incomplete without a consideration of the vast heterogeneity in
immigrant entrepreneurship, which parallels in many ways the diversity of entrepreneurship
more broadly. Immigrant entrepreneurs range from small “mom and pop” stores in low-tech
    1
     Examples include Borjas (1986), Lofstrom (2002), Clark and Drinkwater (2000, 2006), Fairlie and Meyer
(2003), Schuetze and Antecol (2007), Fairlie et al. (2010), Lofstrom et al. (2014), Kerr and Kerr (2017), and
Brown et al. (2018). Examples of studies for high-tech immigrant entrepreneurship include Saxenian (1999,
2002), Anderson and Platzer (2006), Monti et al. (2007), Wadhwa et al. (2007), and Hart and Acs (2011).
   2
     Brown et al. (2018) consider the 2007 SBO and 2014 Annual Survey of Entrepreneurs. Their important
study …nds that immigrant entrepreneurs have distinct motivations for starting a business as compared to
natives, and immigrant entrepreneurs are more likely to engage in R&D and innovation. This is especially true
among college-educated founders.
   3
     Immigrant scientists and engineers have received closer study. For example, Hunt and Gauthier-Loiselle
(2010), Kerr and Lincoln (2010), Hunt (2011), Kerr et al. (2015a,b), Peri et al. (2015), and Breschi et al.
(2017). Kerr (2017) provides a review.



                                                     2
settings to high-tech start-ups in top clusters like Silicon Valley. These …rms are likely to
look quite di¤erent from each other, and they may also be more or less similar to their closest
native peers. We need a better understanding of the range of industries in‡uenced by immigrant
entrepreneurs and their impact on U.S. economic regions as diverse as Montana and Florida.
   This study quanti…es many of these features using a novel data platform— the Survey of
Business Owners (SBO) for 2007 and 2012, combined with the Longitudinal Business Database
(LBD) for 2007-2011. The SBO allows us to measure the number and quality of jobs created by
immigrant entrepreneurs, and we can separate out …rms in high-tech vs. low-tech industries.
The SBO information spans company payroll per employee, usage of full-time vs. temporary
workers, and the provision of various employee bene…ts such as health insurance and paid time
o¤. We also examine di¤erences between native- and immigrant-founded …rms in terms of their
international activities and start-up and expansion …nancing.
   To preview some of our results, dependency on immigrant founders varies substantially
across regions in America, from less than 5% in Idaho and North Dakota to more than 40%
in “gateway” states like California. Immigrant-founded …rms tend to have fewer employees
than native-founded …rms, but they have higher labor productivity (receipts per employee),
are more likely to survive to 2011, and grow employment at a slightly faster pace. The jobs cre-
ated by immigrant-founded …rms provide comparable wages, but these …rms o¤er signi…cantly
fewer bene…ts like healthcare or 401k plans. Re‡ecting the early literature, immigrant-founded
…rms engage in more extensive international activities. Regression analyses show that these
di¤erences are partly explained by industries in which immigrant-founded startups operate,
but a gap persists even with a very stringent set of control variables. High-tech …rms founded
by immigrants tend to look more like their native peers than those in low-tech industries,
but usually the results are of similar qualitative direction regardless of sector. There are also
di¤erences by owner ethnicity, but relatively fewer di¤erences by owner education level.
   The depth of the survey also allows us to consider entrepreneurship inside vs. outside
of prominent tech clusters. We …nd that immigrant-founded companies account for more
than 40% of high-tech startups in leading clusters. As their traits tend to resemble those
of native-founded companies in these clusters, most of the impact appears to come through
sheer quantity of immigrant entrepreneurs agglomerating in key hubs. Finally, we compare the
activity of …rst- generation immigrants to that of second-generation immigrants to measure


                                               3
whether the …rms founded by U.S.-born entrepreneurs with foreign-born parents more closely
resemble the companies started by native entrepreneurs.
       The new …rms that we study have an important impact, as young …rms account for almost
all of the net job growth in America (Haltiwanger et al. 2013). First-generation immigrants
found or co-found 23.7% and 26.0% of these new …rms in 2007 and 2012, respectively. As
entering employment sizes in recent cohorts are mostly similar for immigrants and natives,
immigrant entrepreneurs have accounted for a similar share of new jobs in young companies in
both surveys. Applying these shares to overall U.S. private-sector employment in new …rms as
captured by the Business Dynamics Survey would estimate job provision by young immigrant-
owned …rms of 3-4 million workers. Further incorporating second-generation immigrants would
raise the estimates to 4-5 million workers. While these calculations are only approximate, they
give a sense to the ongoing contribution to the U.S. economy of immigrant entrepreneurship.
       These results inform the potential economic impact of policy reforms. In 2019, the United
States has the EB-5 visa that targets wealthy immigrants capable of investing a million dollars
into a U.S.-based business, but the country lacks a program that facilitates other aspiring
migrant entrepreneurs (or graduating students from U.S. schools who wish to create a …rm vs.
entering paid employment).4 Consequently, the vast majority of immigrant entrepreneurs enter
the United States through the broad migration routes of family-based visas or employment-
sponsored visas (with entrepreneurship becoming possible once a green card is obtained). With
this di¤use and indirect origin, the outcomes of immigrant entrepreneurship must be observed
in the economy vs. inferred from rules or policy requirements.5
       The rest of this study is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the literature on immigrant
entrepreneurship and presents theories as to why immigrants choose to enter entrepreneurship.
Section 3 describes the SBO data platform and provides descriptive tabulation. Section 4 uses
   4
     By comparison, Canada, France and the U.K. have distinct visas for foreign entrepreneurs with various
incentives aimed at attracting more start-ups. The French Tech Ticket program was initiated in 2016, Canada’s
start-up visa scheme in 2013, and the UK’s Entrepreneur Visa in 2008. Other examples include Chile, Cyprus,
Denmark, Finland, Ireland, Lithuania, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Singapore, Spain, and Taiwan. President
Obama sought to increase access to entrepreneur visas through actions like the International Entrepreneur
Rule, but the Trump administration has paused these e¤orts inde…nitely. Kerr (2019) describes e¤orts to
attract global talent in America and other countries. Many U.S. cities seek to attract immigrant entrepreneurs
and their economic stimulus, such as the Competition THRIVE program in New York City, the O¢ ce of New
Americans in Chicago, the International Institute of St. Louis, and the Welcoming Cities initiatives in places
such as Pittsburgh.
   5
     The time in America before starting the venture could boost the chances of success. Mata and Alves (2018)
show that immigrant …rms have lower rate of survival but experience in host countries improves the chances of
survival.


                                                      4
regression analyses to formally compare immigrant- and native-owned businesses. Section 5
provides two extensions: isolating top metropolitan areas and comparing …rst- versus second-
generation immigrants. The …nal section concludes with some discussion of future research
opportunities.


2     Theoretical and Conceptual Background

A growing body of work documents the higher rate at which immigrants enter entrepreneurship
in America than natives (Fairlie 2012). This section explores some of the key …ndings from
this literature and how theoretically we anticipate immigrant entrepreneurship in high-tech
vs. low-tech industries to be di¤erent. As a …rst step, two candidate explanations for high
rates of immigrant entrepreneurship can be dismissed. Most important, the phenomenon is
broad-based in America and not simply due to immigrants from one source country or region
being particularly entrepreneurial. Fairlie and Lofstrom (2013) use the 2007-2011 Current
Population Survey (CPS) and con…rm, among other things, that immigrant entrepreneurship
is pervasive across ethnic groups. Consequently, as immigration to America is very diverse
across education levels, industries, and regions, we anticipate substantial heterogeneity in the
entrepreneurial population.
    Second, immigrant entrepreneurship is not just an American phenomenon. The higher
propensity of immigrants towards creating new …rms is observed in other immigrant-receiving
countries (OECD 2010). Unfortunately, the data on immigrant entrepreneurship globally are
sparse and far from systematic or comparable over nations. However, the existing data are
consistent in observing a higher rate of entrepreneurship among immigrants. The Centre for
Entrepreneurs (2014) shows that over 17% of U.K. immigrants start a …rm, compared to 10%
of natives. For Canada, 19.6% of immigrants become self-employed (5.3% own a …rm), whereas
the comparable numbers are 16.1% and 4.8% for natives (Green et al. 2016). For Australia,
the overall rate of self-employment is about 12%, with immigrants more likely to enter self-
employment than natives (Atalay et al. 2014).6
   6
     The Centre for Entrepreneurs (2014) calculates that immigrants start 14% of all U.K. …rms, with particular
concentration around London. Comparable statistics for Canada and Australia are not possible, but Momani
(2016) reports that 24% of small- and medium-sized enterprise owners in Canada are immigrants.




                                                      5
2.1   Root Factors for Immigrant Entrepreneurship

While our study focuses on the United States, these common global patterns to immigrant
entrepreneurship suggest that the root factors likely overlap across countries. We draw from the
literature the four factors outlined next, which contribute directly and interact with each other.
Some of these root factors act as a positive and pulling force for immigrant entrepreneurship,
emphasizing the personality traits of immigrants, group-level bene…ts from joint selection into
entrepreneurship, and so on. Other factors are darker and point to a push of immigrants into
self employment due to weak opportunities for regular employment, discrimination, and similar
challenges.
   Entrepreneurial Personality: A substantial literature, reviewed by Åstebro et al. (2014)
and Kerr, Kerr and Xu (2018), explores the degree to which entrepreneurs have a prototypical
personality. On many dimensions of personality, such as the classic Big-5 personality traits, the
literature …nds very limited di¤erence between entrepreneurs and wage workers. The bigger
di¤erences instead emerge around factors such as the willingness or ability to tolerate risk and
uncertainty, self-e¢ cacy (the belief in one’s ability to complete tasks and …ll roles), internal
locus of control (the belief that one’s decisions control the outcomes of life vs. external factors),
and the need for achievement. The required tolerance for risk has been closely studied (e.g.,
Kihlstrom and La¤ont 1979, Hvide and Panos 2014) and Kerr, Kerr, and Dalton (2019) …nd
survey and experimental evidence consistent with these personality factors.
   There may be a conceptual connection of these personality traits to immigration. Leaving
one’s home and moving abroad frequently involves uncertainty and risk, and migrants must
often believe in themselves and their power to create a life in their new home. The choice to
migrate may select on individuals with these traits, and the duration within the new home
may further engender them. For example, a young migrant who successfully gets started in
America may endogenously acquire a greater tolerance for risk and belief in her capabilities to
produce the outcomes she desires. While the empirical veri…cation of these linkages remains
incomplete, the act of migration may capture a pool of individuals with personalities more
aligned to opening up a business.
   Conditional on being an entrepreneur (which will be true throughout our empirical work),
we conjecture that these personality forces will have relatively limited di¤erences between high-
tech and low-tech industries. One can easily imagine the poorest of migrants being the most


                                                 6
selected on these dimensions and overcoming the most adversities (per the classic American
dream). Broader population rates of entrepreneurship by immigrant group could be a¤ected
but are beyond this study’s data scope.
       Opportunity-Based Migration: A feature related to the selection to migrate is the
opportunity-based nature of much of immigration. While some migration is sadly forced (e.g.,
refugees), much of immigration occurs when individuals seek opportunities (and much of the
missing bene…ts of migration happen when these intentions are blocked, such as Clemens 2011).
This occurs within regions (e.g., low-skilled migration from India to work in Gulf States) and
on global scales (e.g., ‡ocking of bankers to leading …nancial centers). The United States
has long been a favored destination for prospective entrepreneurs due to its open and mostly
competitive markets, its complementary service providers (such as …nancing), and its content-
sized product markets and customer bases. For many entrepreneurial immigrants, it is the
dream destination.
       While we believe this factor promotes immigrant entrepreneurship across the board, the
impact for high-tech sectors is likely to be more pronounced. America provides prospective
high-tech entrepreneurs access to the scienti…c frontier, the world’s most vibrant talent clus-
ters, deep venture capital markets, and so forth. Akcigit, Baslandze, and Stantcheva (2016)
demonstrate that the most productive immigrant inventors are the most sensitive to higher tax
rates, and Kerr (2010) documents how immigrants are particularly fast to migrate to locations
experiencing breakthrough inventions. These patterns suggest that high-tech entrepreneurs
have the most to gain from migration to America vs. other potential destinations.7
       Weaker Labor Market Prospects: Entrepreneurship does not happen at equal rates
across the education and skill distribution. First, at a macro level, entrepreneurship exhibits
a U-shaped pattern with respect to the full distribution of skills, disproportionately occurring
at the upper and lower tails of the distribution (Poschke 2013; Levine and Rubinstein 2017).
Åstebro, Chen and Thompson (2011) colorfully describe these tails as “stars” and “mis…ts.”
Second, Hegde and Tumlinson (2018) provide provocative evidence that within each education
rank (grade by grade), individuals are more likely to start their own business if they have high
skill levels and abilities compared to others with the same credentials.
   7
    This potential for opportunity-based migration is strong enough to a¤ect early education choices made in
sending countries (e.g., Chand and Clemens 2008; Gibson and McKenzie 2011). Akee et al. (2013) show that
migrants with a history of entrepreneurship in their home country are more likely to be entrepreneurs in their
new nation.


                                                      7
   Both of these patterns connect into immigrant entrepreneurship. At the macro level, im-
migrants are more prevalent at the lower and higher ends of the education distribution than
natives in America. Among those aged 18 and older, immigrants are 20% more likely than
natives to have ended their education with a high school diploma or less, but they are also
40% more likely than natives to have earned a doctorate or equivalent degree (American Com-
munity Survey 2012). Immigration at the lower end of the education distribution is connected
to both employment-based migration for low-skilled work (e.g., agricultural visas) and family-
based migration; these groups arrive disproportionately from Central and Latin America and
connect in part to unauthorized in‡ows. Immigration at the upper end of the education ladder
connects more to student and skilled worker visas.
   At a more micro level, immigrants can be pushed towards entrepreneurship due to a lack
of labor market opportunities commensurate with their skill set. Many immigrants experi-
ence downward mobility and underemployment when they …rst arrive in a destination country.
This is often due to an under-recognition of education and experience gained in their home
country (e.g., Friedberg 2000; Li 2001; Batalova, Fix and Creticos 2008), as it is more di¢ cult
for employers to assess foreign school quality or validate credentials compared to a domestic
candidate. For some migrants, this temporary setback is recti…ed by gaining additional ex-
perience and/or education after migration (e.g., Creese and Weibe 2012), but others look to
entrepreneurship as an attractive alternative.
   Given the pervasive nature of this factor, it is not theoretically clear if it should impact high-
tech or low-tech industries more. The challenges presented by discrimination (e.g., Oreopoulos
2011; Edo, Jacquemet, and Yannelis 2013) or a lack of employment authorization may be
more acute in low-tech work. The founding entrepreneur may also decide to start a business
because of comparative access to underemployed or undocumented individuals, potentially
gaining lower labor costs compared to competitors.
   For high-tech industries, it is likely that the pathways to wage work are stronger for im-
migrants and more consistent, due to the greater transportability of technical skills and the
deeper pool of the labor markets. According to 2012 ACS statistics, immigrants are twice as
likely as natives to be employed in a STEM occupation, and thus employers will have greater
incentives to recruit e¤ectively in these markets. On the other hand, small proportionate dif-
ferences in wage versus entrepreneurial outcomes become much larger as one gets to the highest


                                                 8
end of the skill distribution.
       Co-Ethnic Social Bond: Connected to the above factors, immigrant entrepreneurs dis-
play a remarkable concentration— varying by ethnic group— in terms of the sectors in which
they operate. Prominent low-tech examples include Vietnamese nail care salons, Korean dry
cleaners, Gujarti Indian motels, and Punjabi Indian convenience stores. In the pre-Uber days,
immigrant groups often drove most of the taxis in a city, with the particular ethnic group vary-
ing by city. Studies of this entrepreneurial concentration highlight the bene…ts obtained by
group specialization and shared knowledge when strong social networks undergird the ethnic
community, and this concentration becomes a natural pathway to employment and potential
entrepreneurship for new arrivals.8
       There is similar evidence in advanced high-tech sectors of this specialization and co-ethnic
connection, albeit likely less pronounced. Hegde and Tumlinson (2014) document that venture
investors are more likely to invest in a …rm run by someone of the same ethnic background,
and Gompers, Mukharlyamov, and Xuan (2016) document how venture inventors also co-invest
with each other along ethnic lines. These co-ethnic connections are not necessarily e¢ cient
choices, as investors may be less careful for example, but speak again to the group-based
concentration.
       Consistent with this concentration, we later document in the SBO data that roughly half of
immigrant-owned startups are in three sectors: accommodation and food services, retail trade,
and professional and technical services. Native-owned …rms are less concentrated. These group
based factors appear strongest among low-tech services and trade segments, compared to the
high-tech sector, due to the greater integration of high-tech …rms in local markets.

2.2      Combining Features and De…ning Business Traits

Our discussion highlights how all four of these root factors contribute to immigrant entrepre-
neurship, but likely to varying degrees for high-tech vs. low-tech industries. We conjecture that
immigrant founders of high-tech …rms are more likely to select into entrepreneurship due to
positive pull factors, especially opportunity-based migration. Push factors like discrimination
or weak labor market prospects are likely to be less important, although early stories of Silicon
Valley immigrant entrepreneurs do mention perceptions of glass ceilings on advancement at
   8
   For example, Kalnins and Chung (2006), Roth et al. (2012), Patel and Vella (2013), Andersson et al. (2014),
Kerr and Mandor¤ (2015), and Battisti et al. (2016).


                                                      9
local tech incumbents.
      Consequently, it is likely that high-tech immigrant entrepreneurs will be stronger and build-
ing better …rms overall than their fellow migrants in low-tech settings. Some early con…rmation
of this selection e¤ect is evident in the 2012 SBO data, where immigrant high-tech founders
draw disproportionately from the highest education groups. Hunt (2011) also observes that the
highest earning, most innovative, and most entrepreneurial immigrants arrived in the United
States through temporary work or education visas, both which require a high level of educa-
tion. These high-skilled individuals are quite mobile and often select locations where they will
have the most opportunities. Indeed, we further conjecture that the strongest of high-tech
immigrant entrepreneurs will be found in innovation clusters where …rms compete in dynamic
markets and diversity rates are high.9 In these competitive clusters, we further anticipate that
the jobs created will need to match to a large degree what is being o¤ered (wages and bene…ts)
by comparable native-founded …rms.
      Immigrant founders in low-tech sectors are harder to predict. These founders are more
likely to have migrated for non-work reasons and to have selected entrepreneurship as a way
to build work opportunities for their families and/or communities. These …rms will be similar
to most small businesses in that few are seeking to disrupt a market or invent a new prod-
uct or model (Hurst and Pugsley 2011). The 2012 SBO con…rms that low-tech immigrant
founders are disproportionately selected from low education groups. In this environment, we
expect greater di¤erences can emerge in terms of employment conditions and pay compared
to comparable native-founded …rms. This is especially true for family …rms or …rms who hire
other immigrants, connected to lower worker productivity (e.g., learning the language), lack
of competing employment o¤ers, or similar.
      Finally, the SBO data collect information on the global activities of …rms. An extensive
literature connects migration to trade.10 Global engagement could be focused on the exchange
of ethnic goods and services, possibly linked to overseas diaspora communities, in ways that ex-
tend the product set of their host country. Migrants may also use their connections and global
understanding to boost overseas sales of general products without ethnic speci…c components.
  9
     For example, Saxenian (1996, 2000), Florida (2005), Fallick, Fleischman, and Rebitzer (2006), and Kerr
(2019).
  10
     Examples include Gould (1994), Head and Ries (1998), Rauch (2001), Rauch and Trindade (2002), Hatzi-
georgiou and Lodefalk (2011), Bahar and Rapoport (2018), and Kerr (2018). Docquier and Rapoport (2012)
provide a broader review.



                                                    10
We anticipate both low- and high-tech immigrant entrepreneurs to have a comparative ad-
vantage towards international engagement than their native peers. We further anticipate the
bene…ts of this advantage to be greater with high-tech industries given the anecdotal and
empirical accounts of global ethnic networks within high-tech industries (e.g., Saxenian 2002,
Kerr 2008) and the typically greater market span for these products.
    While our conceptual background has treated immigrant and native entrepreneurs as sep-
arate, there will be many …rms with mixed founding teams. One starting hypothesis is that
mixed teams would split the di¤erence between pure immigrant and native founding teams,
but one might also believe that the presence of one immigrant founder is enough to tilt charac-
teristics (e.g., overseas linkages to promote engagement). It is also important to recognize that,
by de…nition, mixed …rms have more than one founder and so tend to be larger. Moreover,
they may be less likely to occur in family-based settings or in smaller, rural locations. Thus,
given this ambiguity, we will model them separately below in our empirical work. Moreover,
we will consider some patterns for second-generation or later immigrant groups, where it is
likely a partial assimilation has occurred (e.g., Masurel and Nijkamp 2004; Ibrahim and Galt
2011).


3     Data and Descriptive Tabulations

We use the restricted-access Survey of Business Owners (SBO) data housed in the Federal
Statistical Research Data Centers (RDC). We employ the 2007 and 2012 SBOs and merge
them with other Census Bureau data sources, including the Longitudinal Business Database
(LBD). These data provide a rich and detailed platform to study immigrant entrepreneurship
over across industries and geographies.11

3.1      SBO 2007 and 2012 Data

The raw SBO …les contain many types of …rms, ranging from self-employed individuals who
do not hire employees to small and large employer …rms, some of which are publicly held.
Our SBO analysis considers employer …rms given our focus on understanding the quantity
  11
     Studies using the SBO micro data include those considering ethnic and minority entrepreneurs (e.g., Fairlie
and Robb 2008, 2009; Fairlie 2012; Echeverri-Carroll and Kellison 2012; Gramlich and Perrin 2013; Mora and
Davila 2014), job creation by owner gender (Conroy and Weiler 2016), and sources of start-up capital (e.g.,
Mencken and Tolbert 2016; Kerr et al. 2018). The Fiscal Policy Institute also published a 2012 report using
the 2007 SBO regarding immigrant and native business owners.



                                                      11
and types of jobs created, rather than the self-employment patterns previously discussed in
the literature.12 We also exclude publicly owned …rms from the sample, as it is impossible to
accurately separate them into the immigrant- versus native-owned categories.
       In 2007, our baseline sample of private employer …rms includes 950 thousand companies. We
exclude 1.4 million records for publicly owned …rms and …rms with no identi…able owner (e.g.,
estates, trusts, cooperatives, clubs, tribal entities) and 10.4 million records for self-employed
incorporated non-employers. In 2012, our baseline sample of private employer …rms includes
300 thousand companies. This 2012 sample comes after the exclusion of 224 thousand records
for publicly owned companies and …rms with no identi…able owner and 8.3 million records for
self-employed individuals. The core sample is smaller in 2012 due to the introduction of two
separate versions of the SBO survey instrument, one of which lacks detailed questions about
the owners of the …rm. This change does not impact our work as tabulation weights allow for
population-based estimates.
       We de…ne new …rms to be those entering in the …ve years prior to each survey. This
segment captures the role of immigrants in recent entrepreneurial activity, and we use the
term “startups”interchangeably. The number of new …rm records that underlie the upcoming
analyses is 139 thousand in 2007 and 48 thousand in 2012 (approximately 15% and 16% of
the included SBO …rms in 2007 and 2012, respectively). We track the new …rms that enter
prior to the 2007 SBO over time in the LBD, which provides annual employment and payroll
information. This link a¤ords measurement of the survival and growth patterns of these young
…rms during the critical early years of their operations.
       The SBO records information on each owner of the …rm, and we consider these owners to
be the founders or entrepreneurs of the new …rms that we study, although in a small share of
cases the ownership of the …rm will have changed hands by the time of the SBO survey. In
some tabulations, we mirror the literature by classifying a …rm as immigrant-owned if any of
the …rm’s owners is an immigrant. In our regression analyses, we typically parse into a separate
category the …rms with mixed immigrant and native ownership teams to allow for exclusively
immigrant-owned companies to be compared to exclusively native-owned companies.
       We de…ne the high-tech industry based on the company NAICS code being in the list of
high-tech industry NAICS codes in Hecker (2005) or Goldschlag and Miranda (2016) or being
  12
    Immigrants account for about 15% of self-employed owners in SBO. We later provide complementary evi-
dence using incorporated self-employed statistics from the American Community Survey.


                                                  12
an NAICS code listed as a patent-intensive industry in Doms et al. (2012).13 The SBO records
data on around 97 thousand high-tech …rms in 2007 and 48 thousand in 2012 (approximately
15% and 18% of the included SBO …rms in 2007 and 2012, respectively). Among new …rms,
high-tech …rms account for 16 thousand in 2007 and 8 thousand in 2012, or a 12% and 16%
share respectively. Of course, a …rm can be technologically sophisticated in a low-tech industry,
and vice versa. Despite the imperfections of industry-based divisions, the ability to explore
entrepreneurship in high-tech settings is a powerful addition to the literature.
       We also investigate patterns for Metropolitan Statistical Areas (MSAs), following previous
research on the high concentration of high-tech …rms (e.g., Liu, Painter, and Wang 2014).
High-tech MSAs are de…ned as the San Francisco Bay area, inclusive of Silicon Valley and San
Jose, and the remaining top ten MSAs for housing high-tech …rms using combined 2007 and
2012 SBOs: Atlanta, Boston, Chicago, Dallas, Houston, Los Angeles, Miami, New York, and
Washington D.C.
       Throughout this paper, Census Bureau disclosure requires observation counts be rounded,
and all reported numbers are likewise rounded to four signi…cant digits. We use the SBO
tabulation weights in summary tables, and the noise-infused employment, payroll and receipt
outcomes in 2007 (and for variables built upon those metrics).

3.2      SBO Descriptive Analysis

Tables 1a-c describe the SBO sample for new …rms, with parallel tabulations for all …rms being
found in Appendix Tables A1a-c. In Table 1a, 26% of new …rms formed in 2012 have an im-
migrant founder, which is comparable to prior work and other data approaches.14 Immigrant-
owned …rms have fewer employees but slightly higher receipts per employee.15 Receipts include
the total revenue and business done by domestic establishments of the …rm, excluding foreign
operations; values are reported in thousands of nominal dollars. Immigrant-owned …rms also
  13
     High-tech industries include NAICS 333, 335, 1131-2, 2111, 2211, 3241, 3251-6, 3259, 3341-6, 3364, 3369,
3391, 3399, 4234, 4861-2, 4869, 5112, 5161, 5171-4, 5179, 5181-2, 5191, 5211, 5232, 5413, 5415-7, 5511, 5612,
and 8112.
  14
     Kerr and Kerr (2017) measure immigrant entrepreneurship through the Longitudinal Employer Household
Dynamics (LEHD) database, a very large administrative dataset collected by the Census Bureau. Relative to
the SBO, these data cover a much greater number of establishments, but the …rm and founder details in the SBO
are much richer. Kerr and Kerr (2017) …nd that the share of immigrant founders steadily increased between
1995 and 2008, reaching 25% by 2008.
  15
     Employment, payroll and sales receipts variables are not collected by the SBO but instead merged by the
Census Bureau from the economic censuses conducted in parallel to the SBO.




                                                     13
pay lower wages (measured as payroll divided by employment), with an 12% di¤erential evident
in 2012, and begin with more start-up capital.
   Looking at the traits of entrepreneurs, female ownership is similar across both …rm groups.
Immigrant entrepreneurs tend to be younger and are more likely to combine owners of several
ages, perhaps indicative of a greater prevalence of family businesses. Education levels are
broadly comparable between immigrants and natives. Native-only …rms are more likely to
have single owners, while …rms with immigrant or mixed owners are more likely to report three
or more owners.
   In addition to paying lower wages, immigrant-owned …rms are less likely to o¤er employee
bene…ts such as health insurance, retirement bene…ts, and paid leave. These di¤erences across
owner types are among the starkest in the SBO data and perhaps indicate less attractive
employment. (The provision of these bene…ts declined among all start-ups between 2007 and
2012, which we have con…rmed in other data sources like the Current Population Survey.)
   Immigrant-owned …rms are comparable to native-owned …rms in terms of hiring temporary
versus full-time workers. Nationally, temporary workers account for just over 2% of private
sector jobs (Economics and Statistics Administration, 2015). Temporary employment includes
workers from temporary agencies, day laborers, and leased employees; part-time workers are
a separate category. Finally, immigrant-owned …rms show a much higher rate of international
activity as measured by exporting, outsourcing, and maintaining overseas operations.
   Table 1b separates purely immigrant-owned start-ups from mixed teams, with Appendix
Table A1b providing comparable breakouts for all …rms. Immigrant-only teams accounted
for 19% and 22% of new …rms in 2007 and 2012, while mixed teams accounted for 5% and
4%, respectively. Start-ups with mixed ownership tend to be larger and begin with more
capital, but they are comparable for wages and receipts per employee. Interestingly, the most
common number of owners is two for mixed teams, as compared to only one among immigrant-
and native-only …rms. The greater number of owners allows for mixed teams to show more
ownership diversity for age, education, and gender. With respect to bene…ts, mixed-owner
…rms are more likely to o¤er health insurance and paid leave, but not retirement bene…ts.
Related to hiring more employees, mixed-owner …rms are more likely than native-only …rms
to hire both temporary and full-time workers. Lastly, mixed-owner …rms report international
operations at a higher rate than any other …rm group, including immigrant-only …rms.


                                             14
   Table 1c considers new …rms in high-tech vs. low-tech industries. Immigrant-owned star-
tups comprised 29% and 26% of high- and low-tech entry in 2012, respectively. This is similar
to 2007, but rates among high-tech …rms rose faster (the proportions were 25% and 24%, re-
spectively). Among immigrant-owned …rms, high-tech …rms tend to hire fewer employees and
pay almost double the wages of immigrant-owned …rms in low-tech settings. Start-up capital
amounts are consistently lower among high-tech …rms, but higher for immigrant-owned …rms
among both groups.
   High-tech …rms often have larger founding teams, despite their lower employment, but
are less likely to include women. High-tech founders are also more concentrated in higher
levels of education. High-tech …rms are substantially more likely to o¤er bene…ts and engage
in international activities. The earlier di¤erences among immigrant- and native-owned …rms
remains among both industry groups in regards to international operations; di¤erences in
employer-provided bene…ts remain for low-tech …rms but are much smaller for high-tech …rms.
As noted earlier, this could be due to the prevalence of high-tech …rms in more competitive
markets for employees.

3.3   Industry, Financing and Geographic Variation

Table 2 lists the most common two-digit NAICS industry codes for immigrant- and native-
owned …rms. Roughly half of immigrant-owned startups are in three sectors: accommodation
and food services, retail trade, and professional and technical services. Native-owned …rms
show less industrial concentration, as noted earlier. This industry breakdown highlights the
concentration of immigrant entrepreneurs at the upper and lower ends of the distribution.
Professional and technical services include many high-tech industries, whereas accommodation
and food services and retail trade fall into the low-tech category.
   The di¤erences in …rm traits in Tables 1a-1c could be due to these industry choices, but
data from the March 2017 National Compensation Survey conducted by the Bureau of Labor
Statistics suggest that industry di¤erences are unlikely to bear full responsibility. Our working
paper tabulates in greater depth how the three most prominent sectors for immigrant-owned
businesses fall above and below national averages on most dimensions like o¤ering bene…t
plans. Upcoming regression analyses control for industry di¤erences in a rigorous manner.
   Previous studies document that immigrant-owned businesses start with more funding (e.g.,



                                               15
Fairlie 2012); the 2007 SBO shows that much of this di¤erence comes through …rms with mixed
ownership teams. Table 3 shows the most common sources of start-up capital for immigrant
entrepreneurs.16 The …rst panel reports capital sources for all new …rms, while the second two
separate …rms by industry. Firms with mixed owners report a higher use of nearly all funding
sources. Personal savings are the most important source of capital for all …rms, but this source
is especially important for …rms with immigrant owners. Firms with native owners are more
likely to have bank loans and credit, while those with immigrant owners are more likely to rely
on family loans. The use of home equity is highest among mixed owner …rms and fell across all
groups between 2007 and 2012, re‡ecting the e¤ects of the Great Recession. These patterns
may signal a lower ability by immigrants to obtain bank credit.17 Venture capital funding is
rare but consistently higher for high-tech …rms.
       Figure 1 documents the states with the greatest and least reliance on immigrant entrepre-
neurs, with extreme values tabulated in Table 4. The least dependent states, such as Montana,
the Dakotas, and Idaho, have 6% or less of their new …rms founded by immigrants in 2012,
whereas the shares for California, New Jersey, and New York exceed 40%. These di¤erences
are naturally tied to geographic variation in where immigrants make up a large share of the
population. The correlation in 2012 between the working age population share and …rm owner
share for immigrants is 0.85 for new …rms and 0.91 for all …rms. Metropolitan areas within
states also vary substantially. The most-dependent MSAs in California display immigrant
business owner shares in excess of 60%, a 50% increase upon the state average.
       Figure 2 illustrates the absolute growth of immigrant entrepreneurship by state between
the 2007 and 2012 SBO. Texas (6%), New Jersey (6%), and Alabama (5%) saw the largest
gains, while the District of Columbia (-10%), New Mexico (-5%), and South Dakota (-3%) saw
the largest declines. Figures for some of these smaller states should be treated with caution
given smaller sample size. Most states experienced modest increases, while 15 states saw a
decline, in the percent of new …rms founded by immigrant entrepreneurs between 2007 and
2012.
       Figure 3 plots the share of immigrant entrepreneurs among high-tech vs. low-tech startups
by state in 2012. The included 30 states in the graph are those where a su¢ cient number of
  16
      Appendix Table A2 shows similar patterns for sources of expansion capital, with native-only …rms being
less likely to expand.
   17
      For example, Blanch‡ower et al. (2003), U.S. Chamber of Commerce (2005) and Bruder et al. (2011).



                                                    16
SBO observations pass the Census Bureau’s disclosure rules for both industry groups. Most
states are clustered around the 45-degree line, re‡ecting a similar proportion of immigrant
entrepreneurship across industries, and the correlation of the two series is 0.83. The main
outlier is New Jersey, which had more than 60% of new, high-tech …rms founded by immigrants
in 2012.


4    Regression Analysis of Immigrant Entrepreneurs

Our descriptive tabulations measure sizable di¤erences between immigrant- and native-owned
…rms in terms of employment, wages, and other job characteristics like employer-provided
bene…ts. This section analyzes the degree to which these di¤erences persist once we control for
state and industry choices, along with other observable traits of the owners like age, gender,
and race/ethnicity. The background regression takes the form:

                      Yf;t =    Imm.Entrf;t +     Mixed.Entrf;t + Xf;t +    t   + "f;t ;          (1)

where Yf;t is a measured trait of the …rm. Imm.Entrf;t takes a (0,1) value for the founding team
being comprised exclusively of immigrants. Mixed.Entrf;t take a (0,1) value for the founding
team being comprised of both immigrants and natives. Native-only teams serve as the reference
category.
    Our regression models combine the 2007 and 2012 SBO data and control for year …xed
e¤ects     t.   Baseline controls Xf;t include the …rm’s state and six-digit NAICS industry, and the
gender, age, and number of owners of the …rm. These controls are incorporated through indi-
cator variables. We also consider ethnicity by aggregating baseline SBO categories into three
groups: African-American, Hispanic (Mexican, Cuban, Other Hispanic, not Puerto Rican),
and Asian (Chinese, Indian, Filipino, Japanese, Korean, Vietnamese, and Other Asian). We
then enter for each of these groups the share of founders who are of that ethnic background.
In a second regression set, we further add a control for the log of …rm employment as a size
measure.
    Figure 4 reports the        point estimates and con…dence intervals for the indicator variable of
an immigrant-only founding team. Regressions are unweighted and use robust standard errors
to derive 95% con…dence intervals. To facilitate easy comparison, we conduct these regressions
separately for high-tech vs. low-tech …rms and combine the results into Figure 4. Circles in-


                                                   17
dicate the coe¢ cients for immigrant founders in high-tech entrepreneurship; triangles indicate
the same for low-tech industries. The accompanying table reports the relative economic mag-
nitude of the coe¢ cient for immigrant entrepreneurs. This e¤ect is calculated as the coe¢ cient
divided by the mean of the outcome variable. These calculations help evaluate the relative
economic magnitudes given that some outcomes are in logs (the …rst four rows) vs. indicator
variables (the rest); they also account for baseline di¤erences across industries.18
       Panel A displays the results without …rm size controls. Immigrant entrepreneurs hire fewer
employees than native-owned …rms, with a sizable relative e¤ect of 16% for low-tech sectors.
The immigrant e¤ect is smaller at 5% and not statistically signi…cant for high-tech …rms. By
contrast, immigrant vs. native founder di¤erences on start-up capital raised, labor productivity
(i.e., receipts/employee), and wages tend to be quite modest and with a relative e¤ect of under
1%. The types of employees hired by immigrant-only founders look mostly similar to their
native peers.
       The more noticeable di¤erences are at the bottom of Panel A. Immigrants in low-tech
settings are substantially less likely to have employer-provided bene…ts, with the relative size
ranging from 24% less for paid time o¤ to 66% for 401k plans. As a summary metric, immigrant
startups in low-tech sectors are 18% less likely to o¤er any of the three indicated employer-
provided bene…ts than natives. Within the high-tech industries, the gaps are substantially
less, but still reach a 16% relative e¤ect for the o¤ering of 401k plans. In total, immigrant-
only high-tech startups are 4% less likely to o¤er any of the three indicated employer-provided
bene…ts than natives. Thus, the average “job quality,” as de…ned by these metrics, is weaker
in immigrant-owned …rms, and the earlier analysis shows that the lower provision of these
bene…ts is not being o¤set in higher wages.
       Similarly, but in the opposite direction, immigrant-owned startups show typically 40%-
70% increases in international engagement. These international engagement e¤ects are less
distinguishable between low-tech and high-tech …rms. In aggregate, immigrant founders in
low-tech and high-tech sectors are 81% and 57%, respectively, more likely to engage in one or
more of the three forms of international engagement captured by the SBO.
       While we do not report the regression coe¢ cients for control variables, a few results are
  18
    Tables A3a-A4n in the online appendix provide our complete estimations. These tables also provide analyses
with a full sample combining high-tech and low-tech together, regression variants without control variables, and
regression variants where we do not parse out the mixed ownership group. Our NBER working paper also
contains additional variations of these regressions.


                                                      18
worth noting. Startups with more owners tend to hire more workers, start their …rms with
more capital, pay higher wages, and are also more likely to provide employee bene…ts. Larger
…rms, in general, are also more likely to pay better and to o¤er employee bene…ts. Part of
this di¤erence is due to legal mandates imposed upon larger …rms, but a long literature has
noted the greater general attractiveness of jobs in larger …rms (e.g., Moore 1911; Brown et
al. 1990; Gibson and Stillman 2009). Firms with female owners, younger owners, and lower-
educated owners tend to hire fewer employees, pay lower wages and bene…ts, and engage less
in international activities.
   In most cases, these estimated coe¢ cients and e¤ects in Figure 4 resemble what is observed
in tabulations of the raw data; we also tend to …nd similar results (tabulated in the appendix)
when excluding all …rm controls Xf;t . One of the more interesting exceptions is that the lower
wage rates paid by immigrant …rms in the low-tech sector would be more signi…cant at 1%-
1.5% in relative terms without the controls, compared to the 0.2% with the controls. State
and industry choices account for about half of the di¤erence, and adding ethnicity controls
accounts for the rest, with Asian and Hispanic owned …rms paying lower wages in the low-tech
sector.
   Panel B introduces the …rm size control. It is debatable whether one should control for
the fact that immigrants tend to own di¤erent-sized …rms than natives, as we use …rm size
in constructing some metrics (e.g., receipts per employment) and the size of a company is
endogenous with other …rm outcomes. Nevertheless, the overall picture remains very similar.
For most …rm traits, this control slightly diminishes the coe¢ cients and relative magnitudes,
but the major themes of weaker provision of bene…ts and greater overseas activity persist.
   Figure 5 plots regression coe¢ cients similar to Figure 4 for a variant of speci…cation (1) that
combines the immigrant only and mixed team indicator variables. Most of themes emphasized
above are reproduced, as the number of mixed ownership teams is small compared to the
immigrant only count. The most noticeable di¤erences are a moderating e¤ect on the observed
lower provision of employer-provided bene…ts by immigrant owned companies and an expansion
of di¤erences compared to native only …rms for international engagement.
   Finally, Tables 5a and 5b study the survival and growth properties of immigrant- vs. native-
owned …rms using the subsequent history of 2007 SBO …rms to 2011 in the LBD. The sample
begins with 139 thousand companies that were founded between 2002 and 2007 and present


                                               19
in the 2007 SBO. Among those …rms matched to the 2007 LBD, immigrant-only founded
…rms are somewhat more likely to survive to 2011 than are native-owned …rms (62.8% versus
60.1%). Conditional on survival until 2011, immigrant-only …rms remain somewhat smaller
than native-only …rm, with immigrant-only startups growing their employment 23% to 2011
versus 19% for natives.19
         As we parse the sample into high-tech vs. low-tech, interesting di¤erences emerge. The
survival rate for immigrant-only high-tech startups tends to be equal to or less than native-only
…rms, but the growth rate is signi…cantly faster in large part due to a smaller starting size.
For low-tech, immigrant-only …rms are more likely to survive and again appear to catch-up in
terms of employment by 2012 to native-only …rms.
         Table 5b shows the stability of these patterns in regression formats, using linear probability
models for survival. In aggregate, immigrant-founded …rms in high-tech behave in a manner
quite similar to native-founded high-tech …rms, whereas di¤erences for low-tech remain condi-
tional on size. The faster growth of immigrant-owned …rms in both samples directly connects
to their smaller starting size. The 2007-2011 period was, of course, the depths of the Great
Recession, and with the future extensions of the LBD it will be important to look at these
patterns throughout the subsequent recovery.


5         Extensions
5.1        Spatial Di¤erences

We earlier noted that immigrant entrepreneurship is unevenly distributed across the country,
with eight-fold or higher di¤erences across states. Florida (2005), Moretti (2012), and other
scholars emphasize the growth of powerful high-tech and knowledge centers, with spillover
e¤ects onto job creation for other workers. The authors frequently connect these dynamic
clusters to immigration and entrepreneurship, and many business press accounts speak of a
Silicon Valley exceptionalism. We turn to describing with new data the role of immigration
entrepreneurs across tech hubs.20
    19
     We de…ne growth through the log ratio of 2011 employment to 2007 employment, and the patterns are very
similar if instead using the Davis et al. (1996) formula with average employment as the baseline.
  20
     In addition to providing an economic portrait of current activity, these distributions can be informative
for potential policy changes to encourage regional visas for incoming skilled immigrants. Such visas are used,
for example, in Canada and are often discussed as a mechanism for building broader policy consensus around
expanded migration.



                                                     20
       Table 6 describes how immigrant entrepreneurs are distributed over MSAs. While 29%
of new high-tech …rms are owned by immigrants or mixed teams, this share is 63% in the
San Francisco Bay area and 44% in other top tech clusters, compared to 18% elsewhere.
Dramatically, about 4% of all high-tech …rms owned by immigrants are located in the San
Francisco Bay area, compared to 1% for natives. New immigrant-founded …rms also constitute
high shares of low-tech activity in the big tech centers, but there is overall more mass of
immigrant low-tech startups outside of the top 10 tech clusters.
       Figure 6 maps regression coe¢ cients for immigrant-only, mixed, and native-only founding
teams by location, with native-only founding teams located outside of the top 10 tech clusters
serving as the reference group. Appendix Table 6 provides the underlying regressions. Panel A
of Figure 6 shows that high-tech …rms founded by immigrants only are modestly under-sized
relative to their peers in the top 10 tech clusters, but the bigger di¤erences are in the low-tech
sector where immigrant-only startups are smaller within and outside of tech centers.
       The remaining panels of Figure 6 condition on …rm size in addition to the other controls.
For startup …nancing, immigrant-only teams raise more seed capital within and outside of
the top tech clusters, whereas no real di¤erence exists for low-tech sectors. On receipts per
employee, immigrant-only teams look mostly similar to their native-only counterparts, while
wages paid by immigrant-only …rms are lower in high tech clusters than peer companies. Lower
provision of employer-provided bene…ts by immigrant-only …rms is most pronounced in low-
tech sectors, regardless of spatial position, and the gap is erased in mixed teams. By contrast,
the greater propensity by immigrant founders towards international activities is strongest in
high-tech sectors and independent of a mixed or immigrant-only founding team.
       We interpret these results as suggesting that most of the impact of immigrant high-tech
entrepreneurship for tech centers happens through the quantity dimension: Silicon Valley and
similar tech hubs attract a lot of immigrant founders. Being located in a high-tech cluster
demands more of companies: higher receipts per employee and greater wages. Immigrant-
founded …rms are not very di¤erent on these dimensions, providing slightly lower wages and
bene…ts, as we have seen in prior analyses. This is somewhat to be expected: when representing
40% or more of local startups, it is harder for immigrant founders in tech clusters to behave
too di¤erently from peer entrants.21
  21
     Earlier versions of this paper considered generic state-level policies like minimum wages and occupational
licensing, …nding little explanatory power. Interesting for future research, an index developed by Monogan


                                                      21
    We supplement this SBO analysis with comparable evidence from the publicly available
American Community Survey (ACS) data. Within the ACS, the closest metric to business
ownership is self-employed individuals in incorporated businesses (SE-I). The primary ACS
sample is restricted to individuals who report their place of birth and are aged between 25 and
55. The ACS shows that an increasing share of SE-I entrepreneurs are immigrants, growing
from 17% in 2001 to about 24% by 2015.22
    Table 7 again shows immigrant SE-I are disproportionately agglomerated in top tech hubs
compared to native SE-I. While the ACS collected fewer data …elds, we can look at income
levels reported for the individual and household. Interestingly, immigrant SE-I in high-tech
industries report mostly comparable income to native SE-I in all geographic settings. By
contrast, low-tech immigrant SE-I report lower incomes than native SE-I and these di¤erences
become more pronounced in leading tech hubs, as the incomes for native SE-I rise faster.
These intriguing patterns suggest that immigrants engaged in high-tech entrepreneurship in
the prominent tech hubs are quite similar to their native peers, but that these larger cities also
have a more expansive low-tech immigrant entrepreneurship sector that behaves di¤erently
from native-led startups nearby in these sectors.

5.2    Second-Generation Immigrant Entrepreneurs

The SBO data allow the identi…cation of individuals who were born in the United States but
are of a speci…c ethnic origin, including Chinese, Indian, and Mexican. While the survey does
not ask whether one or both their parents were born outside of the United States, one can
approximate second-generation immigrants via ethnicity. Using the public use ACS data for
2001-2016, we …nd that 94% of U.S.-born persons who report to be of Chinese ethnic origin
have at least one parent who is an immigrant. These percentages are 99% and 71% for persons
of Indian and Mexican ethnic origin, respectively. Table 8 repeats the earlier tabulations in
(2013) to quantify the state-level “tone of immigrant policy”enacted between 2005 and 2011 can predict higher
immigrant entrepreneur shares over-and-above the immigrant population baseline. This index captures features
like the ability of immigrants to obtain an ID or drivers license to enforcement activities by U.S. Immigration
and Customs Enforcement. A one standard-deviation in policy tone predicts a 1-2% increase in immigrant
founder shares.
   22
      Similar to Figure 2, most states show growing immigrant SE-I shares across this time period, with 14 states
exceeding 6% growth, while only three states— West Virginia, Vermont, and Maine— saw declines. Immigrant
SE-I has pulled increasingly from individuals coming from Mexico, India, and China since 2001, although no
country accounts for more than 4% of the total SE-I stock in 2015. In 2015, immigrant SE-I shares are higher
for those with STEM degrees (27%) or Business/Education (22%) compared to other …elds (17%). Our NBER
working paper provides additional statistics related to this sample.



                                                       22
Table 1a but separates out the entrepreneurial activity of second-generation immigrants to the
United States. We identify these individuals as those labelling themselves as born in America
but of an immigrant ethnicity. These labels are imperfect, to be sure, but also provide a
reasonable approximation on a phenomenon of broad interest.23
       For these tabulations, Columns 1 and 4 report statistics where only …rst-generation immi-
grants are owners of the business, potentially along with natives, but no second-generation im-
migrants own the business. Columns 2 and 5 focus only on businesses where second-generation
immigrants are owners, potentially along with natives, but no …rst-generation immigrants are
owners. Columns 3 and 6 document cases where only natives are owners. As such, the columns
are mutually exclusive but not collectively exhaustive. In particular, about 1% of the sample is
not included and represents cases where both …rst- and second-generation immigrant business
ownership is reported for the …rm. With this framing, second-generation immigrants account
for approximately 4% of U.S. entrepreneurship in 2007 and 6% in 2012.
       A fascinating pattern emerges:         on many dimensions where the di¤erences between
immigrant- and native-owned …rms are most visible (e.g., o¤ering health insurance, exporting),
businesses owned by second-generation immigrants sit in between the other two …rm types.
This patterns highlights a potential assimilation of immigrant-founded …rms into the broader
business landscape of America which has not been documented before.24 Second-generation
immigrant owners tend to be younger than the other owner types, which may, for example,
a¤ect their ability to accumulate start-up capital. Female-owned …rms (whether fully or par-
tially) are most common in the group of second-generation immigrant-owned companies, in
both the newly founded and all …rms samples.
  23
      Duncan and Trejo (2018) review the evidence regarding second-generation immigrants in the United States,
their education assimilation, and the heterogeneity across countries of origin, but entrepreneurship remains un-
der explored. Case examples include Waters (1994), Zhou and Bankston (1994), and Berry et al. (2006). Data
from the 2012 Global Entrepreneurship Monitor (GEM) indicate that US …rst-generation immigrants are more
entrepreneurial than either natives or second-generation immigrants (Kelley et al. 2012). Looking at Fortune
500 companies in 2011, roughly equal proportions of them were founded by …rst-generation (19%) and second-
generation (23%) immigrants (Partnership for a New American Economy 2011). Andersson and Hammarstedt
(2010) study the self-employment activity of second-generation immigrants in Sweden, and Beckers and Blum-
berg (2013) consider the Netherlands. While the SBO cannot quantify rates of entry into entrepreneurship by
…rst- versus second-generation immigrants, the data allow us to describe their businesses.
   24
      It important to note that the assimilation interpretation cannot be distinguished with these data from
cohort e¤ects. The SBO second-generation entrepreneurs are children of …rst-generation immigrants from an
earlier cohort, who came from di¤erent places and under di¤erent contexts than the …rst-generation immigrants
of today. To fully untangle, future work needs access to data sources like the Internal Revenue Service that
directly link second-generation children to their immigrant parents.




                                                      23
6    Discussion and Future Research

We explored the 2007 and 2012 Survey of Business Owners records to learn more about how
the businesses created by immigrants resemble and di¤er from those owned by natives. To
summarize a few key …ndings: immigrant-owned …rms are somewhat smaller than native-
owned …rms in terms of employee counts but have comparable or greater sales per employee; the
jobs created by immigrant …rms have mostly comparable salaries but lower provision of health,
retirement, and paid time o¤ bene…ts; and the …rms owned by immigrants show a substantially
higher rate of engagement in international activity like exporting and the launch of overseas
facilities. Immigrant-owned businesses have a modestly di¤erent industry composition than
native-owned business, but the bigger di¤erences are spatial, with ten-fold di¤erences across
states in terms of the share of businesses owned by immigrants. Finally, new immigrant-owned
businesses in the 2007 SBO are more likely to survive to 2011 and show greater employment
growth to 2011.
    There are several important directions future research can take. We have provided novel
evidence on the quality of jobs generated by immigrant-owned …rms in terms of compensation
and bene…ts, but there many other dimensions worth pursuing. Merging onto the SBO the
Longitudinal Employer Household Dynamics (LEHD) database would allow researchers to look
at the duration of jobs and the evolution of earnings over tenure for workers in immigrant-
versus native-owned …rms. The LEHD’s mostly universal nature would also allow a greater
characterization of ethnic enclaves within regions and how immigrant entrepreneurs function
inside vs. external to them.
    Uniting the Decennial Census …les with the SBO data would also provide greater infor-
mation on the countries of origin of immigrants. These extra data would allow researchers
to examine more sharply di¤erences over groups. As immigrant entrepreneurship rates dif-
fer somewhat by nationality, one could learn more about how much of these patterns follow
from group-wide preferences to be one’s own boss (Hurst and Pugsley 2011) and how the
concentration of immigrant groups into speci…c occupations for entrepreneurship (Kerr and
Mandor¤ 2015) shifts their behavior. Such extensive margin evidence would better highlight
the mechanisms behind perceived di¤erences in job quality.
    The evidence regarding greater overseas activity of immigrant-owned businesses also de-
serves more consideration. These contributions may be more quantitative and model-based:

                                             24
what are the general equilibrium implications of a rising share of U.S. entrepreneurs being im-
migrants and therefore being more likely to engage in global activities? As the period of time
covered by these surveys includes some countries expanding and others contracting, the rela-
tive value of these overseas connections will provide nice variation to tease out their empirical
e¤ects.
   Finally, we have provided some basic evidence and back-of-the-envelope calculations for
job provision in immigrant …rms in the introduction, but more of the job creation and job
destruction machinery (e.g., Davis et al. 1996) and growth analysis (e.g., Puri and Zarutskie
2012) could be applied to these groups. This would be especially powerful when combined
with information on the individuals hired. Immigrant owners may show di¤erent employment
adjustment patterns for immigrant employees from their home country than immigrants from
other countries or native employees. Given the heavy geographic and industrial clustering of
immigrant entrepreneurs, this could in turn in‡uence regional business cycles.


References

Akcigit, U., S. Baslandze and S. Stantcheva (2016). “Taxation and the International Mobility
of Inventors.” American Economic Review 106(10): 2930-2981.
Akee, R.K.Q., D.A. Jaeger and K. Tatsiramos (2013). “The Persistence of Self-Employment
Across Borders: New Evidence on Legal Immigrants to the United States.”Economics Bulletin
33(1): 126-137.
Anderson, S. and M. Platzer (2006) American Made: The Impact of Immigrant Entrepreneurs
and Professionals on U.S. Competitiveness. National Venture Capital Association Report,
Washington DC.
Andersson, F., M. García-Pérez, J. Haltiwanger, K. McCue and S. Sanders (2014). “Workplace
Concentration of Immigrants.” Demography 51(6): 2281-2306.
Andersson, L. and M. Hammarstedt (2010). “Intergenerational Transmissions in Immigrant
Self-Employment: Evidence from Three Generations.”Small Business Economics 34: 261-276.
Åstebro, T., J. Chen and P. Thompson (2011). “Stars and Mis…ts: Self-Employment and
Labor Market Frictions.” Management Science 57(11): 1999-2017.
Åstebro, T., H. Herz, R. Nanda and R.A. Weber (2014). “Seeking the Roots of Entrepreneur-
ship: Insights from Behavioral Economics.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 28(3): 49-70.
Atalay, K., W.Y. Kim and S. Whelan (2014). “The Decline of Self-Employment Rate in
Australia.” Australian Economic Review 47(4): 472-489.
Bahar, D. and H. Rapoport. (2018). “Migration, Knowledge Di¤usion and the Comparative
Advantage of Nations.” Economic Journal 128(612): F273-F305.
Batalova, J., M. Fix and P.A. Creticos (2008). Uneven Progress the Employment Pathways of
Skilled Immigrants in the United States. Migration Policy Institute.
Battisti, M., G. Peri and A. Romiti (2016). “Dynamic E¤ects of Co-Ethnic Networks on Im-
migrants’Economic Success.” Working Paper 22389, National Bureau of Economic Research.


                                               25
Beckers, P. and B.F. Blumberg (2013). “Immigrant Entrepreneurship on the Move: A Longi-
tudinal Analysis of First- and Second-Generation Immigrant Entrepreneurship in the Nether-
lands.” Entrepreneurship & Regional Development 25(7-8): 654-691.
Berry, J.W., J.S. Phinney, D.L. Sam and P. Vedder (2006). “Immigrant Youth: Acculturation,
Identity, and Adaptation.” Applied Psychology: An International Review 55(3): 303-332.
Blanch‡ower, D.G., P.B. Levine and D.J. Zimmerman (2003). “Discrimination in the Small
Business Credit Market.” The Review of Economics and Statistics 85(4): 930-943.
Borjas, G. (1986). “The Self-Employment Experience of Immigrants.” Journal of Human
Resources 21: 487-506.
Breschi, S., F. Lissoni and E. Miguelez (2017). “Foreign Inventors in the US: Testing for
Diaspora and Brain Gain E¤ects.” Journal of Human Resources 17(5): 1009-1038.
Brown, J.D., J.S. Earle, M.J. Kim and K.-M. Lee (2018). “Immigrant Entrepreneurs, Job
Creation, and Innovation.” Census Bureau Working Paper.
Brown, J.L., C. Hamilton and J. Medo¤ (1990). Employers Large and Small. Harvard Uni-
versity Press, Cambridge MA.
Bruder, J., D. Neuberger and S. Rathke-Doppner (2011). “Financial Constraints of Ethnic En-
trepreneurship: Evidence from Germany.”International Journal of Entrepreneurial Behaviour
& Research 17(3): 296-313.
Centre for Entrepreneurs (2014). Migrant Entrepreneurs: Building Our Businesses, Creating
Our Jobs. March 2014, London, UK.
Chand, S. and M. Clemens (2008). “Skilled Emigration and Skill Creation: A Quasi-
experiment.” Working Paper 152, Center for Global Development.
Clark, K. and S. Drinkwater (2000). “Pushed Out or Pulled In? Self-Employment Among
Ethnic Minorities in England and Wales.” Labour Economics 7(5): 603-628.
Clark, K. and S. Drinkwater (2006). “Changing Patterns of Ethnic Minority Self-Employment
in Britain: Evidence from Census Microdata.” IZA Discussion Papers 2495, Institute for the
Study of Labor (IZA).
Clemens, M.A. (2011). “Economics and Emigration: Trillion-Dollar Bills on the Sidewalk?”
Journal of Economic Perspectives 25(3): 83-106.
Conroy, T. and S. Weiler (2016). “Does Gender Matter for Job Creation? Business Ownership
and Employment Growth.” Journal of Small Business Economics 47(2): 397-419.
Creese, G. and B. Wiebe (2012). “‘Survival Employment’: Gender and Deskilling among
African Immigrants in Canada.” International Migration 50(5): 56-76.
Davis, S., J. Haltiwanger and S. Schuh (1996). Journal Creation and Job Destruction. The
MIT Press, Cambridge MA.
Docquier, F. and H. Rapoport. (2012). “Globalization, Brain Drain, and Development.”
Journal of Economic Literature 50(3): 681-730.
Doms, M., S. Graham, B. Bond, G. Hancock, J. Burston, D. Langdon and F. Yu (2012).
Intellectual Property and the U.S. Economy: Industries in Focus. Economics and Statistics
Administration; US Patent and Trademark O¢ ce.
Duncan, B. and S.J. Trejo (2018). “Socioeconomic Integration of U.S. Immigrant Groups over
the Long Term.” In Pozo, S. (Ed.) The Human and Economic Implications of Twenty-First
Century Immigration Policy, Sichel Lecture Series, W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment
Research, Kalamazoo, MI, 33-62.
Echeverri-Carroll, E. and B.J. Kellison (2012). Survey of Texas Hispanic-owned Businesses
with Paid Employees. The ICBI Institute at The University of Texas at Austin, Technical
Report.
Economics and Statistics Administration (2015). Temporary Help Workers in the U.S. Labor
Market (ESA Issue Brief #03-15). Washington, DC: Jessica R. Nicholson.

                                            26
Edo, A., N. Jacquemet and C. Yannelis (2013). “Language Skills and Homophilous Hiring
Discrimination: Evidence from Gender and Racially Di¤erentiated Applications.” Review of
Economics of the Household 17(1): 349-376.
Fairlie, R.W. (2012). Immigrant Entrepreneurs and Small Business Owners, and their Access
to Financial Capital. U.S. Small Business Administration Report, Washington DC.
Fairlie, R.W. and M. Lofstrom (2013). “Immigration and Entrepreneurship.” IZA Discussion
Paper 7669.
Fairlie, R.W. and B.D. Meyer (2003). “The E¤ect of Immigration on Native Self-Employment.”
Journal of Labor Economics 21(3): 619-650.
Fairlie, R.W. and A. Robb (2008). Race and Entrepreneurial Success: Black-, Asian-, and
White-Owned Businesses in the United States. The MIT Press, Cambridge MA.
Fairlie, R.W. and A. Robb (2009). “Gender Di¤erences in Business Performance: Evidence
from the Characteristics of Business Owners Survey.”Small Business Economics 33: 375-395.
Fairlie, R.W., J. Zissimopoulos and H.A. Krashinsky (2010). “The International Asian Business
Success Story: A Comparison of Chinese, Indian, and Other Asian Businesses in the United
States, Canada, and United Kingdom.” In Lerner, J. and A. Schoar (Eds.) International
Di¤ erences in Entrepreneurship, University of Chicago Press and National Bureau of Economic
Research, Chicago IL, 179-208.
Fallick, B., C.A. Fleischman and J.B. Rebitzer (2006). “Job-Hopping in Silicon Valley: Some
Evidence Concerning the Microfoundations of a High-Technology Cluster.” Review of Eco-
nomics and Statistics 88(3): 472-481.
Florida, R. (2007). Cities and the Creative Class. Routledge, New York, NY.
Friedberg, R.M. (2000). “You Can’t Take It with You? Immigrant Assimilation and the
Portability of Human Capital.” Journal of Labor Economics 18(2): 221-251.
Gibson, J. and D. McKenzie (2011). “The Microeconomic Determinants of Emigration and Re-
turn Migration of the Best and Brightest: Evidence from the Paci…c.”Journal of Development
Economics 95(1): 18-29.
Gibson, J. and S. Stillman (2009). “Why Do Big Firms Pay Higher Wages? Evidence from an
International Database.” Review of Economics and Statistics 91(1): 213-218.
Goldschlag, N. and J. Miranda (2016). “Business Dynamics Statistics of High Tech Industries.”
Center for Economic Studies Working Paper 16-55, US Census Bureau.
Gompers, P.A., V. Mukharlyamov and Y. Xuan (2016). “The Cost of Friendship.” Journal of
Financial Economics 119(3): 626-644.
Gould, D. (1994). “Immigrant Links to the Home Country: Empirical Implications for U.S.
Bilateral Trade Flows.” Review of Economics and Statistics 76: 302-316.
Gramlich, K. and D. Perrin (2013). Hispanic Business Growth in Oregon. Thesis, University
of Oregon.
Green, D., H. Liu, Y. Ostrovsky and G. Picot (2016) “Business Ownership and Employment
in Immigrant-Owned Firms in Canada.” Economic Insights 057, Statistics Canada.
Haltiwanger, J., R. Jarmin and J. Miranda (2013). “Who Creates Jobs? Small vs. Large vs.
Young.” Review of Economics and Statistics 95(2): 347-361.
Hart, D.M. and Z.J. Acs (2011). “High-Tech Immigrant Entrepreneurship in the United
States.” Economic Development Quarterly 25(2): 116-129.
Hatzigeorgiou, A. and M. Lodefalk (2011). “Trade and Migration: Firm-Level Evidence.”
Working Paper 2011:6, Örebro University, School of Business.
Head, K. and J. Ries (1998). “Immigration and Trade Creation: Econometric Evidence from
Canada.” Canadian Journal of Economics 31(1): 47-62.


                                             27
Heckler, D. (2005). “High-Technology Employment: A NAICS-Based Update.”Monthly Labor
Review 128, 57.
Hegde, D. and J. Tumlinson (2014). “Does Social Proximity Enhance Business Partnerships?
Theory and Evidence from Ethnicity’s Role in U.S. Venture Capital.” Management Science
60(9): 2355-2380.
Hegde, D. and J. Tumlinson (2018). “Asymmetric Information and Entrepreneurship.”Work-
ing Paper.
Hunt, J. (2011). “Which Immigrants Are Most Innovative and Entrepreneurial? Distinctions
by Entry Visa.” Journal of Labor Economics 29(3): 417-457.
Hunt, J. and M. Gauthier-Loiselle (2010). “How Much Does Immigration Boost Innovation?”
American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 2(2): 31-56.
Hurst, E. and B.W. Pugsley (2011). “What Do Small Businesses Do?” Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity 43(2): 73-142.
Hvide, H.K. and G.A. Panos (2014). “Risk Tolerance and Entrepreneurship.” Journal of
Financial Economics 111(1): 200-223.
Ibrahim, G. and V. Galt (2011). “Explaining Ethnic Entrepreneurship: An Evolutionary
Economics Approach.” International Business Review 20(6): 607-613.
Kalnins, A. and W. Chung (2006). “Social Capital, Geography, and Survival: Gujarati Immi-
grant Entrepreneurs in the U.S. Lodging Industry.” Management Science 52(2): 233-247.
Kelley, D.J., A. Ali, C. Brush, et al. (2012). Global Entrepreneurship Monitor: 2012 United
States Country Report. Babson College and Baruch College.
Kerr, S.K. and W.R. Kerr (2011). “Economic Impacts of Immigration: A Survey.” Finnish
Economic Papers 24(1): 1-32.
Kerr, S.P. and W.R. Kerr (2017). “Immigrant Entrepreneurship.”In Haltiwanger, J., E. Hurst,
J. Miranda and A. Schoar (Eds.), Measuring Entrepreneurial Businesses: Current Knowledge
and Challenges, NBER Book Series Studies in Income and Wealth, Cambridge MA, 187-249.
Kerr, S.K., W.R. Kerr and M. Dalton (2019). “Risk Attitudes and Personality Traits of
Entrepreneurs and Venture Team Members.” Working Paper.
Kerr, S.P., W.R. Kerr and W.F. Lincoln (2015a). “Firms and the Economics of Skilled Immi-
gration.” In Kerr, W.R., J. Lerner and S. Stern (Eds.), Innovation Policy and the Economy
Vol. 15, NBER Book Series Innovation Policy and the Economy, Cambridge MA.
Kerr, S.P., W.R. Kerr and W.F. Lincoln (2015b). “Skilled Immigration and the Employment
Structures of U.S. Firms.” Journal of Labor Economics 33(S1): S147-S186.
Kerr, S.P., W.R. Kerr and R. Nanda (2018). “House Money and Entrepreneurship.” Harvard
Business School Working Paper.
Kerr, S.K., W.R. Kerr and T. Xu (2018). “Personality Traits of Entrepreneurs: A Review of
Recent Literature.” Foundation and Trends in Entrepreneurship 14(2): 279-356.
Kerr, W.R. (2010). “Breakthrough Inventions and Migrating Clusters of Innovation.”Journal
of Urban Economics 67(1): 46-60.
Kerr, W.R. (2017). “U.S. High-Skilled Immigration, Innovation, and Entrepreneurship: Em-
pirical Approaches and Evidence.”In Fink, C. and E. Miguelez (Eds.) Innovation, Intellectual
Property, and Economic Development. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 193-221.
Kerr, W.R. (2018). “Heterogeneous Technology Di¤usion and Ricardian Trade Patterns.”
World Bank Economic Review 32(1): 163-182.
Kerr, W.R. (2019). The Gift of Global Talent: How Migration Shapes Business, Economy &
Society. Stanford University Press, Palo Alto, CA.
Kerr, W.R. and W.F. Lincoln (2010). “The Supply Side of Innovation: H-1B Visa Reforms
and U.S. Ethnic Invention,” Journal of Labor Economics 28(3): 473-508.

                                            28
Kerr, W.R. and M. Mandor¤ (2015). “Social Networks, Ethnicity, and Entrepreneurship.”
NBER Working Paper 21597.
Kihlstrom, R.E. and J.-J. La¤ont (1979). “A General Equilibrium Entrepreneurial Theory of
Firm Formation Based on Risk Aversion.” Journal of Political Economy 87(4): 719-748.
Levine, R. and Y. Rubinstein (2017). “Smart and Illicit: Who Becomes an Entrepreneur and
Do They Earn More?,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 132(2): 963-1018.
Li, P.S. (2001). “The Market Worth of Immigrants’Educational Credentials.”Canadian Public
Policy / Analyse de Politiques 27(1): 23-38.
Liu, C.Y., G. Painter and Q. Wang (2014). “Lessons for U.S. Metro Areas: Characteristics and
Clustering of High-Tech Immigrant Entrepreneurs.” Kau¤man Foundation Discussion Paper.
Lofstrom, M. (2002). “Labor Market Assimilation and the Self-Employment Decision of Im-
migrant Entrepreneurs.” Journal of Population Economics 15(1): 83-114.
Lofstrom, M. (2011). “Low-Skilled Immigrant Entrepreneurship.”Review of Economics of the
Household 9(1): 25-44.
Lofstrom, M., T. Bates and S. Parker (2014). “Why Are Some People More Likely to Be-
come Small-Businesses Owners than Others: Entrepreneurship Entry and Industry-Speci…c
Barriers.” Journal of Business Venturing 29(2): 232-251.
Masurel, E. and P. Nijkamp (2004). “Di¤erences between First-Generation and Second-
Generation Ethnic Start-Ups: Implications for a New Support Policy.”Environment and Plan-
ning C: Government and Policy 22(5): 721-737.
Mata, J. and C. Alves (2018). “The Survival of Firms Founded by Immigrants: Institutional
Distance between Home and Host Country, and Experience in the Host Country.” Strategic
Management Journal 39(11): 2965-2991.
Mencken, F.C. and C.M. Tolbert (2016). “Restructuring of the Financial Industry and Im-
plications for Sources of Start-Up Capital for New Businesses in Nonmetropolitan Counties.”
Journal of Rural Social Sciences 31(1): 71-82.
Momani, B. (2016). New Canadian Entrepreneurs: An Underappreciated Contribution to
Canadian Prosperity? Center for International Governance and the Institute for Canadian
Citizenship, Waterloo, ON.
Monogan, J. (2013). “The Politics of Immigrant Policy in the 50 US States, 2005-2011.”
Journal of Public Policy 33(1): 35-64.
Monti, D.J., L. Smith-Doerr and J. MacQuaid (2007). Immigrant Entrepreneurs in the Massa-
chusetts Biotechnology Industry. Immigrant Learning Center, Boston MA.
Moore, H.L. (1911). Laws of Wages: An Essay in Statistical Economics. Augustus Kelley,
New York NY.
Mora, M.T. and A. Davila (2014). “Gender and Business Outcomes of Black and Hispanic
New Entrepreneurs in the United States.”American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings
104(5): 245-249.
Moretti, E. (2012). The New Geography of Jobs. Houghton Mi- in Harcourt, New York, NY.
OECD (2010). Open for Business: Migrant Entrepreneurship in OECD Countries. OECD
Publishing, Paris.
Oreopoulos, P. (2011). “Why Do Skilled Immigrants Struggle in the Labor Market? A Field
Experiment with Thirteen Thousand Resumes.”American Economic Journal: Economic Pol-
icy 3(4): 148-171.
Partnership for a New American Economy (2011). The New American Fortune 500. A Report
by the Partnership for a New American Economy, New York NY.
Patel, K. and F. Vella (2013). “Immigrant Networks and Their Implications for Occupational
Choice and Wages.” Review of Economics and Statistics 95(4): 1249-1277.


                                            29
Peri, G., K. Shih and C. Sparber (2015). “STEM Workers, H-1B Visas and Productivity in
US Cities.” Journal of Labor Economics 33(3): S225-S255.
Poschke, M. (2013). “Who Becomes an Entrepreneur? Labor Market Prospects and Occupa-
tional Choice.” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 37(3): 693-710.
Puri, M. and R. Zarutskie (2012). “On the Lifecycle Dynamics of Venture-Capital- and Non-
Venture-Capital-Financed Firms.” Journal of Finance 67(6): 2247-93.
Rauch, J. (2001). “Business and Social Networks in International Trade.”Journal of Economic
Literature 39: 1177-1203.
Rauch, J. and V. Trindade (2002). “Ethnic Chinese Networks in International Trade.”Review
of Economics and Statistics 84(1): 116-130.
Roth, W.D., M. Seidel, D. Ma and E. Lo (2012). “In and Out of the Ethnic Economy: A
Longitudinal Analysis of Ethnic Networks and Pathways to Economic Success across Immigrant
Categories.” International Migration Review 46(2): 310-361.
Ruggles, S., S. Flood, R. Goeken, J. Grover, E. Meyer, J. Pacas and M. Sobek. IPUMS USA:
Version 9.0 [dataset]. Minneapolis, MN: IPUMS, 2019.
Saxenian, A. (1996). Regional Advantage: Culture and Competition in Silicon Valley and
Route 128. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Saxenian, A. (1999). Silicon Valley’s New Immigrant Entrepreneurs. Public Policy Institute
of California, San Francisco, CA.
Saxenian, A. (2000). “The Origins and Dynamics of Production Networks in Silicon Valley.”
In Kenny, M. (Ed.) Understanding Silicon Valley: The Anatomy of an Entrepreneurial Region.
Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Saxenian, A. (2002). “Silicon Valley’s New Immigrant High-Growth Entrepreneurs.”Economic
Development Quarterly 16: 20-31.
Schuetze, H.J. and H. Antecol (2007). “Immigration, Entrepreneurship and the Venture Start-
Up Process. The Life Cycle of Entrepreneurial Ventures.” In Parker, S. (Ed.), International
Handbook Series on Entrepreneurship, vol. 3. Springer, New York NY.
U.S. Chamber of Commerce (2005). Access to Capital: What Funding Sources Work for You?
Report, US Chamber of Commerce, Washington DC.
Wadhwa, V., A. Saxenian, B. Rissing, and G. Gere¢ (2007). America’s New Immigrant
Entrepreneurs. Duke University Report.
Wang, Q. and C.Y. Liu (2015). “Transnational Activities of Immigrant-Owned Firms and
Their Performances in the USA.” Small Business Economics 44(2): 345-359.
Waters, M.C. (1994). “Ethnic and Racial Identities of Second-Generation Black Immigrants
in New York City.” The International Migration Review 28(4): 795-820.
Zhou, M. and C.L. Bankston (1994). “Social Capital and Adaptation of the Second Generation:
The Case of Vietnamese Youth in New Orleans.” The International Migration Review 28(4):
821-845.




                                            30
Figure 1: Immigrant entrepreneur share of SBO employer firms in 2012




Notes: Sample includes non-public employer firms from the 2012 SBO, with entrepreneurship measured through new
firms created in the five years prior to the survey. These statistics combine Immigrant only and Mixed teams.




Figure 2: Change in percent of new firms founded by immigrant entrepreneurs by
state between SBO 2007 and 2012




Notes: See Figure 1.
Figure 3: Immigrant entrepreneur distribution in high-tech vs. low-tech sectors in
2012




Notes: See Figure 1. Sample includes 30 states for which the number of firms is above the Census Bureau’s disclosure
cut-off for both high-tech and low-tech sectors. The correlation across series is 0.83.
Figure 4: Estimations for firm traits of immigrant entrepreneurs
Panel A: Baseline controls




Panel B: Baseline controls plus firm size control




Notes: See Figure 1 and Table 1a. Estimations pool 2007 and 2012 data. Coefficients are from an indicator variable for
Immigrant only owners. Panel A includes fixed effects for year, state, and 6-digit industry and controls for the gender,
ethnicity/race, age, and number of owners. Panel B further controls for log employment. Regressions are unweighted
and show 95% confidence intervals based upon robust standard errors. Appendix Tables A3a-n tabulate results. Relative
economic magnitudes are calculated as the ratio of the regression coefficient and the mean of the dependent variable.
Figure 5: Figure 4 combining Immigrant only and Mixed teams
Panel A: Baseline controls




Panel B: Baseline controls plus firm size control




Notes: See Figure 4. Coefficients are for an indicator variable which combines Immigrant only and Mixed firm ownership.
Appendix Tables A4a-n tabulate results.
Figure 6: Geographic and industry interactions




A.                                                                              B.




C.                                                                             D.




E.                                                                                F.
Notes: See Figure 4. Firms are separated by ownership types, geographic location, and high-tech vs. low-tech sector. The reference group in estimations is Native
only firms located outside of Top 10 clusters. Figure A includes all controls except firm size. Firm size is added as a control for Figures B-F. Appendix Table A6
provides detailed results.
          Table 1a: Summary statistics for immigrant and native entrepreneurship
                                                2007                                       2012
                                  Immigrant/Mixed    Native only             Immigrant/Mixed    Native only
                                         1                2                         3                4
% of firms                             23.7%            76.3%                     26.0%            74.0%
Mean: employees                         5.26             5.45                      5.03             5.88
Mean: employees if >0                   6.57             6.91                      6.52             7.70
Mean: receipts (thousands)             $739             $729                      $752             $839
Mean: ln(receipts/employee)            11.44            11.34                     11.51            11.38
Mean: payroll/employee                $27,720          $31,350                   $28,470          $32,290
Mean: start-up capital               $164,900         $136,900                  $146,800         $126,800
% 1 owner                               48.5%               49.9%                 59.7%               61.6%
% 2 owners                              37.9%               38.9%                 28.8%               29.0%
% 3 or more owners                      13.6%               11.2%                 11.5%                9.4%
% female owners                         48.3%               47.3%                 44.1%               44.1%
% owners < 35                           12.9%               14.5%                 13.0%               15.5%
% owners 35-55                          58.9%               54.0%                 58.5%               50.9%
% owners > 55                           10.1%               14.9%                 12.1%               18.7%
% mixed age                             18.0%               16.6%                 16.4%               14.9%
% high educated                         41.9%               42.1%                 46.0%               49.1%
% low educated                          44.4%               42.6%                 42.7%               38.7%
% mixed educated                        13.6%               15.4%                 11.4%               12.2%
% offer health insurance                24.2%               33.9%                 18.6%               26.4%
% offer 401k                             9.7%               15.5%                  8.4%               12.5%
% offer paid leave                      33.1%               38.8%                 28.4%               34.6%
% hire temps                            10.3%               11.0%                  6.8%                5.9%
% hire full-time workers                69.3%               67.1%                 62.5%               60.5%
% export                                 8.3%                4.7%                  6.9%                2.6%
% outsource                              2.7%                0.9%                  3.1%                1.2%
% operations abroad                      1.5%                0.5%                  2.7%                1.1%
% in high-tech industry                 11.8%               11.1%                 15.7%               13.7%
SBO survey size (rounded)               30,000             109,000                12,000              36,000
Notes: Sample includes non-public employer firms, with entrepreneurship measured as new firms created in the
five years prior to the survey. Data for 2007 use noise infusion for employment, receipts, and payroll, as well as
variables derived using those measures. Reported numbers use tabulation weighting and are rounded to
maximum of four significant digits. Groupings: Immigrant only includes firms with only immigrant owners, Mixed
includes firms with both immigrant and native owners, and Native only includes firms with only native owners.
Immigrant only and Mixed are combined in this table.
                              Table 1b: Table 1a splitting Immigrant only and Mixed founding teams
                                                           2007                                              2012
                                   Immigrant only         Mixed             Native only   Immigrant only    Mixed     Native only
                                         1                  2                   3              4              5           6
% of firms                             18.5%               5.2%               76.3%          21.7%           4.3%       74.0%
Mean: employees                         4.56               7.77                5.45           4.52           7.63        5.88
Mean: employees if >0                   5.71               9.63                6.91           5.89           9.69        7.70
Mean: receipts (thousands)             $652               $1,047               $729           $681          $1,119       $839
Mean: ln(receipts/employee)            11.45              11.38               11.34          11.50          11.55       11.38
Mean: payroll/employee                $26,250            $32,900             $31,350        $27,410        $33,760     $32,290
Mean: start-up capital               $147,900            $222,500            $136,900       $133,500       $212,700    $126,800
% 1 owner                               62.0%              0.0%               49.9%           71.4%         0.0%        61.6%
% 2 owners                              30.2%              65.5%              38.9%           21.9%         63.6%       29.0%
% 3 or more owners                       7.7%              34.5%              11.2%           6.7%          36.4%       9.4%
% female owners                         42.9%              67.9%              47.3%           40.0%         65.1%       44.1%
% owners < 35                           14.4%              7.6%               14.5%           14.1%         7.7%        15.5%
% owners 35-55                          63.2%              43.5%              54.0%           62.9%         36.4%       50.9%
% owners > 55                           10.9%              7.4%               14.9%           13.1%         7.1%        18.7%
% mixed age                             11.5%              41.5%              16.6%           10.4%         48.8%       14.9%
% high educated                         43.3%              36.8%              42.1%           46.7%         42.5%       49.1%
% low educated                          48.4%              30.5%              42.6%           46.2%         24.5%       38.7%
% mixed educated                         8.3%              32.7%              15.4%           7.1%          33.0%       12.2%
% offer health insurance                20.2%              38.4%              33.9%           16.3%         30.3%       26.4%
% offer 401k                             8.4%              14.2%              15.5%           7.8%          11.0%       12.5%
% offer paid leave                      29.6%              45.3%              38.8%           25.4%         43.6%       34.6%
% hire temps                             9.6%              12.8%              11.0%           6.5%          8.2%        5.9%
% hire full-time workers                67.9%              74.2%              67.1%           60.8%         71.0%       60.5%
% export                                7.9%               9.6%                4.7%           6.7%          8.1%         2.6%
% outsource                             2.7%               3.0%                0.9%           2.8%          4.6%         1.2%
% operations abroad                     1.5%               1.5%                0.5%           2.6%          3.2%         1.1%
% in high-tech industry                10.9%               14.9%              11.1%           15.3%         17.6%       13.7%
SBO survey size (rounded)              22,500              7,500             109,000          9,800         2,300       36,000
Notes: See Table 1a. Immigrant only and Mixed firms presented separately.
                                     Table 1c: Table 1a splitting high-tech versus low-tech industries
                                                             High-tech                                                       Low-tech
                                             2007                             2012                           2007                            2012
                                   Immigrant/                       Immigrant/                     Immigrant/                      Immigrant/
                                                Native only                      Native only                    Native only                     Native only
                                      Mixed                            Mixed                          Mixed                           Mixed
                                        1            2                   3            4                 5            6                  7            8
% of firms                            24.8%        75.3%               28.6%        71.4%             23.6%        76.4%              25.5%        74.5%
Mean: employees                        3.40         3.16                3.50         4.50              5.51         5.73               5.31         6.10
Mean: employees if >0                  4.56         4.24                4.78         6.16              6.82         7.23               6.83         7.93
Mean: receipts (thousands)            $661         $569                $877        $1,237             $749          $749              $729          $776
Mean: ln(receipts/employee)           11.67        11.49               11.88        11.66             11.41        11.32              11.44        11.34
Mean: payroll/employee               $52,430      $47,110             $48,510      $47,780           $24,670      $29,510            $24,960      $29,950
Mean: start-up capital              $105,400      $88,430            $104,700      $89,460          $172,600      $142,900          $154,600      $132,600
% 1 owner                            46.7%          53.3%                57.5%      62.0%            48.7%          49.5%               60.1%       61.5%
% 2 owners                           37.2%          35.0%                28.7%      27.0%            38.0%          39.3%               28.8%       29.3%
% 3 or more owners                   16.2%          11.7%                13.9%      11.0%            13.2%          11.2%               11.1%        9.2%
% female owners                      45.3%          39.6%                40.6%      35.1%            48.8%          48.2%               44.7%       45.5%
% owners < 35                        14.3%          12.3%                11.9%      12.6%            12.8%          14.8%               13.2%       16.0%
% owners 35-55                       57.8%          53.5%                57.9%      50.6%            59.0%          54.1%               58.6%       50.9%
% owners > 55                        9.8%           19.2%                12.5%      22.8%            10.2%          14.4%               12.0%       18.0%
% mixed age                          18.1%          15.1%                17.7%      14.0%            18.0%          16.8%               16.1%       15.1%
% high educated                      71.5%          60.5%                73.6%      63.8%            38.0%          39.8%               40.8%       46.8%
% low educated                       14.6%          23.8%                15.9%      25.3%            48.4%          44.9%               47.6%       40.8%
% mixed educated                     14.0%          15.7%                10.5%      11.0%            13.6%          15.3%               11.5%       12.4%
% offer health insurance             45.3%          45.0%                37.0%      37.8%            21.3%          32.5%               15.2%       24.6%
% offer 401k                         24.8%          26.8%                20.6%      19.6%             7.7%          14.1%                6.1%       11.3%
% offer paid leave                   38.6%          38.1%                34.1%      34.3%            32.3%          38.9%               27.3%       34.6%
% hire temps                         8.3%           7.2%                 6.3%       4.8%             10.6%          11.4%                6.9%        6.1%
% hire full-time workers             66.8%          62.0%                63.9%      56.5%            69.6%          67.7%               62.2%       61.1%
% export                             15.3%           8.0%                18.6%       6.6%             7.4%           4.3%               4.8%         2.0%
% outsource                          10.2%           2.6%                10.6%       3.4%             1.7%           0.6%               1.7%         0.8%
% operations abroad                  4.4%            1.3%                9.0%        3.1%             1.2%           0.4%               1.6%         0.8%
SBO survey size (rounded)             3,800         12,500               2,100       5,700           26,000         96,500              10,000      30,500
Notes: See Table 1a. High-tech is defined as belonging to a high-tech or patent-intensive industry, as described in the main text. These include NAICS 333,
335, 1131-2, 2111, 2211, 3241, 3251-6, 3259, 3341-6, 3364, 3369, 3391, 3399, 4234, 4861-2, 4869, 5112, 5161, 5171-4, 5179, 5181-2, 5191, 5211, 5232,
5413, 5415-7, 5511, 5612, and 8112.
                                  Table 2: Most common industries for immigrant and native entrepreneurs
                                             2007                                                                   2012
                Immigrant/Mixed                            Native only                    Immigrant/Mixed                         Native only
                Industry        Share                   Industry          Share           Industry        Share                Industry          Share
                   1              2                        3                4                5              6                     7                8
New firms
#1     72 Accomm & food              18.0%      54 Prof, tech services    17.5%   72 Accomm & food          20.1%      54 Prof, tech services    19.4%
#2     44 Retail trade               15.3%      23 Construction           16.9%   54 Prof, tech services    14.8%      62 Health care & social   11.7%
#3     54 Prof, tech services        13.3%      62 Health care & social    9.7%   44 Retail trade           12.6%      23 Construction           10.5%
#4     62 Health care & social       11.5%      44 Retail trade            9.5%   62 Health care & social   12.5%      72 Accomm & food          10.4%
#5     23 Construction                9.4%      72 Accomm & food           7.6%   81 Other services          6.9%      44 Retail trade            6.4%
#6     81 Other services              6.7%      56 Admin etc. services     6.6%   23 Construction            5.8%      81 Other services          6.4%
#7     42 Wholesale trade             5.9%      53 Real estate & rental    6.4%   42 Wholesale trade         5.7%      56 Admin etc. services     6.3%
% firms in top 7 industries          80.1%                                74.2%                             78.4%                                71.1%
All firms
#1      72 Accomm & food             16.3%      54 Prof, tech services    15.1%   72 Accomm & food          16.2%      54 Prof, tech services    17.0%
#2      44 Retail trade              15.5%      23 Construction           14.7%   62 Health care & social   14.3%      23 Construction           13.4%
#3      62 Health care & social      12.3%      44 Retail trade           13.0%   54 Prof, tech services    12.8%      62 Health care & social   11.1%
#4      54 Prof, tech services       11.9%      62 Health care & social    9.4%   44 Retail trade           12.5%      44 Retail trade            7.7%
#5      23 Construction               8.2%      72 Accomm & food           6.4%   81 Other services          7.7%      81 Other services          6.6%
#6      42 Wholesale trade            7.3%      81 Other services          6.2%   23 Construction            7.0%      56 Admin etc. services     6.5%
#7      81 Other services             7.2%      56 Admin etc. services     6.0%   42 Wholesale trade         6.9%      72 Accomm & food           6.1%
% firms in top 7 industries          78.7%                                70.8%                             77.4%                                68.4%
Notes: See Table 1a. Industries are 2-digit NAICS codes.
                   Table 3: Sources of start-up capital for immigrant and native entrepreneurs
                                                 2007                                                     2012
                          Immigrant only         Mixed           Native only       Immigrant only         Mixed           Native only
                                1                 2                   3                  4                 5                   6
All firms
Mean: start-up capital       $147,900           $222,500          $136,900            $133,500           $212,700          $126,800
Personal savings              71.2%              72.7%             70.1%               74.7%              77.1%             71.8%
Bank loan                     14.1%              19.0%             18.7%               10.6%              12.2%             14.3%
Credit                        14.8%              19.4%             18.1%               11.3%              15.4%             13.9%
Home equity loan              13.1%              17.9%             13.6%                5.1%               7.1%              6.1%
Assets                         9.6%              14.1%             12.8%                8.7%              10.9%             10.3%
Family loan                    4.9%               6.1%              4.7%                5.6%               5.1%              5.0%
Venture funding                0.5%               2.4%              0.8%                0.5%               2.6%              0.8%
Other financing                2.2%               4.0%              3.2%                1.9%               3.7%              3.2%
High-tech
Mean: start-up capital        $67,000           $210,200           $88,430             $86,100           $187,500           $89,460
Personal savings               77.3%             73.8%              76.5%               76.4%             77.8%              75.3%
Bank loan                      4.0%               7.2%              6.9%                2.1%               2.6%               5.5%
Credit                         11.6%             15.5%              15.1%               8.7%              10.8%              11.4%
Home equity loan               6.6%              11.9%              8.5%                2.8%               2.4%              3.6%
Assets                         7.1%              13.4%              9.9%                6.6%               7.8%              7.8%
Family loan                    2.3%               6.9%              2.9%                3.1%               3.9%               2.8%
Venture funding                1.1%               5.6%              1.6%                0.8%               7.3%               1.6%
Other financing                1.6%               3.4%              1.8%                0.6%               3.3%               1.1%
Low-tech
Mean: start-up capital       $157,500           $226,000          $142,900            $142,100           $217,900          $132,600
Personal savings              70.4%              72.5%             69.3%               74.4%              76.9%             71.2%
Bank loan                     15.4%              21.0%             20.1%               12.2%              14.3%             15.7%
Credit                        15.2%              20.1%             18.5%               11.8%              16.4%             14.3%
Home equity loan              13.9%              19.0%             14.2%                5.5%               8.2%              6.5%
Assets                         9.9%              14.3%             13.2%                9.1%              11.6%             10.8%
Family loan                    5.3%               6.0%              4.9%                6.1%               5.4%              5.3%
Venture funding                0.4%               1.8%              0.7%                0.5%               1.5%              0.7%
Other financing                2.3%               4.1%              3.4%                2.1%               3.7%              3.4%
Notes: See Table 1a. Reported figures document the share of firms reporting they used the funding source for start-up capital as a
percentage of all surveyed firms. Firms can report using multiple funding sources.
                              Table 4: State level dependency on immigrant entrepreneurs
                                         2007                                                            2012
                  New firms      Share             All firms     Share            New firms      Share             All firms      Share
                     1             2                    3          4                 5             6                   7            8
Top 10      California           42.4%      California           33.1%      New Jersey           44.5%      California            33.4%
            Washington D.C.      42.3%      Washington D.C.      32.6%      New York             43.1%      Washington D.C.       29.7%
            New York             39.6%      New York             27.1%      California           41.9%      New York              29.1%
            New Jersey           38.6%      New Jersey           26.2%      Florida              33.0%      New Jersey            28.3%
            Florida              30.1%      Hawaii               25.3%      Washington D.C.      32.2%      Florida               25.9%
            Connecticut          28.3%      Florida              25.3%      Illinois             31.7%      Hawaii                23.4%
            Maryland             27.9%      Maryland             18.9%      Massachusetts        30.2%      Maryland              21.1%
            Illinois             27.7%      Nevada               18.6%      Texas                30.1%      Illinois              20.2%
            Massachusetts        26.4%      Illinois             17.7%      Maryland             30.1%      Texas                 19.8%
            Nevada               26.4%      Connecticut          17.2%      Hawaii               29.8%      Nevada                18.9%

Bottom 10   Montana               5.0%      North Dakota          3.4%      South Dakota         2.4%       South Dakota          2.5%
            West Virginia         5.0%      South Dakota          3.5%      North Dakota         4.7%       North Dakota          3.2%
            South Dakota          5.7%      Iowa                  4.5%      Idaho                4.8%       Nebraska              3.4%
            Wyoming               6.3%      Wyoming               4.5%      Montana              5.4%       Montana               3.4%
            Nebraska              6.6%      Montana               4.5%      Iowa                 6.1%       Iowa                  3.7%
            North Dakota          6.7%      Nebraska              4.6%      West Virginia        6.3%       Idaho                 4.7%
            Idaho                 7.1%      West Virginia         4.8%      Maine                6.6%       Wyoming               4.8%
            Iowa                  8.7%      Mississippi           5.2%      Wyoming              6.8%       West Virginia         5.0%
            Kentucky              9.0%      Arkansas              5.2%      Utah                 7.6%       Arkansas              5.4%
            Arkansas              9.0%      Idaho                 5.5%      Nebraska             8.0%       Maine                 5.4%
Notes: Table shows states with highest and lowest shares of immigrant owners among surveyed SBO firms. These statistics combine
Immigrant only and Mixed teams.
                                             Table 5a: Firm survival and growth summary statistics
                                                    All industries                             High-tech                             Low-tech
                                        Immigrant                                  Immigrant                             Immigrant
                                                       Mixed         Native only                Mixed      Native only                Mixed     Native only
                                          only                                       only                                  only
                                           1              2              3            4           5            6            7           8           9
Survival Rate
Survival until 2008                       87.5%        87.8%           86.2%        85.1%       89.7%        86.0%        87.8%       87.4%       86.2%
Survival until 2009                       77.4%        76.2%           74.7%        74.0%       79.6%        75.3%        77.8%       75.6%       74.6%
Survival until 2010                       69.4%        67.8%           66.7%        65.3%       70.9%        66.9%        69.9%       67.2%       66.7%
Survival until 2011                       62.8%        61.2%           60.1%        59.4%       63.8%        60.4%        63.2%       60.8%       60.1%
Conditional on Survival Until 2011
Mean: Log employment 2007                 0.948        1.342           1.047        0.569       0.983        0.674        0.991       1.417       1.094
Mean: Log employment 2011                 1.174        1.617           1.238        0.823       1.363        0.885        1.214       1.664       1.281
Mean: Employee growth 2007-2012           22.6%        27.4%           19.0%        25.4%       42.5%        21.1%        22.3%       24.7%       18.1%
Notes: See Table 1a. SBO firms are matched to LBD and followed until 2011.
                                       Table 5b: Firm survival and growth regressions
                                 All industries                        High-tech                          Low-tech
                       Alive in 2011      Growth 2007-11   Alive in 2011     Growth 2007-11   Alive in 2011     Growth 2007-11
                              1                  2                3                 4                5                6
                        N=139,000             N=87,000      N=16,000             N=10,000      N=123,000           N=77,000
1. No controls
Immigrant only            0.013              0.022            -0.015             0.032           0.017              0.020
                         (0.004)            (0.009)          (0.011)            (0.025)         (0.004)            (0.009)
Mixed                     0.008              0.055            0.057              0.153           -0.004             0.031
                         (0.006)            (0.015)          (0.014)            (0.042)         (0.006)            (0.018)
Constant                  0.623              0.165            0.611              0.216           0.624              0.158
Adj R2                   0.0001             0.0002           0.0011             0.0020          0.0002             0.0001

2. State & 6-Digit NAICS
Immigrant only           0.013               0.017            -0.017             0.011           -0.001             0.018
                        (0.004)             (0.010)          (0.011)            (0.026)         (0.004)            (0.010)
Mixed                    0.007               0.036            0.054              0.104           -0.002             0.023
                        (0.006)             (0.015)          (0.015)            (0.042)         (0.006)            (0.018)
Constant                 0.604               0.219            0.630              0.110           0.602              0.225
Adj R2                   0.046               0.029            0.015              0.045           0.050              0.028

3. Plus size in 2007
Immigrant only            0.029             -0.137           -0.003             -0.042           0.333             -0.151
                         (0.004)            (0.009)          (0.001)            (0.025)         (0.004)            (0.010)
Mixed                     0.002              0.042            0.036              0.159           -0.005             0.022
                         (0.006)            (0.014)          (0.014)            (0.025)         (0.006)            (0.016)
Constant                  0.520              0.605            0.557              0.370           0.516              0.629
Adj R2                    0.076              0.163            0.041              0.126           0.081              0.168
Notes: See Table 5a. Regressions are unweighted.
                          Table 6: Geographic distribution in 2012
                                                Immigrant              Share of
                                 Immigrant    owned share of          immigrant       Share of native
                               owned share of     group              owned firms       owned firms
                                   firms       employment            over groups       over groups
                                     1              2                     3                 4
New firms
High-tech industries
Overall                             28.5%            23.7%
Outside of Top 10 clusters          17.6%            17.0%               37.0%            69.0%
Top 10 clusters exlcuding SF        43.9%            37.8%               59.1%            30.1%
San Jose and San Francisco          62.5%            75.0%                3.9%             0.9%

Low-tech industries
Overall                             25.6%            23.0%
Outside of Top 10 clusters          18.1%            16.8%               48.9%            76.2%
Top 10 clusters exlcuding SF        42.0%            38.0%               49.6%            23.5%
San Jose and San Francisco          62.5%            52.5%                1.5%             0.3%

All firms
High-tech industries
Overall                             20.0%            13.9%
Outside of Top 10 clusters          12.2%             9.4%               39.8%            71.4%
Top 10 clusters exlcuding SF        33.6%            26.8%               56.4%            27.9%
San Jose and San Francisco          58.6%            36.4%                3.8%             0.7%

Low-tech industries
Overall                             17.4%            14.5%
Outside of Top 10 clusters          11.8%            10.0%               49.3%            77.8%
Top 10 clusters exlcuding SF        32.3%            27.0%               49.3%            21.8%
San Jose and San Francisco          41.6%            40.7%                1.4%             0.4%
Notes: See Table 1a. These statistics combine Immigrant only and Mixed teams. The Top-10 MSAs include
Atlanta, Boston, Chicago, Dallas, Houston, Los Angeles, Miami, New York, San Jose / San Francisco, and
Washington D.C.
                           Table 7: Geographic distribution for immigrant and native self-employed, 2012-2015

                                               Share of                Average          Average                      Average         Average
                                              immigrant  Share of     individual       individual                  household       household
                                Immigrant        self-  native self- income for       income for       Ratio of    income for      income for       Ratio of
                               share of self- employed employed immigrant self-       native self-   Column 4 to immigrant self-   native self-   Column 7 to
                                employed over groups over groups      employed         employed       Column 5      employed        employed       Column 8
                                    1             2          3            4                5              6             7               8              9
High-tech industries
Overall                          19.9%                                  $99,532        $104,636        95.1%        $163,918       $160,784          101.9%
Outside of Top 10 clusters       11.7%       35.5%        66.9%         $91,844         $96,169        95.5%        $147,648       $147,559          100.1%
Top 10 clusters excluding SF     31.4%       55.8%        30.4%        $100,541        $120,542        83.4%        $166,199       $186,265          89.2%
San Jose and San Francisco       45.1%        8.7%         2.6%        $124,389        $135,824        91.6%        $215,592       $202,175          106.6%

Low-tech industries
Overall                          21.9%                                 $64,993          $81,876        79.4%        $110,920       $130,900          84.7%
Outside of Top 10 clusters       14.0%       44.0%        75.5%        $62,185          $76,128        81.7%        $105,625       $121,704          86.8%
Top 10 clusters excluding SF     38.8%       52.3%        23.1%        $66,979          $98,403        68.1%        $113,462       $157,393          72.1%
San Jose and San Francisco       43.5%        3.7%         1.3%        $70,329         $120,730        58.3%        $138,142       $192,168          71.9%
Notes: See Table 6. Data from American Consumer Survey, pooling 2012-2015. Sample restricted to incorporated self-employed respondents aged 25-55.
                                  Table 8: First- and second-generation immigrant entrepreneurs
                                                         2007                                                         2012
                                 Immig. 1st gen.     Immig. 2nd gen.       Native only        Immig. 1st gen.     Immig. 2nd gen.       Native only
                                       1                   2                    3                   4                   5                    6
% of firms                           22.8%               4.4%                 71.9%               24.7%               6.5%                 67.6%
Mean: employees                       5.18                5.57                 5.44                4.95                4.69                 5.99
Mean: employees if >0                 6.47                7.22                 6.90                6.40                6.30                 7.83
Mean: receipts (thousands)           $734                $696                 $731                $744                $657                 $857
Mean: ln(receipts/employee)          11.44               11.29                11.34               11.51               11.37                11.39
Mean: payroll/employee              $27,720             $32,100              $31,310             $28,510             $31,350              $32,380
Mean: start-up capital             $162,900            $128,500             $137,400            $143,500            $119,600             $127,500
% 1 owner                             50.5%               43.8%              50.2%                 62.8%               60.3%              61.7%
% 2 owners                            37.0%               42.7%              38.6%                 27.1%               29.8%              28.9%
% 3 or more owners                    12.5%               13.5%              11.2%                 10.1%                9.9%               9.4%
% female owners                       47.4%               53.2%              46.9%                 42.8%               51.6%              43.4%
% owners < 35                         13.0%               19.9%              14.2%                 13.1%               22.6%              14.8%
% owners 35-55                        59.8%               55.2%              54.0%                 59.8%               54.5%              50.6%
% owners > 55                         10.4%                6.7%              15.4%                 12.6%                8.9%              19.6%
% mixed age                           16.8%               18.2%              16.5%                 14.5%               14.0%              15.0%
% high educated                       42.3%               40.5%              42.2%                 46.5%               47.5%              49.3%
% low educated                        44.8%               41.9%              42.6%                 43.3%               39.3%              38.6%
% mixed educated                      12.9%               17.7%              15.2%                 10.2%               13.2%              12.1%
% offer health insurance              24.0%               30.7%              34.1%                 18.3%               23.0%              26.7%
% offer 401k                           9.8%               11.9%              15.7%                  8.4%               11.0%              12.6%
% offer paid leave                    32.7%               38.3%              38.8%                 27.8%               30.6%              34.9%
% hire temps                          10.2%               11.7%              10.9%                  6.7%                6.7%               5.8%
% hire full-time workers              69.1%               68.3%              67.0%                 62.2%               61.6%              60.4%
% export                               8.3%               5.2%                4.7%                  6.9%               3.3%                2.6%
% outsource                            2.7%               1.1%                0.8%                  3.1%               1.1%                1.2%
% operations abroad                    1.5%               1.0%                0.5%                  2.8%               1.1%                1.1%
Notes: See Table 1a. Immig. 1st gen. firms are those with at least one first- but no second-generation immigrant owners. Immig. 2nd gen. firms are
those with at least one second- but no first-generation immigrant owners. These tabulations do not include firms with both first- and second-generation
immigrant owners.
                            Table A1a: Table 1a using data for all SBO firms
                                                2007                              2012
                                  Immigrant/Mixed      Native only   Immigrant/Mixed     Native only
                                         1                  2               3                 4
% of firms                             16.4%              83.6%           17.8%             82.2%
Mean: employees                         8.43              10.63            8.55             10.98
Mean: employees if >0                   9.41              11.69            9.61             12.26
Mean: receipts (thousands)            $1,467             $1,923          $1,573            $2,128
Mean: ln(receipts/employee)            11.57              11.54           11.60             11.58
Mean: payroll/employee                $31,570            $34,330         $31,650           $35,770
Mean: start-up capital               $157,500           $135,500        $139,000          $110,800
% 1 owner                             45.3%              47.8%           57.4%             60.9%
% 2 owners                            39.2%              37.2%           30.6%             29.1%
% 3 or more owners                    15.5%              15.0%           12.0%             10.0%
% female owners                       48.5%              45.0%           44.5%             40.9%
% owners < 35                          6.0%               4.8%            5.6%              4.8%
% owners 35-55                        51.3%              45.3%           49.8%             40.2%
% owners > 55                         23.6%              32.1%           27.9%             40.6%
% mixed age                           19.2%              17.8%           16.7%             14.4%
% high educated                       40.8%              40.4%           44.4%             45.0%
% low educated                        44.0%              43.5%           43.1%             43.1%
% mixed educated                      15.2%              16.1%           12.6%             11.9%
% offer health insurance              36.9%              50.3%           27.7%             40.0%
% offer 401k                          18.2%              29.8%           13.5%             22.9%
% offer paid leave                    44.9%              55.9%           36.7%             47.5%
% hire temps                          12.3%              14.7%            7.0%              7.1%
% hire full-time workers              75.7%              77.4%           66.9%             68.4%
% export                              11.0%               7.7%            7.5%              3.7%
% outsource                            2.7%               0.9%            2.9%              0.9%
% operations abroad                    1.6%               0.7%            2.6%              1.0%
% in high-tech industry                10.8%             9.3%            14.4%             12.6%
SBO survey size (rounded)             126,000           820,000          50,000           249,000
Notes: See Table 1a.
                                       Table A1b: Table 1b using data for all SBO firms
                                                  2007                                           2012
                              Immigrant only      Mixed        Native only    Immigrant only     Mixed    Native only
                                    1              2                3               4             5            6
% of firms                        12.3%           4.2%            83.6%           14.5%          3.3%        82.2%
Mean: employees                    6.95           12.77           10.63            7.21          14.41       10.98
Mean: employees if >0              7.79           14.05           11.69            8.14          15.87       12.26
Mean: receipts (thousands)       $1,185          $2,293          $1,923          $1,304         $2,743      $2,128
Mean: ln(receipts/employee)       11.57           11.59           11.54           11.61          11.68       11.58
Mean: payroll/employee           $29,280         $38,140         $34,330         $29,860        $39,300     $35,770
Mean: start-up capital          $145,300        $192,600        $135,500        $128,200       $184,100    $110,800
% 1 owner                         60.8%           0.0%           48.7%            70.6%          0.0%       60.9%
% 2 owners                        31.3%          62.4%           36.6%            22.9%         64.0%       29.0%
% 3 or more owners                 7.9%          37.6%           14.7%             6.5%         36.0%       10.0%
% female owners                   41.7%          68.5%           45.0%            39.0%         68.7%       40.9%
% owners < 35                      7.0%           3.1%            4.8%             6.3%          2.7%        4.8%
% owners 35-55                    56.4%          36.3%           45.3%            54.3%         30.2%       40.2%
% owners > 55                     25.7%          17.4%           32.1%            29.7%         20.0%       40.6%
% mixed age                       10.9%          43.3%           17.8%             9.8%         47.1%       14.2%
% high educated                   42.5%          35.7%           40.4%            45.8%         38.0%       45.0%
% low educated                    48.3%          31.4%           43.5%            46.6%         27.8%       43.1%
% mixed educated                   9.2%          32.9%           16.1%             7.6%         34.2%       11.9%
% offer health insurance          30.7%          54.5%           50.3%            23.8%         44.7%       40.0%
% offer 401k                      14.3%          29.4%           29.8%            11.6%         21.5%       22.9%
% offer paid leave                39.8%          59.5%           55.9%            33.3%         51.3%       44.9%
% hire temps                      10.5%          17.5%           14.7%             6.5%          9.0%        7.0%
% hire full-time workers          73.7%          81.5%           77.4%            65.0%         74.7%       68.4%
% export                          10.3%          13.2%            7.7%            7.0%          9.9%         3.7%
% outsource                        2.4%           3.3%            0.9%            2.6%          3.8%         0.9%
% operations abroad                1.6%           1.4%            0.7%            2.5%          3.3%         1.0%
% in high-tech industry           9.7%           13.8%           9.3%            13.4%          18.9%       12.6%
SBO survey size (rounded)        83,000          43,000         820,000          38,500         11,500     249,000
Notes: See Table 1b.
                                          Table A1c: Table 1c using data for all SBO firms
                                                    High-tech                                                Low-tech
                                        2007                         2012                       2007                         2012
                              Immigrant/                   Immigrant/                 Immigrant/                   Immigrant/
                                           Native only                  Native only                Native only                  Native only
                                 Mixed                        Mixed                      Mixed                        Mixed
                                   1            2               3            4             5            6               7            8
% of firms                       18.6%        81.4%           18.4%        81.6%         19.9%        80.1%           17.5%        82.6%
Mean: employees                   8.75         9.79           10.21        15.74          8.40        10.72            8.27        10.30
Mean: employees if >0            10.23        11.14           11.95        17.86          9.31        11.74            9.23        11.47
Mean: receipts (thousands)      $1,882        $1,784          $3,027      $4,197        $1,417        $1,937          $1,328       $1,831
Mean: ln(receipts/employee)      11.72        11.55           12.02        11.87         11.55        11.54           11.56        11.54
Mean: payroll/employee          $53,690      $50,350         $50,800      $48,180       $29,040      $32,750         $28,580      $34,020
Mean: start-up capital         $118,900      $107,200       $100,800      $91,550      $162,200      $138,600       $144,900      $113,500
% 1 owner                       42.6%         48.1%          52.4%        56.7%         45.7%         47.8%          58.3%        61.5%
% 2 owners                      37.5%         34.6%          31.7%        29.5%         39.5%         37.5%          30.4%        29.0%
% 3 or more owners              19.9%         17.3%          15.9%        13.8%         14.9%         14.8%          11.3%        9.5%
% female owners                 43.5%         39.9%          40.0%        36.4%         49.1%         45.6%          45.3%        42.5%
% owners < 35                   6.3%          4.4%           5.1%         3.8%          6.0%          4.9%           5.7%         4.9%
% owners 35-55                  51.3%         45.1%          47.9%        38.5%         51.2%         45.3%          50.1%        40.5%
% owners > 55                   22.2%         32.3%          26.8%        41.2%         23.8%         32.1%          28.1%        40.5%
% mixed age                     20.3%         18.2%          20.2%        16.5%         19.0%         17.8%          16.1%        14.1%
% high educated                 64.5%         55.6%          66.0%        55.9%         37.9%         38.8%          40.7%        43.4%
% low educated                  18.3%         26.0%          19.9%        29.5%         47.1%         45.3%          47.0%        45.1%
% mixed educated                17.3%         18.4%          14.1%        14.6%         15.0%         15.9%          12.3%        11.5%
% offer health insurance        58.6%         60.5%          49.4%        54.0%         34.2%         49.2%          24.0%        37.9%
% offer 401k                    35.1%         39.7%          26.5%        32.2%         16.2%         28.8%          11.3%        21.6%
% offer paid leave              53.9%         56.1%          47.5%        51.6%         43.8%         55.8%          34.8%        46.9%
% hire temps                    12.9%         14.0%          7.6%         7.7%          12.2%         14.8%          6.9%         7.0%
% hire full-time workers        75.5%         74.2%          70.8%        68.8%         75.7%         77.7%          66.2%        68.4%
% export                        23.1%         16.4%          23.7%        12.1%          9.6%         6.8%            4.9%         2.5%
% outsource                     8.9%          2.6%           10.4%        3.0%           1.9%         0.7%            1.6%         0.6%
% operations abroad             4.4%          1.9%           8.5%         3.0%           1.2%         0.5%            1.6%         0.7%
SBO survey size (rounded)       16,500       80,000          8,700        39,000       109,000       740,000         42,000       211,000
Notes: See Table 1c.
                  Table A2: Sources of expansion capital for immigrant and native entrepreneurs
                                          2007                                        2012
                         Immigrant only   Mixed       Native only   Immigrant only    Mixed       Native only
                              1            2              3              4             5              6
All firms
Personal savings             38.4%        36.7%         34.5%           37.2%         33.7%         28.6%
Credit                       15.9%        21.8%         20.5%            9.6%         12.1%         10.8%
Bank loan                    10.9%        16.8%         15.8%            6.3%          8.2%          8.8%
Profit from business         10.5%        16.3%         15.4%            8.0%         13.7%         10.8%
Home equity loan              9.3%        10.8%         8.7%             3.0%          2.4%          2.3%
Assets                        6.0%         7.6%         7.1%             5.2%          4.2%          4.4%
Family loan                   3.1%         3.2%         2.4%             2.3%          3.5%          1.9%
Venture funding               0.3%         1.7%         0.5%             0.5%          1.5%          0.5%
Other financing               1.5%         2.4%         1.7%             0.7%          1.5%          1.1%
Did not expand               32.2%        30.3%         35.6%           34.8%         32.6%         43.8%
High-tech
Personal savings             37.7%        31.0%         31.1%           32.8%         33.1%         24.8%
Credit                       14.3%        17.5%         17.2%            8.2%         10.7%          8.9%
Bank loan                     6.5%        11.8%         9.5%             2.6%          4.2%          5.4%
Profit from business         16.0%        21.2%         18.5%           10.1%         14.6%         11.9%
Home equity loan              6.5%         5.4%         6.1%             1.8%          1.7%          1.9%
Assets                        4.3%         7.2%         4.9%             3.4%          4.7%          3.4%
Family loan                   1.9%         5.0%         1.9%             1.9%          2.4%          1.8%
Venture funding               1.0%         6.0%         1.3%             1.5%          5.6%          1.5%
Other financing               1.5%         3.6%         1.6%             0.5%          3.1%          1.0%
Did not expand               36.7%        30.7%         40.2%           41.6%         31.7%         50.3%
Low-tech
Personal savings             38.1%        37.7%         34.9%           37.9%         33.8%         29.2%
Credit                       16.1%        22.6%         20.9%            9.9%         12.4%         11.1%
Bank loan                    11.4%        17.6%         16.5%            6.9%          9.1%          9.3%
Profit from business          9.8%        15.4%         15.0%            7.7%         13.5%         10.6%
Home equity loan              9.7%        11.7%         9.0%             3.2%          2.6%          2.4%
Assets                        6.2%         7.7%         7.4%             5.5%          4.1%          4.5%
Family loan                   3.2%         2.9%         2.4%             2.4%          3.8%          1.9%
Venture funding               0.2%         1.0%         0.4%             0.3%          0.7%          0.3%
Other financing               1.5%         2.2%         1.7%             0.7%          1.2%          1.1%
Did not expand               31.6%         3.3%         35.0%           33.6%         32.8%         42.7%
Notes: See Table 3.
                       Table A3a: Regressions with mixed founding team indicator:
                                          ln(firm employment)
                              All industries                     High-tech                           Low-tech
                      1              2          3        4           5          6             7         8            9
New firms
Immig only          -0.227       -0.184        n.a.    -0.226     -0.046       n.a.        -0.228     -0.202        n.a.
                    (0.008)      (0.010)               (0.022)    (0.028)                  (0.009)    (0.011)
Mixed                0.318       -0.008                 0.381      0.000                    0.327     -0.008
                    (0.015)      (0.014)               (0.035)    (0.034)                  (0.017)    (0.015)
Asian                            -0.166                           -0.056                              -0.186
                                 (0.012)                          (0.034)                             (0.013)
Hispanic                         -0.046                           -0.118                              -0.037
                                 (0.025)                          (0.076)                             (0.026)
Constant             1.44          1.04                 1.10        0.72                    1.48        1.10
N                  148,000      148,000                18,000     18,000                  130,000     130,000
Adj R2              0.009        0.278                  0.014      0.221                   0.009       0.279
All firms
Immig only          -0.451       -0.222        n.a.    -0.398     -0.162       n.a.        -0.458     -0.230        n.a.
                    (0.004)      (0.005)               (0.014)    (0.016)                  (0.004)    (0.005)
Mixed                0.237       -0.007                 0.312      0.012                    0.222     -0.016
                    (0.006)      (0.006)               (0.016)    (0.016)                  (0.007)    (0.006)
Asian                            -0.283                            0.041                              -0.338
                                 (0.007)                          (0.022)                             (0.007)
Hispanic                         -0.189                            0.026                              -0.213
                                 (0.013)                          (0.045)                             (0.014)
Constant             2.10          1.55                 2.07        1.38                    2.11        1.58
N                  1,152,000 1,151,000                130,000    130,000                 1,021,000 1,021,000
Adj R2               0.013     0.257                   0.010      0.259                    0.014     0.259
Year                 Yes           Yes         Yes      Yes         Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes         Yes
State                No            Yes         Yes      No          Yes        Yes           No         Yes         Yes
Sector (6-digit)     No            Yes         Yes      No          Yes        Yes           No         Yes         Yes
Gender               No            Yes         Yes      No          Yes        Yes           No         Yes         Yes
Ethnicity/Race       No            Yes         Yes      No          Yes        Yes           No         Yes         Yes
Age                  No            Yes         Yes      No          Yes        Yes           No         Yes         Yes
Education            No            Yes         Yes      No          Yes        Yes           No         Yes         Yes
N Owners             No            Yes         Yes      No          Yes        Yes           No         Yes         Yes
Firm Size            No            No          Yes      No          No         Yes           No         No          Yes
Notes: See Table 1a. Data for 2007 and 2012 are pooled. Regressions are unweighted. Immigrant only and Mixed firms
presented separately. High-tech is defined as belonging to a high-tech or patent-intensive industry, as described in the
main text. Control variables are entered through indicator variables. Robust standard errors are reported.
                        Table A3b: Regressions with mixed founding team indicator:
                                            ln(start-up capital)
                             All industries                       High-tech                       Low-tech
                     1              2           3         4           5         6         7          8         9
New firms
Immig only          0.023       -0.049         0.023    -0.261      0.036      0.088     0.066    -0.057      0.018
                   (0.011)      (0.013)       (0.014)   (0.031)    (0.037)    (0.043)   (0.012)   (0.014)    (0.015)
Mixed               0.607        0.034         0.030     0.813      0.039      0.010     0.600     0.031      0.033
                   (0.020)      (0.018)       (0.019)   (0.053)    (0.046)    (0.051)   (0.022)   (0.020)    (0.021)
Asian                            0.014         0.067               -0.135     -0.136               0.040      0.099
                                (0.017)       (0.018)              (0.044)    (0.052)             (0.018)    (0.019)
Hispanic                        -0.479        -0.499               -0.198     -0.274              -0.499     -0.515
                                (0.032)       (0.035)              (0.102)    (0.113)             0.0339     (0.037)
Constant            10.75        10.00          9.66    10.17        9.30       9.07     10.82     10.11       9.74
N                  154,000     154,000        122,000   19,500     19,500     15,000    135,000   135,000    107,000
Adj R2              0.009       0.298          0.369     0.021      0.325     0.397      0.008     0.283      0.356
All firms
Immig only          0.035        0.058         0.122    -0.220      0.068      0.115     0.077     0.057      0.123
                   (0.006)      (0.007)       (0.007)   (0.017)    (0.020)    (0.021)   (0.006)   (0.008)    (0.008)
Mixed               0.418        0.053         0.057     0.462      0.060      0.041     0.434     0.048      0.059
                   (0.009)      (0.009)       (0.010)   (0.024)    (0.022)    (0.023)   (0.010)   (0.010)    (0.010)
Asian                            0.030         0.095               -0.067     -0.773               0.052      0.131
                                (0.009)       (0.010)              (0.025)    (0.027)             (0.010)    (0.010)
Hispanic                        -0.433        -0.414               -0.375     -0.428              -0.439     -0.411
                                (0.018)       (0.018)              (0.054)    (0.058)             (0.019)    (0.019)
Constant            10.84         9.99          9.63    10.54        9.54       9.31     10.87     10.05       9.66
N                  822,000     822,000        751,000   97,000     97,000     86,000    725,000   725,000    664,000
Adj R2              0.011       0.233          0.261     0.016      0.258     0.274      0.010     0.227      0.259
Year                 Yes          Yes           Yes      Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes
State                No           Yes           Yes      No         Yes        Yes        No        Yes        Yes
Sector (6-digit)     No           Yes           Yes      No         Yes        Yes        No        Yes        Yes
Gender               No           Yes           Yes      No         Yes        Yes        No        Yes        Yes
Ethnicity/Race       No           Yes           Yes      No         Yes        Yes        No        Yes        Yes
Age                  No           Yes           Yes      No         Yes        Yes        No        Yes        Yes
Education            No           Yes           Yes      No         Yes        Yes        No        Yes        Yes
N Owners             No           Yes           Yes      No         Yes        Yes        No        Yes        Yes
Firm Size            No           No            Yes      No         No         Yes        No        No         Yes
Notes: See Table A3a.
                        Table A3c: Regressions with mixed founding team indicator:
                                          ln(receipts/employee)
                              All industries                       High-tech                        Low-tech
                      1              2           3         4           5         6          7          8         9
New firms
Immig only           0.088        0.070         0.060     0.107      0.029      0.030      0.086     0.073      0.061
                    (0.008)      (0.010)       (0.010)   (0.023)    (0.031)    (0.031)    (0.009)   (0.010)    (0.010)
Mixed                0.127        0.042         0.042     0.239      0.086      0.087      0.095     0.031      0.030
                    (0.014)      (0.013)       (0.013)   (0.032)    (0.032)    (0.032)    (0.002)   (0.014)    (0.014)
Asian                             0.048         0.040                0.071      0.072                0.043      0.032
                                 (0.012)       (0.012)              (0.037)    (0.037)              (0.013)    (0.013)
Hispanic                         -0.163        -0.165               -0.224     -0.221               -0.158     -0.160
                                 (0.024)       (0.023)             (0.0812)    (0.082)              (0.025)    (0.024)
Constant            11.41         11.18        11.230     11.53      11.09      11.07     11.39      11.18      11.25
N                  148,000      148,000        148,000   18,000     18,000     18,000    130,000    130,000    130,000
Adj R2              0.002        0.274          0.276     0.009      0.136     0.137      0.001      0.291      0.294
All firms
Immig only          -0.018        0.059         0.056     0.172      0.061      0.065     -0.061     0.058      0.054
                    (0.004)      (0.004)       (0.004)   (0.012)    (0.013)    (0.013)    (0.004)   (0.004)    (0.004)
Mixed                0.043        0.056         0.056     0.258      0.098      0.097      0.005     0.046      0.046
                    (0.005)      (0.005)       (0.005)   (0.015)    (0.013)    (0.013)    (0.006)   (0.005)    (0.005)
Asian                             0.006         0.002               -0.007     -0.008                0.006      0.000
                                 (0.005)       (0.005)              (0.017)    (0.017)              (0.006)    (0.006)
Hispanic                         -0.199        -0.201               -0.146     -0.147               -0.205     -0.208
                                 (0.010)       (0.014)              (0.038)    (0.038)              (0.011)    (0.011)
Constant            11.68         11.42         11.43     11.50      11.25      11.22      11.7      11.43      11.46
N                  1,146,000 1,146,000 1,146,000         127,000   127,000     127,000   1,019,000 1,019,000 1,019,000
Adj R2               0.000     0.367     0.367            0.021     0.364       0.364      0.000     0.368     0.368
Year                 Yes           Yes           Yes       Yes       Yes         Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes
State                No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Sector (6-digit)     No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Gender               No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Ethnicity/Race       No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Age                  No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Education            No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
N Owners             No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Firm Size            No            No            Yes       No        No          Yes       No         No         Yes
Notes: See Table A3a.
                        Table A3d: Regressions with mixed founding team indicator:
                                           ln(payroll/employee)
                              All industries                       High-tech                        Low-tech
                      1              2           3         4           5         6          7          8         9
New firms
Immig only          -0.191       -0.036        -0.020    -0.003     -0.036     -0.030     -0.215    -0.037     -0.021
                    (0.006)      (0.008)       (0.008)   (0.019)    (0.025)    (0.025)    (0.007)   (0.008)    (0.008)
Mixed                0.098        0.033         0.034     0.253      0.066      0.067      0.037     0.022      0.023
                    (0.011)      (0.010)       (0.010)   (0.026)    (0.026)    (0.026)    (0.012)   (0.011)    (0.011)
Asian                            -0.033        -0.019                0.038      0.045               -0.048     -0.033
                                 (0.010)       (0.010)              (0.031)    (0.031)              (0.010)    (0.010)
Hispanic                         -0.146        -0.143               -0.201     -0.186               -0.144     -0.141
                                 (0.020)       (0.020)              (0.071)    (0.071)              (0.020)    (0.020)
Constant             9.99          9.73          9.65     10.44      10.09      10.00      9.94       9.69       9.60
N                  148,000      148,000        148,000   18,000     18,000     18,000    130,000    130,000    130,000
Adj R2              0.007        0.255          0.264     0.005      0.101     0.119      0.008      0.247      0.255
All firms
Immig only          -0.215       -0.044        -0.020    -0.055     -0.037     -0.016     -0.244    -0.046     -0.022
                    (0.003)      (0.003)       (0.003)   (0.008)    (0.010)    (0.009)    (0.003)   (0.003)    (0.003)
Mixed                0.113        0.064         0.065     0.198      0.074      0.073      0.055     0.059      0.061
                    (0.004)      (0.003)       (0.003)   (0.008)    (0.008)    (0.008)    (0.004)   (0.004)    (0.004)
Asian                            -0.083        -0.053               -0.003     -0.008               -0.098     -0.064
                                 (0.004)       (0.004)              (0.012)    (0.012)              (0.004)    (0.004)
Hispanic                         -0.203        -0.183               -0.169     -0.172               -0.207     -0.186
                                 (0.008)       (0.008)              (0.029)    (0.027)              (0.009)    (0.009)
Constant            10.20          9.93          9.77     10.69      10.29      10.11     10.15       9.88       9.72
N                  1,151,000 1,151,000 1,151,000         130,000   130,000     130,000   1,021,000 1,021,000 1,021,000
Adj R2               0.007     0.287     0.310            0.006     0.116       0.160      0.007     0.278     0.299
Year                 Yes           Yes           Yes       Yes       Yes         Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes
State                No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Sector (6-digit)     No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Gender               No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Ethnicity/Race       No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Age                  No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Education            No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
N Owners             No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Firm Size            No            No            Yes       No        No          Yes       No         No         Yes
Notes: See Table A3a.
                        Table A3e: Regressions with mixed founding team indicator:
                                       (0,1) use temporary workers
                              All industries                       High-tech                        Low-tech
                      1              2           3         4           5         6          7          8         9
New firms
Immig only          -0.025        0.001         0.005    -0.006      0.012      0.017     -0.028    -0.001      0.003
                    (0.002)      (0.002)       (0.003)   (0.005)    (0.006)    (0.007)    (0.002)   (0.003)    (0.003)
Mixed                0.022       -0.008        -0.010     0.023     -0.027     -0.028      0.024    -0.003     -0.005
                    (0.004)      (0.004)       (0.004)   (0.008)    (0.009)    (0.010)    (0.004)   (0.004)    (0.005)
Asian                            -0.011        -0.004               -0.005     -0.007               -0.013     -0.004
                                 (0.003)       (0.004)              (0.008)    (0.009)              (0.003)    (0.004)
Hispanic                          0.009         0.007               -0.002      0.005                0.010      0.007
                                 (0.007)       (0.007)              (0.018)    (0.022)              (0.007)    (0.008)
Constant            0.140         0.068         0.027     0.104      0.048      0.019     0.144      0.073      0.029
N                  185,000      185,000        147,000   24,000     24,000     18,000    161,000    161,000    129,000
Adj R2              0.009        0.077          0.105     0.005      0.060     0.117      0.010      0.079      0.105
All firms
Immig only          -0.078       -0.012        -0.002    -0.065     -0.008      0.004     -0.080    -0.012     -0.003
                    (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.001)   (0.003)    (0.004)    (0.004)    (0.001)   (0.002)    (0.002)
Mixed                0.021       -0.020        -0.018     0.038     -0.026     -0.024      0.015    -0.019     -0.017
                    (0.002)      (0.002)       (0.002)   (0.005)    (0.005)    (0.005)    (0.002)   (0.002)    (0.002)
Asian                            -0.038        -0.027               -0.007     -0.013               -0.044     -0.031
                                 (0.002)       (0.002)              (0.005)    (0.005)              (0.002)    (0.002)
Hispanic                         -0.030        -0.027               -0.014     -0.021               -0.033     -0.029
                                 (0.002)       (0.004)              (0.002)    (0.012)              (0.004)    (0.004)
Constant            0.266         0.118         0.046     0.288      0.115      0.022     0.264      0.117      0.049
N                  1,231,000 1,230,000 1,138,000         143,000   143,000     129,000   1,088,000 1,087,000 1,009,000
Adj R2               0.030     0.161     0.181            0.034     0.171       0.217      0.030     0.160     0.177
Year                 Yes           Yes           Yes       Yes       Yes         Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes
State                No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Sector (6-digit)     No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Gender               No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Ethnicity/Race       No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Age                  No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Education            No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
N Owners             No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Firm Size            No            No            Yes       No        No          Yes       No         No         Yes
Notes: See Table A3a.
                        Table A3f: Regressions with mixed founding team indicator:
                                        (0,1) use full-time workers
                              All industries                       High-tech                        Low-tech
                      1              2           3         4           5         6          7          8         9
New firms
Immig only          -0.016       -0.014         0.009     0.002     -0.003      0.005     -0.018    -0.015      0.009
                    (0.003)      (0.004)       (0.004)   (0.008)    (0.011)    (0.012)    (0.003)   (0.004)    (0.004)
Mixed                0.074        0.012         0.020     0.131      0.014      0.018      0.065     0.010      0.019
                    (0.004)      (0.005)       (0.005)   (0.011)    (0.011)    (0.011)    (0.005)   (0.005)    (0.005)
Asian                             0.010         0.028                0.021      0.025                0.006      0.027
                                 (0.005)       (0.005)              (0.013)    (0.014)              (0.005)    (0.005)
Hispanic                          0.017         0.017                0.003      0.015                0.018      0.016
                                 (0.010)       (0.010)              (0.031)    (0.033)              (0.010)    (0.010)
Constant            0.716         0.658         0.570     0.661      0.567      0.512     0.723      0.677      0.579
N                  185,000      185,000        147,000   24,000     24,000     18,000    162,000    161,000    129,000
Adj R2              0.009        0.091          0.183     0.007      0.089     0.172      0.009      0.092      0.185
All firms
Immig only          -0.072       -0.031        -0.009    -0.049     -0.025     -0.006     -0.075    -0.031     -0.009
                    (0.001)      (0.002)       (0.002)   (0.004)    (0.005)    (0.004)    (0.001)   (0.002)    (0.002)
Mixed                0.034        0.008         0.011     0.065      0.013      0.013      0.028     0.006      0.011
                    (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.001)   (0.003)    (0.004)    (0.003)    (0.002)   (0.002)    (0.002)
Asian                            -0.025        -0.002                0.018      0.012               -0.032     -0.004
                                 (0.002)       (0.002)              (0.006)    (0.005)              (0.002)    (0.002)
Hispanic                         -0.015        -0.001                0.021      0.014               -0.019     -0.002
                                 (0.004)       (0.004)              (0.013)    (0.012)              (0.004)    (0.004)
Constant            0.865         0.809         0.689     0.846      0.766      0.675     0.867      0.816      0.690
N                  1,232,000 1,231,000 1,139,000         143,000   143,000     129,000   1,089,000 1,088,000 1,010,000
Adj R2               0.024     0.107     0.195            0.015     0.120       0.207      0.023     0.106     0.194
Year                 Yes           Yes           Yes       Yes       Yes         Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes
State                No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Sector (6-digit)     No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Gender               No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Ethnicity/Race       No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Age                  No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Education            No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
N Owners             No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Firm Size            No            No            Yes       No        No          Yes       No         No         Yes
Notes: See Table A3a.
                        Table A3g: Regressions with mixed founding team indicator:
                                      (0,1) offer at least one benefit
                              All industries                       High-tech                        Low-tech
                      1              2           3         4           5         6          7          8         9
New firms
Immig only          -0.157       -0.088        -0.075    -0.034     -0.024     -0.024     -0.175    -0.098     -0.083
                    (0.003)      (0.004)       (0.004)   (0.008)    (0.011)    (0.012)    (0.003)   (0.004)    (0.004)
Mixed                0.055       -0.002         0.004     0.114      0.023      0.025      0.038    -0.006      0.000
                    (0.005)      (0.005)       (0.005)   (0.001)    (0.012)    (0.012)    (0.006)   (0.005)    (0.006)
Asian                            -0.056        -0.040               -0.016     -0.003               -0.066     -0.047
                                 (0.005)       (0.005)              (0.014)    (0.015)              (0.005)    (0.006)
Hispanic                         -0.071        -0.061               -0.072     -0.030               -0.068     -0.062
                                 (0.011)       (0.011)              (0.032)    (0.034)              (0.010)    (0.011)
Constant             0.60          0.47          0.38     0.67        0.54       0.49      0.59       0.47       0.36
N                  185,000      185,000        147,000   24,000     24,000     18,000    161,000    161,000    129,000
Adj R2              0.024        0.143          0.229     0.011      0.068     0.150      0.028      0.149      0.235
All firms
Immig only          -0.204       -0.107        -0.087    -0.073     -0.045     -0.030     -0.224    -0.115     -0.095
                    (0.001)      (0.002)       (0.002)   (0.004)    (0.005)    (0.004)    (0.002)   (0.002)    (0.002)
Mixed                0.026       -0.004        -0.001     0.061      0.013      0.014      0.014    -0.006     -0.002
                    (0.002)      (0.002)       (0.002)   (0.003)    (0.003)    (0.003)    (0.002)   (0.002)    (0.002)
Asian                            -0.097        -0.073                0.003      0.003               -0.116     -0.085
                                 (0.002)       (0.002)              (0.006)    (0.006)              (0.003)    (0.003)
Hispanic                         -0.110        -0.090               -0.049     -0.050               -0.114     -0.092
                                 (0.005)       (0.004)              (0.013)    (0.013)              (0.005)    (0.005)
Constant             0.82          0.71          0.58     0.86        0.76       0.67      0.82       0.70       0.56
N                  1,232,000 1,232,000 1,139,000         143,000   143,000     129,000   1,090,000 1,089,000 1,010,000
Adj R2               0.043     0.165     0.245            0.019     0.102       0.179      0.049     0.171     0.252
Year                 Yes           Yes           Yes       Yes       Yes         Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes
State                No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Sector (6-digit)     No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Gender               No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Ethnicity/Race       No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Age                  No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Education            No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
N Owners             No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Firm Size            No            No            Yes       No        No          Yes       No         No         Yes
Notes: See Table A3a.
                      Table A3h: Regressions with mixed founding team indicator:
                                      (0,1) offer health insurance
                              All industries                       High-tech                        Low-tech
                      1              2           3         4           5         6          7          8         9
New firms
Immig only           -0.162       -0.088        -0.073    -0.073     -0.040     -0.037     -0.175    -0.096     -0.079
                    (0.003)      (0.003)       (0.004)   (0.009)    (0.011)    (0.012)    (0.003)   (0.004)    (0.004)
Mixed                0.059        -0.010        -0.007    0.126      0.017      0.020      0.039     -0.015     -0.012
                    (0.005)      (0.005)       (0.005)   (0.013)    (0.013)    (0.014)    (0.006)   (0.005)    (0.006)
Asian                             -0.072        -0.054               -0.044     -0.022               -0.078     -0.060
                                 (0.004)       (0.005)              (0.014)    (0.015)              (0.005)    (0.005)
Hispanic                          -0.134        -0.140               -0.122     -0.092               -0.133     -0.143
                                 (0.008)       (0.009)              (0.013)    (0.035)              (0.009)    (0.010)
Constant            0.411         0.258         0.150     0.497      0.341      0.274     0.400      0.255      0.138
N                  185,000      185,000        147,000   24,000     24,000     18,000    161,000    161,000    129,000
Adj R2              0.027        0.161          0.267    0.013      0.088      0.195      0.032      0.167      0.264
All firms
Immig only           -0.244       -0.123        -0.098    -0.119     -0.064     -0.042     -0.263    -0.130     -0.105
                    (0.001)      (0.002)       (0.002)   (0.004)    (0.005)    (0.005)    (0.002)   (0.002)    (0.002)
Mixed                0.045        -0.012        -0.009    0.086      0.018      0.017      0.029     -0.017     -0.012
                    (0.002)      (0.002)       (0.002)   (0.004)    (0.004)    (0.004)    (0.002)   (0.002)    (0.002)
Asian                             -0.117        -0.084               -0.017     -0.015               -0.135     -0.095
                                 (0.002)       (0.002)              (0.007)    (0.006)              (0.003)    (0.002)
Hispanic                          -0.193        -0.174               -0.128     -0.136               -0.197     -0.175
                                 (0.005)       (0.005)              (0.015)    (0.014)              (0.005)    (0.005)
Constant            0.683         0.509         0.335     0.753      0.596      0.458     0.676      0.501      0.320
N                  1,233,000 1,232,000 1,140,000         143,000   143,000     129,000   1,090,000 1,089,000 1,010,000
Adj R2               0.051     0.217     0.314            0.027     0.149       0.265      0.058     0.222     0.317
Year                 Yes           Yes           Yes       Yes       Yes         Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes
State                No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Sector (6-digit)     No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Gender               No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Ethnicity/Race       No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Age                  No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Education            No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
N Owners             No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Firm Size            No            No            Yes       No        No          Yes       No         No         Yes
Notes: See Table A3a.
                        Table A3i: Regressions with mixed founding team indicator:
                                          (0,1) offer paid time off
                              All industries                       High-tech                        Low-tech
                      1              2           3         4           5         6          7          8         9
New firms
Immig only          -0.127       -0.069        -0.055     -0.078    -0.034     -0.039     -0.134    -0.074     -0.057
                    (0.003)      (0.004)       (0.004)   (0.008)    (0.011)    (0.012)    (0.003)   (0.004)    (0.004)
Mixed                0.080        0.004         0.009      0.167     0.028      0.031      0.062    -0.001      0.004
                    (0.005)      (0.005)       (0.005)   (0.0130    (0.013)    (0.013)    (0.006)   (0.006)    (0.006)
Asian                            -0.047        -0.028               -0.045     -0.029               -0.049     -0.029
                                 (0.005)       (0.005)              (0.013)    (0.015)              (0.005)    (0.006)
Hispanic                         -0.014        -0.006               -0.015      0.016               -0.013     -0.008
                                 (0.010)       (0.010)              (0.031)    (0.034)              (0.010)    (0.011)
Constant            0.459         0.321         0.212     0.445      0.296      0.233     0.461      0.332      0.213
N                  185,000      185,000        147,000   24,000     24,000     18,000    161,000    161,000    129,000
Adj R2              0.016        0.134          0.238     0.015      0.135     0.267      0.017      0.135      0.234
All firms
Immig only          -0.120       -0.102        -0.078    -0.122     -0.057     -0.035     -0.223    -0.108     -0.083
                    (0.002)      (0.002)       (0.003)   (0.004)    (0.005)    (0.005)    (0.002)   (0.002)    (0.002)
Mixed                0.041       -0.004        -0.001     0.098      0.022      0.022      0.026    -0.009     -0.005
                    (0.002)      (0.002)       (0.002)   (0.004)    (0.004)    (0.004)    (0.002)   (0.002)    (0.002)
Asian                            -0.097        -0.066               -0.011     -0.014               -0.079     -0.075
                                 (0.002)       (0.002)              (0.007)    (0.006)              (0.005)    (0.003)
Hispanic                         -0.072        -0.053                0.007     -0.001               -0.083     -0.057
                                 (0.005)       (0.005)              (0.015)    (0.014)              (0.005)    (0.005)
Constant            0.714         0.560         0.393     0.727      0.583      0.443     0.713      0.559      0.386
N                  1,233,000 1,232,000 1,139,000         143,000   143,000     129,000   1,090,000 1,089,000 1,010,000
Adj R2               0.039     0.180     0.277            0.024     0.183       0.306      0.042     0.181     0.273
Year                 Yes           Yes           Yes       Yes       Yes         Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes
State                No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Sector (6-digit)     No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Gender               No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Ethnicity/Race       No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Age                  No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Education            No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
N Owners             No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Firm Size            No            No            Yes       No        No          Yes       No         No         Yes
Notes: See Table A3a.
                        Table A3j: Regressions with mixed founding team indicator:
                                            (0,1) offer 401k plan
                              All industries                       High-tech                        Low-tech
                      1              2           3         4           5         6          7          8         9
New firms
Immig only          -0.090       -0.046        -0.039    -0.028     -0.037     -0.038     -0.099    -0.048     -0.041
                    (0.002)      (0.003)       (0.003)   (0.007)    (0.009)    (0.011)    (0.002)   (0.003)    (0.003)
Mixed               -0.011       -0.039        -0.040    0.0001     -0.026     -0.019     -0.019    -0.041     -0.043
                    (0.004)      (0.004)       (0.004)   (0.011)    (0.012)    (0.013)    (0.004)   (0.004)    (0.005)
Asian                            -0.027        -0.021                0.019      0.013               -0.037     -0.027
                                 (0.003)       (0.004)              (0.012)    (0.014)              (0.003)    (0.004)
Hispanic                         -0.070        -0.072               -0.096     -0.102               -0.069     -0.070
                                 (0.006)       (0.007)              (0.025)    (0.023)              (0.006)    (0.007)
Constant            0.199         0.056        -0.011     0.283      0.187      0.127     0.188      0.039     -0.029
N                  185,000      185,000        147,000   24,000     24,000     18,000    161,000    161,000    129,000
Adj R2              0.012        0.120          0.172     0.005      0.054     0.101      0.015      0.128      0.181
All firms
Immig only          -0.214       -0.096        -0.078    -0.123     -0.068     -0.053     -0.229    -0.100     -0.081
                    (0.001)      (0.002)       (0.002)   (0.004)    (0.005)    (0.003)    (0.001)   (0.002)    (0.002)
Mixed                0.007       -0.039        -0.035     0.030     -0.036     -0.030     -0.006    -0.039     -0.035
                    (0.002)      (0.002)       (0.002)   (0.005)    (0.005)    (0.005)    (0.002)   (0.002)    (0.002)
Asian                            -0.077        -0.053               -0.012     -0.025               -0.089     -0.059
                                 (0.002)       (0.002)              (0.007)    (0.007)              (0.002)    (0.002)
Hispanic                         -0.152        -0.143               -0.094     -0.108               -0.158     -0.146
                                 (0.004)       (0.004)              (0.014)    (0.015)              (0.004)    (0.004)
Constant            0.460         0.208         0.067     0.542      0.302      0.175     0.451      0.196      0.052
N                  1,233,000 1,232,000 1,140,000         143,000   143,000     129,000   1,090,000 1,089,000 1,010,000
Adj R2               0.037     0.192     0.250            0.025     0.132       0.206      0.041     0.198     0.253
Year                 Yes           Yes           Yes       Yes       Yes         Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes
State                No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Sector (6-digit)     No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Gender               No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Ethnicity/Race       No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Age                  No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Education            No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
N Owners             No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Firm Size            No            No            Yes       No        No          Yes       No         No         Yes
Notes: See Table A3a.
                        Table A3k: Regressions with mixed founding team indicator:
                              (0,1) engage in at least one international activity
                              All industries                       High-tech                        Low-tech
                      1              2           3         4           5         6          7          8         9
New firms
Immig only           0.044        0.046         0.047     0.117      0.125      0.133      0.033     0.035      0.034
                    (0.002)      (0.002)       (0.003)   (0.007)    (0.009)    (0.011)    (0.002)   (0.002)    (0.003)
Mixed                0.081        0.054         0.054     0.173      0.118      0.118      0.058     0.003      0.041
                    (0.004)      (0.003)       (0.004)   (0.011)    (0.012)    (0.013)    (0.004)   (0.003)    (0.004)
Asian                            -0.010        -0.008               -0.017     -0.017               -0.010     -0.009
                                 (0.003)       (0.003)              (0.011)    (0.014)              (0.003)    (0.003)
Hispanic                         -0.005        -0.002                0.041      0.037               -0.005     -0.001
                                 (0.005)       (0.006)              (0.025)    (0.030)              (0.005)    (0.006)
Constant             0.06          0.02          0.01     0.12        0.03       0.02     0.055      0.017       0.01
N                  186,000      186,000        148,000   24,000     24,000     18,000    163,000    162,000    130,000
Adj R2              0.006        0.119          0.128     0.026      0.097     0.111      0.005      0.115      0.121
All firms
Immig only           0.018        0.040         0.043     0.080      0.103      0.111      0.025     0.030      0.033
                    (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.001)   (0.004)    (0.005)    (0.005)    (0.001)   (0.001)    (0.001)
Mixed                0.043        0.063         0.065     0.143      0.082      0.082      0.084     0.057      0.060
                    (0.001)      (0.002)       (0.002)   (0.005)    (0.005)    (0.005)    (0.002)   (0.002)    (0.002)
Asian                             0.012         0.019               -0.010     -0.011                0.014      0.021
                                 (0.002)       (0.002)              (0.006)    (0.007)              (0.002)    (0.002)
Hispanic                         -0.005        -0.003               -0.026     -0.041                0.001      0.004
                                 (0.003)       (0.003)              (0.013)    (0.014)              (0.003)    (0.003)
Constant             0.02          0.03          0.01     0.26        0.06       0.02     0.112      0.024       0.00
N                  1,236,000 1,236,000 1,143,000         143,000   143,000     129,000   1,094,000 1,093,000 1,014,000
Adj R2               0.056     0.209     0.218            0.014     0.189       0.205      0.010     0.197     0.203
Year                 Yes           Yes           Yes       Yes       Yes         Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes
State                No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Sector (6-digit)     No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Gender               No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Ethnicity/Race       No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Age                  No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Education            No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
N Owners             No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Firm Size            No            No            Yes       No        No          Yes       No         No         Yes
Notes: See Table A3a.
                        Table A3l: Regressions with mixed founding team indicator:
                                               (0,1) exports
                              All industries                       High-tech                        Low-tech
                      1              2           3         4           5         6          7          8         9
New firms
Immig only           0.033        0.035         0.034     0.063      0.089      0.098      0.028     0.027      0.025
                    (0.002)      (0.002)       (0.002)   (0.006)    (0.008)    (0.010)    (0.002)   (0.002)    (0.002)
Mixed                0.061        0.040         0.041     0.119      0.083      0.091      0.046     0.030      0.031
                    (0.003)      (0.003)       (0.004)   (0.010)    (0.010)    (0.012)    (0.003)   (0.003)    (0.004)
Asian                            -0.012        -0.010               -0.044     -0.050               -0.008     -0.006
                                 (0.003)       (0.003)              (0.010)    (0.012)              (0.003)    (0.003)
Hispanic                          0.002         0.005                0.040      0.041                0.001      0.004
                                 (0.005)       (0.006)              (0.023)    (0.027)              (0.005)    (0.006)
Constant            0.055         0.020         0.012     0.097      0.026      0.012     0.050      0.019      0.014
N                  180,000      180,000        143,000   23,000     23,000     17,000    157,000    157,000    125,000
Adj R2              0.007        0.121          0.130     0.014      0.112     0.124      0.006      0.120      0.126
All firms
Immig only           0.022        0.040         0.044     0.024      0.076      0.083      0.020     0.034      0.038
                    (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.001)   (0.004)    (0.005)    (0.005)    (0.001)   (0.001)    (0.001)
Mixed                0.069        0.039         0.040     0.104      0.054      0.055      0.052     0.034      0.035
                    (0.002)      (0.002)       (0.002)   (0.005)    (0.005)    (0.005)    (0.002)   (0.002)    (0.002)
Asian                            -0.022        -0.018               -0.063     -0.066               -0.015     -0.012
                                 (0.002)       (0.002)              (0.006)    (0.006)              (0.002)    (0.002)
Hispanic                         -0.014        -0.012               -0.033     -0.048               -0.010     -0.007
                                 (0.003)       (0.003)              (0.012)    (0.013)              (0.003)    (0.003)
Constant            0.117         0.039         0.017     0.242      0.062      0.026     0.103      0.032      0.013
N                  1,193,000 1,192,000 1,123,000         136,000   136,000     123,000   1,057,000 1,056,000 1,000,000
Adj R2               0.009     0.228     0.237            0.013     0.229       0.290      0.009     0.216     0.222

Year                 Yes           Yes           Yes       Yes       Yes         Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes
State                No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Sector (6-digit)     No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Gender               No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Ethnicity/Race       No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Age                  No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Education            No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
N Owners             No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Firm Size            No            No            Yes       No        No          Yes       No         No         Yes
Notes: See Table A3a.
                     Table A3m: Regressions with mixed founding team indicator:
                                      (0,1) operations abroad
                              All industries                       High-tech                        Low-tech
                        1            2           3         4           5         6          7          8         9
New firms
Immig only           0.013        0.015         0.016     0.043      0.046      0.048      0.008     0.011      0.011
                    (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.001)   (0.004)    (0.005)    (0.006)    (0.001)   (0.001)    (0.001)
Mixed                0.018        0.013         0.013     0.047      0.032      0.032      0.011     0.008      0.009
                    (0.002)      (0.002)       (0.002)   (0.006)    (0.006)    (0.007)    (0.002)   (0.002)    (0.002)
Asian                             -0.004        -0.004               -0.004     -0.001               -0.005     -0.006
                                 (0.001)       (0.002)              (0.007)    (0.008)              (0.001)    (0.001)
Hispanic                          0.004         0.004                0.055      0.053                0.001      0.001
                                 (0.003)       (0.003)              (0.016)    (0.018)              (0.003)    (0.003)
Constant            0.006         -0.006        -0.009    0.013      -0.013     -0.019    0.005      -0.003     -0.004
N                  186,000      186,000        148,000   24,000     24,000     18,000    163,000    162,000    130,000
Adj R2              0.005        0.025          0.027    0.016      0.026      0.032      0.002      0.022      0.022
All firms
Immig only           0.015        0.019         0.021     0.036      0.042      0.045      0.012     0.016      0.017
                    (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.001)   (0.002)    (0.003)    (0.003)    (0.001)   (0.001)    (0.001)
Mixed                0.018        0.008         0.008     0.040      0.018      0.019      0.011     0.005      0.006
                    (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.001)   (0.003)    (0.003)    (0.003)    (0.001)   (0.001)    (0.001)
Asian                             -0.004        -0.003               -0.003     -0.004               -0.004     -0.003
                                 (0.001)       (0.001)              (0.004)    (0.004)              (0.001)    (0.001)
Hispanic                          0.002         0.002                0.006      -0.003               0.003      0.004
                                 (0.001)       (0.002)              (0.007)    (0.007)              (0.001)    (0.001)
Constant            0.014         -0.008        -0.013    0.041      -0.009     -0.021    0.011      -0.008     -0.012
N                  1,236,000 1,235,000 1,142,000         143,000   143,000     129,000   1,092,000 1,092,000 1,012,000
Adj R2               0.002     0.044     0.047            0.005     0.062       0.070      0.001     0.036     0.037
Year                 Yes           Yes           Yes       Yes       Yes         Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes
State                No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Sector (6-digit)     No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Gender               No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Ethnicity/Race       No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Age                  No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Education            No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
N Owners             No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Firm Size            No            No            Yes       No        No          Yes       No         No         Yes
Notes: See Table A3a.
                        Table A3n: Regressions with mixed founding team indicator:
                                             (0,1) outsourcing
                              All industries                       High-tech                        Low-tech
                      1              2           3         4           5         6          7          8         9
New firms
Immig only           0.018        0.018         0.018     0.071      0.053      0.056      0.010     0.012      0.012
                    (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.001)   (0.005)    (0.006)    (0.007)    (0.001)   (0.001)    (0.001)
Mixed                0.030        0.021         0.019     0.081      0.054      0.047      0.018     0.014      0.014
                    (0.001)      (0.002)       (0.002)   (0.008)    (0.008)    (0.009)    (0.002)   (0.002)    (0.002)
Asian                             0.004         0.003                0.026      0.028               -0.001     -0.002
                                 (0.002)       (0.002)              (0.008)    (0.010)              (0.002)    (0.002)
Hispanic                         -0.005        -0.005               -0.004     -0.010               -0.003     -0.003
                                 (0.003)       (0.003)              (0.016)    (0.018)              (0.003)    (0.003)
Constant            0.011        -0.007        -0.010     0.031     -0.006     -0.006     0.008     -0.005     -0.008
N                  186,000      186,000        148,000   24,000     24,000     18,000    162,000    162,000    130,000
Adj R2              0.006        0.043          0.046     0.021      0.046     0.046      0.003      0.032      0.035
All firms
Immig only           0.018        0.005         0.004     0.067      0.042      0.043      0.011    0.0001     -0.002
                    (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.001)   (0.003)    (0.003)    (0.003)    (0.001)   (0.001)    (0.001)
Mixed                0.043        0.029         0.030     0.058      0.038      0.035      0.038     0.028      0.029
                    (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.001)   (0.003)    (0.003)    (0.003)    (0.001)   (0.001)    (0.001)
Asian                             0.035         0.039                0.049      0.051                0.032      0.035
                                 (0.001)       (0.001)              (0.004)    (0.005)              (0.001)    (0.001)
Hispanic                          0.010         0.010                0.007      0.003                0.012      0.013
                                 (0.001)       (0.002)              (0.007)    (0.008)              (0.001)    (0.002)
Constant            0.015        -0.009        -0.014     0.035     -0.010     -0.022     0.013     -0.009     -0.013
N                  1,235,000 1,234,000 1,141,000         143,000   143,000     129,000   1,092,000 1,091,000 1,012,000
Adj R2               0.006     0.040     0.040            0.013     0.035       0.038      0.005     0.037     0.035
Year                 Yes           Yes           Yes       Yes       Yes         Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes
State                No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Sector (6-digit)     No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Gender               No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Ethnicity/Race       No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Age                  No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Education            No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
N Owners             No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Firm Size            No            No            Yes       No        No          Yes       No         No         Yes
Notes: See Table A3a.
                     Table A4a: Regressions without mixed founding team indicator:
                                          ln(firm employment)
                              All industries                    High-tech                     Low-tech
                      1              2          3       4           5        6        7          8        9
New firms
Imm/Mixed           -0.096       -0.124        n.a.   -0.040     -0.026     n.a.    -0.100    -0.138     n.a.
                    (0.008)      (0.009)              (0.020)    (0.023)            (0.008)   (0.009)
Asian                            -0.206                          -0.069                       -0.228
                                 (0.012)                         (0.033)                      (0.013)
Hispanic                         -0.069                          -0.123                       -0.061
                                 (0.025)                         (0.075)                      (0.026)
Constant             1.44          1.02                1.10        0.71              1.48       1.09
N                  148,000      148,000               18,000     18,000            130,000    130,000
Adj R2              0.002        0.277                 0.000      0.221             0.002      0.278
All firms
Imm/Mixed           -0.231       -0.132        n.a.   -0.117     -0.074     n.a.    -0.249    -0.144     n.a.
                    (0.004)      (0.004)              (0.011)    (0.012)            (0.004)   (0.005)
Asian                            -0.339                          -0.017                       -0.390
                                 (0.006)                         (0.021)                      (0.007)
Hispanic                         -0.226                           0.001                       -0.249
                                 (0.013)                         (0.045)                      (0.014)
Constant             2.11          1.54                2.07        1.37              2.11       1.57
N                  1,152,000 1,152,000                130,000   130,000            1,021,000 1,021,000
Adj R2               0.006     0.256                   0.002     0.258               0.008     0.258
Year                 Yes           Yes         Yes      Yes       Yes       Yes      Yes        Yes      Yes
State                No            Yes         Yes      No        Yes       Yes      No         Yes      Yes
Sector (6-digit)     No            Yes         Yes      No        Yes       Yes      No         Yes      Yes
Gender               No            Yes         Yes      No        Yes       Yes      No         Yes      Yes
Ethnicity/Race       No            Yes         Yes      No        Yes       Yes      No         Yes      Yes
Age                  No            Yes         Yes      No        Yes       Yes      No         Yes      Yes
Education            No            Yes         Yes      No        Yes       Yes      No         Yes      Yes
N Owners             No            Yes         Yes      No        Yes       Yes      No         Yes      Yes
Firm Size            No            No          Yes      No        No        Yes      No         No       Yes
Notes: See Table A3a. Immigrant only and Mixed firms are combined.
                    Table A4b: Regressions without mixed founding team indicator:
                                         ln(start-up capital)
                             All industries                       High-tech                       Low-tech
                     1              2           3         4           5         6         7          8         9
New firms
Imm/Mixed           0.164       -0.021         0.025     0.058      0.037      0.054     0.190    -0.028      0.023
                   (0.011)      (0.012)       (0.013)   (0.029)    (0.031)    (0.036)   (0.011)   (0.013)    (0.013)
Asian                           -0.006         0.065               -0.136     -0.112               0.020      0.095
                                (0.016)       (0.017)              (0.042)    (0.049)             (0.018)    (0.019)
Hispanic                        -0.489        -0.500               -0.199     -0.266              -0.511     -0.517
                                (0.016)       (0.035)              (0.101)    (0.112)             (0.034)    (0.034)
Constant            10.75         9.99          9.66    10.17        9.30       9.08     10.83     10.11       9.74
N                  154,000     154,000        122,000   19,500     19,500     15,000    135,000   135,000    107,000
Adj R2              0.005       0.298          0.369     0.002      0.325     0.397      0.005     0.282      0.356
All firms
Imm/mixed           0.153        0.056         0.095     0.034      0.064      0.077     0.183     0.053      0.097
                   (0.006)      (0.006)       (0.006)   (0.015)    (0.016)    (0.017)   (0.006)   (0.007)    (0.007)
Asian                            0.031         0.112               -0.064     -0.052               0.055      0.146
                                (0.009)       (0.009)              (0.014)    (0.026)             (0.010)    (0.010)
Hispanic                        -0.432        -0.404               -0.374     -0.417              -0.438     -0.401
                                (0.017)       (0.018)              (0.054)    (0.058)             (0.018)    (0.019)
Constant            10.84         9.99          9.63    10.54        9.54       9.31     10.87     10.05       9.66
N                  822,000     821,000        750,000   97,000     97,000     86,000    725,000   724,000    664,000
Adj R2              0.009       0.233          0.261     0.010      0.258     0.274      0.009     0.227      0.259
Year                 Yes          Yes           Yes      Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes
State                No           Yes           Yes      No         Yes        Yes        No        Yes        Yes
Sector (6-digit)     No           Yes           Yes      No         Yes        Yes        No        Yes        Yes
Gender               No           Yes           Yes      No         Yes        Yes        No        Yes        Yes
Ethnicity/Race       No           Yes           Yes      No         Yes        Yes        No        Yes        Yes
Age                  No           Yes           Yes      No         Yes        Yes        No        Yes        Yes
Education            No           Yes           Yes      No         Yes        Yes        No        Yes        Yes
N Owners             No           Yes           Yes      No         Yes        Yes        No        Yes        Yes
Firm Size            No           No            Yes      No         No         Yes        No        No         Yes
Notes: See Table A4a.
                     Table A4c: Regressions without mixed founding team indicator:
                                         ln(receipts/employee)
                              All industries                       High-tech                        Low-tech
                      1              2           3         4           5         6          7          8         9
New firms
Imm/Mixed            0.098        0.060         0.054     0.147      0.053      0.054      0.088     0.059      0.051
                    (0.007)      (0.008)       (0.008)   (0.020)    (0.024)    (0.024)    (0.008)   (0.009)    (0.009)
Asian                             0.054         0.044                0.054      0.056                0.052      0.038
                                 (0.012)       (0.012)              (0.033)    (0.033)              (0.012)    (0.012)
Hispanic                         -0.159        -0.163               -0.231     -0.227               -0.152     -0.156
                                 (0.023)       (0.022)              (0.081)    (0.081)              (0.025)    (0.024)
Constant            11.50         11.18         11.23     11.53      11.09      11.07     11.39      11.18      11.25
N                  147,000      147,000        147,000   18,000     18,000     18,000    130,000    130,000    130,000
Adj R2              0.002        0.274          0.276     0.008      0.136     0.136      0.001      0.291      0.294
All firms
Imm/Mixed            0.002        0.058         0.056     0.206      0.079      0.081     -0.027     0.053      0.051
                    (0.003)      (0.003)       (0.003)   (0.010)    (0.010)    (0.010)    (0.003)   (0.004)    (0.004)
Asian                             0.006         0.003               -0.019     -0.018                0.009      0.002
                                 (0.005)       (0.005)              (0.016)    (0.016)              (0.005)    (0.005)
Hispanic                         -0.198        -0.201               -0.151     -0.151               -0.202     -0.207
                                 (0.010)       (0.010)              (0.038)    (0.038)              (0.011)    (0.011)
Constant            11.68         11.42         11.43     11.50      11.25      11.21     11.70      11.43      11.46
N                  1,146,000 1,146,000 1,146,000         127,000   127,000     127,000   1,019,000 1,019,000 1,019,000
Adj R2               0.000     0.367     0.367            0.021     0.364       0.364      0.000     0.368     0.368
Year                 Yes           Yes           Yes       Yes       Yes         Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes
State                No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Sector (6-digit)     No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Gender               No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Ethnicity/Race       No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Age                  No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Education            No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
N Owners             No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Firm Size            No            No            Yes       No        No          Yes       No         No         Yes
Notes: See Table A4a.
                     Table A4d: Regressions without mixed founding team indicator:
                                         ln(payroll/employee)
                              All industries                       High-tech                        Low-tech
                      1              2           3         4           5         6          7          8         9
New firms
Imm/Mixed           -0.122        0.012        -0.002     0.076      0.007      0.011     -0.158    -0.018     -0.007
                    (0.006)      (0.007)       (0.007)   (0.017)    (0.020)    (0.020)    (0.006)   (0.007)    (0.007)
Asian                            -0.049        -0.031                0.008      0.016               -0.061     -0.043
                                 (0.009)       (0.009)              (0.029)    (0.029)              (0.010)    (0.010)
Hispanic                         -0.155        -0.149               -0.212     -0.197               -0.151     -0.146
                                 (0.020)       (0.020)              (0.071)    (0.071)              (0.020)    (0.020)
Constant             9.99          9.73          9.64     10.45      10.09      10.00      9.94       9.68       9.60
N                  148,000      148,000        148,000   18,000     18,000     18,000    130,000    130,000    130,000
Adj R2              0.003        0.254          0.264     0.001      0.101     0.119      0.005      0.247      0.255
All firms
Imm/Mixed           -0.110        0.001         0.015     0.046      0.019      0.029     -0.152    -0.003      0.011
                    (0.002)      (0.003)       (0.003)   (0.006)    (0.007)    (0.007)    (0.003)   (0.003)    (0.003)
Asian                            -0.111        -0.075               -0.039     -0.037               -0.123     -0.084
                                 (0.004)       (0.004)              (0.011)    (0.011)              (0.004)    (0.004)
Hispanic                         -0.211        -0.197               -0.185     -0.185               -0.225     -0.200
                                 (0.008)       (0.008)              (0.028)    (0.027)              (0.009)    (0.008)
Constant            10.20          9.93          9.76     10.69      10.29      10.11     10.15       9.88       9.72
N                  1,151,000 1,151,000 1,151,000         130,000   130,000     130,000   1,021,000 1,021,000 1,021,000
Adj R2               0.002     0.287     0.309            0.003     0.116       0.160      0.004     0.278     0.299
Year                 Yes           Yes           Yes       Yes       Yes         Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes
State                No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Sector (6-digit)     No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Gender               No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Ethnicity/Race       No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Age                  No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Education            No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
N Owners             No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Firm Size            No            No            Yes       No        No          Yes       No         No         Yes
Notes: See Table A4a.
                     Table A4e: Regressions without mixed founding team indicator:
                                      (0,1) use temporary workers
                              All industries                       High-tech                        Low-tech
                      1              2           3         4           5         6          7          8         9
New firms
Imm/Mixed           -0.014       -0.002         0.000     0.003     -0.004     -0.002     -0.016    -0.002      0.000
                    (0.002)      (0.002)       (0.003)   (0.004)    (0.005)    (0.006)    (0.002)   (0.003)    (0.003)
Asian                            -0.009        -0.001                0.006      0.007               -0.012     -0.003
                                 (0.003)       (0.003)              (0.007)    (0.009)              (0.003)    (0.004)
Hispanic                          0.010         0.009                0.001      0.009                0.010      0.008
                                 (0.007)       (0.007)              (0.019)    (0.022)              (0.007)    (0.008)
Constant            0.140         0.069         0.028     0.104      0.051      0.023     0.145      0.073      0.030
N                  185,000      185,000        147,000   24,000     24,000     18,000    161,000    161,000    129,000
Adj R2              0.008        0.077          0.105     0.004      0.060     0.116      0.009      0.079      0.105
All firms
Imm/Mixed           -0.047       -0.015        -0.009    -0.026     -0.017     -0.010     -0.051    -0.015     -0.009
                    (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.001)   -0.003     (0.003)    (0.003)    (0.001)   (0.001)    (0.001)
Asian                            -0.036        -0.022               -0.002     -0.003               -0.042     -0.027
                                 (0.002)       (0.002)              (0.005)    (0.005)              (0.002)    (0.002)
Hispanic                         -0.029        -0.024               -0.012     -0.017               -0.032     -0.027
                                 (0.004)       (0.004)              (0.012)    0.0121               (0.004)    (0.004)
Constant            0.266         0.118         0.047     0.289      0.127      0.024     0.264      0.117       0.05
N                  1,231,000 1,230,000 1,138,000         143,000   143,000     129,000   1,088,000 1,087,000 1,009,000
Adj R2               0.028     0.161     0.181            0.032     0.116       0.217      0.028     0.160     0.177
Year                 Yes           Yes           Yes       Yes       Yes         Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes
State                No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Sector (6-digit)     No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Gender               No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Ethnicity/Race       No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Age                  No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Education            No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
N Owners             No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Firm Size            No            No            Yes       No        No          Yes       No         No         Yes
Notes: See Table A4a.
                     Table A4f: Regressions without mixed founding team indicator:
                                       (0,1) use full-time workers
                              All industries                       High-tech                        Low-tech
                      1              2           3         4           5         6          7          8         9
New firms
Imm/Mixed           -0.016       -0.005         0.013     0.040      0.004      0.010      0.001    -0.007      0.012
                    (0.003)      (0.003)       (0.003)   (0.007)    (0.009)    (0.009)    (0.003)   (0.004)    (0.004)
Asian                             0.004         0.025                0.016      0.021                0.001      0.024
                                 (0.005)       (0.005)              (0.013)    (0.013)              (0.005)    (0.005)
Hispanic                          0.014         0.015                0.001      0.013                0.015      0.015
                                 (0.009)       (0.010)              (0.031)    (0.033)              (0.010)    (0.010)
Constant            0.716         0.656         0.569     0.662      0.566      0.511     0.723      0.675      0.579
N                  185,000      185,000        147,000   24,000     24,000     18,000    162,000    161,000    129,000
Adj R2              0.009        0.091          0.183     0.004      0.089     0.172      0.008      0.092      0.185
All firms
Imm/Mixed           -0.039       -0.015        -0.001    -0.005     -0.006      0.003     -0.044    -0.016     -0.001
                    (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.001)   (0.003)    (0.003)    (0.003)    (0.001)   (0.001)    (0.001)
Asian                            -0.035        -0.007                0.006      0.006               -0.041     -0.009
                                 (0.002)       (0.002)              (0.005)    (0.005)              (0.002)    (0.002)
Hispanic                         -0.021        -0.004                0.016      0.011               -0.025     -0.005
                                 (0.004)       (0.004)              (0.013)    (0.012)              (0.004)    (0.004)
Constant            0.866         0.807        0.6876     0.847      0.764      0.674     0.868      0.814      0.689
N                  1,232,000 1,231,000 1,139,000         143,000   143,000     129,000   1,089,000 1,088,000 1,010,000
Adj R2               0.022     0.107     0.195            0.012     0.120       0.207      0.023     0.106     0.194
Year                 Yes           Yes           Yes       Yes       Yes         Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes
State                No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Sector (6-digit)     No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Gender               No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Ethnicity/Race       No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Age                  No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Education            No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
N Owners             No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Firm Size            No            No            Yes       No        No          Yes       No         No         Yes
Notes: See Table A4a.
                     Table A4g: Regressions without mixed founding team indicator:
                                     (0,1) offer at least one benefit
                              All industries                       High-tech                        Low-tech
                      1              2           3         4           5         6          7          8         9
New firms
Imm/Mixed           -0.107       -0.060        -0.048     0.009     -0.006     -0.003     -0.127    -0.069     -0.056
                    (0.003)      (0.003)       (0.004)   (0.007)    (0.009)    (0.010)    (0.003)   (0.004)    (0.004)
Asian                            -0.075        -0.058               -0.029     -0.017               -0.085     -0.065
                                 (0.005)       (0.005)              (0.013)    (0.014)              (0.005)    (0.006)
Hispanic                         -0.082        -0.071               -0.076     -0.035               -0.080     -0.073
                                 (0.010)       (0.011)              (0.032)    (0.034)              (0.010)    (0.011)
Constant             0.60          0.47          0.37     0.67        0.53       0.49      0.60       0.46       0.35
N                  185,000      185,000        147,000   24,000     24,000     18,000    161,000    161,000    129,000
Adj R2              0.016        0.141          0.228     0.006      0.068     0.149      0.002      0.148      0.234
All firms
Imm/Mixed           -0.131       -0.065        -0.051    -0.022     -0.016     -0.008     -0.152    -0.072     -0.057
                    (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.001)   (0.003)    (0.003)    (0.003)    (0.001)   (0.002)    (0.001)
Asian                            -0.123        -0.095               -0.016     -0.012               -0.142     -0.107
                                 (0.002)       (0.002)              (0.005)    (0.005)              (0.002)    (0.002)
Hispanic                         -0.127        -0.105               -0.057     -0.056               -0.132     -0.107
                                 (0.005)       (0.004)              (0.013)    (0.013)              (0.005)    (0.005)
Constant             0.82          0.67          0.57     0.86        0.75       0.67     0.818      0.695      0.558
N                  1,233,000 1,232,000 1,140,000         143,000   143,000     129,000   1,090,000 1,089,000 1,010,000
Adj R2               0.034     0.163     0.244            0.014     0.101       0.178      0.040     0.170     0.250
Year                 Yes           Yes           Yes       Yes       Yes         Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes
State                No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Sector (6-digit)     No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Gender               No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Ethnicity/Race       No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Age                  No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Education            No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
N Owners             No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Firm Size            No            No            Yes       No        No          Yes       No         No         Yes
Notes: See Table A4a.
                    Table A4h: Regressions without mixed founding team indicator:
                                     (0,1) offer health insurance
                              All industries                       High-tech                        Low-tech
                      1              2           3         4           5         6          7          8         9
New firms
Imm/Mixed            -0.110       -0.062        -0.050    -0.016     -0.017     -0.013     -0.126    -0.070     -0.057
                    (0.003)      (0.003)       (0.003)   (0.008)    (0.009)    (0.010)    (0.003)   (0.003)    (0.004)
Asian                             -0.009        -0.069               -0.060     -0.039               -0.095     -0.075
                                 (0.004)       (0.005)              (0.013)    (0.015)              (0.005)    (0.005)
Hispanic                          -0.438        -0.149               -0.127     -0.098               -0.143     -0.151
                                 (0.009)       (0.009)              (0.031)    (0.035)              (0.009)    (0.010)
Constant            0.412         0.252         0.145     0.498      0.337      0.270     0.407      0.249      0.133
N                  185,000      185,000        147,000   24,000     24,000     18,000    161,000    161,000    129,000
Adj R2              0.019        0.161          0.260    0.005      0.088      0.194      0.024      0.166      0.263
All firms
Imm/Mixed            -0.153       -0.077        -0.060    -0.041     -0.024     -0.012     -0.174    -0.085     -0.067
                    (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.001)   (0.003)    (0.004)    (0.003)    (0.001)   (0.002)    (0.002)
Asian                             -0.145        -0.107               -0.043     -0.034               -0.162     -0.118
                                 (0.002)       (0.002)              (0.006)    (0.006)              (0.002)    (0.002)
Hispanic                          -0.211        -0.189               -0.139     -0.144               -0.216     -0.191
                                 (0.005)       (0.004)              (0.015)    (0.014)              (0.005)    (0.005)
Constant            0.684         0.504         0.330     0.754      0.590      0.454     0.677      0.495      0.315
N                  1,233,000 1,232,000 1,140,000         143,000   143,000     129,000   1,090,000 1,089,000 1,010,000
Adj R2               0.040     0.215     0.313            0.019     0.148       0.265      0.047     0.221     0.316
Year                 Yes           Yes           Yes       Yes       Yes         Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes
State                No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Sector (6-digit)     No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Gender               No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Ethnicity/Race       No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Age                  No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Education            No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
N Owners             No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Firm Size            No            No            Yes       No        No          Yes       No         No         Yes
Notes: See Table A4a.
                     Table A4i: Regressions without mixed founding team indicator:
                                         (0,1) offer paid time off
                              All industries                       High-tech                        Low-tech
                      1              2           3         4           5         6          7          8         9
New firms
Imm/Mixed           -0.078       -0.045        -0.033    -0.007     -0.010     -0.010     -0.090    -0.051     -0.037
                    (0.003)      (0.003)       (0.004)   (0.008)    (0.009)    (0.010)    (0.003)   (0.004)    (0.004)
Asian                            -0.063        -0.043               -0.062     -0.050               -0.065     -0.043
                                 (0.005)       (0.005)              (0.013)    (0.014)              (0.005)    (0.005)
Hispanic                         -0.023        -0.014                0.008      0.008               -0.022     -0.015
                                 (0.010)       (0.010)              (0.021)    (0.003)              (0.010)    (0.011)
Constant            0.459         0.316         0.207     0.447      0.291      0.227     0.461      0.327      0.209
N                  185,000      185,000        147,000   24,000     24,000     18,000    161,000    161,000    129,000
Adj R2              0.016        0.133          0.237     0.002      0.134     0.267      0.011      0.134      0.234
All firms
Imm/Mixed           -0.131       -0.062        -0.046    -0.038     -0.018     -0.006     -0.147    -0.069     -0.052
                    (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.001)   (0.003)    (0.004)    (0.003)    (0.001)   (0.001)    (0.001)
Asian                            -0.122        -0.086               -0.036     -0.033               -0.136     -0.094
                                 (0.002)       (0.002)              (0.006)    (0.006)              (0.003)    (0.003)
Hispanic                         -0.088        -0.066               -0.003     -0.010               -0.095     -0.070
                                 (0.005)       (0.005)              (0.015)    (0.014)              (0.005)    (0.005)
Constant            0.714         0.556         0.389     0.728      0.578      0.439     0.714      0.554      0.382
N                  1,233,000 1,232,000 1,140,000         143,000   143,000     129,000   1,090,000 1,089,000 1,010,000
Adj R2               0.039     0.179     0.276            0.014     0.182       0.305      0.034     0.180     0.273
Year                 Yes           Yes           Yes       Yes       Yes         Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes
State                No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Sector (6-digit)     No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Gender               No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Ethnicity/Race       No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Age                  No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Education            No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
N Owners             No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Firm Size            No            No            Yes       No        No          Yes       No         No         Yes
Notes: See Table A4a.
                     Table A4j: Regressions without mixed founding team indicator -
                                          (0,1) offer 401k plan
                              All industries                       High-tech                        Low-tech
                      1              2           3         4           5         6          7          8         9
New firms
Imm/Mixed           -0.071       -0.044        -0.039    -0.020     -0.033     -0.030     -0.081    -0.046     -0.041
                    (0.002)      (0.002)       (0.003)   (0.007)    (0.008)    (0.009)    (0.002)   (0.002)    (0.003)
Asian                            -0.029        -0.020                0.015      0.008               -0.038     -0.026
                                 (0.003)       (0.004)              (0.012)    (0.014)              (0.003)    (0.004)
Hispanic                         -0.071        -0.072               -0.097     -0.104               -0.070     -0.070
                                 (0.006)       (0.007)              (0.025)    (0.029)              (0.006)    (0.007)
Constant            0.199         0.056        -0.011     0.284      0.186      0.125     0.189      0.039     -0.029
N                  185,000      185,000        147,000   24,000     24,000     18,000    161,000    161,000    129,000
Adj R2              0.010        0.120          0.172     0.004      0.054     0.101      0.013      0.128      0.181
All firms
Imm/Mixed           -0.144       -0.073        -0.060    -0.065     -0.052     -0.042     -0.161    -0.076     -0.062
                    (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.001)   (0.003)    (0.004)    (0.004)    (0.001)   (0.002)    (0.002)
Asian                            -0.091        -0.064               -0.022     -0.032               -0.103     -0.070
                                 (0.002)       (0.002)              (0.006)    (0.007)              (0.002)    (0.002)
Hispanic                         -0.161        -0.150               -0.099     -0.111               -0.168     -0.154
                                 (0.004)       (0.004)              (0.014)    (0.015)              (0.004)    (0.004)
Constant            0.461         0.206         0.065     0.546      0.300      0.173     0.452      0.193      0.050
N                  1,233,000 1,232,000 1,140,000         143,000   143,000     129,000   1,090,000 1,089,000 1,010,000
Adj R2               0.031     0.192     0.250            0.004     0.132       0.206      0.035     0.198     0.253
Year                 Yes           Yes           Yes       Yes       Yes         Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes
State                No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Sector (6-digit)     No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Gender               No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Ethnicity/Race       No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Age                  No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Education            No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
N Owners             No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Firm Size            No            No            Yes       No        No          Yes       No         No         Yes
Notes: See Table A4a.
                     Table A4k: Regressions without mixed founding team indicator:
                            (0,1) engage in at least one international activity
                              All industries                       High-tech                        Low-tech
                      1              2           3         4           5         6          7          8         9
New firms
Imm/Mixed            0.053        0.049         0.049     0.074      0.122      0.127      0.039     0.036      0.036
                    (0.002)      (0.002)       (0.002)   (0.004)    (0.008)    (0.009)    (0.002)   (0.002)    (0.002)
Asian                            -0.011         -0.01               -0.015     -0.013               -0.012     -0.010
                                 (0.003)       (0.003)              (0.011)    (0.013)              (0.003)    (0.003)
Hispanic                         -0.005        -0.003                0.041      0.039               -0.005     -0.002
                                 (0.005)       (0.006)              (0.025)    (0.030)              (0.005)    (0.006)
Constant             0.06          0.02          0.01     0.03        0.03       0.01      0.06      0.017       0.01
N                  187,000      186,000        148,000   24,000     24,000     18,000    163,000    162,000    130,000
Adj R2              0.007        0.119          0.128     0.021      0.097     0.111      0.002      0.115      0.121
All firms
Imm/Mixed            0.056        0.049         0.052     0.104      0.093      0.096      0.043     0.041      0.044
                    (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.001)   (0.003)    (0.004)    (0.004)    (0.001)   (0.001)    (0.001)
Asian                             0.006         0.013               -0.004     -0.002                0.008      0.014
                                 (0.002)       (0.002)              (0.006)    (0.006)              (0.002)    (0.002)
Hispanic                         -0.009        -0.006               -0.024     -0.037               -0.004      0.000
                                 (0.003)       (0.003)              (0.013)    (0.014)              (0.003)    (0.003)
Constant             0.13          0.03          0.01     0.26        0.06      0.022     0.112      0.023      0.002
N                  1,237,000 1,234,000 1,141,000         143,000   143,000     129,000   1,094,000 1,093,000 1,014,000
Adj R2               0.008     0.209     0.218            0.014     0.189       0.205      0.009     0.197     0.203
Year                 Yes           Yes           Yes       Yes       Yes         Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes
State                No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Sector (6-digit)     No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Gender               No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Ethnicity/Race       No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Age                  No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Education            No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
N Owners             No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Firm Size            No            No            Yes       No        No          Yes       No         No         Yes
Notes: See Table A4a.
                     Table A4l: Regressions without mixed founding team indicator:
                                              (0,1) exports
                              All industries                       High-tech                        Low-tech
                      1              2           3         4           5         6          7          8         9
New firms
Imm/Mixed            0.040        0.036         0.037     0.079      0.087      0.095      0.033     0.028      0.027
                    (0.001)      (0.002)       (0.002)   (0.006)    (0.007)    (0.008)    (0.002)   (0.002)    (0.002)
Asian                            -0.013        -0.012               -0.042     -0.048               -0.009     -0.007
                                 (0.003)       (0.003)              (0.009)    (0.011)              (0.003)    (0.003)
Hispanic                          0.001         0.004                0.041      0.041                0.000      0.004
                                 (0.005)       (0.006)              (0.022)    (0.027)              (0.005)    (0.006)
Constant            0.055         0.019         0.012     0.097      0.024      0.013     0.050      0.019      0.013
N                  180,000      180,000        143,000   23,000     23,000     17,000    157,000    157,000    125,000
Adj R2              0.006        0.121          0.121     0.013      0.112     0.121      0.006      0.120      0.121
All firms
Imm/Mixed            0.037        0.039         0.042     0.055      0.065      0.069      0.030     0.034      0.037
                    (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.001)   (0.003)    (0.004)    (0.004)    (0.001)   (0.001)    (0.001)
Asian                            -0.021        -0.017               -0.056     -0.057               -0.015     -0.012
                                 (0.002)       (0.002)              (0.005)    (0.016)              (0.002)    (0.002)
Hispanic                         -0.013        -0.011               -0.030     -0.044               -0.010     -0.006
                                 (0.003)       (0.003)              (0.012)    (0.013)              (0.003)    (0.003)
Constant            0.117         0.040         0.018     0.243      0.063      0.028     0.103      0.032      0.013
N                  1,193,000 1,192,000 1,123,000         136,000   136,000     123,000   1,057,000 1,056,000 1,000,000
Adj R2               0.008     0.228     0.228            0.011     0.229       0.228      0.009     0.216     0.228
Year                 Yes           Yes           Yes       Yes       Yes         Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes
State                No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Sector (6-digit)     No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Gender               No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Ethnicity/Race       No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Age                  No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Education            No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
N Owners             No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Firm Size            No            No            Yes       No        No          Yes       No         No         Yes
Notes: See Table A4a.
                    Table A4m: Regressions without mixed founding team indicator:
                                       (0,1) operations abroad
                              All industries                       High-tech                        Low-tech
                      1              2           3         4           5         6          7          8         9
New firms
Imm/Mixed            0.014        0.014         0.015     0.044      0.041      0.041      0.009     0.010      0.010
                    (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.001)   (0.003)    (0.004)    (0.005)    (0.001)   (0.001)    (0.001)
Asian                            -0.004        -0.004                0.000      0.003               -0.005     -0.005
                                 (0.001)       (0.002)              (0.006)    (0.007)              (0.001)    (0.001)
Hispanic                          0.005         0.005                0.056      0.054                0.001      0.001
                                 (0.003)       (0.003)              (0.016)    (0.018)              (0.003)    (0.003)
Constant            0.006        -0.006        -0.008     0.013     -0.012     -0.017     0.006     -0.003     -0.004
N                  186,000      186,000        148,000   24,000     24,000     18,000    163,000    162,000    130,000
Adj R2              0.005        0.025          0.025     0.016      0.026     0.025      0.002      0.022      0.025
All firms
Imm/Mixed            0.016        0.015         0.016     0.038      0.030      0.032      0.011     0.012      0.012
                   (0.0003)      (0.001)       (0.001)   (0.002)    (0.002)    (0.002)   (0.0004)   (0.001)    (0.001)
Asian                            -0.001         0.000                0.005      0.005               -0.001      0.000
                                 (0.001)       (0.001)              (0.003)    (0.004)              (0.001)    (0.001)
Hispanic                          0.004         0.004                0.009      0.001                0.005      0.006
                                 (0.001)       (0.002)              (0.007)    (0.008)              (0.001)    (0.001)
Constant            0.014        -0.007         0.013     0.041     -0.008     -0.020     0.011     -0.007     -0.011
N                  1,236,000 1,235,000 1,142,000         143,000   143,000     129,000   1,092,000 1,092,000 1,012,000
Adj R2               0.002     0.044     0.044            0.005     0.062       0.044      0.001     0.036     0.044
Year                 Yes           Yes           Yes       Yes       Yes         Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes
State                No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Sector (6-digit)     No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Gender               No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Ethnicity/Race       No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Age                  No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Education            No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
N Owners             No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Firm Size            No            No            Yes       No        No          Yes       No         No         Yes
Notes: See Table A4a.
                     Table A4n: Regressions without mixed founding team indicator:
                                            (0,1) outsourcing
                              All industries                       High-tech                        Low-tech
                      1              2           3         4           5         6          7          8         9
New firms
Imm/Mixed            0.021        0.019         0.018     0.074      0.053      0.052      0.012     0.013      0.013
                    (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.001)   (0.004)    (0.005)    (0.006)    (0.001)   (0.001)    (0.001)
Asian                             0.003         0.002                0.026      0.030               -0.002     -0.002
                                 (0.002)       (0.002)              (0.008)    (0.010)              (0.002)    (0.002)
Hispanic                         -0.005        -0.005               -0.004     -0.009               -0.003     -0.003
                                 (0.003)       (0.003)              (0.016)    (0.018)              (0.003)    (0.003)
Constant            0.011        -0.007        -0.011     0.031     -0.006     -0.006     0.008     -0.005     -0.008
N                  186,000      186,000        148,000   24,000     24,000     18,000    162,000    162,000    130,000
Adj R2              0.005        0.043          0.043     0.021      0.046     0.043      0.002      0.032      0.043
All firms
Imm/Mixed            0.026        0.015         0.015     0.064      0.040      0.015      0.019     0.011      0.011
                   (0.0003)      (0.001)       (0.001)   (0.002)    (0.002)    (0.001)    (0.001)   (0.001)    (0.001)
Asian                             0.029         0.032                0.050     -0.004                0.025      0.028
                                 (0.001)       (0.001)              (0.004)    (0.002)              (0.001)    (0.001)
Hispanic                          0.006         0.006                0.007      0.005                0.008      0.008
                                 (0.001)       (0.002)              (0.007)    (0.003)              (0.001)    (0.002)
Constant            0.015        -0.011        -0.016     0.035     -0.010     -0.021     0.013     -0.010     -0.014
N                  1,235,000 1,234,000 1,141,000         143,000   143,000     129,000   1,092,000 1,091,000 1,012,000
Adj R2               0.005     0.039     0.039            0.013     0.035       0.039      0.003     0.035     0.039
Year                 Yes           Yes           Yes       Yes       Yes         Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes
State                No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Sector (6-digit)     No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Gender               No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Ethnicity/Race       No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Age                  No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Education            No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
N Owners             No            Yes           Yes       No        Yes         Yes       No         Yes        Yes
Firm Size            No            No            Yes       No        No          Yes       No         No         Yes
Notes: See Table A4a.
                               Table A5a: Geographic distribution for immigrant and native entrepreneurs in 2007
                                                                                                          Immigrant      Share of
                                    Count of    Employees in     Count of   Employees in    Immigrant    owned share    immigrant Share of native
                                   immigrant     immigrant     native owned native owned   owned share     of group    owned firms owned firms
                                  owned firms   owned firms        firms        firms        of firms    employment    over groups over groups
                                       1             2               3            4             5              6            7           8
New firms
High-tech industries
Overall                             23,200        79,100         70,500       223,300        24.8%         26.2%
Outside of Top 10 Clusters           9,300        32,500         49,500       154,000        15.8%         17.4%         40.1%         70.2%
Top 10 Clusters excluding SF        13,000        42,000         20,500       67,000         38.8%         38.5%         56.0%         29.1%
San Jose and San Francisco            900          4,600          500          2,300         64.3%         66.7%         3.9%          0.7%

Low-tech industries
Overall                            174,700        961,000        565,400     26,035,700      23.6%         3.6%
Outside of Top 10 Clusters         87,500         526,000        446,000     25,330,000      16.4%         2.0%          50.1%         78.9%
Top 10 Clusters excluding SF       85,000         422,000        118,000      696,000        41.9%         37.7%         48.7%         20.9%
San Jose and San Francisco          2,200         13,000          1,400         9,700        61.1%         57.3%         1.3%          0.2%

All firms
High-tech industries
Overall                             71,200        619,500        310,100      3,034,500      18.7%         17.0%
Outside of Top 10 Clusters          31,000        294,000        219,000      2,160,000      12.4%         12.0%         43.5%         70.6%
Top 10 Clusters excluding SF        38,000        305,000        89,000        854,000       29.9%         26.3%         53.4%         28.7%
San Jose and San Francisco           2,200        20,500          2,100         20,500       51.2%         50.0%         3.1%          0.7%

Low-tech industries
Overall                            586,400       4,922,500      3,028,500    32,470,000      16.2%         13.2%
Outside of Top 10 Clusters         295,000       2,596,000      2,380,000    25,270,000      11.0%         9.3%          50.3%         78.6%
Top 10 Clusters excluding SF       284,000       2,259,000       638,000     7,072,000       30.8%         24.2%         48.4%         21.1%
San Jose and San Francisco          7,400          67,500         10,500      128,000        41.3%         34.5%         1.3%          0.3%
Notes: See Table 6.
                               Table A5b: Geographic distribution for immigrant and native entrepreneurs in 2012
                                                                                                          Immigrant      Share of
                                    Count of    Employees in     Count of   Employees in    Immigrant    owned share    immigrant Share of native
                                   immigrant     immigrant     native owned native owned   owned share     of group    owned firms owned firms
                                  owned firms   owned firms        firms        firms        of firms    employment    over groups over groups
                                       1             2               3            4             5              6            7           8
New firms
High-tech industries
Overall                             12,700        45,000         31,900       145,000        28.5%         23.7%
Outside of Top 10 clusters           4,700        22,500         22,000       110,000        17.6%         17.0%         37.0%         69.0%
Top 10 clusters excluding SF         7,500        21,000          9,600       34,500         43.9%         37.8%         59.1%         30.1%
San Jose and San Francisco            500          1,500           300          500          62.5%         75.0%         3.9%          0.9%

Low-tech industries
Overall                             68,500        363,200        199,600      1,215,900      25.6%         23.0%
Outside of Top 10 clusters          33,500        188,000        152,000       932,000       18.1%         16.8%         48.9%         76.2%
Top 10 clusters excluding SF        34,000        172,000        47,000        281,000       42.0%         38.0%         49.6%         23.5%
San Jose and San Francisco           1,000         3,200           600          2,900        62.5%         52.5%         1.5%          0.3%

All firms
High-tech industries
Overall                             45,200        458,000        180,700      2,847,000      20.0%         13.9%
Outside of Top 10 clusters          18,000        231,000        129,000      2,238,000      12.2%         9.4%          39.8%         71.4%
Top 10 clusters excluding SF        25,500        215,000        50,500        588,000       33.6%         26.8%         56.4%         27.9%
San Jose and San Francisco           1,700        12,000          1,200         21,000       58.6%         36.4%         3.8%          0.7%

Low-tech industries
Overall                            265,700       2,202,000      1,260,200    12,979,000      17.4%         14.5%
Outside of Top 10 clusters         131,000       1,122,000       980,000     10,100,000      11.8%         10.0%         49.3%         77.8%
Top 10 clusters excluding SF       131,000       1,043,000       275,000     2,825,000       32.3%         27.0%         49.3%         21.8%
San Jose and San Francisco          3,700          37,000         5,200        54,000        41.6%         40.7%         1.4%          0.4%
Notes: See Table 6.
                                                                                     Table A6: Additional regression results: location and industry interactions
                                              ln(emp)         ln(s-u cap)   ln(rec/emp)   ln(pay/emp)   temps       full-time   1+ benefit   health ins    pto       401-k    1+ global   export    int. oper.   outsource
A: New firms: High-tech industry (All controls except firm size)
Immigs Only * Top-10 Tech MSA                  -0.026            0.042          0.150        0.075       0.015        0.011      -0.015       -0.024      -0.035    -0.025      0.139      0.104      0.052        0.056
                                               (0.018)          (0.027)        (0.030)      (0.028)     (0.005)      (0.003)     (0.010)      (0.010)     (0.011)   (0.004)    (0.013)    (0.012)    (0.003)      (0.005)
Mixed Team * Top-10 Tech MSA                    0.052            0.117          0.262        0.223      -0.013        0.032       0.041        0.052       0.021    -0.040      0.123      0.101      0.031        0.056
                                               (0.025)          (0.024)        (0.017)      (0.022)     (0.004)      (0.008)     (0.011)      (0.016)     (0.013)   (0.012)    (0.011)    (0.007)    (0.005)      (0.007)
Native Only * Top-10 Tech MSA                   0.094            0.098          0.178        0.193       0.007        0.017       0.023        0.040       0.006     0.019      0.022      0.023     -0.001        0.006
                                               (0.007)          (0.009)        (0.021)      (0.016)     (0.004)      (0.005)     (0.007)      (0.010)     (0.009)   (0.004)    (0.007)    (0.007)    (0.002)      (0.002)
Immigs Only * Not Top-10 Tech MSA               0.008            0.112          0.049        0.006       0.015       -0.003      -0.014       -0.022      -0.030    -0.036      0.128      0.093      0.039        0.055
                                               (0.015)          (0.021)        (0.022)      (0.028)     (0.004)      (0.007)     (0.013)      (0.009)     (0.009)   (0.003)    (0.008)    (0.009)    (0.002)      (0.003)
Mixed Team * Not Top-10 Tech MSA                0.016            0.040          0.071        0.071      -0.032        0.013       0.023        0.016       0.035    -0.006      0.126      0.084      0.033        0.055
                                               (0.022)          (0.016)        (0.011)      (0.012)     (0.002)      (0.003)     (0.005)      (0.005)     (0.005)   (0.013)    (0.004)    (0.003)    (0.003)      (0.004)
Constant                                         0.72             9.29          11.10        10.10        0.05         0.57        0.54         0.34        0.30      0.19       0.03       0.03      -0.01        -0.01
Number of firms                                18,000          19,500          18,000       18,000      24,000       24,000      24,000       24,000      24,000    24,000     24,000     23,000     24,000       24,000
Adj R2                                          0.23            0.33            0.14         0.11        0.07         0.09        0.07         0.09        0.14      0.06       0.10       0.12       0.03         0.05
B: New firms: Low-tech industry (All controls except firm size)
Immigs Only * Top-10 Tech MSA                  -0.172           -0.035          0.177        0.063      -0.003       -0.041      -0.077       -0.081      -0.068    -0.054      0.049      0.039      0.015        0.016
                                               (0.002)          (0.018)        (0.019)      (0.011)     (0.003)      (0.003)     (0.007)      (0.005)     (0.007)   (0.004)    (0.004)    (0.003)    (0.001)      (0.001)
Mixed Team * Top-10 Tech MSA                    0.091            0.118          0.207        0.189      -0.015        0.025       0.025        0.024       0.019    -0.047      0.064      0.047      0.015        0.022
                                               (0.013)          (0.026)        (0.016)      (0.011)     (0.003)      (0.006)     (0.006)      (0.010)     (0.007)   (0.008)    (0.003)    (0.002)    (0.002)      (0.002)
Native Only * Top-10 Tech MSA                   0.073           -0.021          0.187        0.192       0.000       -0.002       0.024        0.044      -0.011     0.008      0.016      0.013      0.004        0.004
                                               (0.010)          (0.009)        (0.014)      (0.014)     (0.003)      (0.003)     (0.003)      (0.005)     (0.002)   (0.002)    (0.002)    (0.002)    (0.001)      (0.002)
Immigs Only * Not Top-10 Tech MSA              -0.184           -0.084          0.098       -0.009       0.000       -0.017      -0.101       -0.083      -0.084    -0.039      0.033      0.024      0.010        0.012
                                               (0.023)          (0.022)        (0.031)      (0.019)     (0.002)      (0.004)     (0.008)      (0.008)     (0.008)   (0.005)    (0.006)    (0.005)    (0.001)      (0.002)
Mixed Team * Not Top-10 Tech MSA               -0.027           -0.016          0.019        0.017       0.002        0.003      -.0115       -0.017      -0.014    -0.035      0.035      0.028      0.007        0.012
                                               (0.012)          (0.022)        (0.004)      (0.002)     (0.002)      (0.005)     (0.004)      (0.007)     (0.005)   (0.005)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)      (0.001)
Constant                                         1.10            10.12          11.18         9.69        0.07         0.68        0.47         0.25        0.33      0.04       0.02       0.02       0.00         0.00
Number of firms                               130,000          135,000         130,000      130,000     161,000     161,000      161,000     161,000      161,000   161,000   162,000     157,000   163,000      163,000
Adj R2                                         0.28             0.28            0.29         0.25        0.08        0.09         0.15        0.17         0.14      0.13      0.12        0.12      0.02         0.03
C: New firms: High-tch industry (All controls including firm size)
Immigs Only * Top-10 Tech MSA                    n.a.            0.092          0.151        0.078       0.018        0.022      -0.021       -0.023      -0.040    -0.026      0.150      0.116      0.054        0.062
                                                                (0.045)        (0.030)      (0.029)     (0.002)      (0.007)     (0.006)      (0.013)     (0.007)   (0.002)    (0.021)    (0.018)    (0.004)      (0.007)
Mixed Team * Top-10 Tech MSA                                     0.037          0.261        0.216      -0.020        0.027       .0352        0.048       0.012    -0.036      0.116      0.100      0.030        0.054
                                                                (0.033)        (0.016)      (0.019)     (0.002)      (0.009)     (0.010)      (0.018)     (0.008)   (0.013)    (0.014)    (0.010)    (0.007)      (0.006)
Native Only * Top-10 Tech MSA                                    0.067          0.175        0.181      -0.002        0.007       0.015        0.033      -0.008     0.015      0.023      0.024     -0.001        0.009
                                                                (0.031)        (0.021)      (0.017)     (0.004)      (0.008)     (0.008)      (0.010)     (0.006)   (0.003)    (0.009)    (0.007)    (0.004)      (0.002)
Immigs Only * Not Top-10 Tech MSA                                0.135          0.049        0.006       0.014       -0.007      -0.015       -0.024      -0.046    -0.040      0.133      0.099      0.041        0.057
                                                                (0.019)        (0.021)      (0.028)     (0.004)      (0.005)     (0.007)      (0.006)     (0.006)   (0.004)    (0.014)    (0.013)    (0.002)      (0.005)
Mixed Team * Not Top-10 Tech MSA                                 0.028          0.070        0.069      -0.035        0.017       0.026        0.020       0.040     0.000      0.132      0.099      0.033        0.048
                                                                (0.005)        (0.010)      (0.010)     (0.001)      (0.002)     (0.003)      (0.003)     (0.002)   (0.011)    (0.005)    (0.004)    (0.002)      (0.004)
Constant                                                          9.07          11.08        10.01        0.02         0.51        0.49         0.27        0.23      0.13       0.02       0.01      -0.02        -0.01
Number of firms                                                14,500          18,000       18,000      18,000       18,000      18,000       18,000      18,000    18,000     18,000     18,000     18,000       18,000
Adj R2                                                          0.40            0.14         0.13        0.12         0.18        0.16         0.20        0.27      0.11       0.12       0.13       0.04         0.05
D: New firms: Low-tech industry (All controls including firm size)
Immigs Only * Top-10 Tech MSA                   n.a.             0.043          0.167        0.077      -0.003        0.012      -0.061       -0.065      -0.050    -0.051      0.046      0.036      0.015        0.016
                                                                (0.028)        (0.019)      (0.012)     (0.003)      (0.003)     (0.007)      (0.004)     (0.008)   (0.006)    (0.004)    (0.004)    (0.001)      (0.001)
Mixed Team * Top-10 Tech MSA                                     0.082          0.213        0.182      -0.020        0.022       .0174        0.019       0.013    -0.063      0.060      0.042      0.016        0.021
                                                                (0.022)        (0.018)      (0.011)     (0.004)      (0.005)     (0.004)      (0.008)     (0.005)   (0.008)    (0.003)    (0.001)    (0.002)      (0.002)
Native Only * Top-10 Tech MSA                                   -0.017          0.191        0.186      -0.002       -0.002       0.016        0.037      -0.015    -0.001      0.016      0.012      0.004        0.004
                                                                (0.006)        (0.015)      (0.014)     (0.004)      (0.003)     (0.003)      (0.004)     (0.002)   (0.003)    (0.002)    (0.002)    (0.001)      (0.002)
Immigs Only * Not Top-10 Tech MSA                               -0.010          0.086        0.006       0.005        0.006      -0.090       -0.069      -0.070    -0.034      0.034      0.024      0.010        0.012
                                                                (0.030)        (0.032)      (0.022)     (0.003)      (0.006)     (0.008)      (0.004)     (0.009)   (0.008)    (0.006)    (0.004)    (0.002)      (0.002)
Mixed Team * Not Top-10 Tech MSA                                 0.006          0.017        0.019       0.001        0.017      -.0017       -0.013      -0.005    -0.035      0.038      0.030      0.007        0.012
                                                                (0.019)        (0.004)      (0.002)     (0.002)      (0.005)     (0.005)      (0.005)     (0.005)   (0.003)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)      (0.001)
Constant                                                          9.75          11.25         9.60        0.03         0.58        0.36         0.14        0.21     -0.03       0.01       0.01       0.00        -0.01
Number of firms                                                107,000         130,000      130,000     129,000     129,000      129,000     129,000      129,000   129,000   130,000     125,000   130,000      130,000
Adj R2                                                          0.36            0.30         0.26        0.11        0.19         0.24        0.27         0.24      0.18      0.12        0.13      0.03         0.04
Notes: All regressions include year dummies. Standard errors are clustered by MSA-type*Firm-type
                                          Table A7: Table 8 using data for all SBO firms
                                                    2007                                              2012
                              Immig. 1st gen.   Immig. 2nd gen.   Native only   Immig. 1st gen.   Immig. 2nd gen.   Native only
                                    1                 2                3              4                 5                6
% of firms                        15.8%             3.1%             80.4%          17.0%             4.4%             77.9%
Mean: employees                    8.30              9.83            10.67           8.39              9.20            11.08
Mean: employees if >0              9.26             11.04            11.71           9.43             10.51            12.36
Mean: receipts (thousands)       $1,447            $1,528           $1,938         $1,547            $1,429           $2,168
Mean: ln(receipts/employee)       11.57             11.45            11.55          11.63             11.51            11.58
Mean: payroll/employee           $31,560           $34,750          $34,310        $31,600           $34,040          $35,860
Mean: start-up capital          $156,000          $124,600         $136,000       $136,200          $112,700         $110,700
% 1 owner                         48.8%             44.4%           48.8%           60.0%             57.5%           61.1%
% 2 owners                        37.6%             40.3%           36.5%           29.3%             31.6%           28.9%
% 3 or more owners                13.6%             15.3%           14.7%           10.7%             10.9%           10.0%
% female owners                   47.5%             52.6%           44.8%           43.4%             47.5%           40.5%
% owners < 35                      6.0%              9.3%            4.6%            5.7%             10.0%            4.5%
% owners 35-55                    52.1%             52.6%           45.0%           50.5%             50.4%           39.7%
% owners > 55                     24.2%             19.9%           32.6%           28.7%             24.5%           41.5%
% mixed age                       17.6%             18.2%           17.8%           15.1%             15.2%           14.4%
% high educated                   41.1%             39.1%           40.4%           44.8%             45.4%           45.0%
% low educated                    44.4%             44.1%           43.5%           43.5%             42.2%           43.2%
% mixed educated                  14.5%             16.8%           16.1%           11.8%             12.4%           11.9%
% offer health insurance          36.4%             43.9%           50.5%           27.5%             33.7%           40.3%
% offer 401k                      18.0%             22.9%           30.1%           13.4%             17.5%           23.2%
% offer paid leave                44.4%             51.3%           56.0%           36.3%             40.8%           47.8%
% hire temps                      12.0%             14.3%           14.7%            6.9%              7.9%            7.0%
% hire full-time workers          75.4%             77.0%           77.4%           66.6%             67.5%           68.5%
% export                          11.0%              7.8%            7.7%            7.5%              4.3%            3.7%
% outsource                        2.5%              1.1%            0.9%            2.8%              1.3%            0.9%
% operations abroad                1.6%              0.8%            0.6%            2.6%              1.2%            1.0%
Notes: See Table 7.
