NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE HEALTH EFFECTS OF CESAREAN DELIVERY FOR LOW-RISK FIRST BIRTHS
David Card
Alessandra Fenizia
David Silver
Working Paper 24493
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24493

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2018

We thank Pablo Muñoz and Alice Wu for exceptional research assistance, Pat Kline, Marit
Rehavi and Chris Walters for many detailed comments, and seminar participants at UC Berkeley,
UC Merced, Princeton and NBER Summer Institute (Children) for helpful comments and
suggestions. We are also extremely grateful to Laura Giuliano for conversations that led to this
project. Our use of the data in this project is covered under UC Berkeley Federalwide Assurance
#00006252. Silver gratefully acknowledges funding from the National Institute on Aging, Grant
Number T32-AG000186. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by David Card, Alessandra Fenizia, and David Silver. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Health Effects of Cesarean Delivery for Low-Risk First Births
David Card, Alessandra Fenizia, and David Silver
NBER Working Paper No. 24493
April 2018
JEL No. I11,J13
ABSTRACT
Cesarean delivery for low-risk pregnancies is generally associated with worse health outcomes
for infants and mothers. The interpretation of this correlation, however, is confounded by
potential selectivity in the choice of birth mode. We use birth records from California, merged
with hospital and emergency department (ED) visits for infants and mothers in the year after
birth, to study the causal health effects of cesarean delivery for low-risk first births. Building on
McClellan, McNeil, and Newhouse (1994), we use the relative distance from a mother’s home to
hospitals with high and low c-section rates as an instrument for c-section. We show that relative
distance is a strong predictor of c-section but is orthogonal to many observed risk factors,
including birth weight and indicators of prenatal care. Our IV estimates imply that cesarean
delivery causes a relatively large increase in ED visits of the infant, mainly due to acute
respiratory conditions. We find no significant effects on mothers’ hospitalizations or ED use after
birth, or on subsequent fertility, but we find a ripple effect on second birth outcomes arising from
the high likelihood of repeat c-section. Offsetting these morbidity effects, we find that delivery at
a high c-section hospital leads to a significant reduction in infant mortality, driven by lower death
rates for newborns with high rates of pre-determined risk factors.
David Card
Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall, #3880
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
card@econ.berkeley.edu

David Silver
Department of Economics
Julis Romo Rabinowitz Building
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
silverdw@gmail.com

Alessandra Fenizia
Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall, #3880
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
afenizia@econ.berkeley.edu

An online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w24493

The current rate of cesarean delivery in the U.S. is both high on average and
widely variable across hospitals and regions, with little relation to differences in medical
need (see e.g., Baicker et al. 2008; Kozhimannil et al., 2014). Though c-sections are
clearly beneficial in some situations, a large body of research suggests that cesarean
delivery for low-risk pregnancies is associated with worse outcomes for infants, mothers
and subsequent births.1 These findings have led many experts ─ including the American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2014) ─ to argue for policies to reduce the
rate of c-sections for births that could be safely delivered vaginally.
A fundamental problem in assessing the health effects of c-section is the
selectivity of observed delivery mode. Even among low-risk first births, where prescheduled c-sections are relatively rare (Declercq et al, 2006), a quarter of deliveries end
with a cesarean procedure - often when there are indications that labor has stalled or
the fetus is under stress (Zhang et al., 2010). Much of the variation in c-section rates
appears to be due to differences in how long labor is allowed to progress before
patients are recommended for the procedure.2 What is needed in this setting to
evaluate the relative costs and benefits of “marginal” c-sections is exogenous variation
in providers’ willingness to wait for vaginal deliveries to run their course.3
In this paper we exploit the fact that hospitals have different rates of cesarean
delivery for low-risk pregnancies, and that many women deliver at the nearest hospital,
to derive estimates of the impacts of c-section on health outcomes of infants and
mothers whose choice of delivery mode is determined by distance. Building on
McClellan, McNeil, and Newhouse (1994), we classify hospitals into two groups based
on their average c-section rate for low-risk first births (LRFBs), and use the relative

1

See e.g., Clark and Silver (2011), Gregory et al. (2011), Goer et al. (2012), and Hyde et al. (2012).
Declercq et al. (2006) report that over 90% of mothers who experienced a primary c-section after trial of
labor attribute the "idea to have a cesarean" to their care provider.
3
Two prospective RCTs of “active management of labor” interventions to reduce c-section rates (LopezZeno et al., 1992; Frigoletto et al. 1995) reached different conclusions about whether such programs had
an effect on c-section rates. More recently, Gimovsky and Berghella (2016) implemented a small (N=78)
RCT to extend labor for women with a prolonged second stage, which substantially reduced c-section
rates. These studies were under-powered for studying subsequent health effects on mothers and infants.
2

1

The current rate of cesarean delivery in the U.S. is both high on average and
widely variable across hospitals and regions, with little relation to differences in medical
need (see e.g., Baicker et al. 2008; Kozhimannil et al., 2014). Though c-sections are
clearly beneficial in some situations, a large body of research suggests that cesarean
delivery for low-risk pregnancies is associated with worse outcomes for infants, mothers
and subsequent births.1 These findings have led many experts ─ including the American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2014) ─ to argue for policies to reduce the
rate of c-sections for births that could be safely delivered vaginally.
A fundamental problem in assessing the health effects of c-section is the
selectivity of observed delivery mode. Even among low-risk first births, where prescheduled c-sections are relatively rare (Declercq et al, 2006), a quarter of deliveries end
with a cesarean procedure - often when there are indications that labor has stalled or
the fetus is under stress (Zhang et al., 2010). Much of the variation in c-section rates
appears to be due to differences in how long labor is allowed to progress before
patients are recommended for the procedure.2 What is needed in this setting to
evaluate the relative costs and benefits of “marginal” c-sections is exogenous variation
in providers’ willingness to wait for vaginal deliveries to run their course.3
In this paper we exploit the fact that hospitals have different rates of cesarean
delivery for low-risk pregnancies, and that many women deliver at the nearest hospital,
to derive estimates of the impacts of c-section on health outcomes of infants and
mothers whose choice of delivery mode is determined by distance. Building on
McClellan, McNeil, and Newhouse (1994), we classify hospitals into two groups based
on their average c-section rate for low-risk first births (LRFBs), and use the relative

1

See e.g., Clark and Silver (2011), Gregory et al. (2011), Goer et al. (2012), and Hyde et al. (2012).
Declercq et al. (2006) report that over 90% of mothers who experienced a primary c-section after trial of
labor attribute the "idea to have a cesarean" to their care provider.
3
Two prospective RCTs of “active management of labor” interventions to reduce c-section rates (LopezZeno et al., 1992; Frigoletto et al. 1995) reached different conclusions about whether such programs had
an effect on c-section rates. More recently, Gimovsky and Berghella (2016) implemented a small (N=78)
RCT to extend labor for women with a prolonged second stage, which substantially reduced c-section
rates. These studies were under-powered for studying subsequent health effects on mothers and infants.
2

1

distance from a mother's home zip code to the nearest high c-section (H) hospital versus
low c-section (L) hospital as an instrument for the probability of cesarean delivery.
We implement this approach using a California data set that combines hospital
discharge records for mothers and newborns, birth certificate information, in-patient
and out-patient records for mothers in the year before birth, and similar records for
mothers and infants in the year after birth. These data provide policy-relevant indicators
of postpartum health for a large sample of LRFBs as well as detailed information on
demographic characteristics and risk factors. We also link mothers to subsequent
births, allowing us to study the effects of primary c-section on fertility and health
outcomes at the second birth.
We show that after controlling for local hospital areas and a few maternal
characteristics relative distance is uncorrelated with a large set of pre-determined risk
factors, but strongly affects the probability of c-section – particularly intrapartum
procedures. We then characterize the compliers whose c-sections can be attributed to
relative distance. Under “LATE-like” assumptions these are mothers whose hospital
choice is affected by distance and whose delivery mode is determined by the type of
hospital they select. We interpret the latter condition as isolating births with two key
features: first, that providers at high c-section hospitals would recommend intervention
at an earlier stage in the labor process; and second, that patients would comply.
Empirically we distinguish hospital compliers who shift from L to H hospitals
when they are relatively closer to an H hospital, and procedure compliers who switch
from vaginal to cesarean delivery under the same conditions. We find that procedure
compliers are more heavily selected: 69% have less than high school education (versus
52% of hospital compliers and 41% of LRFBs); and 83% are covered by Medicaid or other
government insurance (versus 61% of hospital compliers and 43% or all deliveries). We
conclude that poorer and less-educated women are more likely to select a nearby
hospital, and are more likely to undergo a c-section if they present at a high c-section
hospital. The flexibility of their delivery outcomes contrasts with the rigidity exhibited by

2

the physician mothers studied by Johnson and Rehavi (2016) and suggests that lowerSES patients may be particularly susceptible to hospital-specific practice differences.4
At birth we find that infants delivered by c-section have higher Apgar scores and
lower rates of birth-related injuries but are more likely to be placed on mechanical
ventilation, consistent with previous studies which point to decreased lung function as a
leading unintended effect of c-section.5 Complying mothers who deliver by c-section
have lower rates of trauma to the perineum and vulva, and substantially shorter times
between arrival at the hospital and delivery, indicative of the relatively long labors for
members of the complier group who deliver vaginally.
In the year after birth we find a large, statistically significant impact of cesarean
delivery on the probability of ED admissions, over half of which are attributed to
respiratory-related diagnoses. The magnitude of the estimated effect is highly robust to
inclusion or exclusion of 17 measured risk factors, including birthweight and prenatal
smoking, prenatal care, and mother’s health conditions. The effect also cumulates
steadily over the follow-up period, suggestive of a persistent health gap between
cesarean and vaginal births. For mothers the estimated impacts of cesarean delivery are
only one-tenth as big, and far from statistically significant, although we cannot rule out
some impact on the probability of ED visits.
An issue for interpreting the effect on ED admissions of infants is that high csection hospitals may have other practices that affect health independently of the csection channel.6 To address this we examine breech presentation births. Hospital
4

A large literature (see Chandra et al., 2012) studies the relative contribution of supply- and demand-side
factors in explaining regional variation in medical treatment. Recent research suggests that supply-side
determinants – including physician risk preferences and abilities, supplier-induced demand, organizational
factors, and specialization – explain a substantial share of regional variation, while patient preferences are
relatively unimportant (e.g., Finkelstein et al. 2016; Cutler, Skinner, Stern, Wennberg 2017). Our results
imply that supply-side factors may be even more important for certain patients (e.g., lower SES mothers).
5
See App. A for an overview of the literature. The causal channel identified in some existing literature
(e.g., Hyde et al. 2012) is through the transfer of microbes during labor that lead to differences in immune
system development. Jachetta (2014) explores the effect of cesarean delivery on asthma using
malpractice insurance premiums as an instrument for c-section.
6
McClellan et al. (1994) termed this the “correlated treatments” problem. A similar concern arises in
other settings where randomization to “gatekeepers” (e.g. physicians, hospitals or judges) with varying
treatment styles is used to generate variation in a treatment of interest, e.g., Maestas et al. (2013), Aizer
and Doyle (2015).

3

choices of mothers with breech presentation are affected by relative distance but 98%
deliver by c-section, so they are effectively “procedure always-takers”. Reassuringly, we
find that delivery at an H hospital has no effect on readmission rates of breech
deliveries. We also compare the estimated first-stage effects on the probability of csection and the reduced-form effects on ED admissions across 4 quartiles of the
predicted probability of delivering by c-section at H hospitals. We find that the reducedform effects vary proportionately with the first-stage effects, as would be expected if
the causal channel runs through c-section.
We go on to examine two longer-term indicators of maternal health: fertility and
second-birth outcomes. Our point estimates show no systematic or significant effect of
cesarean delivery on the probability of a second birth up to 4 years after the first birth,
though our sample sizes for these impacts are limited (due to our 5-year sample
window) and we cannot rule out meaningful impacts of either sign. We find a large
positive effect of a first c-section on the risk of c-section at second birth, reflecting the
low rate of vaginal birth after c-section in our sample. Consistent with early scheduling
of repeat c-sections we find negative effects on gestation and birth weight of the second
child after primary c-section. We also find evidence of higher rates of ED visits for the
second child, comparable to the effect observed for the first.
Finally, we consider the effects of hospital delivery practices on infant deaths.
Delivery at a high c-section hospital is associated with a relatively large reduction in
infant mortality -- on the order of 2.5 fewer deaths per 1000 births -- with p-values
around 0.02. This effect is entirely driven by reductions in deaths for infants with higher
predicted death rates (based on pre-determined factors): for the bottom two-thirds of
the risk distribution we find no effect of delivery at H hospitals. Given the concentration
of the effect among a relatively small subset of births we cannot reliably disentangle
how much of the lower death rate is attributable to earlier c-sections at H hospitals (i.e.,
an intensive margin effect), versus more c-sections (an extensive margin effect). In any
case, the mortality reductions per c-section at these hospitals are large enough to

4

potentially offset the higher morbidity effects of cesarean delivery, suggesting the need
for caution in pursuing policy changes to reduce c-section rates at these hospitals.7

II. An Overview of C-Section and Our Modeling Approach
a. Hospital Setting
Figure 1 provides a stylized overview of the pathways leading to c-section. The
left side of the figure shows the pathway for mothers with a planned c-section. This
group includes women who have had a previous c-section and those with breech
pregnancy, multiple fetuses, and risk factors like obesity and eclampsia (Declercq et al,
2006; Zhang et al. 2010). Their c-sections occur with no attempted labor and are
commonly classified as “scheduled.”
To the right are mothers who reach normal term with no scheduled intervention.
Typically, a mother-to-be shows early signs of labor and is admitted to hospital where
her progress is monitored and pain relief and labor-augmenting medications are
administered. 8 Barring other factors a decision to perform c-section is reached when
labor time exceeds the threshold TH (which depends on maternal characteristics and the
specific hospital) resulting in an “unscheduled” or intrapartum c-section. Practices
appear to vary widely over how long to allow labor to proceed (Zhang et al., 2010;
Kozhimannil et al, 2013, 2014), leading to wide variation across hospitals in the average
rate of intrapartum c-section. Similar variation exists in the decision process for mothers
whose gestation has exceeded normal bounds, resulting in earlier or later admission to
the hospital, more or less aggressive induction, and earlier or later recommendations for
c-section.
Given these two very different paths to c-section we focus on low-risk first
births, eliminating twins, breech presentations, births to mothers younger than 18 or

7

In unreported analysis, we tested for Roy-style selection on survival gains using a generalized controlfunction approach (following Brinch et al. 2017). We find no evidence of this type of sorting.
8
Declercq et al. (2006) report that that 76% of all U.S. mothers had epidural anesthesia during labor.
Many practitioners believe this slows labor and makes c-section more likely, though the evidence is
controversial – see Howell (2000) and Klein (2006).

5

over 35, and five other risk factors (see below).9 We identify the causal effect of csection using a patient’s proximity to hospitals with higher and lower average c-section
rates for low-risk first births. Our interpretation is that these cross-hospital differences
are mainly due to differences in the average time labor is allowed to proceed before
performing c-section (i.e., in the mean of TH in Figure 1).10 Several factors could play a
role in this variation, including financial incentives, malpractice pressures (Baicker et al,
2006), and differences in risk aversion. Rather than try to identify these factors,
however, we take a data-driven approach and simply classify hospitals based on their
average c-section rates for LRFBs.

b. Econometric Framework
Given the timing of birth events we posit a triangular system for the choice of a
high c-section hospital by mother i (denoted by H i ), the choice of cesarean delivery ( Ci )
and a health outcome for the baby or mother ( yi ). A linear version of such a system is:
H i   0  1Z i   x X i  ui

(1)

Ci  0  1H i  2 Z i  x X i  vi

(2)

yi   0  1Ci   2 H i   3Z i   x X i   i

(3)

where Z i is a measure of the relative distance from the mother’s home to a low versus
high c-section hospital, and X i is a vector of controls (which we assume for simplicity
are indicators for a set of mutually exclusive subgroups). Equation (1) says that the
choice of hospital is affected by relative distance. Equation (2) says that the probability
of c-section is affected by which type of hospital a patient chooses and possibly by
relative distance. Equation (3) says that the health outcome is affected by whether the
delivery is performed by c-section or not, and possibly by H i and Z i . Our primary
interest is in the effect of cesarean delivery, represented by the coefficient 1 .
9

We do not eliminate “scheduled” c-sections since the classification depends on indicators of labor on the
mother’s discharge record which are known to be under-reported (Henry et al, 1995).
10
Consistent with this, we find that relative distance mainly affects the rate of unscheduled c-sections,
and that there is a strong effect of relative distance on the elapsed time between the admission of the
mother and the birth (see below).

6

Equations (1) and (2) imply that there is an induced first-stage relationship
between relative distance and the probability of c-section:
Ci   0   1Z i   x X i  i

(4)

where  1  11  2 . Similarly, equations (1)-(3) imply a reduced-form relationship
between relative distance and the health outcome:
yi   0   1 Z i   x X i   i

(5)

where  1  1 1   2 1   3 .

c. Potential Outcomes, Compliers, and Interpretation of IV
Next we use a potential outcomes framework to an interpret IV estimate of the
coefficient 1 in equation (3). For simplicity we focus on a binary version of our relative
distance measure, Z iB , which indicates whether a mother’s home is closer to a high csection hospital or not.11 Let H 0i and H 1i represent indicators for whether mother i
would choose a high c-section hospital when Z iB  0 or Z iB  1 . Similarly, let C0i and C1i
represent indicators for whether she would deliver by c-section when Z iB  0 or Z iB  1 .
A given mother’s potential responses to changes in Z iB are represented by the pairs
( H 0i , H 1i ) and (C0i , C1i ) . In principle, there are 16 different types of mothers,
enumerated in App. Table 1. For example, the group with ( H 0i , H 1i ), (C0i , C1i ) = (1,1),
(0,0) consists of mothers who are H always-takers and C never-takers.
We impose three assumptions that restrict the possible H and C combinations.
First, we assume there are no H defiers. This is a standard LATE assumption and is
equivalent to assuming that all patients weakly prefer closer hospitals (similar to Einav
et al., 2016). Second, we assume that distance has no direct effect on delivery mode,
conditional on the type of hospital (i.e., 2  0 in equation 2). This exclusion restriction
rules out the possibility, for example, that being closer to the hospital affects the stage
11

In our analysis below we use both a continuous measure of relative distance and an indicator for being
closer to a high c-section hospital, and find they give very similar IV estimates. Characterization of
compliers with a continuous instrument is more difficult. We present an extended analysis in App. B.

7

of labor at arrival, which in turn affects the probability of c-section. To address concerns
about the role of travel time we include a measure of the mother’s distance to the
nearest hospital of any type in the control vector X i . Empirically, however, we find that
distance to nearest hospital does not predict c-section, suggesting that this concern is
minimal.12 A third assumption is that H-compliers never switch from cesarean to vaginal
birth. This monotonicity condition rules out rank-reversals in treatment intensity for H
compliers. We view this as plausible given the homogeneity of our LRFB sample.13
Under these assumptions only seven (H, C) combinations are relevant: four
representing groups of mothers whose choice of hospital and delivery mode is
unaffected by distance, and three subgroups of H-compliers: those who always deliver
vaginally (H complier & C never-taker); those who always get c-section (H complier & C
always-taker); and those who switch from vaginal to cesarean delivery when they are
induced to choose a high c-section hospital by relative distance (H&C complier). Only
H&C compliers change delivery mode in response to the value of the instrument, so
these are the “procedure compliers”.
In addition, we make the standard conditional independence assumption that

Z iB is as good as randomly assigned conditional on X i . It is then easy to show that:
E[ H i | Z iB  1, X i ]  E[ H i | Z iB  0, X i ]   1 ( X i )  P( H complier | X i )

(6a)

E[Ci | Z iB  1, X i ]  E[Ci | Z iB  0, X i ]   1 ( X i )  P( H & C complier, X i )

(6b)

Assuming that X i is a set of subgroup indicators, the coefficient  1 of relative distance
in the first-stage model (1) for H identifies a weighted average of the fraction of H
compliers in each subgroup, where the subgroup’s weight equals its relative size times
the relative magnitude of its within-group variance in Z iB (see App. B). Similarly, the
12

In our first-stage regressions with a binary indicator for c-section as the dependent variable the
estimated coefficient of distance to the nearest hospital is 0.015 per 100 miles (s.e. = 0.039), implying
that, if anything, extra travel time to the nearest facility tends to increase a mother’s likelihood of csection.
13
Rank invariance is routinely assumed in the analysis of quantile treatment effects (e.g., Chernozhukov
and Hansen, 2005). Currie and MacLeod (2017) consider a setting where rank-reversal could be
important. They document substantial heterogeneity in physician diagnostic ability, which could lead to
rank reversals if better diagnosticians are concentrated at certain hospitals. Our low-risk first birth
sample excludes most of the higher-risk births considered by Currie and MacLeod (2017).

8

coefficient  1 in the first stage model (4) for c-section identifies a weighted average of
the fraction of H&C compliers in the various covariate subgroups.
Although conditional independence is not directly testable, we evaluate its
plausibility by “holding back” a set of observable risk factors from our vector of basic
controls X i . We then check whether these risk factors are orthogonal to relative
distance after taking account of the basic controls (which consist of maternal
demographics and neighborhood identifiers).
Finally we consider the potential health outcomes for a given birth. Let

Yi ( c, h, z ) represent the outcome that would be observed for birth i conditional on
delivery mode, hospital type and relative distance. As a baseline we assume that

Yi ( c, h, z )  Yi ( c )  {Yi (0), Yi (1)}

(7)

i.e., that the health outcome depends only on delivery mode, with no dependence on

H or Z iB . This assumption, plus our assumptions on the possible (H, C) combinations
and on the conditional independence of Z iB , imply that:14

E[ yi | Z iB  1, X i ]  E[ yi | Z iB  0, X i ]   1 ( X i ) E[Yi (1)  Yi (0) | H & C complier, X i ) . (8)
In other words, the reduced-form difference in average outcomes, conditional on X i , is
proportional to the fraction of H&C compliers times the average treatment effect on
H&C compliers. Together equations (6b) and (8) imply that an IV estimate of the
coefficient 1 in equation (3) using Z iB as an instrument for Ci yields an estimate of a
weighted average of the treatment effects of c-section on H&C complying mothers in
each X i  subgroup, where the weights combine the relative size of the group, the
relative within-group variance in Z iB , and the relative size of the first stage effect on the
group (see App. B).
A more general assumption is that the potential outcomes depend on H and C:

Yi ( c, h, z )  Yi ( c, h )  {Yi (0,0), Yi (0,1), Yi (1,0), Yi (1,1)} .
14

The only mothers in a given covariate subgroup who switch potential outcomes when the instrument
changes from 0 to 1 are the H&C compliers. For these mothers we observe Yi(0) when Zi B = 0 and Yi(1)
when Zi B = 1. Since the share H&C complier is π1(Xi) equation (8) follows immediately.

9

In this case proximity to an H hospital can affect the health outcomes of all three
subgroups of H-compliers: H&C compliers (who switch hospital type and delivery mode
when Z iB changes from 0 to 1); H-complier/C-always takers (who switch hospitals but
always deliver by cesarean); and the H-complier/C-never takers (who switch hospitals
but always deliver vaginally). Let 1 ( X i ) ,  2 ( X i ) and  3 ( X i ) represent the shares of
these 3 groups among the H-compliers (conditional on X i ) , and let

1 ( X i )  E[Yi (1,1)  Yi (0,0) | H & C complier, X i )
 2 ( X i )  E[Yi (1,1)  Yi (1,0) | H complier & CAT , X i )
 3 ( X i )  E[Yi (0,1)  Yi (0,0) | H complier & CNT , X i )
represent the corresponding treatment effects of delivering at an H hospital.15 For a
given X i  group an IV procedure using Z iB as an instrument for H i yields an estimate
of:

1 ( X i ) 1 ( X i )   2 ( X i )  2 ( X i )   3 ( X i ) 3 ( X i ) .

(9a)

Using Z iB as an instrument for Ci , on the other hand, yields an estimate of:

1
 ( X )  ( X )   2 ( X i )  2 ( X i )   3 ( X i )  3 ( X i )  .
1 ( X i ) 1 i 1 i

(9b)

In the baseline case where  2 ( X i )   3 ( X i )  0 , treating Ci as the endogenous variable
gives rise to a consistent estimator of 1 ( X i ). More generally, if delivery at an H
hospital also affects C-always takers or C-never takers, then treating Ci as the
endogenous variable could over- or under-state the effect on H&C compliers.
We evaluate the dependence of health outcomes on hospital type by studying
outcomes for breech presentations.16 These infants are nearly always delivered by csection, owing to the perceived risks of and lack of current expertise in delivering breech

15

μ1 is a combined treatment effect of c-section and delivery at an H hospital for H&C compliers, while μ2
and μ3 represent treatment effects of delivery at an H hospital for mothers whose delivery mode is
independent of hospital type.
16
To ensure comparability to our primary sample, our sample of breech babies consists only of births
meeting all criteria for being low-risk first births except for their presentation.

10

babies vaginally (Hannah et al, 2000; ACOG, 2006).17 Thus, an IV procedure using Z iB as
an instrument for H i yields an estimate of

E[Yi (1,1)  Yi (1,0) | breech, H complier, X i )
A finding that this effect is close to zero suggests that any independent effect of delivery
at a high c-section hospital is also likely to be small for LRFBs.
We also perform a second check by stratifying our sample into groups with
different first-stage effects on the probability of delivering by c-section, and on the
probability of delivering at an H hospital. We then check whether the reduced-form
health effects for different subgroups vary proportionately with their first-stage effects
on the probability of c-section, or with their first-stage effects on the probability of
delivery at an H hospital.

III. Data Sources, Sample Overview, Relative Distance Instrument
a. Data Sources
We use a linked data set created by the California Office of Statewide Health
Planning and Development (OSHPD) that combines information from patient discharge
(PD) records, emergency department (ED) records, ambulatory surgery (AS) records, and
vital statistics (VS) records for all in-hospital births in the state between 2007 and
2011.18 Specifically, PD records for the birth stay of the mother and the infant are linked
with birth certificate data and PD/ED/AS and VS records over the following year for
mothers and infants and with PD/ED/AS records for mothers in the year prior to the
birth. The resulting data set includes birth certificate information on the mother (e.g.,
demographics, weight gain and smoking during pregnancy) and the infant (gestation,
birthweight, Apgar score), as well as PD-derived information on diagnoses at the
delivery. The pre-birth PD/ED/AS records provide additional measures of maternal
health (such as the number of ED visits in the year prior to birth). The post-partum

17

Thus breech deliveries provide “identification at infinity” – see Chamberlain (1986), Heckman (1990).
This is known as PDD/ED/AS/Linked Birth Cohort data, and is available to researchers through OSHPD.
See App. C for more information on the characteristics of the data and the derivation of our samples.
18

11

PD/ED/AS and VS records provide our main health outcomes (hospital visits and infant
death). Importantly, we can link later births for the same mother, enabling us to study
effects on the probability of additional births and on the health outcomes associated
with these births.
This data set has two key limitations. First, we do not observe physician office
visits. This means that we miss some fraction of less urgent health problems for
newborns and mothers than are treated in an office setting rather than at a hospital or
ED/AS center. As discussed below, we suspect that the compliers for our distance-based
instrument tend to use the ED more for routine care than other mothers, so we
arguably capture a higher fraction of such problems than would be detected in a
representative sample of all births.
A second limitation is that we have no direct information on several important
pieces of clinical information, including whether a c-section occurred before or after a
trial of labor.19 In addition the reporting of certain secondary diagnoses (such as uterine
inertia) appears to be endogenously related to the decision to perform c-section (e.g.,
for billing purposes). The offsetting benefit is that we have large sample sizes, allowing
us to detect plausibly sized effects with an IV research design.

b. Sample Overview
Table 1 provides an overview of the characteristics of all 2.7 million births in
California during our 5-year sample window (column 1) and of all low-risk first births
(column 2). We define LRFBs as singleton non-breech first births delivered at 37+ weeks
of gestation. These restrictions correspond to the two lowest risk groups in Robson’s
(2001) widely used classification. In addition we eliminate births from mothers under 18
or over 35, and with 5 other risk factors: eclampsia, pre-eclampsia, growth restrictions,
mother’s BMI >90th percentile, and >20 pre-natal visits. We do not condition on other

19

We follow the existing literature (e.g., Gregory et al., 2002; Johnson and Rehavi, 2017) and classify labor
as having occurred prior to c-section based on the presence of at least one of a set of ICD-9-CM diagnosis
codes devised by Henry et al. (1995) that indicate fetal distress during labor or dystocia. Henry et al.’s
analysis showed that these indicators are measured with some error relative to clinical indications.

12

observable risk factors (such as birthweight), allowing us to test for orthogonality of our
distance-based instrument with factors that are correlated with the health of mothers
or infants.
Column 1 shows that about one-half of all California mothers are Hispanic, onehalf have no more than a high school education, and one-half have their delivery stay
paid by Medi-Cal. All three rates fall to around 40% among LRFB mothers. LRFB mothers
are also younger and weigh less. LRFB mothers are similar to all mothers in their
average number of prenatal visits (about 12) and their probability of an ED visit in the
year before delivery (20%), but have slightly longer mean gestation (40 vs. 39 weeks).
Overall about one third of all California births were delivered by c-section during our
sample period, compared to 25% for LRFBs. These fractions are very similar to national
averages reported by Osterman and Martin (2014).

c. Construction of Relative Distance Instrument
Our distance-based IV strategy relies on a prior classification of hospitals. Since csection rates vary systematically across regions of California, we elected to define high
and low c-section hospitals within Health Referral Regions (HRRs).20 As detailed in App.
C, we fit a logit model for c-section on our LRFB sample, including hospital dummies and
a set of risk factors. We classify a hospital as “high c-section” (H) if its risk-adjusted csection rate (i.e., the hospital effect in the logit) is above the patient-weighted mean
rate for all hospitals in its HRR. Otherwise it’s classified as low c-section (L).
App. Table 2 shows that 29% of LRFBs were delivered by cesarean at H hospitals,
compared to 22% at L hospitals. About two-thirds (0.048/0.075) of the difference is
attributable to a higher rate of unscheduled (intrapartum) c-sections. H hospitals also
differ in other ways: they are more likely to be for-profit (18% vs. 9%) and less likely to
have a NICU unit (74% vs. 86%). Nevertheless, H and L hospitals have very similar

20

Hospital referral regions (HRRs) represent regional health care markets for tertiary medical care,
defined by the Dartmouth Atlas (see Dartmouth Atlas, undated). There are 25 HRRs in our sample of
LRFBs. If we classified hospitals on a statewide basis, we would have many more high c-section hospitals
in Southern and Central California and many more low c-section hospitals in Northern California.

13

average numbers of deliveries per year (3,695 versus 3,635), suggesting that the
classification is not driven by volume-related differences.
Using this classification, we then calculate the distance from the centroid of a
patient’s home zip code to the centroid of the zip code of the nearest H hospital ( d Hi )
and the nearest L hospital ( d Li ) . We define the relative distance Z i  d Li  d Hi and an
indicator for being closer to an H hospital Z iB  1[ Z i  0] . We also define the distance to
nearest hospital d iMIN  min[d Li , d Hi ] .
The third column of Table 1 presents the characteristics of the subsample of
LRFBs that have patient home zip code information, non-missing values for all the
control variables we use in our main specifications, and have d Hi  20 miles, d Li  20
miles, and  20 miles between the mother’s home zip code and the actual hospital she
delivered in. These restrictions eliminate just over 20% of LRFBs, leaving us with a final
analysis sample of 491,604 births. A comparison of columns 2 and 3 suggests that this
sample is quite similar to the overall LRFB sample.
Figure 2 illustrates the strong relationship between relative distance and hospital
choice for LRFB mothers. Here we plot the fraction of mothers in each zip code who
deliver at an H hospital against the value of Z i . The data suggest a nearly symmetric Scurve relationship, tending toward a minimum of about 10% when Z i  15 and a
maximum of about 90% when Z i  15. We interpret this symmetry as evidence that
most mothers treat H and L hospitals as exchangeable, though some are H always-takers
and others are H never-takers.

d. Instrument Validity
A concern with any IV strategy is that the instrumental variable is correlated with
unobserved determinants of the outcome of interest. To assess this concern we
estimated a series of OLS models for each of a set of held-back risk factors that are
predetermined at the delivery date, looking for evidence of a correlation with relative
distance. Specifically for the jth risk factor we fit a model of the form:

14

Ri   0   1Z i   X X i   i
where X i is the set of basic control variables we include in all our outcome models.
This includes year effects, controls for mother’s demographics21, an indicator for
whether the mother had any visits to the ED in the year before the birth, mean income
in the mother’s home ZIP code, distance to the nearest hospital ( d iMIN ), and a set of
Health Service Area (HSA) dummies. 22 The latter ensure that all our models compare
mothers and infants from the same narrow geographic area.
We considered a set of 16 potential risk factors: length of gestation, birthweight,
an indicator for low birth weight, 3 measures of prenatal care, indicators for maternal
diabetes, herpes, and asthma, five measures of maternal smoking, and counts of the
number of ED visits and total medical facility visits (hospital+ED+AS) by the mother in
the year prior to the birth. We also used these 16 variables and X i to estimate logit
models for the probability of c-section and the probability of an ED visit by the infant in
the year after birth, then formed predicted probabilities of these two outcomes that
combine the risk factors in a potentially more powerful way.
The resulting estimates of the  1 coefficients are reported in App. Table 3. Only
two risk factors – the number of ED visits by the mother in the year prior to the birth
and the indicator for maternal herpes – have significant partial correlations with Z i .
Interestingly, the former is positively related to relative distance (with t=2.0) while the
latter is negatively related (with t=-2.2).
To summarize our findings we multiplied the estimated coefficient for each risk
factor by 10 and divided by its standard deviation (i.e., 10ˆ1 / std ( Ri )) ), providing an
estimate of the “effect size” of a 10-mile change in relative distance. The resulting
effect sizes are plotted in Figure 3 along with their confidence intervals. We order the
coefficients by their precision, resulting in a “forest plot”-style graph (Hedges and Olkin,

21

These are dummies for mother’s age, education, race, insurance type, and presence of father, and
continuous controls for height (cubic), weight (cubic), and BMI.
22
Hospital service areas (HSAs) are designed to be relatively self-contained with respect to hospital care,
and are defined by the National Center for Health Statistics: there are 176 in our sample.

15

1985). For reference, we also highlight the ±0.01 effect size range. The pattern of
estimated effect sizes suggests that relative distance has a small and unsystematic effect
on the risk factors, controlling for the X i variables. In particular we find a precisely
estimated zero effect for birthweight (a standard marker of infant health), and relatively
small and opposite-signed effect sizes for the probability of a c-section delivery or an ED
visit in the year after birth.

IV. First Stage Relationships and Complier Characteristics
The first two rows of Table 2 present the estimated first-stage relationships
between relative distance and the probabilities of giving birth in an H hospital ( H i ) or
delivering by cesarean ( Ci ). Both the continuous measure of relative distance (in the
first column) and the binary version (second column) have strong effects on H i , with
partial F-statistics of 104 and 69, respectively. The estimate the first row of the first
column means that a mother living 10 miles closer to an H-hospital is 15.9 percentage
points (ppt’s) more likely to deliver at an H hospital (controlling for X i ), while the
estimate in the second column 2 means that a mother who is closer to an H hospital has
a 10.1 ppt higher probability of delivering at such a hospital. The relative distance
variables also have a strong effect on Ci , with F statistics of 37 and 26, respectively. A
mother living 10 miles closer to an H hospital has a 1.8 ppt higher probability of csection; while a mother who is simply closer to an H-hospital than an L hospital has a 1.1
ppt higher probability of c-section.
The third and fourth rows of Table 2 show the separate effects of relative
distance on scheduled and unscheduled c-sections. These estimates imply that 73%
(using Z i ) or 80% (using Z iB ) of the extra c-sections attributable to proximity to H
hospitals are intrapartum procedures. Since indications of labor appear to be
significantly under-reported, however, we believe these fractions should be interpreted
as lower bounds on the unscheduled shares. Indeed, the 16% under-reporting rate

16

found by Henry et al. (1995) suggests that 60-80% of the scheduled c-sections attributed
to distance are actually intrapartum procedures with no reported indications of labor.23
The next rows of Table 2 show the estimated effects of relative distance on the
probability of cesarean delivery at H and L hospitals, respectively. The estimates imply
that the net increase in overall c-sections attributable to proximity to H hospitals is a
result of a relatively large rise in the rate of c-sections at H hospitals, offset by a
reduction in c-sections at L hospitals. The reduction reflects the behavior of Hcomplier/C-AT’s, who switch hospital types in response to relative distance but have a
cesarean delivery regardless of where they present.
Finally, in the bottom panel of the table we show the implied breakdown of the
overall H-complier population into its three constituent subgroups (H&C compliers, H
compliers/C-AT’s, and H compliers/C-NT’s). To calculate the fractions using the
continuous distance instrument we use the changes in probabilities associated with a
10-mile reduction in relative distance to an H hospital. Regardless of the choice of
instrument we find that H&C compliers represent about 11% of the overall H complier
population, while C-AT’s represent about 20%. This means that a shift in relative
proximity to an H hospital induces an 11-ppt increase in the overall c-section rate of the
H-compliers, from 20% to 31%.24
To further explore the characteristics of the extra c-sections attributable to
relative distance, we used the method suggested by Abadie (2003) to estimate the
mean characteristics of the H (or distance) compliers and the H&C (or procedure)
compliers. The results are summarized in Table 3. We show the distributions of the two
complier groups across race/ethnicity groups, mother’s education categories and
insurance types in Panels A and B. Panel C shows a number of maternal and infant
characteristics, including mother’s height, maternal use of the ED prior to the birth, and
23

Henry et al. (1995)’s data show that of 831 primary c-sections for non-breech births that were clinically
coded as having trial of labor, 701 had indications of labor on the discharge record, implying a 15.6%
under-reporting rate. If we assume that distance only affects unscheduled c-section rates we would
expect to find that scheduled c-sections account for 15.6% of the overall first stage effect.
24
Among all LRFBs, those delivering at L hospitals have a 22% c-section rate, while those delivering at H
hospitals have a 28.9% c-section rate (see App. Table 2). The somewhat larger gap among H-compliers
likely reflects H-compliers being more subject to hospital policies than the broader LRFB group.

17

the baby’s gender and birthweight. We also show the fraction of infants at high risk to
use the ED, based on a simple logit model that includes maternal characteristics and
other predetermined factors.25 Finally, Panel D shows the shares of births from low air
quality areas, as measured by ozone and particulate (PM2.5) pollution. To the extent
that cesarean delivery leads to reduced lung function, the net effect on infant health is
likely to be magnified for families that live in areas with worse air pollution.
A comparison of the demographic characteristics of all LRFB mothers (column 1)
and the H-compliers (column 2) shows that the latter group are more likely to be
Hispanic and to have at most a high school education. They are also more likely to have
government insurance (mainly Medi-Cal). 26 They are not differentially selected from
low-income ZIP codes but they do tend to reside in areas with worse air quality, and
their babies have a higher predicted risk of visiting the ED. Consistent with evidence
from other settings – e.g., Beckert et al.’s (2012) study of hip replacement patients –
these comparisons suggest that less-advantaged families put more weight on distance in
deciding which hospital to use.
The H&C compliers (column 3) are even more highly selected in all these
dimensions: for example, only 14% have a college degree. H&C-complying mothers are
also much more likely to live in lower income areas, and to have been users of the ED
prior to the birth. Nearly all (91%) of these mothers’ infants have above-median risk of
a postpartum ED visit. H&C-complying mothers are also relatively likely to have short
stature and to deliver a male baby.
An implication of the results in Table 3 is that differences in hospital practices
have a larger impact on the probability of c-section for lower-SES mothers. This is the
“flip side” of the findings reported by Johnson and Rehavi (2017), who conclude that the
delivery modes of physician mothers are less responsive to the financial incentives faced

25

The index combines risk factors for lower health and predictors of the use of the ED for care.
The very low fraction of distance compliers with Kaiser insurance is consistent with the fact that Kaiser
insured mothers would be expected to deliver at a Kaiser hospital in all but emergency situations. We
have estimated our main models excluding Kaiser insurees and find that the first stage and reduced form
effects are typically a little larger in magnitude, while the associated IV estimates are of very similar size.
This is as expected given there are so few Kaiser insurees among the compliers.
26

18

by their doctors.27 A second implication is that since the procedure compliers are
relatively heavy predicted ED-users, our IV estimates of the effect of cesarean delivery
on ED use may overstate the impacts for other groups who rely more on physician office
visits for routine and non-emergent care.

V. Impacts of C-Section Delivery on Infant and Maternal Health
a. Outcomes at the Delivery
With this background, we turn to an analysis of the health effects of cesarean
delivery. We begin in Table 4 by focusing on outcomes associated with delivery itself,
including Apgar scores, incidence of a birth injury, admission to the NICU, and use of
ventilation for the infant. For mothers, we focus on perineal laceration and other
injuries incurred during labor, as well as the length of the hospital stay at delivery. For
each outcome, we show the mean value among all LRFBs (in the first column), the OLS
coefficient from a regression of the outcome on Ci and our basic controls (in the
second), then the estimated reduced-form effects and IV estimates based on the
continuous instrument Z i and the discrete instrument Z iB .
Apgar scores are widely used as indicators of newborn health (see Casey et al.,
2001).28 We focus on the 5-minute test, which in an OLS regression has a small but
significantly negative correlation with cesarean delivery. In IV models the correlation
becomes relatively large and positive (0.5 to 0.65 points on a 1-10 scale), suggesting that
there are unobserved determinants of Apgar scores that are negatively correlated with
c-section, but that on average, cesarean delivery has a positive impact on newborns.29
For birth injuries the OLS and IV estimates are both negative (i.e., cesarean delivery
lowers the risk of injury) but the IV estimates are substantially larger in magnitude. The

27

An earlier study Grytten et al. (2011) finds that in Norway, where c-section rates are among the lowest
in the OECD, physician mothers are more likely to have c-section. They attribute this to enhanced agency
of these mothers in the hospital setting.
28
The Apgar is based on 5 components (breathing, heart rate, muscle tone, reflexes, and skin color) each
of which is scored 0 1 or 2. See Finster and Wood (2005) for a brief history and discussion of the test.
29
Altman et al. (2015) show that prolonged second stage of labor is associated with low Apgar scores. The
positive IV effect of c-section we measure could be attributable to a shortening of labor.

19

IV estimates suggest that c-section reduces injuries associated with difficult labor (e.g.,
branchial plexus injury) at a rate of 1-2 per 100 c-sections, without offsetting rises in
other types of injuries (e.g., lacerations attributable to the procedure itself).30
Comparing OLS and IV estimates of the effect of c-section on NICU admission we
also find a switch from a positive (OLS) to a negative (IV) effect. In this case, however,
the IV estimates are potentially confounded by the lower fraction of H hospitals with a
NICU unit (74% vs. 86% at L hospitals). To the extent that NICU admission decisions are
influenced by the availability of a unit in the same hospital, we might expect to see
lower NICU admissions for deliveries at H hospitals. To assess this channel, we
examined NICU admissions for breech births. Since nearly all breech births are delivered
by c-section, with no differential between H and L hospitals, any reduced form effect of
being closer to an H hospital for these babies is arguably attributable to supply-side
considerations. In fact, we find that the reduced form effects for breech deliveries are
comparable to the effects for LRFBs, though imprecise. Thus, the reduction in NICU
admissions suggested by the IV models in Table 4 could be explained by the lower
availability of NICU’s at H hospitals, rather than a causal effect of c-section.
Last, we look at the incidence of ventilation (use of mechanical devices to aid the
newborn in breathing). OLS models show that ventilation is more likely for newborns
delivered by c-section, with an effect that is large (+1 percentage point) relative to the
baseline rate (1.5% across all births).31 This pattern is consistent with a large literature
suggesting that breathing problems are more likely for babies delivered by c-section
(See App. A). In contrast to the patterns we see for the 5-minute Apgar and the risk of
birth injury, the IV models suggest even larger (though somewhat imprecisely
estimated) effects. Even at the lower bound of its 95% confidence interval, the IV
estimate based on the continuous distance instrument implies that about 3 per 100

30

Alexander et al. (2006) study fetal injuries after c-section and note that the highest rates of injuries are
for fetuses born after an unsuccessful trial of forceps or vacuum delivery. To the extent that doctors at H
hospitals use these procedures less, and opt for c-section earlier, these injuries will be avoided.
31
The 1.5% incidence rate we measure in our sample is comparable to the rate of 1.8% measured by
Angus et al. (2001) using 1994 discharge data for California and New York.

20

babies delivered by c-section are placed on a ventilator. The point estimate implies that
one-quarter of all cesarean deliveries for complying mothers end up on ventilation.
The next two rows of Table 4 present OLS and IV effects for two (related)
measures of maternal injuries during labor: trauma to the perineum and vulva, and
more serious (2nd degree or higher) perineal laceration (PL).32 The former category
includes the latter, as well as less serious (1st degree) PL's, vulvar and perineal
hematomas, and anal sphincter tears. The rate of trauma injuries is relatively high for
first-birth mothers (46% on average); about two-thirds of these are 2nd degree or
higher PL's. As shown by the OLS estimates, trauma and PL are substantially lower for
cesarean deliveries: indeed, the rates of both injuries are under 1% among c-section
births. Interestingly, the IV estimates are even larger in magnitude.
To interpret the IV estimate for the rate of more serious PLs based on the binary
instrument we used Abadie's (2003) method to estimate the "potential outcomes" for
PL among the complier population. This approach suggests that for compliers who
deliver vaginally at L hospitals the rate of PL is essentially 100% (the numerical estimate
is 1.22, with a standard error of 0.27), while for those who deliver by c-section at H
hospitals the rate is 0 (the numerical estimate is 0.01, with a standard error of 0.01).
Our interpretation is that, for compliers who deliver vaginally because they are closer to
L hospitals, the rate of more serious delivery-related injuries is high. This elevated rate is
potentially indicative of a long and difficult labor, which also has been linked by other
researchers to bad infant outcomes such as asphyxia (Chandra et al. 1997; Maghoma
and Buchmann 2002; Aslam et al. 2014), and highlights a tradeoff between performing
intrapartum c-sections and waiting for labor to progress.
In the final three rows of Table 4, we investigate the effects of c-section on the
mother’s length of stay (LOS) during the delivery episode. On average mothers
undergoing c-section have longer recovery periods and thus longer LOS, a fact that is
32

We have investigated a few other outcomes at birth, namely unplanned hysterectomy and asphyxia of
the neonate. In our sample, the mean rate of unplanned hysterectomy is only 1 in 10,000; we find no
evidence of an effect of c-section but the precision of our estimates is low. Asphyxia is also rare (3.2 per
1000), and we find very weak evidence (t=0.5) that c-sections reduce asphyxia. There is somewhat
stronger evidence that c-section reduces asphyxia-related infant deaths.

21

reflected by our OLS estimate of an additional 1.4 days in the hospital for mothers
undergoing c-section relative to vaginal delivery. We then split a mother’s LOS into two
components: (1) the number of days from a mother’s admission to the birth, i.e. the
length of labor,33 and (2) the number of days from birth until the mother is discharged
home, i.e. the post-birth LOS. Most of the gap in total length of stay for mothers
undergoing c-section occurs after birth.
Turning to the IV estimates, we find that marginal c-sections among the
procedure compliers have a somewhat shorter LOS, though the estimates are somewhat
imprecise. Consistent with our discussion in Section IIa we find that the time from
mother’s admission to birth is significantly reduced (by around 0.6 days) when the
delivery is by c-section. The duration of the post-birth stay is longer for compliers who
deliver by c-section rather than vaginally (by about 0.4 days) but the difference is
substantially smaller than the 1.3 days implied by the OLS estimate.34 We conclude
from these estimates that the complier group have relatively long labors when they
deliver vaginally and require a long post-birth recovery – nearly as long as a postcesarean recovery.35

b. Post Deliver Admission Outcomes
Table 5 summarizes the estimated impacts of cesarean delivery on admissions to
hospitals, ambulatory surgical centers (ASCs) and EDs in the year after birth by infants
and mothers. Focusing first on infants, the estimated OLS coefficients imply that
cesarean delivery is associated with no change in the combined risk of any type of visit
(in-patient, ASC or ED), but with an elevated risk of ED visits (with an effect of about 6
33

We use this terminology somewhat loosely, as we do not observe exactly when the mother went into
different stages of labor. We only know the days elapsed between her admission to the hospital and the
birth date of the baby. According to Declercq et al. (2006), the mean time in labor for first-time mothers
is around 11 hours. Consistent with this, the delay from admission to birth is 0 or 1 day in 95% of cases.
34
The mean potential outcome of post-birth stays for the compliers is 2.7 days for a cesarean delivery and
2.4 days for a vaginal delivery. By comparison the average post birth stay for all vaginal births is 1.8 days.
35
We have also investigated other indicators of prolonged labor, including a code on the birth certificate,
which yields qualitatively similar results. However, average reported rates for prolonged labor on the
birth certificate vary widely across hospitals (from 0 to 16%) so we are reluctant to attach much weight to
this variable and do not use it elsewhere in the paper.

22

per 1000 c-sections), mainly attributable to visits for respiratory conditions. These
patterns mean there is actually a negative OLS effect of c-section on in-patient and ASC
visits, suggesting that babies delivered by c-section have less need for procedures that
would be performed in these settings.
The reduced-form estimates for both the continuous and binary measures of
relative distance show significant positive effects on ED visits in the year after birth.
Scaling by the first stage, the IV estimates imply that complier-driven c-section deliveries
have a substantially elevated risk of ED use in the year after birth, 60-70% of which is
attributable to visits for respiratory-related conditions.
The OLS and IV results for mothers’ readmissions present an interesting contrast
to these estimates. OLS models show that LRFB mothers who deliver by c-section have
a roughly 3 ppt higher probability of visiting a hospital, ED, or ASC in the following year.
Given the average rate of about 15%, this is a reasonably large effect. In contrast to the
case for infants, however, the reduced-form estimates show negligible effects of relative
distance on combined in-patient and out-patient visits or ED visits, so the IV point
estimates are 5-20 times smaller than the corresponding estimates for infants.
Nevertheless, the imprecision in these estimates means we cannot reject the OLS
results, or even somewhat larger effects.

c. Evaluating the Robustness of the Estimated Impacts on Infant ED Admissions
The estimated impacts of cesarean delivery on ED use by infants in Table 5 are
quite large, but also somewhat imprecise. For example, using the continuous measure
of distance a 95% confidence interval for the IV estimate extends from +0.2 to 1. To
probe the robustness of these estimates we performed a number of checks. First, we
estimated the reduced-form impacts on the probability of at least one ED visit using a
series of time windows from 1 month to 12 months after the birth. The reduced-form
estimates and associated confidence intervals based on the continuous distance
measure are reported in App. Table 4 and plotted in Figure 4. For both versions of the

23

instrument we find that the cumulative effect rises smoothly, as would be expected if
there is a systematic health gap between cesarean and vaginal deliveries.
As a second check we developed a simple procedure to evaluate the sensitivity
of the estimated reduced-form effect of relative distance to the inclusion or exclusion of
other controls. As noted above we have 16 risk factors that are excluded from our basic
control set X i . In addition we included an additional measure of pre-birth medical use
by the mother (a dummy for any in-patient visit in the year before birth), yielding a total
of 17 extra risk factors. For each integer J=0...17 we performed a simple Monte Carlo
exercise, randomly selecting subsets of J risk factors to be added to our baseline
reduced form model.36 We then calculated the minimum, maximum, mean and median
value of the estimated reduced form effect for each J. These statistics are plotted in
Figure 5.
The figure illustrates two important points. First, adding any subset of the extra
controls has at most a small effect on the magnitude of the estimated reduced-form
effect. Second, although extra controls can lead to slightly smaller or slightly larger
reduced-form estimates, the range is symmetric. Following the logic of Altonji, Elder
and Taber (2005) this suggests that the addition of other (unmeasured) risk factors
would not be expected to lead to a systematic change in the estimated reduced form
estimate.37

d. Testing Multiple Channels Using Breech Deliveries
As discussed in Section II, a concern with our distance-based IV strategy is that
high c-section hospitals may have other treatment practices that contribute to the
36

Note that J=0 corresponds to our baseline model, while J=17 corresponds to a model with all 17 factors.
We also used Oster’s (2018) approach to estimate a lower bound on the reduced form effect. This
starts with an assumption on the maximal R-squared that could be achieved with all possible controls,
then extrapolates from the change in the estimated coefficient from no controls to the available controls
to form an extreme bound. In our case, if we start from the reduced form estimate with our baseline
covariates and consider the effect of adding the 17 extra risk factors, and follow her suggestion of a 30%
maximal increase in R-squared, her approach implies a bound of 0.13 on the reduced form effect of
relative distance. If instead we start from the reduced form effect with only HSA fixed effects, her
approach implies a bound of 0.10. The main factor in our baseline covariate set that has an impact on the
reduced form coefficient estimates is maternal education.

37

24

reduced-form effect of relative distance on infant health. To evaluate this concern we
examine breech presentation pregnancies. App. C describes the derivation of the
sample and the mean characteristics of the 12,744 low-risk breech presentation first
births (BPFBs) in our data set. Relative to LRFBs, mothers with breech presentation are
less likely to be Hispanic, have higher education and are less likely to be covered by
Medi-Cal. Most importantly, 98% of BPFBs are delivered by c-section. BPFBs are also less
likely to visit EDs or hospitals in the year after birth: their mean probability of any
inpatient or outpatient visit is 0.355, while their mean probability of an ED visit is 0.308
– both rates are about 3 ppt’s below the corresponding rates for LRFBs.
The first 6 columns in Panel A of Table 6 compare the estimated first-stage and
reduced-form models for LRFBs and BPFBs, utilizing our continuous measure of relative
distance. Relative distance has a slightly larger effect on the choice of an H hospital by
BPFBs than LRFBs, though we cannot reject similar effects (t=1.35). As expected,
however, the first-stage effect on the probability of c-section for BPFBs is small in
magnitude, suggesting that H hospitals are no more likely to perform c-section for
BPFBs. Importantly, the reduced-form effect of relative distance on the probability of
an ED visit in the year after birth is also small in size (-0.030), though somewhat
imprecise. We infer that delivery at an H hospital has no large effect on the health of
distance-complying BPFBs, nearly all of whom are c-section always-takers.
If one assumes that the health impacts of cesarean delivery and delivery at an H
hospital are additive and the same size for LRFBs and BPFBs then it is possible to fit a
pooled model on the two groups that includes two endogenous variables: H i (delivery
at an H hospital) and Ci (cesarean delivery) and has two instrumental variables: Z i
(relative distance) and the interaction of Z i with an indicator for breech presentation.
The estimated first-stage and reduced-form coefficients for this pooled model are
shown in the 3 right-most columns of Panel A, while estimates from three alternative
second-stage models are shown in the 3 right-most columns of Panel B: one which
assumes that only H i matters, one that assumes that only Ci matters, and one that

25

allows both effects.38 For reference we also show the estimated IV coefficients from the
two single-channel models fit separately to LRFBs and BPFBs.
The pooled first-stage models essentially reproduce the first stages for the
subgroups, while the pooled reduced-form model shows a positive effect of relative
distance and a negative effect of the interaction between relative distance and breech
presentation. The IV estimates from the specification that includes both channels show
a large positive effect of cesarean delivery (0.730) – very similar in magnitude to the
estimated effect in our baseline model for LRFBs – coupled with a very small and
statistically insignificant effect of delivery at an H hospital (0.019). These results provide
some assurance that the effects of proximity to an H hospital work through c-section,
rather than through unobserved differences in treatment practices at these hospitals.

e. Additional Checks
We conducted two additional checks to evaluate the possibility that delivery at H
hospitals has an independent effect on ED admissions in the year after birth. First,
we compared the first-stage and reduced-form effects of relative proximity to an H
hospital across various subgroups of infants. Equation (8) implies that the reduced-form
difference in average health outcomes for a subgroup defined by a specific set of X i ' s,
say X i  X g , is proportional to the fraction of H&C compliers in group g times the
average treatment effect on H&C compliers in the group. If the average treatment
effect is constant across subgroups then we should observe a relationship like:
RF ( g )   1 ( g ) 1

(13a)

where RF (g ) is the estimated reduced-form effect of Z iB on the health outcome for
subgroup g,  1 ( g ) is the estimated first-stage effect of Z iB on the probability of csection for subgroup g, and 1 is the treatment effect of c-section. On the other hand,

38

In the pooled models, we include a breech dummy and interactions of the HSA dummies with the
breech dummy, which capture any unobserved differences in the latent health of BPFB’s versus LRFB’s
across HSA’s. Estimated models without these interactions are quite similar, and not much more precise.

26

if delivery at an H hospital is the mediating channel then we would expect to observe a
relationship like:
RF ( g )  1 ( g )  2

(13b)

where 1 ( g ) is the estimated first-stage effect of Z iB on the probability of delivery at an
H hospital for subgroup g, and  2 is the treatment effect of H delivery on the outcome.
To distinguish whether (13a) or (13b) provides a better description of the pattern
of reduced-form effects we need a stratification such that 1 ( g ) /  1 ( g ) varies across
groups. Since this ratio is just the relative fraction of H&C compliers among all Hcompliers in a subgroup, we elected to form groups based on the predicted probability
of delivering by c-section at an H hospital (i.e., H i Ci ) . Specifically, we used a
combination of X i plus the 16 risk factors we used to test the validity of relative
distance as an instrument. As shown in App. Table 5, classifying our sample into 4
quartiles based on predicted probabilities from this model leads to groups with  1 ( g )
ranging from 0.007 to 0.016,  1 ( g ) ranging from 0.075 to 0.118, and the ratio

1 ( g ) /  1 ( g ) ranging from 0.085 to 0.137.
Figure 6 plots the estimates of RF (g ) against  1 ( g ) for the four groups. We
also show the fit from a simple regression (with an unrestricted constant) of RF (g )
on  1 ( g ) . The figure reveals three important facts. First, the reduced form impacts on
ED admission are highly correlated with the first stage effect on c-section, with a
squared correlation of 0.71. Second, the two quantities move proportionally – the
estimated constant is essentially 0. Third, the slope of the between-group regression is
0.67, which is very close to our direct IV estimate of 0.697 (see Table 5). In contrast, as
shown in App. Figure 1 the relationship between RF (g ) and the estimated first-stage
effect on delivery at an H hospital is much weaker (R-squared = 0.12) and has a
relatively large intercept. We conclude that the variation in the reduced form effect of

Z iB on ED readmission rates is better explained by differences in first-stage effects on csection rates than by differences in first stage effects on H-delivery.

27

As a second check, we developed bounds on the effects of H delivery for infants
whose mothers were H-compliers but either c-section always takers (H-compliers/CAT)’s or c-section never takers (H-compliers/C-NT)’s. The bounds are derived by
examining the reduced-form effects of relative distance on ED admission rates for
infants who are delivered by c-section or delivered vaginally, regardless of hospital type.
Such reduced-form comparisons are confounded by selection bias since the H&C
complier group switches from vaginal to cesarean delivery when an H hospital is closer.
Since the probability of ED admissions has to range from 0 to 1, however, it is possible
to bound the size of the selection-bias component. The derivation of the bounds is
presented in App. B; the results are reported in App. Table 6. Unfortunately, the bounds
are relatively wide so we are not able to rule out potentially important effects of
delivery at an H hospital on the postpartum ED admission rates of the two groups of Hcompliers that have the same mode of delivery regardless of where they are born.

f. Effects on Subsequent Fertility and Second-Birth Outcomes
Next, we turn to the impacts of cesarean delivery on subsequent fertility and the
health outcomes of later births. For this analysis we link first-time mothers with any
second delivery we observe during our sample period. We study the effects on fertility
using subsamples of mothers we observe for 2, 3 or 4 years after their first birth. Panel A
of Table 7 shows the number of observations in each subsample, the mean c-section
rate, and the first-stage coefficients for c-section using the continuous and discrete
instruments (both measured using the mother’s address at the first birth). Panel B
presents the estimated reduced-form effects of the instruments on the probability of a
second birth in each of the 3 follow-up windows, as well as OLS and IV estimates of the
effects of cesarean delivery at the first birth on this probability.
Looking across the rows of Panel A we see that the mean rate of cesarean
delivery at first birth is very stable across our follow-up windows. The estimated firststage coefficients are also relatively stable, and similar to the corresponding estimates
based on the entire sample of births. The entries in the first column of Panel B show

28

that about 13% of LRFBs have a second child within 2 years after their first birth; 27%
have a second birth within 3 years and 36% have a second birth within 4 years.
The OLS coefficients in the second column of Panel B suggest that cesarean
delivery is associated with a roughly constant 2 percentage point reduction in the
probability of a second birth. This represents a 13% effect on fertility within 2 years, a
9% effect within 3 years, and a 5% effect within 4-years. These effects are at the lower
end of the range in the existing literature summarized in the meta analyses by O’Neill et
al. (2013) and Gurol-Urganci et al. (2013), though they are comparable to OLS estimates
obtained by Norberg and Pantano (2016) using survey-based US data.39
Observational comparisons of fertility differences may yield biased estimates of
the causal effect of c-section if there are unobserved factors that affect both primary csection and future fertility. Our IV estimates are purged of these factors and give a
more mixed picture, with the signs of the effects over a 2-year or 3-year period varying
with the choice of instrument. Over the longest possible 4-year window both IV
estimates are positive but imprecise. Given the limited sample sizes for the various
follow-up windows, our design is underpowered to detect modest sized fertility effects.
An alternative design for studying the causal effect of c-section on fertility is
proposed by Halla et al. (2016), who focus on differences in c-section rates for mothers
who deliver on weekends and Fridays. We tried their approach in our data and found
that the probability of c-section is significantly lower on weekends (by 3.5-3.7 ppt’s,
mostly attributable to a reduction in scheduled c-sections), and that weekend deliveries
of the first birth are associated with slightly higher subsequent fertility rates. (The
Friday effect in our data is very small). The implied IV estimates (and standard errors)
on the probability of birth after 2, 3, and 4 years are ˗0.026 (0.044), ˗0.078 (0.068) and
˗0.105 (0.105), respectively. These are not significantly different from our distance
based estimates but they are systematically negative (and also more precise).

39

As emphasized by Battacharya et al. (2005) and Norberg and Pantano (2016) any effect of primary csection on later fertility can represent a combination of physiological and behavioral responses. Both
these studies find some evidence that women who deliver a birth by c-section have a higher rate of
subsequent contraception use.

29

Nevertheless, we are reluctant to place much weight on these estimates since the
weekend effect is largely driven by scheduled c-sections, and we suspect that these
mothers may have other health issues that are correlated with future fertility.
Next, we turn to the health outcomes of the second child. For this analysis, we
focus on all second births to mothers in our LRFB sample – a total of around 93,500
births. Descriptive statistics for this sample are reported in App. C. Unlike our main
sample we include breech presentations, preterm births (i.e., <37 weeks gestation), and
pregnancies with other risk factors in our second-birth sample.
The first row of Table 8 presents the mean rate of primary c-section and the
estimated first-stage coefficients for the probability of c-section at first birth in our
second-birth sample. A slightly lower fraction of mothers in the second birth sample
had a c-section at the first birth than in the overall LRFB sample (24.5% vs. 25.6%). The
first-stage coefficients of our two distance instruments are also a little different in the 2birth sample. In particular, the effect of the binary version of the instrument is
substantially attenuated (estimated effect =0.006 versus 0.011 in the LRFB sample) and
is not statistically different from 0 at conventional levels (t=1.53), indicating that the
resulting IV estimates may be unreliable.
The next row presents OLS and IV estimates of the effect of a cesarean delivery
at the first birth on the probability of a cesarean delivery at the second birth. The OLS
estimate shows that a primary c-section increases the probability of a subsequent csection by 81 ppt. The IV estimates are even larger (and in fact bigger than 1, though
not significantly so) suggesting that proximity to an H hospital at first birth creates a
permanent split in delivery mode within the complier population.40

40

We used Abadie’s (2003) method with our binary distance instrument to estimate the mean
probabilities of c-section at second birth for members of the complier group who delivered by c-section or
vaginally at first birth. The estimated means are 1.08 and -0.08, respectively. By construction the
difference in these two estimates is the IV estimate of the increase in probability of c-section at second
birth for the compliers who delivered by c-section at first birth. We also looked at models for having two
cesarean deliveries: the effect of relative distance at the first birth on this outcome is essentially the same
as the effect on cesarean delivery at first birth, confirming that essentially all mothers in the complier
group who are induced to have a primary c-section have a second c-section.

30

A potential concern with using relative distance at first birth as an instrument for
primary c-section is that this variable is highly correlated with relative distance at the
second birth, since many mothers remain in the same zip code. To the extent that
delivery mode at the second birth is affected by relative distance at that time, there may
be an upward bias in the IV estimates. To examine this issue, in the next row we show a
specification that includes relative distance measured at second birth as an extra control
variable, so that identification relies on mothers who move between births.41 Adding
this extra control reduces our relative-distance IV estimate for the effect of c-section at
first birth on c-section delivery at second birth from 1.160 (std. error = 0.189) to 0.864
(std. error = 0.302), though the estimated coefficient for the control itself is not
significant. For the binary version of the instrument, our standard errors unfortunately
make this test uninformative (point estimate for effect of c-section at first birth on csection at second birth = -0.187, std. error = 2.743).
Another way to evaluate concerns over the effect of distance at the second birth
is examine the impact of c-section at first birth on unscheduled c-sections. Arguably, the
“state dependence” effect of a primary c-section should affect scheduled c-sections,
whereas proximity to an H hospital at the second birth should mainly affect the
probability of an unscheduled c-section. The fourth row of Table 8 presents estimates
of the effect of c-section at first birth on the probability of an unscheduled c-section at
second birth. The OLS effect is small and positive (but highly significant) whereas the IV
estimates are small and negative (but insignificantly different from 0), implying that the
causal effects we estimate for c-section of the second birth are all driven by effects on
scheduled c-section rates.
The next three rows of Table 8 present OLS and IV estimates of the effect of a
cesarean delivery at the first birth on the probability of an inpatient or outpatient visit
by the mother in the year before the second birth, and on the gestation length and
birthweight of the second child. The OLS estimates suggest that mothers with a primary
41

The between-birth mobility rate (defined as changing ZIP codes between births) in our LRFB sample is
38.8%. This rate is comparable in annualized terms to the 26.4% 1-year mobility rate in the 2007-2011
American Community Survey for women aged 18-35 who report having a child in the past year.

31

c-section are slightly more likely to visit hospital facilities in the period before their
second birth, have a slightly shorter gestation, and have slightly heavier second babies.
The IV estimates show a larger negative effect on gestation – equivalent to about a 2week earlier deliver – and a larger negative effect on birthweight, equal to about 600
grams. These impacts are in accord with the nearly 100% rate of scheduled c-section
following a primary c-section, and the fact that pre-scheduled c-sections are typically
performed a couple of weeks ahead of the expected delivery date, leading to a
reduction in birthweight of 220-240 grams per week of pre-term delivery (the slope of a
standard fetal growth curve at 35 weeks gestation).
Next, we examine the incidence of two important risk factors at the second
birth: placenta previa (placenta partially covering the cervix) and other placenta-related
issues; and hypertension (including pre-eclampsia and eclampsia). 42 As discussed in
App. A, a sizeable literature has documented that previous c-section is associated with
an elevated risk of placental previa and related problems. There are also a few studies
linking previous c-section to eclampsia/pre-eclampsia (e.g., Cho et al, 2015; Mbah et al,
2012). Both groups of risk factors have incidence rates around 2.5% in our second birth
sample. An OLS model shows a small but highly significant positive effect of prior csection on the risk of placenta-related problems. The IV estimate using our continuous
distance measure is about 2 times larger, but too imprecise to rule out much larger
effects, or a zero effect. The OLS estimate of the effect of primary c-section on risk of
hypertension is essentially 0.43 The corresponding IV estimates are positive, but again
are too imprecise to provide much information.
The last three rows of Table 8 examine post-partum hospital and ED visits by the
mother and second child. OLS models show an elevated rate of hospital visits by
42

We measure incidence of placenta previa and related diagnoses using by the presence of at least one
ICD9 code of 641 among the primary and secondary diagnoses on the mother’s discharge record for the
second birth. This includes placenta previa, premature separation of the placenta (placental abruption)
and placenta-related hemorrhage. We measure hypertension by the presence of at least one ICD9 code of
642. This includes pre-existing hypertension conditions as well as transient hypertension of pregnancy
(eclampsia and pre-eclampsia).
43
We note that the mothers in our second birth sample did not have eclampsia or pre-eclampsia at their
first birth, and had BMI less than the 90th percentile among first birth mothers, so two important risk
factors for subsequent hypertension-related complications are removed.

32

mothers who had a previous c-section, similar in size to the effect in the year after the
first birth (0.026 versus 0.031 in Table 5). The reduced-form and IV estimates based on
the continuous distance instrument are small in magnitude, but the standard errors are
large so we cannot rule out a range of causal effects.
The OLS, reduced form, and IV results for hospital and ED visits of the second
child in the year after birth are also similar in magnitude to the corresponding effects on
the first child. For example, the IV-based point estimates of the effect of cesarean
delivery of the first birth are in the range of 0.7-0.9 extra ED visits for the first birth and
0.4-0.8 extra ED visits for the second. Given that the primary c-section leads to a nearly
100% rate of c-section at the second birth, these findings support the hypothesis that
cesarean delivery causes health problems for the infant that result in increased ED
admissions in the year after birth.

g. Impacts on Infant Death
In the final step of our analysis we turn to the effects of hospital practices and
cesarean delivery on infant death in the year after birth. A concern here is that the risk
of death may be related to the timing of c-section for births in which the fetus was
under severe stress.44 If so, then the tendency of practitioners at H hospitals to reach a
decision to perform c-section earlier in the labor process could have an “intensive
margin” effect on infants who would ultimately be delivered by c-section regardless of
hospital type (H-complier/C-always takers) in addition to any impact on H&C compliers
who are only delivered by c-section at an H hospital (the “extensive margin” effect we
believe is most relevant for other outcomes). To deal with this possibility we mainly
focus on measuring the causal effect of delivery at an H hospital, interpreting the impact
in the framework of equation (9a).

44

Tolcher et al. (2014) present a meta-analysis of the literature on the health impacts of the delay
between reaching a decision to perform c-section and delivery. They find an inconclusive link.
Nevertheless, standard practice guidelines aim to keep this delay time to under 30 minutes -- see e.g.,
Dunphy et al. (1991); National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (2011) -- and some studies find
that an extended delay is associated with worse outcomes -- e.g., Thomas et al. (2004).

33

A second issue is that for most LRFBs the risk of death is extremely low.
Arguably, any true effect of hospital practices or cesarean delivery should be
concentrated on the subset of births with an elevated risk of death. To isolate high-risk
deliveries, we developed an index for the risk of death using the full set of control
variables X i and the 16 additional risk factors discussed in Section IIId. We also
included one additional risk factor based on the presence of a secondary diagnosis code
indicating an irregular heart rate or rhythm during labor.45 This indicator of fetal stress
is uncorrelated with relative distance to an H hospital, but is highly correlated with both
the probability of c-section and the risk of death.46 We used a logistic regression to
model the risk of death, then stratified deliveries into predicted risk groups.47
Ultimately, we settled on a simple two-group classification: a low-risk group with
predicted risk scores in the bottom two-thirds of the overall distribution, and a high-risk
group with predicted risk scores in the top third of the distribution.
To set the stage for our analysis, Appendix Table 7 shows the characteristics of
all LRFBs and those that lead to infant death within a year of birth, and a parallel
comparison between all high-risk deliveries and those that lead to infant death. We note
that there are only 596 deaths in our entire sample, representing a combined neonatal
and post-neonatal death rate of 0.121% or 1.2 per 1,000 births. (By comparison the
overall infant mortality rate in California during our sample period was about 5.5 per
1,000 births.) 358 of these deaths occur in the high-risk sample, representing a death
rate of 2.2 per 1,000.
A few important characteristics stand out as highly correlated with the risk of
death. Infants that die are more likely to be low birth weight: 14.4% of all deaths and
23.2% of the deaths among the high-risk group were <2,500 grams at birth versus only
45

Specifically, we use any report of ICD9 65971 (abnormality in fetal heart rate or rhythm).
Nelson, Sartwelle and Rouse (2016) argue that the use of electronic fetal heart monitors during labor
leads to a high rate of false positive detection of fetal stress, which in turn contributes to the high rate of
c-section delivery in the U.S., in part because of fear of litigation in the event of a problem such as
cerebral palsy attributed to birth asphyxia.
47
We form risk groups using a 10-fold sample-splitting technique to preclude over-fitting or “endogenous
stratification” (Harvill et al. 2013; Abadie et al. 2017). In particular, we randomly select 10 equal-sized
folds; then estimate the model 10 times, leaving out one of the folds; and finally, we predict risk of death
in the left-out fold.
46

34

2.3% of our overall LRFB sample. They are also more likely to experience abnormal
heart rate/rhythm during delivery; more likely to a 5-minute Apgar score below 7; more
likely to be transferred to a NICU unit; more likely to have an inpatient hospital stay
after birth; and more likely to have been delivered by cesarean. Interestingly, the higher
rate of c-section is due to scheduled c-sections: infants that die are notably less likely to
have been delivered by an unscheduled c-section.
Panel A of Table 9 shows the OLS, reduced form, and IV results for models of the
risk of death for all LRFBs, while panels B and C present parallel analyses for the lowand high-risk subgroups, respectively. For each group we show estimated 1st stage
models assuming that the endogenous variable of interest is delivery at an H hospital,
along with the corresponding reduced form and IV estimates. We then show a parallel
set of models assuming that the endogenous variable is c-section delivery.
Beginning with panel A, a simple OLS model with basic controls shows that
delivery at an H hospital has a small, insignificant negative effect on the death rate. The
reduced-form models, however, show a relatively large negative effect of proximity to
an H hospital on death rates – with a magnitude of -0.38 deaths per 1,000 births for a
move 10 miles closer to an H hospital, or -0.27 deaths per 1,000 births for being closer
to an H hospital. Both estimates are significant at conventional levels, with a t-statistic
of 2.35 for the continuous measure of relative distance (p=0.019), and a t-statistic of
2.14 (p=0.033) for the discrete distance measure. Scaling by the first-stage effect for
delivery at an H hospital, the estimated IV coefficients imply a life-saving effect of 2.42.6 infant deaths per 1,000 births to H-complying mothers. Scaling by the first stage for
c-section – which is only appropriate if there is no effect of H delivery on H-compliers
who have the same delivery mode at H or L hospitals – the effect is 21 to 23 infant
deaths prevented per 1,000 c-sections performed on H&C compliers.
The results in Panel B show that there is essentially no effect of proximity to high
c-section hospitals on the death rate of lower-risk infants. Thus, the overall effects in
Panel A are driven by responses for the higher-risk group. Focusing on this group

35

(Panel C) we note four salient facts. First, the average c-section rate for these infants is
actually slightly below the rate for infants with lower risk of death (24.9% versus 27.5%).
Second, within the high-risk sample there is a significant positive relationship between
c-section and death – the OLS coefficient implies that infants delivered by c-section have
a 1.2/1,000 higher death rate. Third, mothers of high-risk infants are somewhat more
responsive to relative distance than other mothers: the first-stage effects on the
probability of H-delivery are about 20% bigger in magnitude than the corresponding
effects for mothers of low-risk infants. 48 Fourth, the probability of c-section is also more
responsive to relative distance, implying that hospital practice patterns have a larger
effect on delivery mode of these mothers.
The estimated reduced form coefficients in Panel C are large in magnitude: a 10
mile drop in the relative distance to an H-hospital leads to a decline in infant mortality
of about 1 per 1,000 births (t=2.76), while simply being closer to an H hospital leads to a
reduction of 0.8 per 1,000 births (t=2.73). We investigated the robustness of these
estimates to controlling for the 17 extra risk factors included in our risk of death model.
We find that the reduced-form effects are essentially the same when we include all
these factors, or any random subset of extra risk factors.49 We also investigated the
reduced form effects using logit models, which assume a proportional effect of
proximity to H hospitals rather than an absolute effect. We find that the average
reduced-form effects are very similar to the estimated effects reported in Table 9.
A key question is whether these reduced-form effects should be scaled by the
first-stage coefficients for delivery at an H hospital or by the first-stage coefficients for
cesarean delivery. To explore this we tried the approach in Figure 6 of dividing high-risk
deliveries into subgroups with different first stage effects for H-delivery and c-section,
but were unable to find any stratification that led to significant non-proportionality in

48

The bigger responses to distance may be due in part to the characteristics of mothers of high-risk
infants, which are similar to the characteristics of the distance and procedure compliers (i.e., lowereducation, and insured by Medi-Cal).
49
Adding all 18 risk factors the reduced-form effect of relative distance on death for the overall sample
becomes -0.384 (std. error=0.160) while the reduced-form effect for the high-risk sample becomes -1.113
(std. error=0.390). The IV estimates are similarly highly robust.

36

the two first stages. Given this uncertainty we focus on the implied IV coefficients that
treat H-delivery as the causal channel. Among hospital-complying mothers in the highrisk sample, 13-15% are H&C compliers, 18-19% are H-complier/C always takers, and 6569% are H-complier/C never takers. The treatment effect per delivery at an H hospital
can be interpreted as a weighted average of the treatment effects on these 3 groups,
using their relative shares as weights.
The IV estimates in panel C imply that delivery at a high c-section hospital
prevents about 6 to 7 deaths per 1,000 births by distance-complying mothers, though
the 95% confidence interval for even the more precise estimate based on the
continuous measure of relative distance is relatively wide, extending from 1.6 to 10.5
deaths per 1,000. Assuming that the delivery practices at H hospitals have no lifesaving
effect on H-complier/C never-takers, the point estimate of the causal effect per
combined marginal and infra-marginal c-section is around 3 times larger than the effect
per delivery at an H hospital. Under this assumption, the effect is 18 prevented deaths
per 1,000 marginal and inframarginal c-sections, with a 95% confidence interval from 4
to 32 per 1,000.

VI. Discussion
To summarize our main results, we find:
1. at birth: cesarean delivery is associated with shorter labor times, lower rates of birthrelated injuries for mothers, higher APGAR scores, lower rates of birth injuries for
infants, but a substantial increase in use of mechanical ventilation.
2. in the year after birth: each c-section delivery is associated with 70-80 ppt. increase
in the probability of an ED visits by the infant, mostly for respiratory ailments, but no
higher rate of in-patient hospital visits or ASC use.
3. longer-term: cesarean delivery has no clear effect on fertility. Subsequent births
after a primary c-section are virtually all delivered by scheduled c-section, with a 2-week
shorter gestation and 500-600 gram lower birth weight. These second infants appear to
have a higher risk of ED visits in the year after birth.

37

4. infant death: delivery at a hospital with an above-average rate of cesarean deliveries
is associated with a significant reduction in neonatal and post-neonatal death. The
point estimate of the effect amounts to a saving of roughly 18 deaths per 1,000
marginal and infra-marginal c-sections at high c-section hospitals.
Together these findings paint a nuanced picture of the costs and benefits of
“marginal” c-sections that are attributable to distance-based hospital choices by
patients and systematic variation in hospital delivery practices. We confirm the widely
held presumption in the existing literature that cesarean deliveries have reduced lung
function that results in the need for extra care after birth. Moreover, these health
problems appear to spill over to later births due to the very high rate of repeat csection, creating a multiplier effect. On the other hand, we find evidence that delivery
practices at high c-section hospitals have a relatively large lifesaving effect. Whether
the positive mortality effects are large enough to offset the negative morbidity effects is
a question we leave for further work.

38

References
Abadie, Alberto (2003). “Semiparametric instrumental variable estimation of treatment
response models.” Journal of Econometrics 113: 231-263.
Abadie, Alberto, Jiaying Gu and Shu Shen (2015). “Instrumental variable estimation with
first-stage heterogeneity.” Unpublished manuscript.
Aizer, Anna and Joseph J. Doyle (2014). “Juvenile incarceration, human capital and
future crime: evidence from randomly assigned judges.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
130: 759-803.
Alexander, James M. et al. (2006). “Fetal injury associated with cesarean delivery.”
Obstetrics and Gynecology 108 (4): 885-890.
Altman, Maria et al. (2015). “Prolonged second stage labor is associated with low Apgar
score.” European Journal of Epidemiology 30: 1209-1215.
Altonji, Joseph G., Todd Elder and Christopher Taber (2005), “Selection on observed and
unobserved variables: assessing the effectiveness of Catholic schools.” Journal of
Political Economy 113: 151-184.
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2006). “Mode of term singleton
breech delivery.” Committee on Obstetric Practice Committee Opinion No. 340. July
2006 (Reaffirmed 2016).
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2014). “Safe prevention of the
primary cesarean delivery.” Obstetrics and Gynecology 123: 693-711.
Angus, Derek C., Walter T. Linde-Zwirbe, Gilles Clermont, Martin F. Griffin and Reese H.
Clark (2001). “Epidemiology of neonatal respiratory failure in the United States.”
American Journal of Respiratory Critical Care Medicine 164: 1154-1160.
Aslam, Hazif M., Shafaq Saleem, Rafia Afzal, Umair Iqbal Sahrish Muhammad Saleem,
Muhammad Wagas Abid Shaikh, Nahish Shahid (2014). “Risk factors of birth asphyxia.”
Italian Journal of Pediatrics 94: 1-9.
Bahtiyar, Mert O. et al. (2006). “Prior cesarean delivery is not associated with an
increased risk of stillbirth in a subsequent pregnancy: analysis of U.S. perinatal mortality
data, 1995-1997.” American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology 195: 1373-1378.
Battacharya, S., M. Porter, K. Harrild, J. Mollison and E. van Teijlingen (2005). “Absence
of conception after cesarean section: voluntary of involuntary?” British Journal of
Obstetrics and Gynecology 113: 268-275.
39

Baicker, Katherine, Kasey S. Buckles and Amitabh Chandra (2006). “Geographic variation
in the appropriate use of cesarean delivery.” Health Affairs 25: 355-367.
Beckert, Walter, Mette Christensen and Kate Collyer (2012). “Choice of NHS-funded
hospital service in England.” Economic Journal 122: 400-417.
Casey, Brian M, Donald D. McIntire, and Kenneth J. Leveno. (2001). “The continuing
value of the Apgar score for the assessment of newborn infants.” New England Journal
of Medicine 344: 467-471.
Chamberlain, G. (1986). “Asymptotic efficiency in semiparametric model with
censoring.” Journal of Econometrics 32: 189–218.
Chandra, Amitabh, David Culter and Zirui Song (2012). “Who ordered that? The
economics of treatment choices in medical care.” In Mark V. Pauly, Thomas G. Mcguire,
and Pedro P. Barros, editors, Handbook of Health Economics, volume 2. Amsterdam:
Elsevier.
Chernozhukov, Victor and Christian Hansen (2005). “An IV model of quantile treatment
effects.” Econometrica 73: 245-261.
Cho, Geum Joon et al. (2015). “Prior cesarean section is associated with increased
preeclampsia risk in a subsequent pregnancy.” BioMed Central Pregnancy and Childbirth
2015: 15-24.
Clark, Erin A. S. and Robert M. Silver (2011). “Long-term maternal morbidity associated
with repeat cesarean delivery.” American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology
Supplement (December 2011): S2-S10.
Currie, Janet M. and W. Bentley MacLeod (2017). “Diagnosing expertise: human capital,
decision making, and performance among physicians.” Journal of Labor Economics 35:
1-43.
Curtain, Sally C. et al. “Maternal morbidity for vaginal and cesarean deliveries according
to previous cesarean history: New data from birth certificate, 2013.” National Vital
Statistics Reports 64: 1-13.
Cutler, David, Jonathan Skinner, Ariel Dora Stern, and David Wennberg (2017).
“Physician beliefs and patient preferences: A new look at regional variation in health
care spending.” Harvard Business School Working Paper 15-090.

40

Darmasseelare, Karthik et al. (2014). “Mode of Delivery and Offspring Body Mass Index,
Overweight and Obesity in Adult Life: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.” PLoS
ONE 9(2): e87896.
Dartmouth Atlas, undated. List of health referral regions. Available at:
http://www.dartmouthatlas.org/tools/faq/researchmethods.aspx.
Declercq, Eugene R., Carol Sakala, Maureen P. Corry and Sandra Applebaum (2006).
Listening to mothers: Report of the second national U.S. survey of women’s childbearing
experiences. New York: Childbirth Connection.
Deneux-Tharaux, C., E. Carmona, MH Bouvier-Colle and G. Breart (2006). “Postpartum
maternal mortality and cesarean delivery.” Obstetrics and Gynecology 108: 541-548.
Dunphy, B.C., J.N. Robinson, O.M. Shell, J.S.D. Nicholls and M.D.G. Gillmer (1991).
“Cesarean section for fetal distress, the interval from decision to delivery, and the
relative risk of poor neonatal condition.” Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology 11: 241244.
Einav, Liran, Amy Finkelstein and Heidi Williams (2016). “Paying on the margin for
medical care: evidence from breast cancer treatment.” American Economic Journal:
Economic Policy 8: 52-79.
Finkelstein, Amy, Matthew Gentzkow and Heidi Williams (2016). “Sources of geographic
variation in heath care: evidence from patient migration.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 131: 1681-1726.
Finster, Mieczyslaw and Margaret Wood (2005). “The Apgar score has survived the test
of time.” Anesthesiology 2005: 855-857.
Frigoletto, Fredric D. et al. (1995). “A clinical trial of active management of labor.” New
England Journal of Medicine 333: 745-750.
Getahun, D. et al. (2006). “Previous cesarean delivery and risks of placenta previa and
placental abruption.” Obstetrics and Gynecology 107: 771-778.
Gimovsky, Alexis C., Vincenzo Berghella (2016) “Randomized controlled trial of
prolonged second stage: extending the time limit vs usual guidelines.” American Journal
of Obstetrics and Gynecology 214: e1-6.
Goer, Henci, Amy Romano and Carol Sakala (2012). Vaginal or cesarean birth: What is at
stake for women and babies? New York: Childbirth Connections.

41

Gregory, Kimberly D., Lisa M. Korst, Jeffrey A. Gornbein and Lawrence D. Platt (2002).
“Using Administrative data to identify indications for elective primary cesarean
delivery.” Health Services Research 37: 1387-1401.
Gregory, Kimberly D., Sherri Jackson, Lisa M. Korst and Moshe Friedman (2011).
“Cesarean versus vaginal delivery: Whose risks? Whose benefits?” American Journal of
Perinatology 29: 7-18.
Grytten, Jostein Ivar, Irene Skau and Rune Jorgens Sorensen (2011). “Do expert patients
get better treatment than others? Agency discrimination and statistical discrimination in
obstetrics.” Journal of Health Economics 30: 163-180.
Gurol-Urganci, Ipek, et al. (2013). “Impact of cesarean section on subsequent fertility: a
systematic review and meta-analysis.” Human Reproduction 28: 1943-1952.
Hall, M.H., D.M. Campbell, C. Fraser and J. Lemon (1989). “Mode of delivery and future
fertility.” British Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology 96: 1297-1303.
Halla, Martin, Harald Mayr, Gerald J. Pruckner and Pilar Garcia-Gomez (2016). “Cutting
fertility? The effect of cesarean deliveries on subsequent fertility and maternal labor
supply.” Institute for the Study of Labor IZA Working Paper No. 9906.
Hannah, M.E., W.J. Hannah, S.A. Hewson, E.D. Hodnett, S. Saigal and A.R. Willan for the
Term Breech Trial Collaborative Group (2000). “Planned cesarean section versus
planned vaginal birth for breech presentation at term: a randomised multicentre trial.”
Lancet 356:1375-1383.
Hansen, Anne Kirkeby, Kirsten Wisborg, Niels Uldberg, and Tine Brink Hendriksen
(2008). “Risk of respiratory morbidity in term infants delivered by elective caesarean
section: cohort study.” BMJ: 10.1136/bmj.39405.539282.BE
Harvill, Eleanor L., Laura R. Peck and Stephen H. Bell (2013). “On overfitting in analysis of
symmetrically predicted endogenous subgroups from randomized experimental
samples: Part three of a method note in three parts.” American Journal of Evaluation 34:
545- 566.
Heckman, James J. (1990). “Varieties of selection bias.” American Economic Review 80:
313-318.
Hedges, Larry V. and Ingram Olkin (1985). Statistical methods for meta-analysis.
Orlando: Academic Press.

42

Hemminki, Elina, Julia Shelley, and Mika Gissler (2005). “Mode of delivery and problems
in subsequent births: A register-based study from Finland.” American Journal of
Obstetrics and Gynecology 193: 169-177.
Henry, Olivia A., Kimberly D. Gregory, Calvin J. Hobel and Lawrence D. Platt (1995).
“Using ICD-9 codes to identify indications for primary and repeat cesarean sections:
agreement with clinical records.” American Journal of Public Health 85: 1143-1146.
Howell, C.J. (2000). “Epidural versus non-epidural analgesia for pain relief in labor.”
Cochrane Database Systematic Reviews 2: CD000331.
Hyde, Matthew J., Alison Mostyn, Neena Modi, and Paul R. Kemp (2012). “The health
implications of birth by cesarean section.” Biological Reviews 87: 229-243.
Jachetta, Christine (2014). “Cesarean sections and later child health outcomes.”
Unpublished manuscript. University of Illinois Urbana Champaign Department of
Economics. Downloaded from http://www.christinejachetta.com/
Johnson, Erin M. and M. Marit Rehavi (2016). “Physicians treating physicians:
information and incentives in childbirth.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy
8: 115-141.
Kjerulff, K. H., J. Zhu, C.S. Weisman, and C.V. Avanth (2013). “First birth cesarean section
and subsequent fertility: A population-based study in the USA, 2000-2008.” Human
Reproduction 28: 3349-3357.
Klein, Michael C. (2006). “Does epidural analgesia increase rate of cesarean section?”
Canadian Family Physician 52: 419-423.
Kozhimannil, Katy Backes, Michael R. Law and Beth A. Virnig (2013). “Cesarean delivery
rates vary tenfold among US hospitals: Reducing variation may address quality and cost
issues.” Health Affairs 32: 527-535.
Kozhimannil, Katy Backes, Mariana C. Arcaya, and S.V. Subramanian (2014). “Maternal
clinical diagnoses and hospital variation in the risk of cesarean delivery: analysis of a
national US hospital discharge database.” PLoS Medicine 11: e1001745.
Kristensen, Kim and Loony Hendricksen (2016). “Cesarean section and disease
associated with immune function.” Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 137: 587590.
Kuklina, Elena V. et al. (2009). “Severe obstetric morbidity in the United States.”
Obstetrics and Gynecology 11: 293-299.

43

Lindquist SAI, et al. (2017). “Association of previous cesarean delivery with surgical
complications after a hysterectomy later in life”. JAMA Surgery 2017.2825
Lopez-Zeno, Jose A., Alan M. Peaceman, Joseph Adashek and Michael L. Socol (1992).
“A controlled trial of a program for the active management of labor.” New England
Journal of Medicine 326: 450-454.
Lydon-Rochell, Mona, Victoria L. Holt, Diane P. Martin and Thomas R. Easterling (2000).
“Association between method of delivery and maternal rehospitalization.” Journal of
the American Medical Association 283: 2411-2416.
MacDorman, Marian F., Eugene Declercq, Fay Menacker, and Michael H. Malloy (2008).
“Neonatal mortality for primary cesarean and vaginal births to low-risk women:
Application of an intention-to-treat model.” Birth 35: 3-8.
Machado, Lovina S.M. (2011) “Emergency peripartum hysterectomy: incidence,
indications, risk factors and outcome.” North American Journal of Medical Science 3:
358-361
Maestas, Nicole, Kathleen J. Mullen, and Alexander Strand (2013). “Does disability
insurance receipt discourage work? Using examiner assignment to estimate causal
effects of SSDI receipt”. American Economic Review 103: 1797-1829.
Mbah, A.K., P.P. Sharma, A.P. Alio, D.W. Fombo, K. Bruder and H.M. Salihu (2012).
“Previous cesarean section, gestational age at first delivery and subsequent risk of preeclampsia in obese mothers.” Archives of Gynecology and Obstetrics 285: 1375-1381.
McClellan, Mark, Barbara J. McNeil and Joseph P. Newhouse (1994). “Does more
intensive treatment of acute myocardial infarction in the elderly reduce mortality?”
Journal of the American Medical Association 272: 859-866.
Molina, George et al. (2015). “Relationship between cesarean delivery rate and
maternal and neonatal mortality.” Journal of the American Medical Association 314:
2263-2270.
Moore, Hannah C. et al. (2011). “Hospitalization for bronchiolitis in infants is more
common after elective cesarean delivery.” Arch Dis Child 10.1136-300607.
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (2011). Cesarean section: Clinical
guideline. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Available at
nice.org.uk/guidance/cg132.

44

Nelson, Karin B., Thomas P. Sartwelle and Dwight J. Rouse (2016). “Electronic fetal
monitoring, cerebral palsy, and cesarean section: assumptions versus evidence.” BMJ
355: i6405
Neu, Josef and Jona Rushing (2012). “Cesarean versus vaginal delivery: Long term infant
outcomes and the hygiene hypothesis.” Clinical Perinatology 38: 321-331.
Norberg, Karen and Juan Pantano (2016). “Cesarean sections and subsequent fertility.”
Journal of Population Economics 29: 5-37.
O’Neill, Sinead M. et al. (2013). “Cesarean delivery and subsequent pregnancy interval:
A systematic review and meta-analysis.” BMC Pregnancy and Childbirth 13: 165.
Oster, Emily (2018). “Unobservable selection and coefficient stability: Theory and
Evidence.” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics.” forthcoming.
Prior, Emily et al. (2012). “Breastfeeding after cesarean delivery: A systematic review
and meta-analysis of world literature.” American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 10.394.
Roduit, C. et al. (2009). “Asthma at 8 years of age in children born by cesarean section.”
Thorax: 64: 107-113.
Rouse, Dwight J and John Owen (1999). “Prophylactic cesarean delivery for fetal
macrosomia diagnosis by means of ultrasonography – a Faustian bargain?” American
Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology 181: 332-338.
Salam, Muhammad T. et al. (2006). “Mode of delivery is associated with asthma and
allergy occurrences in children.” AEP 16: 341-346.
Sevelsted, Astrid, Jakob Stokholm and Hans Bisgaard (2016). “Risk of asthma from
cesarean delivery depends on membrane rupture.” Journal of Pediatrics 171: 38-42.
Stokholm, Jakob et al. (2016). “Cesarean section changes neonatal gut colonization.”
Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 138: 881-889.
Thavagnanam, S., J. Fleming, A. Bromley, M.D. Shields, and C.R. Cardwell (2008). “A
meta-analysis of the association between cesarean section and childhood asthma.”
Clinical and Experimental Allergy 38: 629-633.
Thomas, Jane, Shantini Paranjothy and David James (2004). “National cross sectional
survey to determine whether the decision to delivery interval is critical in emergency
cesarean section.” BMJ 10: 1136.

45

Tollanes, Mette C., Dag Moster, Anne K. Dltweit, and Lorentz M. Irgens (2008).
“Cesarean section and risk of severe childhood asthma: A population-based cohort
study.” Journal of Pediatrics 2008: 112-117.
Tolcher, Mary C., Rebcca L. Johnson, Sherif A. El-Nashar, and Colin P. West (2014).
“Decision-to-incision time and neonatal outcomes.” Obstetrics and Gynecology 125:536548.
Villar, Jose et al. (2007). “Maternal and neonatal individual risks and benefits associated
with cesarean delivery: Multicenter study.” BMJ: 10.1136/bmj.39363.706956.55
Zhang, Jun, James Troendle, Uma M. Reddy et al. (2010). “Contemporary cesarean
delivery practice in the United States.” Obstetrics and Gynecology 203: 326.e1-e10.

46

Appendix A: An Overview of the Literature on the Health Effects of Cesarean Delivery
(i) Infant Outcomes
Table A1 summarizes a selection of recent studies on the short and medium-run health
effects of cesarean delivery for infants. We review studies on injury or death of the baby; lung
function and respiratory problems; asthma; immune system; and breastfeeding. Not included
in the table are several other active areas of research that study impacts of cesarean delivery
on longer-term outcomes such as the probability of adult obesity (see the recent review by
Darmasseelane et al., 2014).
Across the board a general finding is that babies delivered by c-section fare worse:
higher neonatal and post-neonatal death; elevated risks of respiratory system problems
including asthma; evidence of digestive system disorders, and lower rates of breastfeeding. An
unusually detailed prospective study by Villar et al. (2007) of births in eight Latin American
countries illustrates the general nature of these findings and the difficulty in interpreting the
results as causal. 1 The authors show that neonatal death rates for cephalic fetuses delivered by
c-section after trial of labor are substantially higher than rates for those delivered vaginally
(0.65% versus 0.38%). Eliminating the roughly 30% of intrapartum c-sections performed after
indications of fetal distress, the neonatal death rate of the remaining c-section group falls to
0.51% -- not statistically different from the rate for the vaginal births (but still higher), and
indicative of a potentially large endogeneity bias in the overall comparison.
Our reading of the literature is that the most widely documented correlation is between
c-section delivery and respiratory problems. Such a pattern has been documented in large-scale
1

The study is unusual in collecting detailed data on reasons for c-section, gathered immediately after the birth by
trained survey staff.

cohort studies in several Nordic countries (e.g., Hansen et al., 2008; Tollanes et al., 2008) and in
meta analyses of the literature (e.g., Thavagnanam et al., 2008). As discussed in a recent
review by Hyde et al. (2012), there is clinical evidence that babies born by c-section have worse
lung function immediately after birth -- possibly attributable to a therapeutic effect of the labor
process (including release of hormones and clearance of lung liquid). A number of researchers
also hypothesize that there is a transfer of microbes from mother to infant during labor that aid
in the development of the immune and digestive systems (e.g., Neu and Rushing, 2012).

(ii) Maternal Outcomes
Table A2 presents a parallel summary of the literature on the health effects of cesarean
delivery on mothers. Here the literature is less numerous: our reading is that the major health
risks include complications at birth and maternal death; reduction in future fertility; abnormal
placentation in subsequent pregnancies; and risk of future stillbirths. Most studies find that
mothers who deliver by c-section have higher risk of birth-related complications (such as need
of a blood transfusion), higher risk of severe morbidity and mortality in the period after the
birth, reduced future fertility, higher risk for placenta previa (placenta near or covering the
cervix) and placenta accreta/increta/percreta (abnormal placental attachment). Evidence on
future stillbirths is less clear.
As with the literature on infant health effects, most of these studies are based on
observational designs, making it difficult or impossible to assert causality, though some of the
potential effects are grounded in clinic evidence (see for example the review of studies on
abnormal placentation by Clark and Silver, 2011). An interesting exception is the study by Halla

et al. (2016) on future fertility, which uses day of the week of the birth as an instrument for csection. We discuss this design in Section V.f, where we report the same basic pattern as Halla
et al. (2016) in our data, but argue that day of the week may not be a valid instrument in our
setting because of the greater presence of pre-scheduled c-sections on weekdays.

Table A1: Summary of Literature on Infant Health Effects of C-Section
Study authors; design; main findings
Health Issue
a. Rouse and Owen (1999) prophylactic CS's for large fetuses (>4000g) have small impact on permanent brachial plexus injury
1. Delivery
injuries and death b. Alexander et al (2006): 1.1% of CS babies have some birth injury - mostly cuts from the incision.
c. Villar et al (2007): CS might decrease death for cephalic pregnancies, definitely for breech; increased NICU, but rupturing of
membranes may be protective
d. MacDorman et al (2008): CS has 1.7-2.4 higher risk of infant neonatal mortality for primary, low-risk births. Intention to treat
analysis combines CS after TOL with vaginal births as intended vaginal.
e. Molina et al. (2015); cross-national analysis of C-section and infant morality; neonatal mortality rates decline until C-Section
rate of 20%, then stable across countries
2. Lung Function
and Repiratory
Problems

a. Hansen et al. (2008); Danish cohort study (cov. adj.); scheduled C-Section increases risk of respiratory illness 200-400%
b. Moore et al. (2011); Australian register study (cov. adj.); elective CS increases risk of hospitalization for bronchiolitis by 10% in
first year of life
c. Hyde et al. (2012); review of clinical literature; CS without TOL associated with reduced lung function after birth
d. Kristensen et al. (2015); Danish register study (cov. adj.); elective CS associated with 20% higher risk of pneumonia and other
mucosal system disorders

3. Asthma

e. Salam et al (2006): retrospective study of California youth; CS raises incidence of allergy by 26% (cov. adj.)
b. Roduit et al. (2008); Dutch cohort study (cov. adj.). CS associated with 20% increase in risk of childhood asthma,
higher effect for allergic parents
c. Thavagnanam et al. (2008); meta analysis of 23 studies of CS and asthma; CS associated with 45% increase in risk at age 8
d. Tollanes et al. (2008); Norwegian register study (cov. adj.); CS raises risk of asthma by age 18 by 50%
e. Jachetta (2014); IV study using MSA-level malpractice premiums instrument; CS associated with higher rate of
hospitalization for asthma and lung disease

4. Immune
System

a. Neu and Rushing (2012); review of clinical literature; CS without TOL affects micobial colonization/immune response
b. Sevelsted et al. (2015); Danish register study (cov. adj.); CS associated with higher risk of immune deficiency,
inflammatory bowel disorders
c. Stokholm et al. (2016); prospective study of Copenhagen births; CS associated with different gut microbes in first year

5. Breastfeeding

Prior et al (2012); meta-analysis of 48 studies; CS without TOL associated with lower rate of early initiation of breastfeeding;
CS after TOL same as vaginal births
Notes: CS = c-section delivery; OR = odds ratio; TOL=trial of labor; cov-adj = covariate adjustment

Table A2: Summary of Literature on Maternal Health Effects of C-Section
Health Outcome
1. Complications at
birth; mortality

Study authors; design; main findings
a. Lydon-Rochell et al. (2000); cohort of primiparous women in Washington State;
mean effect = 80% higher rate of rehospitalization in 60 days following CS
b. Deneux-Tharaux et al. (2006); 3.5 times more likely for mom to die in CS
c. Villar et al (2007); WHO-supported study of Latin American births;
incidence of mother injury/death increases in CS
d. Kuklina et al (2009) - rise in CS explains rise in maternal morbidity at birth
e. Curtain et al. (2015); US births in 2013; (no cov. adj.); higher rates of tranfusion,
ICU admission
f. Molina et al. (2015); cross-national analysis of CS and maternal morality;
mortality rates decline until CS rate of 20%, then stable across countries

2. Fertility

a. Hall et al. (1989); U.K. cohort study (cov. adj); 23% lower fertility
b. Kjerulff et al. (2013); U.S. cohort study (covariate adustment); 16% lower fertility
c. Gurol-Urganci et al. (2013); meta analysis of 18 cohort studies;
mean effect = 9% reduction in fertility following CS
d. Halla et al. (2016); IV based on day of delivery; 17% lower fertility

3. Abnormal
Placentation
(previa, accreta,
etc.)

4. Future Stillbirth

a. Hemminki et al. (2005); Finish register (cov. adj.); 90% higher risk
b. Getahun et al. (2006); U.S. linked cohorts (cov. adj.); 30-100% higher risks
c. Gurol-Urganci et al. (2011); U.K. cohort study and meta analysis of 37 studies
CS at first birth raises risk of placenta previa in second by 50-60%
d. Clark and Silver (2011); review of previous studies; increased risks
Bahtiyar et al. (2006); large U.S. cross-section study (cov. adjustment); no effect

Note: CS = cesarean delivery; cov. adj = covariate adjustment.

Appendix B: Methods

1. Interpretation of First Stage, Reduced Form and IV Estimates
Consider the case where individuals (indexed by i) belong to mututally exclusive
subgroups.
of

J

Let

Xi

represent a vector of indicators for membership in each

yi

subgroups, let

represent an outcome of interest, let

endogenous treatment indicator, and let

Zi

Suppose we estimate a pooled rst stage model for
the vector

Di

represent an

represent an instrumental variable.

Di

that includes

Zi

and

Xi :
Di = π0 + π1 Zi + πX Xi + vi .

By standard Frisch-Waugh arguments the OLS estimate of

P
π
b1

π1

is:

− Dj(i) )(Zi − Z j(i) )
P
2
i (Zi − Z j(i) )

i (Di

=

j(i) is i0 s subgroup, and Dj and Z j represent the means of D and Z within
subgroup j. Let N represent the combined sample size and Nj the sample size
for group j . Then
P P
j
i∈j (Di − D j(i) )(Zi − Z j(i) )
π
b1 =
P P
2
j
i∈j (Zi − Z j(i) )
!P
P
1
2
X  Nj 
i∈j (Zi − Z j )
Nj
i∈j (Di − D j(i) )(Zi − Z j(i) )
=
P P
P
1
2
2
N
j
i∈j (Zi − Z j(i) )
i∈j (Zi − Z j(i) )
N
j


X Nj VZj
=
π
b1j
N
VZ
j

where

VZj is the variance of Z within group j, VZ is the overall
π
b1j is the rst stage regression coecient for group j .

variance of

Z

By the same argument if we estimate a pooled reduced form model for

yi

where
and

that includes

Zi

and the vector

Xi :

yi = δ0 + δ1 Zi + δX Xi + ui .
the OLS estimate of

δ1

is

δb1

=

X  Nj  VZj
N

j
where

δb1j

VZ

δb1j

is the reduced form coecient for group

estimate of the eect of

D

on

y

using

Z

is:

βb1

=

δb1
π
b1
1

j.

Finally, the pooled IV

as an instrument and controlling for

X


X  Nj   VZj   π
b1j δb1j
=
N
VZ
π
b1 π
b1j
j






X Nj
VZj
π
b1j b
=
β1j
N
VZ
π
b1
j
where

βb1j = δb1j /b
π1j

is the IV estimate within subgroup j.

2. Bounds on the Treatment Eects of H-delivery on H-complying
C-section Always-takers and Never-takers
For purposes of this section, assume that the instrument

a) Eect on H-compliers/C-always takers.

Zi

is dichotomous.

Consider a comparison of

E[yi |Zi = 1, Ci = 1] − E[yi |Zi = 0, Ci = 1]
Zi = 0, Ci = 1 is: G1 =
{(H − N T, C − AT ), (H − AT, C − AT ), (H − comp, C − AT )}. The group with
Zi = 1, Ci = 1 consists of G1 plus (H&C comp). Now:

From Appendix Table 1, the group of mothers with

E[yi |Zi = 1, Ci = 1]

where

θ1 ≡

=

(1 − θ1 )E[yi |Zi = 1, i ∈ G1 ]
+θ1 E[yi |Zi = 1, i ∈ (H&C comp)}]

P (H&C comp)
P (G1 ) + P (H&C comp)

is the relative fraction of H&C compliers in the group with

Zi = 1, Ci = 1.

Therefore

E[yi |Zi = 1, i ∈ G1 ]
=

E[yi |Zi = 1, Ci = 1] − θ1 E[yi |Zi = 1, i ∈ (H&C comp)]
1 − θ1

Moreover, since

E[yi |Zi = 0, i ∈ G1 ] = E[yi |Zi = 0, Ci = 1]
if we knew

E[yi |Zi = 1, i ∈ (H&C comp)]

we could construct an estimator of

the dierence:

D1

≡ E[yi |Zi = 1, i ∈ G1 ] − E[yi |Zi = 0, i ∈ G1 ]
E[yi |Zi = 1, Ci = 1] − θ1 E[yi |Zi = 1, i ∈ (H&C comp)]
=
1 − θ1
−E[yi |Zi = 0, Ci = 1]
2

(H − comp, C − CAT ) group switches hospital types when Zi
D1 /S1 provides an estimator of the causal eect of switching
H = 0 to an H = 1 hospital on this group, where

Since only the

switches, the ratio
from an

S1 =

P (H − comp, C − AT )
P (G1 )

is the share of the group that switches hospital.
Assuming the outcome

1.

yi is dichotomous, 0 ≤ E[yi |Zi = 1, i ∈ (H&Ccomp)] ≤

So an upper bound on the causal eect is

U1

1
S1

=




E[yi |Zi = 1, Ci = 1]
− E[yi |Zi = 0, Ci = 1]
(1 − θ1 )

and a lower bound is

L1

=

1
S1




E[yi |Zi = 1, Ci = 1] − θ1
− E[yi |Zi = 0, Ci = 1]
(1 − θ1 )

b) Eect on H-compliers/C-never takers.

Consider a comparison of

E[yi |Zi = 1, Ci = 0] − E[yi |Zi = 0, Ci = 0]
Zi = 1, Ci = 0 is: G0 =
{(H − N T, C − N T ), (H − AT, C − N T ), (H − comp, C − N T )}. The group with
Zi = 0, Ci = 0 is G0 plus the (H&C comp) group. Using the same argument as

From Appendix Table 1, the group of mothers with

above, we can decompose

E[yi |Zi = 0, Ci = 0]
where

π0 =

=

(1 − θ0 )E[yi |Zi = 0, i ∈ G0 ]
+θ0 E[yi |Zi = 0, i ∈ (H&C comp)}]

P (H&C comp)
P (G0 ) + P (H&C comp)

is the relative fraction of H&C compliers in the group with

Zi = 0, Ci = 0.

Thus

E[yi |Zi = 0, i ∈ G0 ]
=

E[yi |Zi = 0, Ci = 0] − θ0 E[yi |Zi = 0, i ∈ (H&C comp)]
1 − θ0

Moreover, since

E[yi |Zi = 1, i ∈ G0 = E[yi |Zi = 1, Ci = 0]
if we knew

D0

E[yi |Zi = 0, i ∈ (H&C comp)]

we could construct the dierence:

= E[yi |Zi = 1, i ∈ G0 ] − E[yi |Zi = 0, i ∈ G0 ]
= E[yi |Zi = 1, Ci = 0]
E[yi |Zi = 0, Ci = 0] − θ0 E[yi |Zi = 0, i ∈ (H&C comp)]
−
(1 − θ0 )
3

(H − comp, C − N T ) group swithes hospital types
D0 /S0 provides an estimator of the causal eect of
H = 0 to an H = 1 hospital for this group, where

Moreover, since only the
when

Zi

switches, the ratio

switching from an

S0 =

P (H − comp, C − N T )
P (G0 )

0 ≤ E[yi |Zi = 0, i ∈ (H&C comp)] ≤ 1.

As before, we know

So an upper bound

on the causal eect is

U0



1
S0

=

E[yi |Zi = 1, Ci = 0] −

E[yi |Zi = 0, Ci = 0] − θ0
(1 − θ0 )



and a lower bound is

L0

=

1
S0



E[yi |Zi = 0, Ci = 1]
E[yi |Zi = 1, Ci = 0] −
(1 − θ0 )

Appendix Table 6 presents point estimates of the lower and upper bounds for
the two groups of H-complier/C-AT and H-complier/C-NT. We form condence
intervals for these point estimates by a Monte Carlo approach in which we randomly draw new samples, with replacement. To retain the clustered structure
of the data we draw samples based on maternal home zip codes.

3. Characterizing Compliers with a Continuous Instrument
Assume the causal model of interest is

yi = β0 + β1 Di + β2 Xi + β3 Wi + εi
where

Di

Xi

is a particular covariate of interest,

Wi

is a set of other controls, and

is an endogenous treatment dummy. Denote the rst stage model by:

Di = π0 + π1 Zi + π2 Xi + π3 Wi + vi
Then the coecient

π1

from the population regression model is:

π1 =
where

fi
Z

refers to the part of

Zi

fi ]
Cov[Di , Z
var[Zei ]

that remains after projecting on

a constant.
Consider the generalized complier IV:

Di Xi = λ0 + λ1 Di + λ2 Xi + λ3 Wi + υi

4

Xi , Wi ,

and

which is estimated by IV using the rst stage model above for the endogenous
variable

Di .

The population IV estimator is

λIV
1 =

fi ]
cov[Di Xi , Z
.
fi ]
cov[Di , Z

We will show that under a monotonicity condition this provides an estimate of

Xi .
λIV
1

an interpretable weighted average of

The numerator of the expression for

fi ]
cov[Di Xi , Z

is:

fi ]
= E[Di Xi Z
fi |Xi ]]
= E[Xi E[Di Z

Using this expression, the IV estimator can be written as:

λIV
1

fi |Xi ]]
E[Xi E[Di Z
fi ]
E[Di Z
ˆ
=
X w(X)f (X)dX
=

x
where

w(Xi )

fi |Xi ]
E[Di Z
fi ]
E[Di Z

=

and f (X) is the density of X . Notice that the weights w(Xi ) sum to 1, since
fi |Xi ]] = E[Di Z
fi ]. Moreover, provided that E[Di Z
fi |Xi ] = cov[Di , Z
fi |Xi ]
E[E[Di Z
has the same sign for all Xi (i.e., that the instrument either raises or lowers the
probability of Di = 1 for each value of X ) the weights are all positive. Finally,
notice that

w(Xi )

=
=
=

fi |Xi ]
cov[Di , Z
fi ]
cov[Di , Z
ei |Xi ]/var[Z
fi |Xi ] var[Zei |Xi ]
cov[Di , Z
×
fi ]/var[Z
fi ]
var[Zei ]
cov[Di , Z
π1 (Xi ) var[Zei |Xi ]
×
π1
var[Zei ]

fi |Xi ] is
π1 (Xi ) ≡ cov[Di , Zei |Xi ]/var[Z
instrument conditional on Xi . So the weight

where

the rst stage coecient of the
can be interpreted as a product

of the relative rst stage eect for observations for a given
relative variance of the instrument for the

To summarize:

x − group

and the

x − group.

Under a monotonicity assumption the complier IV

estimand is a weighed average of

Xi ,

λIV
1

where the weights reect the relative size

of the rst-stage eect of the instrument on the particular

x − group, multiplied

by the relative variance of the instrument within the group.

5

Appendix C: Data
a. Overview of PDD/ED/AS/Linked Birth Cohort Data
California OSHPD has created a linked file that combines in-patient discharge
records for delivering mothers and newborns with Vital Statistics (VS) data (i.e.,
information collected from birth certificates and death records) and information
on in-patient, Emergency Department (ED), and Ambulatory Surgery Center
(ASC) records for each mother in the period from one year before to one year
after the birth, and for each infant in the period up to one year after the birth.
We use a version of this file that has information on live hospital delivered births
for the period from 2007 to 2011.
Appendix D of the data base gives the name, address, zip code, and Hospital
Service Areas (HSA) for each hospital, ED, and ASC in the state. We also use
external information from the Dartmouth Atlas website to assign HSA’s and
Health Referral Regions (HRR’s). We add data from the US Census Bureau on
average income in each zip code.

b. Construction of relative distance instruments
The procedure for constructing a mother’s relative distance to high and low
c-section hospitalsconsists of 3 steps:
1. We estimate each hospital’s risk-adjusted c-section rate among low-risk
first births;
2. We classify hospitals as low (L) or high (H) c-section hospitals based on
their risk-adjusted c-section rates from (1);
3. We calculate each mother’s distances to the nearest L and H hospitals,
from which we calculate our main relative distance measure.
In step 1 we fit a logistic regression model to our sample of low-risk first births
that includes a baseline set of case risk factors Xi and indicators for the hospital
h(i) at which mother i delivered. Specifically, using our LRFB sample, we
estimate the model:
P (Ci = 1|Xi ) = Λ(α + X0i β + γh(i) )
where Λ is the logistic CDF.
In step 2 we compare hospital h’s estimated logit coefficient γ̂h to the birthweighted average hospital coefficient in each Hospital Referral Region (HRR)
hP
i−1 P
γ̄HRR =
N
j
j∈HRR
j∈HRR Nj γ̂j (where Nh is the number of low risk
first births delivered at hospital h in our analysis sample). We define a hospital
to be a “high c-section hospital” (or H hospital) if γ̂h ≥ γ̄HRR and otherwise a
“low c-section hospital.”
In step 3 we use information on the centroid of each mother’s home zip code
and on the centroids of the zip codes for each hospital to define the distance
1

from each mother to each hospital. We then define the distance to the nearest
H hospital and the nearest L hospital.

c. Breech Birth Sample
We use the variable “fetpres” from VS records as our indicator of fetal presentation. We define our breech first birth (BPFB) sample using the same restrictions
as we impose on our main low risk first birth analysis sample, with the exception
that we focus on breech presentation fetuses. Column 2 of the Data Appendix
Table shows the characteristics of the resulting sample. For reference column
1 reproduces the third column of Table 1 and shows the characteristics of our
main LRFB analysis sample.

d. Second Birth Sample
We select our second birth as follows: using the mother id variable we find
any later birth to a mother who is included in our LRFB sample for which the
recorded parity is 2 and for which information on delivery mode is available.
Column 3 of the Data Appendix Table shows the characteristics of the first
births that can be linked to a second birth. Among the second births, 1.7%
are breech presentation, 5.9% are delivered at less than 37 weeks gestation, and
mean birth weight is 3392 grams.

2

Data Appendix Table: Characteristics of Main Analysis Sample, Breech Sample, and
Second Birth Sample
LRFB Analysis
Low Risk
Sample
Breech Births
Mother's characteristics
Mean age
At most high school education (%)
Mean weight (pounds)
Race/eth: Hispanic (%)
Asian (%)
Nonhispanic white (%)
Nonhispanic black (%)
Insurance: Medi-Cal (%)
private non-Kaiser (%)
private Kaiser (%)
Birth risk factors and characteristics
Breech presentation (%)
Mean number prenatal care visits
Mother had ED visit year prior to birth (%)
Mean gestation (weeks)
Mean birthweight (grams)
Delivery outcomes
C-section delivery (%)
Scheduled c-section (%)
Delivered at H hospital (%)
Postpartum outcomes
Infant re-admitted to ED (%)
Infant re-admitted as in-patient (%)
Mother readmitted (any type) (%)
Another birth within 4 years (%)
Sample size

LRFB with
2nd Birth

25.6
41.2
137
44.2
17.6
31.7
5.6
39.8
39.9
14.9

27.4
31.7
137
35.1
19.6
41.6
2.9
30.8
50.6
14.3

26.4
31.4
137
33.5
19.4
41.5
4.7
26.6
53.8
17.3

0.0
12.2
19.5
39.9
3348

100.0
12.2
17.9
39.4
3278

0.0
12.5
20.7
39.9
3364

25.6
9.2
51.5

97.9
79.2
51.9

24.5
8.6
52.8

33.8
8.2
14.9
36.4
491,604

30.9
7.3
13.8
39.5
12,749

31.0
7.9
17.1
100.0
93,575

Notes: See notes to Table 1. Low risk breech births are births with same low risk criteria as LRFB sample, but with breech
presentation. Second birth sample describes charactersistics of first birth for those mothers that are in the LRFB sample
and are observed having a second birth.

Figure 1: Pathways to C-Section Delivery

planned c-section
"scheduled" c-section
(no trial of labor)

no planned c-section
go to term

onset of labor

no onset of labor
induce labor

T=0
vaginal delivery
T=T h

if still in labor → c-sec on
"unscheduled" c-section
(trial of labor)

Fraction Delivering at H Hospital

Figure 2: Relative Distance and Probability of Delivery at
High C-section (H) Hospital

0.8
0.6

600+ patients
300-599 patient
75-299 patients
<75 patients

0.4
0.2
0.0

-20

-10

0

10

Relative Distance to H vs. L Hospital (miles)
Note: each point represents a home zip code. Fitted logistic shown in red.

20

Figure 3: Effect Sizes of Being 10 Miles Closer to a High CSection Hospital on Predetermined Risk Factors

Predicted ED Admission (Infant)
# ED Visits by Mom Prebirth
Predicted C-section

# In Pat. Visits by
Mom Prebirth

Herpes
Low Birthweight
C

Asthma

Birthweight
Diabetes
Gestation
#Cigs/day 3rd Trimester
#Cigs/day 2nd Trimester
Smoked when
pregnant

Late Start for Prenatal Care
C
#Cigs/day
1st Trimester

#Cigs/day
Pre-Pregnancy

Month Prenatal Care Began
C
#Prenatal Visits

-0.05 -0.04 -0.03 -0.02 -0.01

0.00

0.01

0.02

0.03

Effect Size (Change in Std. Dev. Units) of Being
10 Miles Closer to H Hospital (95% CI shown)

0.04

0.05

Figure 4: Estimated Reduced Form Effects of Relative Distance on
Probability of ED Visit for Infant at Different Followup Horizons
0.30

Prob. of ED Visit

0.25

Point estimates
and 95% C.I.

0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Duration of Followup Window (months)

11

12

Figure 5: Sensitivity of Estimated Reduced Form Effect of
Relative Distance on Probability of ED Visit
0.17
Reduced Form Effect

max

median

mean

min

0.16
Basic estimate
(no extra controls)
= 0.163

Estimate with all
17 extra controls
= 0.162

0.15
0

2
6
10
14
17
Number of Added Covariates (Randomly Selected)

Figure 6: First Stage and Reduced Form Effects of Proximity to HHospital on Probability of C-Section and Infant ED Admission
RF Effect on ED Admissions

0.20
0.16
0.12
0.08

Unrestricted fit across
quartiles. Slope = implied
IV coefficient = 0.672.
Intercept = 0.003.
R-sq=0.71.

0.04
0.00

0.00

0.02

0.04

0.06

0.08

0.10

0.12

0.14

0.16

1st stage effect on Probability of C-section (x10)

Note: Points = fitted pairs of 1st stage and reduced form coefficients (with 95% CI for RF
coefficients) by quartile of predicted probability of c-section at H-hospital.

0.18

Table 1: Characteristics of All Births, Low Risk First Births and Analysis Sample

Mother's characteristics
Mean age
At most high school education (%)
Mean weight (pounds)
Race/eth: Hispanic (%)
Asian (%)
Nonhispanic white (%)
Nonhispanic black (%)
Insurance: Medi-Cal (%)
private non-Kaiser (%)
private Kaiser (%)
Birth risk factors and characteristics
Mean Parity
Previous c-section (%)
Breech presentation (%)
Mean number prenatal care visits
Mother had ED visit year prior to birth (%)
Mean gestation (weeks)
Mean birthweight (grams)
Delivery outcomes
C-section delivery (%)
Scheduled c-section (%)
Delivered at H hospital (%)
Postpartum outcomes
Infant re-admitted to ED (%)
Infant re-admitted as in-patient (%)
Mother readmitted (any type) (%)
Another birth within 4 years (%)
Sample size

All Births

Low Risk
First Births

Analysis
Sample

28.3
49.6
149
50.9
12.2
27.7
5.8
46.0
34.3
13.1

25.4
41.5
137
44.2
15.5
32.2
5.5
41.1
38.0
14.2

25.6
41.2
137
44.2
17.6
31.7
5.6
39.8
39.9
14.9

2.1
20.7
3.4
12.0
20.6
39.2
3309

---12.1
19.9
39.9
3347

---12.2
19.5
39.9
3348

32.7
23.7
51.8

25.5
9.4
51.6

25.6
9.2
51.5

33.9
9.3
16.8
24.3
2,699,302

34.0
8.2
15.3
35.8
631,506

33.8
8.2
14.9
36.4
491,604

Notes: All births include all live in-hospital births in California, 2007-2011. Low risk first births include singleton
nonbreech full term (37+ weeks) first births with no indications of eclampsia or pre-eclampsia, mother's BMI <
33.83 (90th percentile), and ≤ 20 prenatal visits. Analysis sample includes mothers with valid home zip code,
distance to nearest high or low c-section hospital ≤ 20 miles, and distance to actual hospital of delivery ≤ 20
miles.

Table 2: Estimated First Stage Effects of Relative Distance on Place of Delivery and C-Section
Instrument=Relative Distance

Instrument=Closer to H Hospital

1st Stage Coefficient
(x 100)

1st Stage Coefficient
(x 10)

Outcome Variable

Mean

Deliver at High C-Section (H) Hospital

0.515

1.586
(0.155)

1.013
(0.122)

C-section Delivery

0.256

0.182
(0.030)

0.114
(0.022)

Scheduled C-section (no trial of labor)

0.092

0.051
(0.020)

0.023
(0.013)

Unscheduled C-section (trial of Labor)
(trial of labor)

0.163

0.132
(0.026)

0.091
(0.018)

C-Section at at High C-Section Hospital

0.149

0.489
(0.050)

0.317
(0.040)

C-Section at at Low C-Section Hospital

0.106

-0.307
(0.034)

-0.203
(0.122)

Breakdown of C-Section Deliveries:

Fractions of Complier Subgroups --Moving Family 10 miles closer to H hospital (col. 2) or closer to H hospital (col. 3)
P(H Complier)
0.159
0.101
P(C&H Complier)
0.018
0.011
P(H Complier & C Always Taker)
0.031
0.020
P(H Complier & C Never Taker)
0.110
0.070
P(C Complier|H Complier)
P(C-section| H Complier, further from H hosp.)
P(C-section| H Complier, closer to H hosp.)

0.115
0.193
0.308

0.113
0.200
0.313

NOTE: Sample=491,604 low-risk first births. Standard errors in parentheses clustered at 5-digit ZIP code level. All models include
controls for Hospital Service Area, year of birth, distance to closest hospital, mother's age (17 dummies), mother's education (8
dummies), race, father present, insurance type, cubic in mother's height, cubic in mother's weight, pre-pregnancy BMI, and mean
income in ZIP code. Estimates of fractions of complier subgroups in bottom panel are only interpretable under specific assumptions
described in text.

Table 3: Characteristics of Compliers
Means for Low Means for Hospital Means for Procedure
Risk First Births
Compliers
Compliers
(1)
(2)
(3)
A. Socio Economic Characteristics of Mother
Race/Ethnicity
White
0.32
0.27
0.19
Black
0.06
0.03
0.07
Asian
0.18
0.11
0.12
Hispanic
0.44
0.59
0.62
Education
High School or Less
Some College
BA or Higher

0.41
0.20
0.39

0.52
0.15
0.33

0.69
0.17
0.14

Zip code avg. inc. < median

0.50

0.49

0.92

B. Mother's Insurance Coverage at Delivery
Medi-Cal or other Gov.
0.43
Private Kaiser
0.15
Private non-Kaiser
0.38
Other
0.04

0.61
0.02
0.33
0.04

0.83
-0.05
0.22
0.00

C. Other Maternal/Infant Characteristics
Mother height < 5 ft.
0.04
Mother visit ED prepartum
0.19
Number prepartum ED visits
0.26
Male baby
0.51
Birth weight < median
0.50
Low birth weight (<2500 g)
0.02
Pred. infant readm. > median
0.50

0.05
0.21
0.29
0.53
0.51
0.03
0.63

0.09
0.32
0.46
0.59
0.49
0.03
0.83

D. Local Air Quality (based on Home Zip Code)
Ozone > median
0.50
PM-25 > median
0.50

0.64
0.85

0.77
0.84

Notes: column 1 shows estimated means for overall analysis sample of LRFB's. Column 2
shows means for births that are delivered at H hospitals as a result of being relatively closer
to such hospitals; column 3 shows means for births that are delivered by c-section as a
result of being closer to an H-hospital. Models used to estimate complier characteristics
include basic controls plus characteristic itself.

Table 4: Estimated Effects of C‐Section Delivery on Outcomes of Infant and Mother at Birth
Instrument=Relative Distance

Instrument=Closer to H Hopsital

Outcome Variable

Mean

OLS Coeff.
C‐Section

RF Coefficient
(x 100)

IV
Estimate

RF Coefficient
(x 10)

IV
Estimate

C‐section (1st stage)

0.256

‐‐

0.182
(0.030)

‐‐

0.114
(0.022)

‐‐

Apgar (5 minute)

8.915

‐0.022
(0.002)

0.088
(0.030)

0.482
(0.183)

0.075
(0.020)

0.654
(0.210)

Birth Injury (×100)

0.094

‐0.019
(0.009)

‐0.142
(0.129)

‐0.779
(0.713)

‐0.293
(0.114)

‐2.570
(1.125)

NICU

0.034

0.021
(0.001)

‐0.026
(0.014)

‐0.140
(0.074)

‐0.032
(0.010)

‐0.282
(0.095)

Ventilation

0.015

0.010
(0.001)

0.045
(0.021)

0.248
(0.111)

0.006
(0.010)

0.051
(0.088)

Maternal Outcomes:
Trauma to Perineum and
Vulva During Labor

0.461

‐0.608
(0.005)

‐0.153
(0.057)

‐0.837
(0.271)

‐0.161
(0.035)

‐1.491
(0.288)

Perineal Laceration
(2nd degree or higher)

0.290

‐0.391
(0.005)

‐0.147
(0.039)

‐0.809
(0.199)

‐0.139
(0.028)

‐1.215
(0.268)

Length of Stay (days)

2.637

1.384
(0.007)

‐0.033
(0.091)

‐0.177
(0.501)

‐0.046
(0.067)

‐0.404
(0.630)

Length of Labor (days)
(birth ‐ admission)

0.530

0.084
(0.003)

‐0.112
(0.044)

‐0.610
(0.252)

‐0.087
(0.030)

‐0.770
(0.314)

Post‐birth Stay (days)
(discharge‐birth)

2.105

1.294
(0.006)

0.084
(0.073)

0.454
(0.384)

0.041
(0.058)

0.361
(0.484)

Infant Outcomes:

NOTE: Sample=491,604 first births, except models for 5 minute Apgar, which includes 487,643 observations, and models for
length of stay, length of labor and length of post‐birth stay, which have 482,187 observations. Length of labor is measured by
number of days from mother's admission to birth, censored at maximum of 3 days. Length of stay is censored at maximum of 5
days. Post birth stay is length of stay minus length of labor. Standard errors in parentheses clustered at 5‐digit ZIP code level. All
models (OLS and IV) include the set of controls described in note to Table 2.

Table 5: Estimated Effects of C-Section Delivery on Subsequent In-Patient and Out-Patient Visits
Instrument=Relative
Distance

OLS Coeff. RF Coefficient
IV
C-Section
(x 100)
Estimate

Instrument=Closer to H
Hopsital

RF Coefficient
IV
(x 10)
Estimate

Outcome Variable

Mean

C-section (1st stage)

0.256

--

0.182
(0.030)

--

0.114
(0.022)

--

Any in-patient or out-patient visit

0.385

0.000
(0.002)

0.123
(0.057)

0.673
(0.332)

0.056
(0.042)

0.492
(0.392)

Any ED visit

0.338

0.006
(0.002)

0.163
(0.054)

0.892
(0.335)

0.080
(0.040)

0.698
(0.390)

ED visit for respiratory
related conditions

0.126

0.005
(0.001)

0.090
(0.030)

0.496
(0.190)

0.051
(0.023)

0.448
(0.232)

Maternal Outcomes:
Any in-patient or out-patient visit

0.149

0.031
(0.001)

0.019
(0.026)

0.103
(0.142)

0.003
(0.019)

0.025
(0.166)

Any ED visit

0.129

0.027
(0.001)

0.020
(0.026)

0.108
(0.139)

0.007
(0.018)

0.062
(0.158)

Infant Outcomes:

NOTE: Sample=491,604 first births. Standard errors in parentheses clustered at 5-digit ZIP code level.
All models (OLS and IV) include the set of controls described in note to Table 2. In-patient and outpatient visits are measured over year following birth.

Table 6: Estimated Models for Breech Births and Pooled Models for Low Risk and Breech Births
A. First Stage and Reduced Form Models
Low-risk First Births
1st stages:
Deliver at H
Hospital C-section

Breech First Births

Red. Form:
Visit ED
(12 mo.)

1st stages:
Deliver at H
Hospital C-section

Pooled

Red. Form:
Visit ED
(12 mo.)

1st stages:
Deliver at H
Hospital C-section

Red. Form:
Visit ED
(12 mo.)

Rel. Distance
to H Hosp.

1.586
(0.155)

0.182
(0.030)

0.163
(0.054)

1.965
(0.228)

-0.057
(0.039)

-0.030
(0.133)

1.586
(0.155)

0.182
(0.030)

0.163
(0.054)

Rel. Distance
× Breech

--

--

--

--

--

--

0.386
(0.170)

-0.259
(0.055)

-0.182
(0.129)

B. Second Stage Models for ED Visit in 12 Months After Birth
Low-risk First Births
Channel =
Deliver at H
Hospital

Deliver at H
Hospital
C-Section

Channel =
C-Section

Pooled

Breech First Births
Channel =
Deliver at H
Hospital

Channel =
C-Section

Channel =
Deliver at H
Hospital

Channel =
C-Section

Both
Channels

0.103
(0.035)

--

-0.015
(0.067)

--

0.098
(0.035)

--

0.019
(0.058)

--

0.892
(0.335)

--

0.520
(2.316)

--

0.888
(0.329)

0.730
(0.431)

Note: Standard errors clustered by ZIP code in parentheses. Low risk first birth (LRFB) sample has 491,604 observations with mean c-section
rate=0.256 and mean rate of ED visit=0.338. Breech first birth sample has 12,749 observations with mean c-section rate=0.979 and mean rate of
ED visit=0.309 (see App. C). Pooled models are estimated on combined sample. Models for LRFB and breech first births include same control
variables listed in note to Table 2. Pooled models include these controls plus a dummy for breech births and interactions of the breech dummy
with Health Services Area dummies.

Table 7: Estimated Effects on C-section Delivery on Probability of Second Birth

Mean

OLS Coeff. Instrument=Relative Distance
On CRF Coeff. on
section at Rel. Distance
IV
1st birth
(x 100)
Estimate

Instrument=Closer to H
Hospital

RF Coeff. on
Closer to H
(x 10)

IV
Estimate

A. First Stage Coefficients for C-section at First Birth:
2 year followup sample
(n=299,203)

0.257

--

0.183
(0.036)

--

0.106
(0.026)

--

3 year followup sample
(n=200,742)

0.255

--

0.155
(0.040)

--

0.090
(0.030)

--

4 year followup sample
(n=100,570)

0.252

--

0.187
(0.052)

--

0.110
(0.041)

--

Second Birth within
2 Years

0.127

-0.017
(0.001)

0.017
(0.029)

0.095
(0.158)

-0.007
(0.023)

-0.069
(0.214)

Second Birth within
3 Years

0.272

-0.025
(0.002)

-0.029
(0.050)

-0.183
(0.322)

0.003
(0.040)

0.037
(0.436)

B. Reduced Form and IV Effects:

Second Birth within
0.364
-0.020
0.033
0.174
0.036
0.325
4 Years
(0.003)
(0.068)
(0.360)
(0.054)
(0.501)
NOTE: Standard errors in parentheses clustered at 5-digit ZIP code level. All models include controls
described in Table 2.

Table 8: Estimated Effects of C-Section Delivery at First Birth on Outcomes at Second Birth
Instrument=Relative Distance

RF
Coefficient
(x 100)

IV

Instrument=Closer to H
Hospital

RF
Coefficient
(x 10)

IV

Outcome Variable

Mean

OLS
Coefficient

C-section at 1st birth
(first stage)

0.245

--

0.188
(0.080)

--

0.060
(0.038)

--

Delivered by c-section

0.275

0.811
(0.003)

0.217
(0.052)

1.160
(0.189)

0.062
(0.041)

1.035
(0.420)

Delivered by CS, control
for 2nd-birth rel. distance

0.275

0.800
(0.003)

0.110
(0.059)

0.864
(0.302)

-0.003
(0.042)

-0.187
(2.743)

Del. by unscheduled
c-section

0.027

0.032
(0.002)

-0.004
(0.017)

-0.023
(0.093)

-0.005
(0.015)

-0.078
(0.256)

In-patient/ASC/ED visits
by mother, year pre-birth

0.222

0.015
(0.003)

0.045
(0.048)

0.241
(0.255)

0.023
(0.036)

0.388
(0.642)

Length of gestation (days)
related conditions

275.6

-2.40
(0.10)

-2.94
(1.44)

-15.68
(7.78)

-0.85
(1.17)

-14.21
(19.34)

Birthweight (grams)

3390

16.9
(3.7)

-111.6
(58.6)

-595.0
(345.8)

-27.6
(42.3)

-460.6
(750.4)

Placenta previa and
related problems

0.027

0.004
(0.001)

0.001
(0.014)

0.007
(0.076)

-0.008
(0.011)

-0.142
(0.216)

Hypertension (including
eclampsia/pre-eclampsia)

0.024

0.000
(0.001)

0.007
(0.016)

0.035
(0.085)

0.008
(0.013)

0.140
(0.246)

In-patient/ASC/ED visits
by mother, year after birth

0.167

0.026
(0.003)

0.009
(0.040)

0.045
(0.213)

0.034
(0.033)

0.559
(0.634)

ED visits by infant, year
after birth

0.285

0.002
(0.003)

0.082
(0.057)

0.438
(0.330)

0.050
(0.045)

0.835
(0.937)

In-patient/ASC/ED visits
by infant, year after birth

0.335

0.000
(0.004)

0.081
(0.059)

0.432
(0.339)

0.047
(0.047)

0.785
(0.959)

Estimate

Estimate

Outcomes for Second Birth:

NOTE: Sample=93,575 second births to mothers observed having low-risk first birth (see App. C). Standard
errors in parentheses clustered at 5-digit ZIP code level. All models include the controls described in Table 2.
Placenta previa and related problems includes ICD9 641.xx. Hypertension includes ICD9 642.xx.

Table 9: Estimated Effects of Hospital Policies on Neonatal and Postneonatal Mortality
Instrument=Relative
Distance

Outcome Variable
A. All Births

RF Coeff. on
OLS coeff. Rel. Distance
IV
Mean of Mediator
(x 100)
Estimate

Instrument=Closer to H
Hospital

RF Coeff. on
Closer to H
IV
(x 10)
Estimate

Deliver at H Hospital
(Potential First Stage)

0.515

--

1.586
(0.155)

--

1.013
(0.122)

--

C-section delivery
(Potential First Stage)

0.256

--

0.182
(0.030)

--

0.114
(0.022)

--

Death (x100) by age 1
0.121
(Mediated by H delivery)

-0.005
(0.013)

-0.377
(0.161)

-0.238
(0.100)

-0.267
(0.125)

-0.264
(0.130)

Death (x100) by age 1
0.121
(Mediated by c-section)

0.064
(0.013)

-0.377
(0.161)

-2.067
(0.878)

-0.267
(0.125)

-2.339
(1.163)

B. Births with Low Risk of Death (Lowest 67% of Predicted Risk of Death)
Deliver at H Hospital
(Potential First Stage)

0.525

--

1.432
(0.156)

--

0.931
(0.124)

--

C-section delivery
(Potential First Stage)

0.275

--

0.137
(0.035)

--

0.080
(0.025)

--

Death (x100) by age 1
0.068
(Mediated by H delivery)

-0.001
(0.011)

0.014
(0.147)

0.010
(0.103)

0.021
(0.115)

0.022
(0.124)

Death (x100) by age 1
0.068
(Mediated by c-section)

0.038
(0.012)

0.014
(0.147)

0.102
(1.079)

0.021
(0.115)

0.262
(1.455)

C. Births with High Risk of Death (Top 33% of Predicted Risk of Death)
Deliver at H Hospital
(Potential First Stage)

0.506

--

1.801
(0.175)

--

1.130
(0.141)

--

C-section delivery
(Potential First Stage)

0.249

--

0.243
(0.044)

--

0.169
(0.033)

--

Death (x100) by age 1
0.218
(Mediated by H delivery)

-0.012
(0.030)

-1.091
(0.395)

-0.606
(0.221)

-0.843
(0.309)

-0.745
(0.289)

Death (x100) by age 1
0.218
(Mediated by c-section)

0.119
(0.031)

-1.091
(0.395)

-4.492
(1.645)

-0.843
(0.309)

-4.986
(1.974)

NOTE: Sample of all births has 491,604 observations for low risk first births. Sample of births
with low risk of death has 327,736 observations. Sample with high risk of death has 163,868
observations. Risk of death is predicted by a logit model using basic controls plus additional risk
factors (see text). Predictions made using 10-fold cross-validation of logit model to avoid
overfitting. Standard errors in parentheses clustered at 5-digit ZIP code level. All models include
t l d
ib d i T bl 2

