NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

NEW PERSPECTIVES ON THE DECLINE OF US MANUFACTURING EMPLOYMENT
Teresa C. Fort
Justin R. Pierce
Peter K. Schott
Working Paper 24490
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24490

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2018

Any opinions and conclusions expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
represent the views of the U.S. Census Bureau, the Board of Governors, its research staff, or the
National Bureau of Economic Research. All results have been reviewed to ensure that no
confidential information is disclosed.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Teresa C. Fort, Justin R. Pierce, and Peter K. Schott. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

New Perspectives on the Decline of US Manufacturing Employment
Teresa C. Fort, Justin R. Pierce, and Peter K. Schott
NBER Working Paper No. 24490
April 2018
JEL No. F1,J2,J6,O33
ABSTRACT
We use relatively unexplored dimensions of US microdata to examine how US manufacturing
employment has evolved across industries, firms, establishments, and regions. We show that
these data provide support for both trade- and technology-based explanations of the overall
decline of employment over this period, while also highlighting the difficulties of estimating an
overall contribution for each mechanism. Toward that end, we discuss how further analysis of
these trends might yield sharper insights.
Teresa C. Fort
Tuck School of Business
Dartmouth College
100 Tuck Hall
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
teresa.fort@tuck.dartmouth.edu
Justin R. Pierce
Federal Reserve Board
20th and C Street NW
Washington, DC 20551
justin.r.pierce@frb.gov

Peter K. Schott
Yale School of Management
135 Prospect Street
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
and NBER
peter.schott@yale.edu

1

Introduction

US manufacturing since World War II exhibits three notable trends, illustrated in the
two panels of Figure 1. First, the manufacturing employment has diverged from nonmanufacturing employment, as shown on dierent axes in Figure 1A. While both series
move upward until the late 1970s, manufacturing employment then begins to decline,
even as other non-farm employment continues a steady rise. As a result, there is a continual decline in manufacturing employment's share of total US non-farm employment,
from 32 percent in 1948 to 8 percent in 2017. Second, while US manufacturing employment fell just 12 percent over the 21 years between the post-war peak in 1979 and
2000, it then dropped by more than twice as much  25 percent  from 2000 to 2012.
Third, despite the relative atness and subsequent sharp decline in US manufacturing
employment, the right-hand panel of Figure 1 shows a steady rise in manufacturing real
value added at more or less the same rate as non-manufacturing GDP over the same
period, at least between the late 1970s and the Great Recession.

The combination

of relatively steady and then declining employment, and rising output, indicates that,
over the long term, labor productivity has risen faster in the manufacturing sector than
in the broader economy.
For a variety of reasons, including the perception that workers in manufacturing
receive comparatively high wages conditional on education (Langdon and Lehrman
(2012); Ebenstein et al. (2014)), these trends have stirred intense discussion among
both policy makers and academics. This debate can broadly be summarized as a dispute between views that emphasize the relative importance of trade versus technology.
The trade-based explanation contends that import competition has reduced US manufacturing employment by inducing labor-intensive, low-labor-productivity industries
to move abroad. The technology view argues that the decline in manufacturing employment stems from innovations in production techniques, such as automation, that
have dramatically increased output per worker. If, as implied by Figure 1, consumers
spend a constant share of their expenditure on manufactured goods, then an increase
in labor productivity means fewer workers are needed to meet demand for those goods.
Discussions about the decline in US manufacturing employment often culminate in
a request to decompose the decrease into the part that is due to trade and the part
that is due to technology.

Our view is that providing a denitive accounting of the

amount of employment change attributable to either factor is extraordinarily dicult
for two reasons. First, identifying the numerous changes in tari and non-tari barriers
that have occurred over the last few decades, let alone the wide range of technologies
that have been adopted, is a daunting task.

1 For example, even while

ad valorem

1

More importantly, even if one could

tari rates have trended downward over time, and regional

trade agreements have proliferated, implementation and repeal of contingent protection measures like
antidumping and countervailing duties remains frequent and widespread (Bown (2016)). These temporary barriers have been linked to relative declines in physical productivity and increased prices
among protected manufacturing plants (Pierce (2011)).

Identication of the numerous technologi-

cal innovations introduced during this period, including computerization, electronic communication,
computer-aided design and manufacturing, just-in-time inventory management, and enterprise resource planning, is similarly dicult.

2

Figure 1: U.S. Manufacturing Employment and Real Value Added

identify all of these changes, it is dicult to see how their intertwined impacts on
employment could be teased apart. As an example, consider an anecdote from a recent
Wall Street Journal article (reported in Michaels (2017)), which takes place around
the time of an important US trade liberalization with China discussed below: When
Drew Greenblatt bought Marlin Steel Wire Products LLC, a small Baltimore maker
of wire baskets for bagel shops, he knew nothing about robotics. That was 1998, and
workers made products manually using 1950s equipment. ... Pushed near insolvency
by Chinese competition in 2001, he started investing in automation. Since then, Marlin
has spent $5.5 million on modern equipment. Its revenue, sta and wages have surged
and it now exports to China and Mexico. Are changes in Marlin's employment and
output driven by the availability of robots or increased Chinese competition? What
about employment and output at other producers of steel wire products, who face
increased competition from both China and from Marlin?

These questions are even

more dicult to answer if robots' availability itself is inuenced by trade liberalization,
for example, by robot manufacturers' ability to source intermediate inputs from China.
In this paper, we provide a brief overview of recent eorts to answer such questions
before turning to relatively unexplored dimensions of US microdata for further input. These data allow us to examine changes in US manufacturing employment across
industries, rms, and regions, and thereby oer four new perspectives on how US manufacturing has evolved over the last several decades. We nd that while employment
changes along these dimensions provide support for both trade- and technology-based
explanations, they also highlight the diculties of cleanly separating one force from
the other. Toward that end, we discuss how further analysis of the data we use might
yield sharper insights.
Our rst perspective examines how the overall growth of US manufacturing employment and value added varies by sector.

We nd that some sectors  such as

transportation equipment  exhibit increases in output even as employment is falling,
a potentially clear indication of technology adoption. On the other hand, it is not hard
to nd examples of sectors, such as apparel, characterized by simultaneous increases

3

in import penetration and reductions in both employment and output. Furthermore,
the set of sectors experiencing declines in both employment and output increases after
2000.
Our second perspective analyzes employment loss along rm and establishment
margins of adjustment. One of our more striking ndings  given conventional expectations about how creative destruction due to trade and technology likely manifest 
is that net rm death accounts for just 25 percent of the overall decline in US manufacturing employment between 1977 and 2012. On the other hand, we nd a large role
for net plant exit within incumbent rms, perhaps because adopting new technologies
or adapting to import competition entails high xed costs that continuing rms are
better able to absorb, and which are easier to implement by opening new plants.
Our third perspective breaks down the aggregate change in US manufacturing employment between 1977 and 2012 along regional margins of adjustment.

We nd a

steady reallocation of manufacturing employment away from the north and east towards the south and west until 2000, when employment starts falling in all regions.
The earlier transition may reect domestic oshoring, that is, a movement from
higher- to lower-wage US regions in an era before foreign oshoring was cost-eective.
Our nal perspective takes a wider view of manufacturing rms by examining their
non-manufacturing activities. We nd that manufacturing rms' non-manufacturing
employment increases until 2000  primarily via the addition of new non-manufacturing
establishments  before leveling o.

About a third of this growth is in professional

services, a trend that may represent an evolution of US manufacturing rms into neurofacturers that increasingly provide intellectual services rather than physical goods
(Leamer (2009)).

Prominent examples include Pitney Bowes, which has abandoned

the production of postage meters to oer logistics services, IBM, which increasingly
oers data solutions rather than mainframes, and Apple, which designs the iPhone in
the US but uses oshore contractors for assembly .

2

Some of the Evidence Thus Far

The last three decades have witnessed dramatic changes in both trade and technology.
We provide a sense of some of these changes in Figure 2, which plots U.S. manufacturing
rms' use of two specic forms of technology  computers and electronic networks 
at ve-year intervals from 1977 to 2012. As indicated in the gure, the share of rms
purchasing computers in the noted years increases through the 1990s, with a large jump
in the early 2000s. Data tracking use of electronic networks to control or coordinate
shipments are available starting in 2002, and exhibit an analogous increase in adoption

2

during the 2000s.

Figure 2 also reports several dimensions of trade activity. First, starting in 1992,
we report the share of manufacturing rms that imports from any country as well as

2 As discussed in Fort (2017), plants' use of electronic networks to control or coordinate shipments
involves not just using the internet or other networks, but also integrating electronic communication
in the production process. Computer purchase data are not available in 1997, so we supplement the
Census of Manufactures data with information from the 2000 Annual Survey of Manufactures.

4

Figure 2: Technology and Trade Trends

the share that imports from China, by census year.

Here, as with our indicators of

technology use, we see increases in the early 2000s. Second, we display annual measures
of import penetration and import penetration from China.

These series are dened

as manufacturing imports (or manufacturing imports from China) divided by the sum
of domestic manufacturing shipments plus manufacturing imports less manufacturing
exports, all in real terms. Import penetration from all sources is rising over time, with a
pronounced upward shift after the 1981 recession and relatively rapid growth during the
1990s. Chinese import penetration rises relatively slowly in the 1990s before picking
up in the 2000s.

3

A key message of Figure 2 is that both technology adoption and

importing, including by US producers, generally rise over the sample period, sometimes
simultaneously.
Researchers have adopted several approaches to identify eects of trade shocks on
employment. Perhaps the narrowest denition of a trade shock is a change in trade policy, such as a reduction in import taris, that leads to increased trade ows. Broader
denitions include the impact of other factors, such as transport or communication

3 Appendix Figure A.1 displays the levels of overall U.S. imports, exports, manufacturing value
added, and manufacturing absorption (value added plus imports minus exports).

5

costs, or foreign capital accumulation, that alter comparative advantage and the terms
of trade. A complication associated with identifying such shocks is that they can be induced by technology shocks. For example, a trading partner's productivity growth may
be driven by its adoption of new technologies or production techniques. Investigating
the US steel industry, Oster (1982) shows that large US producers were relatively slow
in adopting new blast-furnace technologies during the 1970s, a factor which may have
contributed to the rise in steel imports from their faster-adopting Japanese rivals.
A growing empirical literature uses specic trade liberalizations to examine whether
US manufacturing employment or wages drop disproportionately in industries with
greater exposure to changes in policy.

Hakobyan and McLaren (2016), for example,

use industry variation in US tari reductions due to the North American Free Trade
Agreement (NAFTA) to document a negative wage eect of NAFTA on less-educated
workers between 1990 and 2000.

Focusing on the next decade, Pierce and Schott

(2016a), show that the post-2000 decline in US manufacturing employment is relatively
larger for industries exposed to the granting of Permanent Normal Trade Relations
to China in October, 2000.

This non-traditional trade liberalization eliminated the

possibility of sudden, substantial spikes in US taris on many Chinese imports, thereby
removing a signicant deterrent to greater integration of the two economies.
Research into the broader set of shocks that might alter US terms of trade makes
use of changes in imports to identify reallocation. These papers devote considerable
eort to excluding variation in imports driven by non-trade factors, such as secular
declines in demand or common technology shocks. Bernard et al. (2006), for example,
nd that US manufacturing plant survival and employment between 1977 and 1997 are
negatively associated with increasing import penetration from low-wage countries. To
identify a causal eect of trade, they use changes in US import taris and ad valorem
trade costs over their sample period as instruments for import penetration. Autor et al.
(2014) and Acemoglu et al. (2016), show that workers in industries with higher growth
in Chinese imports experience increased unemployment between 1992 and 2007.

In

these papers, Chinese import growth in other countries is used as an instrument for its
growth in the United States. The identifying assumption is that Chinese exports to
these other countries are driven by productivity growth in China, and not by changes
in demand or technology outside of China that might also aect US manufacturing
employment.
A related body of work exploits spatial variation in the distribution of manufacturing industries across the United States. Autor et al. (2013) demonstrate that regions
with higher initial shares of employment in industries with greater exposure to imports
from China experience relatively larger declines in employment and labor force participation. Regions with higher initial shares of employment in exposed industries also
exhibit relative declines in the provision of public goods (Feler and Senses (2017)) and
marriage rates (Autor et al. (2017)), as well as relative increases in household debt
(Barrot et al. (2017)) and crime (Che et al. (2017)). These consequences carry over
to health:

Pierce and Schott (2016b) show that regions more exposed to US trade

liberalization with China exhibit relative increases in deaths of despair, including
drug overdoses. This connection is reminiscent of the spike in mortality rates among
high-tenure workers laid o from the steel industry in Pennsylvania during the 1980s
6

(Sullivan and Wachter (2009)).
Studies like those noted above are often conducted using a dierence-in-dierences
framework, which does not account for potential general equilibrium eects and thus
complicates calculation of a trade shock's eect on the overall level of manufacturing employment (Muendler (2017)). Quantitative models, often drawing on empirical
evidence from such studies, do oer such estimates as well as quantications of the
impact of trade on social welfare. Caliendo and Parro (2015), for example, argue that
increased trade with China explains approximately one-quarter of the decline in US
manufacturing employment between 2000 to 2007, and that the growth of trade with
China over this period increased US welfare, though, like Galle et al. (2017), they nd
that gains vary across regions. Handley and Limão (2017) nd that trade liberalization
with China in the 2000s benets consumers via increased imported product variety.
While changes in trade policy and increases in imports, particularly during the
2000s, have received considerable attention, other researchers interpret the long-run
decline in the manufacturing employment share implicit in Figure 1 as driven by technology.

Edwards and Lawrence (2013), for example, argue that the long, post-war

decline in the share of US employment in manufacturing occurs irrespective of the
changing developments in international trade ows, the size of the trade decit, and
other factors. A number of papers assess the role of particular technologies on manufacturing employment. Collard-Wexler and De Loecker (2015) describe the importance
of the introduction of mini-mills in the US steel industry for subsequent gains in output and declines in employment. Acemoglu and Restrepo (2017) nd that US regions
with an industrial mix that pre-disposes them to adopting more industrial robots have
also experienced relatively larger employment declines, at a rate of approximately ve
workers per robot. Similarly, Graetz and Michaels (2017) use cross-country and industry data to show that robot adoption relates to decreased work hours by middle- and
especially low-skill workers.
Another strand of research aims to decompose the respective roles of trade and
technology on employment and wages.

Goos et al. (2014) and Autor et al. (2015)

argue that technological change has decreased the relative demand for routine tasks;
the latter compares the results for computerization of routine tasks to increased Chinese import penetration in the United States and concludes that Chinese imports play
a larger role in the decline of US manufacturing employment, especially after 2000.
While this research uses careful measures to identify technology and trade, it remains
susceptible to the possibility, highlighted in the anecdote presented in the introduction,
as well as theoretical work in this area (e.g., Acemoglu (2002)), that a new technology's
invention or adoption may itself be in response to a trade shock. Bernard et al. (2006),
Khandelwal (2010) and Bernard et al. (2011) show that US rms respond to import
competition in part by upgrading their product mix. Bloom et al. (2016) nd evidence
of technology upgrading within and across European rms that were more exposed to
Chinese imports. In the US context, Autor et al. (2016) also nd that Chinese import
penetration aects manufactures' innovative activities, though they document a nega-

4

tive relationship.

Finally, interconnectedness is also found in the other direction. Fort

4 In related research in labor economics, Clemens et al. (2017) show that imposing restrictions on

7

(2017) and Steinwender (2018) show that innovations in communications technologies
facilitate trade.

As a whole, this research highlights the diculties associated with

clean identication of one force over another.

3

Employment and Value Added Reallocation Across
Industries

Examination of employment and output changes by industry provides useful context
for the trends displayed in Figure 1, while also oering evidence in support of both
trade- and technology-based explanations for the overall decline in US manufacturing
employment since the late 1970s. Figure 3 displays log changes in real value added,
employment and import penetration for the twenty-one three-digit NAICS sectors that
constitute manufacturing. Given the sharp drop in manufacturing employment after
2000 displayed in Figure 1, we provide separate decompositions for years before (left
panel) and after (right panel) that year, ending the latter period before the Great
Recession to avoid its impact. In each period, industries are sorted by their log change
in real value added, from low to high.
Figure 3 has three notable features with respect to identifying the inuence of trade
and technology. The rst is the presence of Leather Products (316) and Apparel (315),
which exhibit declines in both employment and value added in both time periods. These
sectors primarily encompass the production of labor-intensive goods such as clothing
and footwear, commonly thought to be inconsistent with US comparative advantage.
Apparel, in particular, has been subject to substantial tari and quota reductions in
the United States during the period we study (Khandelwal et al. (2013)), and these
liberalizations are reected in the fact that it displays the largest increase in import
penetration across sectors between 1977 and 2000.

5

A second suggestive feature of Figure 3 is the increase in the number of sectors exhibiting simultaneous declines in real value added and employment in the right panel.
Indeed, as illustrated in Appendix Figure A.2, 52 percent of the 473 six-digit manufacturing industries that comprise manufacturing register such reductions between 2000
and 2007, versus 23 percent during the earlier time period.

To the extent that this

trend captures the exit of labor-intensive, low-labor-productivity rms within sectors
whose products most overlap with Chinese manufacturers, this trend is consistent with
the increase in Chinese import competition displayed in Figure 2 aecting US employment, and the research into trade liberalization with China discussed above. On
the other hand, as Figure 2 also illustrates, the 2000s is a period when rms' use of
computers and electronic networks increases. An intriguing possibility worthy of further attention, motivated by the anecdote in the introduction, is whether technology
low-skill immigration induced adoption of more capital-intensive production techniques and shifts in
product mix in the agricultural sector.

5 Reallocation may operate through occupations as well as industries, presenting another challenge

to identifying the impacts of trade and technology. That is, the characteristics that make occupations
susceptible to oshoring, such as routineness, also render them susceptible to automation (Ebenstein
et al. (2014); Oldenski (2014)).

8

Figure 3: Changes in Employment and Output by Industry

9

adoption during this period was hastened by trade liberalization with China.
The third noteworthy feature of Figure 3 with respect to trade and technology is
the presence of sectors such as Chemicals (325), Transportation Equipment (336) and
Miscellaneous Products (339; second panels only), in which value-added rises even as
employment falls. These divergent outcomes, and the large growth in labor productivity they imply, suggest labor-saving technological change. In automobiles, for example,
the replacement of workers with robots is widespread. On the other hand, to the extent
that import competition induces selection away from low-labor-productivity industries
within sectors, trade might also be playing a role (Schott (2003, 2004)). Indeed, the
industries within Miscellaneous Products with the largest loss and gain in employment
between 1977 and 2000 are dolls and surgical instruments, respectively.
A particularly interesting sector exhibiting rising output along with falling employment in recent years is Computers and Electronic Products (334). As pointed out in
Houseman et al. (2011), and suggested by its presence at the bottom of both panels
of Figure 3, this sector accounts for the vast majority of real value added growth in
manufacturing over our sample period.

6

The two most inuential industries in terms of

aggregate real value-added growth within this sector are Semiconductors (334413) and
Electronic Computer Manufacturing (334111). The latter has experienced signicant
growth in Chinese import penetration and is particularly well-known for its oshoring
and outsourcing. Physical production of hard disk drives, like many other consumer
electronic devices, has moved almost completely oshore during our sample period,
even as their design centers remain in the United States (Igami (2018)). The iPhone,
in particular, is well known for being designed in California and assembled  using
physical inputs from many countries, including the United States  in China (Folbre
(2013)).
The growing prevalence of such supply chains highlights a subtle but potentially
important distinction between trade as import competition and trade as a technology.
Although the bulk of US imports from China represent nished goods imported by US
wholesalers and retailers (Bernard et al. (2010)), Figure 2 reveals that a growing share
of manufacturing rms import goods directly. These direct imports may have dierent
consequences than import penetration: empirical analysis of US manufacturing rms
by Antràs et al. (2017) nds that while a rm's presence in an industry subject to
increasing levels of Chinese import penetration is associated with declining rm-level
employment between 1997 and 2007, increases in the value of its direct imports from
China are associated with either growing or no change in employment. In their quantitative model, the authors' provide a rationale for this dierence, showing how greater
access to foreign sourcing opportunities can allow importers to lower prices and raise
output, even as non-importing rms shrink. Bernard et al. (2017) also nd that Danish
rms exposed to increased import competition from China were more likely to oshore
activities to Eastern Europe, which led to decreased domestic employment but not
domestic output. Exploring the role of global value chains in the divergence between
real output and employment is an important area for future research.

6 Houseman et al. (2011) also note that growth in manufacturing real value added may be overstated
due to mismeasurement of prices for imported inputs.

10

4

Reallocation of Manufacturing Employment Across
and Within Firms

In this section we dissect the overall shift in US manufacturing employment between
1977 and 2012 along rm and establishment margins of adjustment. We perform this
decomposition using data from the Longitudinal Business Database (LBD) of the US
Census Bureau, which links all private, non-farm employer establishments and rms
over time starting in 1977 (Jarmin and Miranda (2002)). Each establishment is assigned
a single industry code in each year based on its predominant activity.

7

The data make

a useful distinction between an establishment and a rm. An establishment denotes
a single physical location where business transactions take place and for which payroll
and employment records are kept, such as a manufacturing plant. In our analysis, as
in ocial statistics, employees are grouped into industries based on the classication
of the establishment in which they work. As a result, all employees in a manufacturing
plant are classied as manufacturing employees, regardless of their occupation.
A rm is an organizational structure that can include one or more establishments,
and therefore can span multiple industries. To capture all manufacturing employment
in the LBD, our decomposition includes all rms observed to have at least one manufacturing establishment at any point during the 1977 to 2012 sample period.

The

employment totals reported in this section are restricted solely to the manufacturing
establishments at these rms; employment at their non-manufacturing establishments
is analyzed later in the paper.
We examine three mutually exclusive rm margins of adjustment: changes in employment within the continuing establishments of continuing rms (also referred to as
the intensive margin of continuing rm-plants), changes due to the birth and death
of establishments within continuing rms, and changes due to the birth and death of
entire rms.

8

Figure 4 illustrates the results. The solid line displays overall US manu-

facturing employment, showing the same pattern since 1977 as in Figure 1. The dashed
lines trace out the cumulative employment in year

t

along the margins of adjustment,

in each case relative to the rms and plants present in base year 1977. So, for example, the nal value for the intensive margin indicates that rm-plants present in both
1977 and 2012 experience a decline in employment of approximately -0.8 million. Together, all three margins account for the -6.7 million overall decline in manufacturing

7 We identify manufacturing plants based on an assignment of time-consistent NAICS codes developed by Fort and Klimek (2016) that ensure that the transition from SIC to NAICS does not result
in spurious changes in the number of manufacturing workers based on changes in the set of activities
considered manufacturing. While the resulting manufacturing employment totals from the LBD do
not perfectly match the totals from the Bureau of Labor Statistics displayed in Figure 1, they are
highly correlated over time.

Our analysis drops records that are outside the scope of the County

Business Patterns data, such as agriculture, and observations that are clearly erroneous, for example
because of implausible payroll and employment numbers.

8 We follow Haltiwanger et al. (2013) and dene a rm death as occurring when all establishments

of a rm exit from the LBD. Analogously, rm birth occurs when all a rm's establishments are new
to the LBD. While this approach avoids spurious rm birth and death due to merger and acquisition
activity, future research into the extent to which these types of ownership changes are important
factors in understanding manufacturing might be useful.

11

Figure 4: US Manufacturing Employment by Net Margins of Adjustment

employment registered by the solid line, from 17.8 to 11.1 million.
We nd that most of the change in US manufacturing employment between 1977
and 2012  75 percent  takes place within rms that already existed in 1977 1977
(consider the two lines "within continuing rm-plants" and "net plant birth/death
within rms"). Most striking is the contribution of net plant birth/death within these
rms, which by itself accounts for 63 percent of the overall change.

Conversely, the

set of rm-plants in continuous operation over the sample period is responsible for
relatively little  12 percent  of the overall decline, with most of that occurring during
the early 2000s.
The manner by which rms add or shed workers oers clues about their structure
and transition costs, as well as the nature of the shocks they face. Consider three possibilities. If automating existing plants is relatively cost-eective, employment declines
may be concentrated along the intensive margin  that is, within establishments of
ongoing rms. If technology upgrades are more eciently accomplished by shuttering
outmoded plants in favor of new facilities, employment declines may occur via the net
death of establishments within continuing rms.

9

If entrepreneurs at entering rms

have an edge in creating or implementing new technologies, as argued by Christensen

9 For example, Brynjolfsson and Hitt (1998) describe a medical manufacturer's experience transitioning to computer-integrated manufacturing.

The rm's initial attempt to do so at an existing

plant failed to generate productivity gains because current workers did not understand how to exploit
the new processes. When the rm then opened a new plant with young employees, it realized such
signicant gains that it painted the plant windows black to prevent competitors from replicating its
new techniques.

12

(1997), then resulting reductions in manufacturing employment may be driven by rm
death, as outdated incumbents are pushed from the market.
Responses to increased pressures of international trade can, of course, operate along
the same margins.

Trade liberalization with low-wage countries might render a US

rm's most labor-intensive products unprotable.

To the extent that rms are able

to reallocate production away from these goods within existing facilities, globalization
may manifest as declines in employment along the intensive margin. But if plants are
wedded to particular products, employment loss may be driven by net plant death
within continuing rms. If a broad set of rms' products is subject to increased import
competition or if existing rms are unable to reallocate production within or across
plants, trade competition may lead to the death of entire rms.
The fact that net rm death accounts for just 25 percent of the overall decline in
US manufacturing employment between 1977 and 2012 is surprising given the magnitude of the drop in employment over this period, as well as common expectations of
how creative destruction associated with trade and technology shocks likely operate.
Indeed, in the right panel of Appendix Figure A.3, we nd that net rm birth accounts
for the bulk of employment growth among non-manufacturing rmsrms that never
have a manufacturing establishmentover the same period. On the other hand, most of
the decline in employment along the net rm death margin occurs in the 2000s, which,
as discussed above, may plausibly be related to import competition from China. As
illustrated in Appendix Figure A.4, we nd a similar break with respect to the number of US manufacturing establishments: according to the Census Bureau's publicly
available Business Dynamics Statistics (BDS), this series peaks in 1996. Overall, the
small role of net rm death in the aggregate decline of US manufacturing employment
suggests that incumbents may have an advantage relative to entrants.
The relatively sharp drop in employment associated with net plant death within
continuing rms in the early 2000s, along with the contribution of net rm death during that period, may help rationalize the large distributional losses associated with
increased import competition from China found in the literature. That is, to the extent that rm and plant closures were geographically concentrated, displaced workers
may have found it more dicult to nd new employment in their local labor market.
On the other hand, the more-or-less constant decline of employment associated with
net plant death within continuing rms prior to 2000 is consistent with rms continually replacing outmoded plants with new ones in response to a steady introduction of
new technologies. To what extent do workers displaced by dying establishments nd
employment at new plants?
Simple descriptive regressions provide support for both trade and technology in
plant turnover. For example, we nd a negative correlation between the probability of
a plant's death within a rm and the plant's purchases of computers. This correlation
disappears after 2000, presumably due to the ubiquity of that technology, but during
the 2000s we nd another such correlation with respect to use of electronic networks to
control or coordinate shipments.

10

In other words, there is heterogeneity within rms

10 As discussed further in Appendix Section A.2, these correlations are found by regressing indicator
variables for plant death over years

t

to

t+5

on indicator variables for the noted activities in year

13

t,

in terms of the establishments that adopt various technologies, and plants that do
adopt these technologies have lower exit probabilities. With respect to trade, similar
regressions indicate that before 2000, plant death within rms was correlated with
increased import penetration in that plant's industry.

After 2000, when rm death

becomes a more important margin in the aggregate decline, these correlations are no
longer present at the plant level, but rms facing increased import competition from

11

China are more likely to exit.

One potential explanation for this result is that the

rms that could re-orient themselves away from import-competing industries did so
early on, either by shuttering plants or switching industries. For rms specializing in
import-competing products, however, increased import penetration led to death.
The relatively small, -12 percent change in employment among continuing rmplants masks substantial gross ows associated with continuing rm-plants' expansion
and contraction. We illustrate the magnitude of these gross ows in Figure 5, which
decomposes the three net margins displayed in Figure 4 into their constituent gross
job creation and destruction parts. In each case, job creation margins are displayed
in lines above zero, while their corresponding job destruction margins are displayed in
similarly patterned lines below zero. Here, to compare gross margins over time, and
in contrast to Figure 4, we break the 1977 to 2012 sample period into three intervals
that begin in base years 1977, 1990, and 2000. As a result, the gross margins for any
year

t

in Figure 5 are computed with respect to their nearest prior base year.

So,

for example, the nal values for the gross continuing rm-plant margins indicate that
rm-plants whose employment grew between 2000 and 2012 account for positive 3.6
million of the change in US manufacturing employment between 2000 and 2012, while
continuing rm-plants whose employment fell accounted for negative 5.0 million.
The dominance of the intensive margin in gross employment changes represents
another potentially fruitful area of study. To what extent is the adoption of new technologies, exposure to trade, or either importing or exporting associated with plant
contraction? Plant expansion? Large levels of job creation and destruction at continuing rms also suggest a potentially important role for technology and trade in worker
reallocation.
plants?

Are some workers more likely than others to shue among continuing

In Appendix A.2, we show that rms' technology and trade activities are

correlated with subsequent changes in their employment and output, which is consistent with a role for both trade and technology in the reallocation of activities across
continuing establishments.
Another noteworthy feature of Figure 5 is the decline of all three gross job creation
margins over time. These decreases are indicative of a drop in US business dynamism
that has been documented across all sectors by Decker et al. (2016).

One potential

explanation for this decline is a reduction in rms' responsiveness to productivity shocks
due to rising adjustment frictions (Decker et al. (2018)), such as regulatory constraints,
or the use of oshore rather than domestic capacity to make adjustments. Another is a
reduction in competition, perhaps as a result of increasing entry barriers associated with
along with rm xed eects.

11 Unfortunately, given that trading is observed at the rm level, we are unable to examine whether

plants that import are more or less likely to survive within rms over either period.

14

Figure 5: US Manufacturing Employment by Gross Margins of Adjustment

adopting technology or adapting to globalization.

De Loecker and Eeckhout (2017)

document a steady rise in market power as measured by markups among US rms since
the 1980s, with a sharp tick upwards in the early 2000s. A potentially intriguing area
for further exploration is whether costs associated with trade or technology contribute
to entry barriers. Using simple regressions of rm attributes on indicators for adoption
and industry xed eects, we nd across census years  and display in Appendix Figure
A.5  that rms purchasing computers and using electronic networks are signicantly
larger and have higher labor productivity than non-adopters.

12

Inspired by Acemoglu

and Restrepo (2017), we nd similar premia for rms that import industrial robots
(Harmonized System product code 84.7950.0000) starting in 1997.

These adoption

premia are analogous to the size and productivity premia found for importers and
exporters in the international trade literature (Bernard et al. (2007)). As such, they
may reect the fact that adoption of technology, like expansion into foreign markets,
requires the payment of high xed costs that only the largest and most productive
rms nd it optimal to incur.
Trade may also play a role in the decline of gross manufacturing job creation by
pushing the US economy away from goods production and towards services. Pierce and
Schott (2012) and Asquith et al. (2017) show that during the 2000s, industries with

12 These regressions are described in greater detail in Online Appendix Section A.1.

15

relatively greater exposure to trade liberalization with China exhibit both suppressed
job creation as well as exaggerated job destruction.

To what extent might the US

transition from goods to services occur within rms? Relatedly, the decline in gross
manufacturing job creation along the rm birth and plant birth within continuing rm
margins may indicate that smaller, more capital-intensive rms and plants are entering
at the expense of larger, more labor-intensive establishments and rms.

In fact, as

shown in Appendix Figure A.4, we nd that the average number of workers per US
manufacturing establishment fell 29 percent between 1977 and 2012, while the number
of manufacturing establishments only begins to decline in the 1990s. Are these smaller
entrants producing dierent goods more in line with US comparative advantage, or are
they producing the same goods with a dierent technology?
A nal question related to the gross margins displayed in Figure 5 is the extent to
which the decline in business dynamism in other sectors of the US economy might be
related to the actions of manufacturing rms, or vice versa. Such relationships may
occur through various channels, such as local labor markets or input-output linkages
between manufacturing and non-manufacturing industries. Below, we show that another important dimension of such contact is the fact that manufacturing rms possess
a sizable presence in non-manufacturing industries.

5

Reallocation of Employment Across Regions

While a signicant portion of the literature on both trade and technology has exploited regional variation in the distribution of manufacturing activities to identify
causal impacts, plant and rm relocation within the United States remains a relatively
unexplored dimension of rm adjustment to trade and technology shocks.
We nd substantial reallocation of manufacturing employment across US regions
over time, as well as dierences in the extent to which regional declines in employment
are driven by rm death versus continuing rms.

Figure 6 plots US manufacturing

employment from 1977 to 2012 by the nine US Census regions that comprise the United
States.

Each bar represents manufacturing employment in a given year and region,

and bars are shaded to correspond to the three intervals used in Figure 5: 1977 to
1989 (black); 1990 to 1999 (dark grey); and 2000 to 2012 (light grey). As indicated
in the gure, manufacturing employment in New England, Mid-Atlantic, and East
North Central declines more-or-less steadily over the sample period.

In the rest of

the country, by contrast, it is either relatively at or growing until 2000, after which
manufacturing employment in all regions shrinks.

Indeed, between 1977 and 2000,

combined manufacturing employment in New England, Mid-Atlantic and East North
Central falls by -2.3 million, while the increase for all other regions as a whole is 0.8
million. After 2000, the largest decline, in percentage terms, occurs in South Atlantic
(-38 percent).
Regions also display interesting variation in terms of the margins of rm adjustment. In Appendix Figure A.7, we show that employment loss due to net rm death is
concentrated in New England and Mid-Atlantic, which together account for 16 percentage points of the overall 25 percentage point decline in US manufacturing employment

16

Figure 6: US Manufacturing Employment by Census Region

attributable to that margin. East North Central, by contrast, stands out in terms of
its disproportionate loss of employment within continuing rm-plants.
Reallocation of manufacturing activity within the United States might shed useful
light on reallocation internationally. Indeed, movement of US manufacturing employment from the north and east towards the west and south up to 2000 may have been a
precursor to international oshoring. Bernard et al. (2013), for example, show that US
labor markets exhibit substantial and persistent variation in relative skill endowments
and wages over this period, and that labor markets with dierent relative wages tend to
specialize in dierent groups of industries. Fort (2017) shows that US manufacturing
establishments in high wage locations are more likely to fragment production, especially domestically. Anecdotal evidence suggests rms do in fact relocate in response
to variation in wages across local labor markets. Radio Corporation of America (RCA),
for example, continually moved production of its most labor-intensive products west
and south in search of lower wages before moving it to Mexico in the 1990s (Cowie
(2001)). Such activity is consistent with the Holmes (1998) nding that manufacturing
employment is relatively low in more union-friendly states compared to neighboring
right-to-work states, which are clustered in the South Atlantic, West Central, and
Mountain regions whose manufacturing employment was stable or growing prior to
2000.

Were such reallocations also a response to international competition?

Were

they facilitated by technologies that allow rms to serve customers from more remote,

17

lower-cost labor markets?

Do incumbents have an advantage in making use of such

technologies?
A thornier question raised by Figure 6 is whether relocation within the United
States, either within or across rms, coincides with labor-saving technology upgrades,
as suggested by a the long-running decline in the average number of employees per
establishment referenced above?

If so, how can a causal impact of technology be

identied?

6

Manufacturing Firms' Non-Manufacturing Establishments

Manufacturing rms can also have non-manufacturing establishments. In this section,
we broaden our analysis to investigate how employment at manufacturing rms' nonmanufacturing establishments has evolved, and in what non-manufacturing industries
they participate.

As noted earlier, we dene a manufacturing (M) rm broadly to

encompass any rm observed to have an M establishment during our 1977 and 2012
sample period.

The non-manufacturing (NM) employment of M rms, therefore, is

simply the sum of employment at any NM establishments owned by an M rm. While
we focus on this comprehensive set of rms in order to capture all M employment, it is
important to bear in mind that this denition includes rms not traditionally thought
of as manufacturers  for example, big box retailers that may encompass relatively
small food preparation facilities  and that such rms might have an outsized impact
on the trends in NM employment we display below.
With this caveat in mind, Figure 7 displays M rms' total employment across their
M versus NM establishments. As indicated in the gure, NM employment rises moreor-less steadily until 2000, when it levels o. As a result, M rms' total employment
rises until 2000 before declining afterwards due to the sharp drop in employment at
their M establishments.

13

As illustrated in the left panel of Appendix Figure A.3

most of the growth in M rms' NM employment occurs via net NM plant birth within
continuing rms.
The growing share of M rm employment at NM establishments might indicate
that a growing number of workers at NM establishments is needed to support M production, that M rms' scope is widening to include additional NM activities, or simply
that employment growth at rms' NM establishments reects the broader shift of US
employment toward NM activities.

14

Further insight into these explanations comes

13 In work not reported here, we nd that the trends displayed in Figure 6 are sensitive to how M
rms are dened. For example, requiring rms to have at least some threshold level of employment in
manufacturing in at least one year of the sample results in atter growth of NM employment over the
sample period. In addition, the growth of NM employment at M rms, even with our broad denition
of manufacturing rms, is slower than the growth of NM employment at NM rms. This dierential
is also worthy of further exploration.

14 While recent research suggests that US manufacturers increasingly outsource ancillary services

such as cleaning to domestic contractors (Dey et al. (2012); Berlingieri (2014); Katz and Krueger
(2016)), such activity would not be captured in Figure LATE as it traces NM employment within M

18

Figure 7: Employment at Manufacturing Firms' Manufacturing vs Non-Manufacturing
Establishments

from analysis of the particular activities occurring at M rms' NM plants.

Toward

that end, we break NM industries into three groups based on their two-digit NAICS
sectors: retail (NAICS 44 to 45), professional services (NAICS 51 to 56), and all other
NM industries.

Perhaps unsurprisingly, given the broad denition of M rms noted

above, we nd in Online Appendix Figure A.8 that about one-third of the overall
growth in M rms' NM employment between 1977 and 2012 is in retail, while another
third falls into the other category.
However, 32 percent of the increase in non-manufacturing employment at manufacturing rms is driven by professional services, which captures a wide range of often
skill-intensive activities : information technology (NAICS 51); nance, insurance, real
estate and leasing (NAICS 52-3); engineering and other technical services (NAICS 54);
headquarters services (NAICS 55); and administrative support and waste management
(NAICS 56).

The growing use of workers in such industries may reect the inu-

ence of both trade and technology. For example, one action US manufacturers might
take in response to growing import competition in goods is to move into neurofacturing (Leamer (2009)), either by diversifying away from goods production entirely or
by making use of various communications and management technologies to focus on
the engineering, design or marketing of goods rather than their physical production
rms.

19

15

(Bernard and Fort (2015, 2017)).

These ndings raise a number of intriguing questions. Does increasing use of design,
marketing and other management services facilitate the product dierentiation and
upgrading US rms undertake to compete with producers from low-wage countries?
Does it help explain the rising market power of US producers documented in De Loecker
and Eeckhout (2017)? Do US manufacturing rms expand their service activities in the
same geographic areas in which they used to produce physical goods? As illustrated
in Appendix Figure A.6, though 46 percent of M rms' NM employment growth takes
place in the western half of the United States, the South Atlantic exhibits the fastest
pace of employment growth, at 27 percent. Further analysis of the broader scope of US
manufacturing rms' activities across both geographic and regional dimensions seems
promising.

7

Conclusion

The decline in US manufacturing jobs and concerns over the competitiveness of US
manufacturers in a global market place have sparked considerable commentary and
research in recent years, including several articles in this journal by Charles et al.
(2016), Baily and Bosworth (2014), Tassey (2014), and Houseman et al. (2011).

A

natural question arising in these discussions is whether trade or technology plays a
larger role in the sector's outcomes.
to be overly broad.

As we have explained, we nd that question

It may also distract needed attention away from research into

how to facilitate reallocation among displaced manufacturing workers. Given that few
economists advocate for restricting either technology or trade, such research seems
both timely and prudent.
Instead, we have sought to gain new perspective on the decline of US manufacturing
employment by examining relatively unexplored dimensions of microdata tracking US
manufacturing rms over time, and considering how patterns in those data might be
explained by various mechanisms associated with trade, technology, and other forces.
Here, we summarize a few of the empirical facts we report, and follow-up questions
that are worth pursuing.
We nd that 75 percent of the -6.6 million decline in manufacturing employment
between 1977 and 2012 took place within continuing rms, largely through plant closures. Why is the primary adjustment within rms, and in the form of plant closures?
What barriers to entry  regulatory or otherwise  might have dampened rm creation
or suppressed rm destruction? How do entrants' technology and production functions
dier from those of incumbents and deaths? What are the implications of these plant
closures and new production techniques for displaced workers?
Manufacturing rms' activities outside manufacturing might oer some clues for the
persistence of incumbent manufacturing rms. Before 2000, the drop in manufacturing
rms' manufacturing employment is more than oset by increases in non-manufacturing
workers. After 2000, a sharp decline in those rms' manufacturing employment and

15 Magyari et al. (2017) explores whether US manufacturing rms expand their NM employment in
response to import competition from China.

20

a attening of their non-manufacturing employment leads to a decrease in their total
employment. Relatively high-skill professional workers  like designers and engineers 
account for approximately a third of the non-manufacturing workers added by manufacturing rms. Are incumbents rms better suited to engage in these activities? Does
manufacturing rms' greater focus on services mimic the growth in services that takes
place across non-manufacturing rms, or does it point to an important role for the rm
in building up capabilities that persist over time?
Finally, trade and technology can interact with dierent parts of manufacturing
in very dierent ways. Manufacturing rms that adopt specic technologies, such as
computers or industrial robots, are signicantly dierent from those that do not: in
particular, they are larger and more productive upon adoption. Importing is associated
with dierent outcomes at the rm and industry levels:

while exposure to greater

import competition is associated with employment decline, rms increasing their use
of imported goods conditional on such exposure can exhibit employment gains. Should
direct use of imported goods be considered a technology?
US manufacturing has many dimensions: manufacturing and non-manufacturing establishments, overall trends of falling employment and rising value added, incumbents
and non-incumbents, geographical movements within US regions, sunset and sunrise
industries, dierences in rm-level choices regarding importing inputs and use of technology, and dierences across industries from import penetration and the spread of
technology. Our understanding of how trade and technology aect US manufacturing
must seek to be multifaceted as well.

References
Acemoglu, D. (2002).

ies 69 (4), 781809.

Directed technical change.

The Review of Economic Stud-

Acemoglu, D., D. Autor, D. Dorn, G. H. Hanson, and B. Price (2016). Import competition and the great us employment sag of the 2000s.

nomics 34 (S1), S141S198.

Acemoglu, D. and P. Restrepo (2017, March).

Journal of Labor Eco-

Robots and jobs: Evidence from us

labor markets. Working Paper 23285, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Antràs, P., T. C. Fort, and F. Tintelnot (2017). The margins of global sourcing: Theory
and evidence from u.s. rms.

American Economic Review 107 (9), 251464.

Asquith, B. J., S. Goswami, D. Neumark, and A. Rodriguez-Lopez (2017). Us job ows
and the china shock. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Autor, D., D. Dorn, and G. Hanson (2017, February). When work disappears: Manufacturing decline and the falling marriage-market value of men.
23173, National Bureau of Economic Research.

21

Working Paper

Autor, D., D. Dorn, G. H. Hanson, G. Pisano, and P. Shu (2016, December). Foreign
competition and domestic innovation: Evidence from u.s. patents. Working Paper
22879, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Autor, D., D. Dorn, G. H. Hanson, and J. Song (2014). Trade adjustment: Worker-level
evidence.

The Quarterly Journal of Economics 129, 1991860.

Autor, D. H., D. Dorn, and G. H. Hanson (2013).

The china syndrome: Local la-

bor market eects of import competition in the united states.

Review 103 (6), 212168.

American Economic

Autor, D. H., D. Dorn, and G. H. Hanson (2015). Untangling trade and technology:
Evidence from local labour markets.

The Economic Journal 125, 621646.

Baily, M. N. and B. P. Bosworth (2014, February). Us manufacturing: Understanding
its past and its potential future.

Journal of Economic Perspectives 28 (1), 326.

Barrot, J.-N., E. Loualiche, M. C. Plosser, and J. Sauvagnat (2017, August). Import
competition and household debt.

FRB of NY Sta Report No. 821 .

Becker, R., W. Gray, and J. Marvakov (2013).
database:

Technical notes.

Nber-ces manufacturing industry

Working Paper 5809, National Bureau of Economic

Research.
Berlingieri, G. (2014).

Outsourcing and the rise in services.

Working Paper 1199,

CEPR.
Bernard, A. B. and T. C. Fort (2015, May). Factoryless goods producing rms.

ican Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 105 (5), 518523.

Bernard, A. B. and T. C. Fort (2017).

Amer-

The Factory-Free Economy, Chapter Factoryless

Goods Producers In the US, pp. Chapter 5. Oxford University Press.
Bernard, A. B., T. C. Fort, V. Smeets, and F. Warzynski (2017).

Oshoring and

reorganization. Technical report, Tuck School of Business.
Bernard, A. B., J. B. Jensen, S. Redding, and P. Schott (2011). Multi-product rms
and trade liberalization.

Quarterly Journal of Economics 126 (3), 12711318.

Bernard, A. B., J. B. Jensen, S. J. Redding, and P. K. Schott (2007, August). Firms
in international trade.

Journal of Economic Perspectives 21 (3), 105130.

Bernard, A. B., J. B. Jensen, S. J. Redding, and P. K. Schott (2010, May). Wholesalers
and retailers in US trade.

American Economic Review 100 (2), 408413.

Bernard, A. B., J. B. Jensen, and P. K. Schott (2006). Survival of the best t: Exposure
to low-wage countries and the (uneven) growth of u.s. manufacturing plants.

of International Economics 68, 219237.

22

Journal

Bernard, A. B., S. J. Redding, and P. K. Schott (2013, May). Testing for factor price
equality with unobserved dierences in factor quality or productivity.

Economic Journal: Microeconomics 5 (2), 13563.
Bloom, N., M. Draca, and J. V. Reenen (2016).

Trade induced technical change:

The impact of chinese imports on innovation, diusion, and productivity.

Economic Studies 83, 87117.
Bown, C. (2016).

Global Antidumping Database.

Review of

The World Bank.

Brynjolfsson, E. and L. M. Hitt (1998, August).

Commun. ACM 41 (8), 4955.

American

Beyond the productivity paradox.

Caliendo, L. and F. Parro (2015). Estimates of the trade and welfare eects of nafta.

The Review of Economic Studies 82 (1), 144.

Charles, K. K., E. Hurst, and M. J. Notowidigdo (2016, May). The masking of the
decline in manufacturing employment by the housing bubble.

Perspectives 30 (2), 179200.

Journal of Economic

Che, Y., X. Xu, and Y. Zhang (2017). Chinese import competition, crime, and government transfers in us.
Christensen, C. M. (1997).

Journal of Comparative Economics .
The Innovator's Dilemma.

HarperBusiness.

Clemens, M. A., E. G. Lewis, and H. M. Postel (2017, February). Immigration restrictions as active labor market policy: Evidence from the mexican bracero exclusion.
Working Paper 23125, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Collard-Wexler, A. and J. De Loecker (2015). Reallocation and technology: Evidence
from the us steel industry.
Cowie, J. (2001).

American Economic Review 105 (1), 13171.

Capital moves: RCA's seventy-year quest for cheap labor.

The New

Press.
De Loecker, J. and J. Eeckhout (2017). The rise of market power and the macroeconomic implications. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Decker, R. A., J. Haltiwanger, R. S. Jarmin, and J. Miranda (2016). Where has all
the skewness gone? the decline in high-growth (young) rms in the us.

Economic Review 86, 423.

Decker, R. A., J. C. Haltiwanger, R. S. Jarmin, and J. Miranda (2018).

European

Changing

business dynamism and productivity: Shocks vs. responsiveness. Technical report,
National Bureau of Economic Research.
Dey, M., S. H. Houseman, and A. E. Polivka (2012). Manufacturers' outsourcing to
stang services.

ILR Review .

23

Ebenstein, A., A. Harrison, M. McMillan, and S. Phillips (2014). Estimating the impact
of trade and oshoring on american workers using the current population surveys.

Review of Economics and Statistics 96 (4), 581595.
Edwards, L. and R. Z. Lawrence (2013).

Economies Good for the United States?

Rising Tide: Is Growth in Emerging
Peterson Institute for International Eco-

nomics.
Feenstra, R. C. (1996, March).

U.s. imports, 1972-1994:

Data and concordances.

Working Paper 5515, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Feler, L. and M. Z. Senses (2017, November). Trade shocks and the provision of local
public goods.

American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 9 (4), 10143.

Folbre, N. (2013, August). Not really made in china (or the united states).

York Times .

The New

Fort, T. C. (2017). Technology and production fragmentation: Domestic versus foreign
sourcing.

Review of Economic Studies 84 (2), 650687.

Fort, T. C. and S. Klimek (2016). The eects of industry classication changes on us
employment compostion. Technical report, Tuck School of Business.
Galle, S., A. Rodríguez-Clare, and M. Yi (2017).

Slicing the pie:

Quantifying the

aggregate and distributional eects of trade. Technical report, National Bureau of
Economic Research.
Goos, M., A. Manning, and A. Salomons (2014). Explaining job polarization: Routinebiased technological change and oshoring.

American Economic Review 104 (8),

25092526.
Graetz, G. and G. Michaels (2017). Is modern technology responsible for jobless recoveries?

American Economic Review 107 (5), 16873.

Hakobyan, S. and J. McLaren (2016). Looking for local labor market eects of nafta.

The Review of Economics and Statistics 98 (4), 728741.

Haltiwanger, J., R. S. Jarmin, and J. Miranda (2013). Who creates jobs? small versus
large versus young.

The Review of Economics and Statistics 95, 347361.

Handley, K. and N. Limão (2017, September).
fare:

Policy uncertainty, trade, and wel-

Theory and evidence for china and the united states.

Review 107 (9), 273183.
Holmes, T. J. (1998).

American Economic

The eect of state policies on the location of manufacturing:

Evidence from state borders.

Journal of Political Economy 106 (4), 667705.

Houseman, S., C. Kurz, P. Lengermann, and B. Mandel (2011, June). Oshoring bias
in u.s. manufacturing.

Journal of Economic Perspectives 25 (2), 11132.
24

Igami, M. (2018).

Industry dynamics of oshoring:

The case of hard disk drives.

American Economic Journal: Microeconomics 10 (1), 67101.

Jarmin, R. S. and J. Miranda (2002). The longitudinal business database.

Economic Studies Working Paper 02 (17).

Center for

Katz, L. F. and A. B. Krueger (2016). The rise of alternative work arrangements in
the united states, 1995-2015. Working Paper 22667, NBER.
Khandelwal, A. (2010). The long and short (of ) quality ladders.

Studies 77, 14501476.

Review of Economic

Khandelwal, A. K., P. K. Schott, and S.-J. Wei (2013, October). Trade liberalization
and embedded institutional reform:

Economic Review 103 (6), 216995.

American

Evidence from chinese exporters.

US Depart-

Langdon, D. and R. Lehrman (2012). The benets of manufacturing jobs.

ment of Commerce, ESA Issue Brief , 0112.

Leamer, E. E. (2009).

Heckscher-ohlin models for the post-industrial age.

UCLA,

mimeograph.
Magyari, I. et al. (2017). Firm reorganization, chinese imports, and us manufacturing
employment.

Columbia University .

Wall Street

Michaels, D. (2017, March). Foreign robots invade american factory oors.

Journal .

Muendler, M.-A. (2017). Trade, technology, and prosperity: An account of evidence
from a labor-market perspective. Technical report, WTO Sta Working Paper.
Oldenski, L. (2014). Oshoring and the polarization of the u.s. labor market.

and Labor Relations Review 67.

Oster, S. (1982). Intraindustry structure and the ease of strategic change.

of Economics and Statistics , 376383.

Industrial

The Review

Pierce, J. R. (2011). Plant-level responses to antidumping duties: Evidence from u.s.
manufacturers..

Journal of International Economics 85 (2), 222233.

Pierce, J. R. and P. K. Schott (2012, December). The surprisingly swift decline of u.s.
manufacturing employment.

Working Paper 18655, National Bureau of Economic

Research.
Pierce, J. R. and P. K. Schott (2016a). The Surprisingly Swift Decline of U.S. Manufacturing Employment.

American Economic Review 106 (7), 16321662.

Pierce, J. R. and P. K. Schott (2016b). Trade liberalization and mortality: Evidence
from us counties. Working Paper 22849, NBER.

25

Schott, P. K. (2003, June). One size ts all? heckscher-ohlin specialization in global
production.

American Economic Review 93 (3), 686708.

Schott, P. K. (2004, May).
international trade.

Across-product versus within-product specialization in

The Quarterly Journal of Economics 119 (2), 647678.

Schott, P. K. (2008). The relative sophistication of chinese exporters.

icy 53, 549.

Economic Pol-

Steinwender, C. (2018, March). Real eects of information frictions: When the states
and the kingdom became united.

American Economic Review 108 (3), 65796.

Sullivan, D. and T. V. Wachter (2009). Job displacement and mortality: An analysis
using administrative data.
Tassey, G. (2014).

Quarterly Journal of Economics , 12651306.

Competing in advanced manufacturing:

growth models and policies.

The need for improved

Journal of Economic Perspectives 28 (1), 2748.

26

Appendix for Online Publication
This online appendix contains additional gures referenced in the main text as well as
more detailed information about the regression results referenced in the main text.

A

Regression Detail

A.1

Premia Regressions

We examine the correlation between use of technology and both rm employment and
labor productivity via a series of cross-sectional OLS regressions in each census year of
the form

ln(Attributetf } = α + β1{Activityft } + ηjt + t:f .

(A.1)

The left-hand side variable is either the log employment or the log labor productivity
(shipments divided by employment) for rm

f

in census year t. The rst right-hand side

variable represents participation in one of the following technology or trade activities in
census yeart: purchase of computers, use of electronic networks to control or coordinate
shipments, direct importing of industrial robots (HS 84.7950.0000) or direct importing
t
of any good from any country. ηj represents industry xed eects. We estimate separate
regressions for each activity and each census year from 1977 to 2012. Data for computer
purchases is not available in 1997. Data for importing, importing robots, and use of
electronic networks are not available before 1992, 1997 and 2002, respectively. Point
estimates and ninety-ve percent condence intervals for each activity and year are
displayed in Appendix Figure A.5. As indicated in the gure, rms engaged in each of
the examined activities are larger and more productive than those not engaging in the
activities. These size and productivity premia generally shrink over time, though the
decreases are considerably larger for the technology activities versus direct importing.

A.2

Plant Death Regressions

We examine the correlates of plant death

within

multi-establishment rms by estimat-

ing the following OLS regression,

t:t+5
t
t
t
1{Deatht:t+5
pf } = α + β1{Activity pf } + γln(Empp ) + δf + ρ + pf .

(A.2)

The left-hand side variable is an indicator for whether the plant exits between census
years

t

and

t + 5.

After the constant, the second variable on the right-hand side

represents indicators for whether the plant engages in a particular activity, such as
purchasing computers or using an electronic network to control or coordinate shipments
in census year

t.

The third variable on the right hand side is the natural log of plant

employment, the fourth covariate represents rm xed eects, and the fth covariate
represents year xed eects. We estimate this equation separately across census years

27

before and after 2000, i.e., 1977 to 1997 and 2002 to 2012. Data for computer purchases
are available in all census years except 1997, when this information was not collected.
Data for use of electronic networks are available starting in 2002. We also estimate a
t
variant of equation A.2 in which we replace Activitypf with either the change in import
penetration or the change in import penetration from China in the plant's industry
between years

t

and

t + 5.

Coecient estimates are reported in the rst two columns of Table A.1. Because the
regressors are endogneous and no instrumental variables are employed, these coecient
estimates should be treated as correlations, with no claim of causality.

Table A.1: Plant and Firm Death Regressions

For comparison, we also report a series of analogous rm death regressions in the
second two columns of Table A.1,

1{Deatht:t+5
} = α + β1{Activityft } + ηjt + ρt + t:t+5
,
f
f
28

(A.3)

where

ηjt

captures industry xed eects.

In these regressions, we are also able to

investigate the association between rm death and being a direct importer of industrial
robots (HS 84.7950.0000) in year

t

as well as being a direct importer or being a direct

importer from China of any good in year

t.

As noted in the main text, we are unable

to examine these relationships at the plant level given that trading is observed only at
the rm level.

A.3

Continuing-Firm Regressions

To assess the potential role of trade and technology in US manufacturers' employment changes within continuing rms, we examine how rm outcomes relate to various
activities using rm-level OLS panel regressions of the form

∆log(Outcomet:t+5
) = βActivityft + ηjt + ρt + t:t+5
.
f
f
∆log(Outcomet:t+5
)
f

(A.4)

represents the log dierence in rm-level manufacturing employ-

ment, total employment, real value added in manufacturing, or real value added in
t
manufacturing per manufacturing worker between census years t and t + 5. Activityf ,
as above, represents one of several actions, including purchasing computers, using electronic networks to control or coordinate shipments, being a direct importer of industrial
robots (HS 84.7950.0000), being a direct importer of any good from any country, or
being a direct importer from China.
also include contemporaneous

When considering the latter two activities, we

t to t + 5 changes in the analogous industry-level import

penetration, that is, change in overall import penetration or the change in import penetration from China. These additions allow for the possibility, discussed in Section 3 of
the main text, that import competition and direct foreign sourcing may have dierent
associations with rm outcomes. We note that these regressions are purely descriptive
and should not be interpreted as providing causal evidence. As an additional caveat,
we note that regressions are unweighted.
Results are presented in Table A.2, where the top and bottom panels display results
for census years before and after 2000.

The top panel reports the results of three

regressions for each outcome variable, where the three regressions are separated into
rows. The rst regression examines the relationship between computer purchases and
the outcome variables while the second and third examine relationships with respect
to being an importer or being an importer from China. Computer purchase data are
not available in 1997, and importing data are not available until 1992. As a result, the
number of observations for the rst regression is larger than for the second and third
regressions.

The bottom panel of Table A.2 considers years after 2000 and reports

the results of ve regressions for each outcome variable. All regressions in this panel
have the same number of observations. We note that observations are rounded to the
nearest thousand per Census Bureau disclosure guidelines.
Before 2000, computer purchasers exhibit declines in employment and real value
added relative to non-purchasers, with the declines in the former being somewhat
larger in absolute value. As a result, during this period, computer purchases are associated with increases in labor productivity.

29

Results for being an importer or an

importer from China are similar. A second notable trend in this panel is that for all
three activities, the coecients in regressions considering total rm employment (column 2) are smaller than those for manufacturing employment (column 1), indicating
that employment adjustment to the noted activities occurs disproportionately among
manufacturing establishments.
After 2000, we nd a dierent pattern of results for rms that purchase computers
and are direct importers. These activities are now associated with rising employment
and rising real value added. Moreover, we nd the same pattern of results for rms
that use electronic networks to control or coordinate shipments.

In contrast, rms

that import industrial robots see relatively less manufacturing employment growth
than rms that do not import these robots, though there is no signicant relationship
with their total employment and a positive and signicant relationship with real value
added and labor productivity.

These results are consistent with the premise that

technology may replace workers even as it boosts output. Finally, importing from China
is associated with a statistically signicant decrease in manufacturing employment after
2000, but no statistically signicant relationship with total employment or real value
added.
Results for changes in either overall or Chinese import penetration at the industry
level indicate negative correlations with employment after 2000. Table A.2 contains two
other suggestive results. First, being an importer in post-2000 years is correlated with
relatively higher growth in employment and real value added, whereas increased import
penetration in the rm's initial and primary (based on employment) manufacturing
industry is associated with statistically signicant relative reductions in growth in both
outcomes. Higher growth in Chinese import penetration is associated with relatively
lower growth in manufacturing and total employment, while the relationship with real
value added growth is negative but statistically insignicant at conventional levels
(p-value=0.12). Furthermore, the divergence in rm-level employment versus output
correlations for robot importing and importing from China highlight the possibility
that technology and trade may be factors in decreased manufacturing employment and
increased output of US manufacturing rms.

30

Table A.2: Continuing-Firm Regressions

31

B

Additional Figures

Figure A.1: US Manufacturing Absorption

Figure A.2: Employment versus Value Added Growth Across Six-Digit NAICS Sectors

32

Figure A.3: US Non-Manufacturing Employment by Net Margins of Adjustment

Figure A.4: US Manufacturing Establishment Count

33

Figure A.5: Technology Adopters' Size and Productivity Premia

Figure A.6: US Manufacturing Firm Non-Manufacturing Employment, by Census Region

34

Figure A.7: US Manufacturing Firm Employment by Net Margin of Adjustment and
Region

35

Figure A.8:

US Manufacturing Firm Non-Manufacturing Employment, by Super

NAICS Sectors

36

