NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE ROLE OF TECHNOLOGY IN MORTGAGE LENDING
Andreas Fuster
Matthew Plosser
Philipp Schnabl
James Vickery
Working Paper 24500
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24500

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2018

We thank an anonymous reviewer, Sudheer Chava, Scott Frame, Itay Goldstein, Wei Jiang,
Andrew Karolyi, Chris Mayer, Stephen Zeldes, and seminar and conference participants at
Columbia (RFS FinTech conference), NYU Stern, Kellogg School of Management, University of
St. Gallen, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta 2017 Real Estate Conference, Homer Hoyt Institute,
and the University of Technology, Sydney, for helpful comments. We also thank a number of
anonymous mortgage industry professionals for providing information about institutional details
and industry trends. Katherine di Lucido, Patrick Farrell, Eilidh Geddes, Drew Johnston, April
Meehl, Akhtar Shah, Shivram Viswanathan and Brandon Zborowski provided excellent research
assistance. The views expressed in this paper are solely those of the authors and not necessarily
those of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the Federal Reserve System, or the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Andreas Fuster, Matthew Plosser, Philipp Schnabl, and James Vickery. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Role of Technology in Mortgage Lending
Andreas Fuster, Matthew Plosser, Philipp Schnabl, and James Vickery
NBER Working Paper No. 24500
April 2018
JEL No. G21,G23
ABSTRACT
Technology-based ("FinTech") lenders increased their market share of U.S. mortgage lending
from 2% to 8% from 2010 to 2016. Using market-wide, loan-level data on U.S. mortgage
applications and originations, we show that FinTech lenders process mortgage applications about
20% faster than other lenders, even when controlling for detailed loan, borrower, and geographic
observables. Faster processing does not come at the cost of higher defaults. FinTech lenders
adjust supply more elastically than other lenders in response to exogenous mortgage demand
shocks, thereby alleviating capacity constraints associated with traditional mortgage lending. In
areas with more FinTech lending, borrowers refinance more, especially when it is in their interest
to do so. We find no evidence that FinTech lenders target marginal borrowers. Our results
suggest that technological innovation has improved the efficiency of financial intermediation in
the U.S. mortgage market.
Andreas Fuster
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Research Group
33 Liberty St
New York, NY 10045
andreas.fuster@gmail.com
Matthew Plosser
Financial Intermediation Function
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
33 Liberty Street
New York, NY 10045
matthew.plosser@ny.frb.org

Philipp Schnabl
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West Fourth Street
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
schnabl@stern.nyu.edu
James Vickery
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Financial Intermediation Function
33 Liberty Street
New York, NY 10045
james.vickery@ny.frb.org

A online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w24500

I

Introduction

The U.S. residential mortgage industry is experiencing a wave of technological innovation as
both start-ups and existing lenders seek ways to automate, simplify and speed up each step of
the mortgage origination process. At the forefront of this development are FinTech lenders,
which have a complete end-to-end online mortgage application and approval process that
is supported by centralized underwriting operations, rather than the traditional network of
local brokers or “bricks and mortar” branches. For example, Rocket Mortgage from Quicken
Loans, introduced in 2015, provides a tool to electronically collect documentation about
borrower’s income, assets and credit history, allowing the lender to make approval decisions
based on an online application in as little as eight minutes.
In the aftermath of the 2008 financial crisis, FinTech lenders have become an increasingly
important source of mortgage credit to U.S. households. We measure “FinTech lenders”
as lenders that offer an application process that can be completed entirely online. As of
December 2016, all FinTech lenders are stand-alone mortgage originators that primarily
securitize mortgages and operate without deposit financing or a branch network. Their
lending has grown annually by 30% from $34bn of total originations in 2010 (2% of market) to
$161bn in 2016 (8% of market). The growth has been particularly pronounced for refinances
and for mortgages insured by the Federal Housing Administration (FHA), a segment of the
market which primarily serves lower income borrowers.
In this paper, we study the effects of FinTech lending on the U.S. mortgage market. Our
main hypothesis is that the FinTech lending model represents a technological innovation that
reduces frictions in mortgage lending, such as lengthy loan processing, capacity constraints,
inefficient refinancing, and limited access to finance by some borrowers. The alternative
hypothesis is that FinTech lending is not special on these dimensions, and that FinTech
lenders offer services that are similar to traditional lenders in terms of processing times and
scalability. Under this explanation, there are economic forces unrelated to technology that
explain the growth in FinTech lending (e.g., regulatory arbitrage or marketing).
It is important to distinguish between these explanations to evaluate the impact of technological innovation on the mortgage market. If FinTech lenders do indeed offer a substantially

1

different product from traditional lenders, they may increase consumer surplus or expand
credit supply, at least for individuals who are comfortable obtaining a mortgage online. If,
however, FinTech lending is driven primarily by other economic forces, there might be little
benefit to consumers. FinTech lending may even increase the overall risk of the U.S. mortgage market (e.g., due to lax screening). In addition, the results are important for evaluating
the broader impact of recent technological innovation in loan markets. Mortgage lending is
arguably the market in which technology has had the largest economic impact thus far, but
other loan markets may undergo similar transformations in the future.1
Our analysis identifies several frictions in U.S. mortgage markets and examines whether
FinTech lending alleviates them. We start by examining the effect of FinTech lending on
loan outcomes. We focus particularly on the time it takes to originate a loan as a measure of
efficiency. FinTech lenders may be faster at processing loans than traditional lenders because
online processing is automated and centralized, with less scope for human error. At the same
time, this more automated approach may be less effective at screening borrowers; therefore,
we also examine the riskiness of FinTech loans using data on loan defaults.
We find that FinTech lenders process mortgages faster than traditional lenders, measured
by total days from the submission of a mortgage application until the closing. Using loanlevel data on the near-universe of U.S. mortgages from 2010 to 2016, we find that FinTech
lenders reduce processing time by about 10 days, or 20% of the average processing time.
In our preferred specifications, this effect is larger for refinance mortgages (14.6 days) than
purchase mortgages (9.2 days). The result holds when we restrict the sample to non-banks,
indicating that it is not solely due to differences in regulation. The results are also robust
to including a large set of borrower, loan, and geographic controls; along with other tests
we conduct, this suggests that faster processing is not explained by endogenous matching of
“fast” borrowers with FinTech lenders.
Faster processing times by FinTech lenders do not result in riskier loans. We measure
loan risk using default rates on FHA mortgages, which is the riskiest segment of the market
in recent years. We find that default rates on FinTech mortgages are about 25% lower than
1

Many industry observers believe that technology will soon disrupt a wide range of loan markets including small business loans, leveraged loans, personal unsecured lending, and commercial real estate lending
(Goldman Sachs Research, 2015).

2

those for traditional lenders, even when controlling for detailed loan characteristics. There
is no significant difference in interest rates. These results speak against a “lax screening”
hypothesis, and instead indicate that FinTech lending technologies may help attract and
screen for less risky borrowers.
We also find that FinTech lenders respond more elastically to changes in mortgage demand. Existing research documents evidence of significant capacity constraints in U.S. mortgage lending.2 FinTech lenders may be better able to better accommodate demand shocks
because they collect information electronically and centralize and partially automate their
underwriting operations. To empirically identify capacity constraints across lenders, we use
changes in nationwide application volume as a source of exogenous variation in mortgage
demand and trace out the correlation with loan processing times.
Empirically, we find that a doubling of the application volume raises the loan processing
time by 13.5 days (or 26%) for traditional lenders, compared to only 7.5 days for FinTech
lenders. The result is robust to including a large number of loan and borrower observables,
restricting the sample to nonbanks, or using an interest rate refinancing incentive or a Bartikstyle instrument to measure demand shocks. The estimated effect is larger for refinances,
where FinTech lenders are particularly active. We also document that FinTech lenders reduce
denial rates relative to other lenders when application volumes rise, suggesting that their
faster processing is not simply due to credit rationing during peak periods.
Given that FinTech lenders particularly focus on mortgage refinances, we next study
their effect on household refinancing behavior. Prior literature has shown that many U.S.
households refinance too little or at the wrong times (e.g., Campbell, 2006; Keys et al., 2016).
FinTech lending may encourage efficient refinancing by offering a faster, less cumbersome
loan process. We examine this possibility by studying the relationship between the FinTech
lender market share and refinancing propensities across U.S. counties.
We find that borrowers are more likely to refinance in counties with a larger FinTech
lender presence (controlling for county and time effects). An 8 percentage point increase
2

Fuster et al. (2017b) show that increases in aggregate application volumes are strongly associated with
increases in processing times and higher interest rate margins, thereby attenuating the pass-through of lower
mortgage rates to borrowers. Sharpe and Sherlund (2016) and Choi et al. (2017) also find evidence of
capacity constraints, which they argue alter the mix of loan applications that lenders attract.

3

in the lagged market share of FinTech lenders (which corresponds to moving from the 10th
percentile to the 90th percentile in 2015) raises the likelihood of refinancing by about 10% of
the average. This increase in refinancing appears to be most pronounced among borrowers
estimated to benefit from refinancing. Our findings suggest that FinTech lending, by reducing
refinancing frictions, increases the pass-through of market interest rates to households.
We also analyze cross-sectional patterns in who borrows from FinTech lenders. We find
that FinTech borrowing is higher among more educated populations, and surprisingly among
older borrowers who may be more familiar with the process of obtaining a mortgage. We
find little evidence that FinTech lenders disproportionately target marginal borrowers with
low access to finance. We find no consistent correlation between FinTech lending and local
Internet usage or speed; similarly, using the entry of Google Fiber in Kansas City as a natural
experiment, we find no evidence that improved Internet access increases FinTech mortgage
take-up. These results mitigate concerns about a digital divide in mortgage lending.
Taken together, our results suggest that recent technological innovations are improving
the efficiency of the U.S. mortgage market. We find that FinTech lenders process mortgages
more quickly without increasing loan risk, respond more elastically to demand shocks, and
increase the propensity to refinance, especially among borrowers that are likely to benefit
from it. We find, however, little evidence that FinTech lending is more effective at allocating
credit to otherwise constrained borrowers.
Our results do not necessarily predict how FinTech lending will evolve in the future.
FinTech lenders are nonbanks who securitize most of their mortgages—their growth could
be affected by regulatory changes or reforms to the housing finance system. There is also
uncertainty as to how the increased popularity of machine learning techniques, which FinTech
lenders may be using more intensely, will influence the quantity and distribution of credit.3
Related to this issue, although we find no evidence FinTech lenders select the highest-quality
borrowers (“cream skim”), which could reduce credit for other borrowers, these results could
change as technology-based lending becomes more widespread. Lastly, FinTech lenders use
a less personalized loan process that relies on hard information, which could reduce credit
3

See Bartlett et al. (2017) and Fuster et al. (2017a) for recent studies of these issues in the context of the
U.S. mortgage market.

4

to atypical applications.
Our research contributes to several strands of the literature. Although a large body of
research has studied residential mortgage lending (see Campbell, 2013 and Badarinza et al.,
2016 for surveys), much of the recent work focuses on securitization and the lending boom
prior to the U.S. financial crisis.4 Our paper instead focuses on how technology affects the
structure of residential mortgage lending after the crisis. Most closely related to this paper,
Buchak et al. (2017) study the recent growth in the share of nonbank mortgage lenders,
including FinTech lenders. While there is some overlap between the descriptive parts of
our analyses, and we use similar approaches to classify FinTech lenders, the two papers are
otherwise strongly complementary. Buchak et al. focus on explaining the growth of nonbank lending, using reduced-form analysis and a calibrated structural model. Our paper
focuses on how technology impacts frictions in the mortgage origination process, such as
slow processing times, capacity constraints and slow or suboptimal refinancing.5
Our findings also inform research on the role of mortgage markets in the transmission
of monetary policy (e.g., Beraja et al., 2017; Di Maggio et al., 2017). If lenders constrain
the pass-through of interest rates (Agarwal et al., 2017; Drechsler et al., 2017; Fuster et al.,
2017b; Scharfstein and Sunderam, 2016), or borrowers are slow to refinance (Andersen et al.,
2015; Agarwal et al., 2015), changes in interest rates will not be fully reflected in mortgage
rates and originations. Our findings suggest that technology may be easing these frictions,
potentially improving monetary policy pass-through in mortgage markets.
Finally, our paper contributes to a growing literature on the role of technology in finance
(see Philippon, 2016, for an overview), and a broader literature on how new technology can
lead to productivity growth (see e.g. Syverson, 2011 and Collard-Wexler and De Loecker,
2015). In our case, the “productivity” or “efficiency” measures we consider are processing
times, supply elasticity, default and refinancing propensities, and we are the first to document
that FinTech lending appears to lead to improvements along these dimensions.
4

See, for example, Mian and Sufi (2009), Keys et al. (2010), Purnanandam (2010), Acharya et al. (2013),
or Jiang et al. (2014). Aside from this paper, research focusing on mortgage lending in the post-crisis
environment includes D’Acunto and Rossi (2017), DeFusco et al. (2017), and Gete and Reher (2017).
5
We also study loan defaults and mortgage pricing in a similar way to Buchak et al., but focus on the
riskier FHA segment of the market; they primarily study loans insured by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.

5

II
A.

Who is a FinTech Lender?
Defining FinTech lenders

A central feature of our study is the distinction between FinTech mortgage originators and
other lenders. While many mortgage lenders are adopting new technologies to varying degrees, it is clear that some lenders are at the forefront of using technology to fundamentally
streamline and automate the mortgage origination process. The defining features of this business model are an end-to-end online mortgage application platform and centralized mortgage
underwriting and processing augmented by automation.6
How does the FinTech business model affect the mortgage origination process in practice?7 Online applications mean that a borrower can be approved for a loan without talking
to a loan officer or visiting a physical location. The online platform is able to directly access
the borrower’s financial account statements and tax returns to electronically collect information about assets and income. Other supporting documents can be uploaded electronically,
rather than by being sent piecemeal by mail, fax or email.8 This automates a labor-intensive
process, speeds up information transfer, and can improve accuracy, for example by eliminating transcription errors (Goodman 2016, Housing Wire 2015). The online platform also
allows borrowers to customize their mortgage based on current lender underwriting standards
and real-time pricing.
Supporting and complementing this online application process, FinTech mortgage lenders
6

The discussion of institutional details in this section draws upon extensive conversations with mortgage
industry professionals, market economists within the Federal Reserve, and other industry experts. For more
detail on how technology is reshaping the mortgage market, see Oliver Wyman (2016), The Economist
(2016), Goodman (2016), Goldman Sachs Research (2015) and Housing Wire (2015, 2017).
7
Obtaining a purchase mortgage involves three main steps (see e.g., Freddie Mac, 2016). (1) An initial
application and pre-approval—a pre-approval letter is nonbinding, but is indicative of a borrower’s credit
capacity and is often required to make an offer on a home. (2) Processing and underwriting, which is usually
undertaken after a property has been identified and sale price agreed upon. This step involves verification
of all supporting documentation, often involving many interactions between the processor, loan officer and
borrower, and can take from 1-2 days to several weeks or more (known as the “turn time”). (3) Closing,
when the funds and property deed are transferred. FinTech lenders partially automate the first two steps
and allow them to be completed online. Recently, some lenders have also digitized the third and final step
by creating an electronic mortgage note (e.g., see Quicken Loans, 2017a).
8
FinTech lenders also offer email and phone support. The key distinction to traditional lenders is that
borrowers can process the entire application without using paper forms, email, or phone support. In practice,
the degree of automation is much larger among FinTech lenders relative to other lenders, even if some FinTech
borrowers communicate via email or over the phone with their lender.

6

have developed “back-end” processes to automatically analyze the information collected during the application. For example, borrower information is compared against employment
databases, property records, as well as marriage and divorce records; additionally, algorithms can examine whether recent bank account deposits are consistent with the borrower’s
paystubs. Optical character recognition and pattern recognition software can be used to
process documents uploaded by the borrower and flag missing or inconsistent data. These
systems make the mortgage underwriting process more standardized and repeatable, and
may help identify fraud (Goodman, 2016).
This approach does not eliminate the role of human underwriters, but does make mortgage processing less labor-intensive. In contrast with more hub-and-spoke loan origination
operations that put loan officers and underwriters in branches, FinTech lenders centralize
their processing operations, which allows for labor specialization in the underwriting process.
Lenders have told us anecdotally that this makes it easier to train new workers and to adjust
labor supply in response to demand shocks.
Against these advantages, there may also be important disadvantages of a more automated approach to mortgage underwriting. For example, poorly designed online platforms
may confuse borrowers or lead to errors, and a lack of personal interaction may impede
the transmission of soft information, resulting in less effective borrower screening or credit
rationing.9 Our empirical analysis examines both the benefits and costs of the FinTech
mortgage lending model.
We emphasize that automation and online applications are not entirely new.10 For example many lenders in recent years have allowed borrowers to initiate a mortgage application
online. However, the online application is often just a first step before directing applicants to
speak to a loan officer who then initiates a more traditional loan application process. Similarly, although online mortgage rate comparison services such as LendingTree and BankRate
have been a feature of the mortgage market for many years, these services simply provide
information and connect borrowers and lenders; they do not automate the mortgage origi9
A substantial academic literature has emphasized the role of soft versus hard information in lending
(e.g., Petersen and Rajan, 2002; Stein, 2002).
10
More generally, the use of information technology in mortgage lending and servicing is not a recent
phenomenon—see e.g. LaCour-Little (2000) for a discussion of developments in the 1990s.

7

nation process or put it online.
The emergence of several stand-alone FinTech firms as major lenders over the last few
years is a strong indicator that fundamental change is underway. These firms are at the
technological frontier and focus exclusively on the new business model. In contrast, established lenders with branch-based mortgage origination processes face significant obstacles
in recalibrating their operations away from branches and loan officers. For this reason, the
vanguard of FinTech lenders is composed of nonbanks, which do not have access to deposit
finance and therefore do not retain originated loans on balance sheet. Like other nonbanks,
the vast majority of FinTech lenders sell their loans through established channels supported
by government guarantee programs (FHA, VA, Fannie Mae, and Freddie Mac).
That said, a significant and growing number of mortgage lenders are at present incorporating aspects of the “FinTech model,” and the current distinction between FinTech originators and other firms, including banks, may be temporary. The current market structure
presents a window of opportunity to study the impact of FinTech on mortgage origination,
and to draw inferences about what is likely to happen to the mortgage industry as a whole
as these technologies diffuse more broadly.

B.

Classifying FinTech lenders

For our empirical analysis, we classify an originator as a FinTech lender if they enable a
mortgage applicant to obtain a pre-approval online. We believe this classification distinguishes FinTech lenders from more traditional mortgage originators that may use “online
applications” for marketing purposes but still require interaction with a loan officer.
Our classification should be viewed as a proxy, since an online application platform is only
one dimension of the FinTech “model”. Even so, it is an important component, and is also
easily measurable in a consistent way across a large number of mortgage lenders. In practice,
the set of lenders classified as FinTech by our approach matches up well with firms considered
by industry observers and media to be at the frontier of technology-based mortgage lending.
It also matches quite closely with the independent classification by Buchak et al. (2017).11
11

Our classification and empirical analysis closely follows the methodology in our proposal to the RFS
FinTech initiative submitted on March 15, 2017. Our proposal was submitted before we and Buchak et al.

8

We implement our classification by first compiling lists of the top 100 non-bank lenders
for purchase loans and for refinancings over the analysis period.12 The resulting list includes
135 lenders. We then manually initiate a mortgage application with each lender and analyze
whether it is possible to obtain a pre-approval online. Most lenders halt the online application
prior to the pre-approval and ask the borrower to directly contact a loan officer or broker. We
classify the lender as a FinTech lender if we are able to continue with the online process until
we get to the pre-approval decision that is based on a hard credit check of the applicant’s
credit score.
Our final classification is based on an analysis completed in June 2017. To construct a
panel, we go back in time using a database that archives websites (“Wayback Machine”).
Using the database from 2010 to 2017, we evaluate at which point in time a lender appears
to have adopted their qualifying online lending process. We cannot always conduct a full
evaluation because online application processes often rely on a technological process that
evaluates information in real time. However, we can use the archived website to evaluate
when a lender adopted an application which resembles the qualifying application in 2017.
We use this information to determine the year in which a lender adopted a FinTech lending
model. We corroborate our results using industry reports.13
FinTech lenders exhibit several other distinguishing characteristics relative to their competitors. For example, FinTech firms typically require a Social Security Number and conduct
a hard credit check online, unlike most traditional mortgage originators we classified. FinTech lenders also tend to orient their marketing efforts around their website or mobile phone
app. In particular, FinTech lender advertisements emphasize the functionality and ease of
use of their website or app, and direct borrowers to those platforms. Other lenders may include their website in their marketing material but do not emphasize it to the same degree,
and may primarily use it for “lead generation.”
Figure 1 plots the number of FinTech lenders by year based on our classification. The
became aware of each others’ work and pre-dates the first public version of their working paper.
12
We also examined several top depository bank lenders, but did not classify any of them as FinTech
through 2016 (although some began offering online pre-approvals in 2017). As discussed above, entrenched
bank business models may slow their ability to integrate new technology into their existing branch-based
mortgage origination process.
13
We find no instance of a lender that stopped offering online processing during the analysis period.

9

number increases from two firms in 2010 to 18 lenders by 2017. In Table 1 we list the top 20
lenders in 2016, along with other FinTech lenders in the data in that year. The three largest
originators identified as FinTech lenders are Quicken, LoanDepot.com, and Guaranteed Rate.
All of the primary analyses in this paper use this classification, although we have verified
that our main results are robust to the alternative classification of Buchak et al. (2017).14
Table 2 provides summary statistics of mortgage originations and applications, in total and by lender type, based on data collected under the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act
(HMDA). HMDA data report characteristics of individual residential mortgage applications
and originations from the vast majority of U.S. banks and non-banks. Data include the
identity of the lender, loan amount, property location, borrower income, race and gender,
though not credit score or loan-to-value ratio (LTV). Based on known local conforming loan
limits, we impute whether each loan has “jumbo” status and thus cannot be securitized by
Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, or Ginnie Mae. The processing time of loan applications, one of
our main outcome variables of interest, can only be computed from a restricted version of
the dataset available to users within the Federal Reserve System.15 We include loans with
application dates between January 2010 and June 2016.16 First, we see that in terms of basic
risk characteristics, non-bank lenders originate loans to borrowers with relatively low-income
and high loan to income (LTI) ratio relative to banks. Similarly, FinTech lenders and other
non-bank lenders have a much higher share of FHA and VA loans, but a lower share of jumbo
mortgages, than banks. FinTech lenders originate many more refinance loans (as opposed
to loans used for a home purchase) than banks and other non-bank lenders.17
We also see that FinTech lenders have shorter average processing times than both banks
and other non-bank lenders. In the next section, we study whether this result persists once
14

Our classification is similar tho one proposed by Buchak et al. (2017). There are only minor differences
with respect to the classification of a few smaller lenders.
15
This restricted version of the data records the exact date the lender receives an application, as well as
the date on which the application was resolved (e.g. origination of the loan or denial or withdrawal of the
application). The publicly available HMDA data only contains the year. All other variables are the same.
16
We end the sample in June because for applications submitted later in the year, processing times may
be biased downward. This is due to the fact that only applications for which an action (origination, denial,
etc.) was taken by the end of 2016 are included in the HMDA data available at the time of writing.
17
As Buchak et al. (2017) also note, FinTech lenders have a higher fraction of applications where applicant race or gender information is missing. We understand this is because borrowers can complete online
applications without being required to provide this information.

10

we control for loan characteristics and location-time fixed effects. In Section VII we will
study differences in borrower and location characteristics between FinTech and non-FinTech
mortgages more systematically, building on Table 2.

III

Is FinTech Lending Faster?

Our first research question is whether FinTech lenders are able to process mortgage applications more quickly than other lenders. We measure processing time by the number of
days between application and origination date, as in Fuster et al. (2017b). We estimate the
following OLS regression using loan-level HMDA data:
Processing Timeijct = δct + βFinTechj + γControlsijct + ijct

(1)

where Processing Timeijct is for loan i issued by lender j in census tract c for an application
received in month t, FinTechj is an indicator variable equal to one for FinTech lenders and
zero otherwise, δct is a vector of census-tract-month fixed effects, and Controlsijct includes
loan and borrower controls.18 We winsorize the top and bottom 1% of processing times and
cluster standard errors at the lender-month level.
Our regression includes a large number of observable loan and borrower characteristics
to control for factors other than lender efficiency that may affect processing time (e.g., local
laws, housing market conditions, the complexity of the loan, borrower, and property, and
the speed of obtaining a property appraisal). We expect that our rich set of controls should
account well for these factors. In particular, census-tract-month fixed effects control in a
highly disaggregated way for common geographic and time variation in processing times.
We conduct the analysis separately for home purchase mortgages and refinances because the
latter do not require the homeowner to move and the application process is simpler.
18

The control variables are the natural logarithm of borrower income, the natural logarithm of total loan
amount, indicator variables for race and gender, an indicator variable for whether there is a coapplicant,
an indicator variable for whether a pre-approval was requested, indicator variables for the occupancy and
lien status of the loan, indicator variables for property type, indicator variables for whether the loan is
insured by the FHA or the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) and an indicator variable for loans above
the conforming loan limit (i.e. jumbo loans), and an indicator variable in case applicant income is missing.

11

A.

Processing time results

Panel A of Table 3 presents the results for purchase mortgages. In column (1), we find that
FinTech lenders process loans 7.9 days faster than non-FinTech lenders. This effect is large,
corresponding to 15% of average home purchase processing time of 52 days. The result is
slightly larger in magnitude and remains statistically significant when we include loan and
borrower controls (col. 2), census tract-month fixed effects (col. 3), and both (col. 4, where
the estimated effect corresponds to 18% of the average processing time). The results are also
robust to dropping deposit-taking banks from the sample (col. 5), which suggests that the
results are not driven by regulatory factors or the different funding model of banks.
Panel B of Table 3 finds even larger effects for refinances. Across specifications, FinTech
lenders process mortgages 9.3 to 14.6 days faster than other lenders. The effect corresponds
to 17%-29% of the average refinance loan processing time of 51 days. Again, the result is
robust to comparing FinTech lenders only to other nonbanks, which suggests that it is not
driven by regulation or funding. The FinTech advantage for refinance loans might be larger
because refinances offer more scope for automation than home purchase loans. For example,
home mortgage loans always require an appraisal, which is administered locally and is not
(yet) automated. This interpretation is consistent with the fact that FinTech lending growth
has been larger for refinances relative to home purchase loans.19
While these regressions capture average effects, it is instructive to study the entire distribution of processing times across lender types. We do so in Figure A.1 in the Internet
Appendix, where we plot the cumulative distributions of processing times for both purchase
and refinance mortgages, after accounting for census-tract-month fixed effects and loan characteristics. For purchase mortgages the advantage of FinTech lenders comes primarily from
the right tail (i.e., there are few loans with very long processing times), while for refinances
the entire distribution is shifted to the left. This again suggests that for refinances, it is
more easily possible for FinTech lenders to realize efficiency gains, while for purchase loans
19

In unreported results we also condition on whether the loans are FHA or VA insured loans, since
anecdotally, underwriting rules are less flexible for these loans, possibly constraining the advantages of
FinTech lenders. Indeed, we find for refinances that the FinTech lender advantage is lower by 3 days
(relative to a sample of non-government or “conventional” loans). However, we detect no corresponding
difference in FinTech lenders’ processing time advantage among new purchase loans.

12

the scope may be more limited.

B.

Additional analysis

One potential concern is that our processing time results are affected by endogenous matching between borrowers and lenders. For instance, if younger borrowers are more likely to
use FinTech lenders and also tend to submit their paperwork faster, FinTech lenders would
appear to process mortgages more quickly, even if they do not have an inherent technological advantage. Alternatively, FinTech lenders may attract the most complex mortgage
applications, which would attenuate the estimated FinTech processing time advantage.
We emphasize that the coefficient on FinTech lenders is robust across specifications and
samples. If FinTech lenders matched with borrowers or loan types that are easier to process,
then adding the control variables should attenuate the estimated coefficient; instead, the
coefficient tends to get larger with additional controls. To the extent that unobservable
factors that make some borrowers faster than others are also correlated with observables,
this is a first piece of evidence that our results are unlikely to be driven by endogenous
matching or other unobserved variables, but instead represent the direct effect of FinTech
lending on processing times.
To investigate further, we examine whether the FinTech processing time advantage is
driven by “fast borrowers” migrating to FinTech lenders. We implement this test in two
stages. In the first stage, we predict the probability that each loan is originated by a
FinTech lender as a function of loan and borrower characteristics. We then take this predicted
probability and use it as an explanatory variable in a second stage analysis of processing
times among non-FinTech mortgages. If non-FinTech lenders lose their faster customers to
FinTech lenders, non-FinTech processing times should have increased disproportionately for
borrower and loan types with high FinTech penetration (as measured by a high first-stage
probability).
The second stage results are shown in Table A.1 in the Internet Appendix. In our baseline
specification, we find a positive effect of the predicted FinTech probability on non-Fintech
processing times. This is consistent with selection, although the coefficient is not nearly

13

large enough to explain our earlier processing time results.20 In addition, the coefficient of
interest flips sign once we control for lender-by-census tract fixed effects to allow for the
possibility that FinTech lenders have a high market share in areas where traditional lenders
are slow (col. 2 and 4 of the table). In sum, it does not appear that selection effects could
easily explain the large processing time differences we document.
Furthermore, as a direct test of whether FinTech lenders match with “fast” borrowers,
we study whether FinTech originators have gained the highest market share in geographic
locations where processing times were shortest ex ante, measured in 2010 prior to the growth
in FinTech. These results are presented in Section VII. To preview the key result, we in fact
find the opposite; FinTech lenders have become popular in locations where processing times
were originally slow conditional on observables. This is inconsistent with an “endogenous
selection” interpretation of our processing time estimates, and in fact suggests that slow
processing by traditional lenders may be a driver of the growth in FinTech lending.
Summing up, our results suggest that FinTech mortgage lenders are roughly 20% faster
at processing mortgage originations than other lenders; the estimated effects range from 7.59.4 days for purchase mortgages and 9.3-14.6 days for refinances. Several pieces of evidence
suggest that this finding is not due to endogenous borrower-lender matching or other omitted
variable biases.21

IV

Is FinTech More Efficient or Just Less Careful?

The faster processing speeds of FinTech lenders could simply be a product of less careful
screening of borrowers, rather than greater efficiency.22 We test this “lax screening” hypoth20

For instance, the coefficient of 2.5 in column (1) of Table A.1 means that moving from the 1st to the
99th percentile in predicted FinTech propensity, corresponding to a difference of 0.335, increases expected
processing time by 0.85 days. This is only about one-tenth of the processing time advantage of FinTech
lenders as estimated in Table 3. Magnitudes are similar in column (3), which limits the sample to refinances.
21
As a “reality check”, our estimates also appear roughly comparable to industry-based estimates of the
processing-time advantage of technology-based lending. In particular, Quicken Loans (2017b) claims that
importing income and asset information through their online platform reduces client mortgage processing by
12 days on average. Although it is not clear exactly how this statistic is calculated, it is interesting that it is
in the same ballpark as our estimate of a 8-14 day difference in processing times between FinTech originators
and other lenders.
22
For instance, using proprietary lender data, LaCour-Little (2007) documents that prior to the financial
crisis, processing times were shortest for non-agency non-prime mortgages. This category of loans subse-

14

esis by studying the ex-post performance of FinTech loans compared to similar mortgages
from other lenders. We focus on FHA lending, which has been the riskiest segment of the
mortgage market in recent years and where we are therefore most likely to detect differences
in loan risk.23 We use two separate sources of publicly available data on FHA mortgage
defaults: segment level data extracted from the FHA Neighborhood Watch Early Warning
System (“FHA NW data”) and FHA loan-level data from Ginnie Mae (“FHA Ginnie Mae
data”). To our knowledge, this is the first academic study to make systematic use of either
of these data sources.24

A.

Analysis of default rates in FHA NW data

We start by analyzing default rates on FHA loans using FHA NW data. The data contains
origination volume and default rates for each lender at the national level and by state and
metropolitan statistical area (MSA). The data are available for all FHA loans as well as certain subcategories including home purchase mortgages, refinances, and mortgages originated
in underserved census tracts.25 The data generally covers the period 2015:Q3 to 2017:Q3,
although state and national data for all loans (not broken down by loan type) are available
over a longer sample period from 2012:Q3 to 2017:Q3.
Default rates are calculated as the share of loans that become at least 90 days delinquent
or are the subject of an FHA insurance claim within a specific time horizon after origination.
The data include rates at one-year (“1 Year Default”) and two-year (“2 Year Default”)
quently experienced extremely high default rates during the crisis.
23
FHA mortgages require a down payment of as little as 3.5% and are generally made to borrowers with
low credit scores who do not qualify for a prime conforming loan. FHA loans are government-guaranteed,
which limits the credit risk for the lender. However the lender is not fully indemnified against risk since
the FHA can refuse to compensate the lender for credit losses in cases of fraud or other defects in mortgage
underwriting. FHA lenders have also paid out large legal settlements on FHA loans due to breaches of the
False Claims Act and other laws. As a result of these risks, many large bank lenders have withdrawn from
FHA lending or wound back their participation in the market (see e.g., Wall Street Journal, 2015).
24
The FHA Ginnie Mae data are similar to the loan-level data made available by government-sponsored
enterprises (GSEs) Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. These are analyzed by Buchak et al. (2017), who find little
difference in default probabilities between FinTech and other lenders (for origination vintages 2010-2013).
The main drawback of the GSE data is that these prime agency mortgages have experienced very low default
rates for recent vintages (as they are significantly less risky than FHA loans) so that it may be difficult to
detect differences across lenders.
25
A census tract is considered underserved by the FHA based on an administrative classification derived
from median income and the share of minority households.

15

horizons. In order to control for geographic variation in default rates we scale a lender’s
default rate in each location by the overall default rate in that area. As an alternative to
raw default rates, the data also contain the “Supplementary Performance Metric” (SPM),
which scales a lender’s default rate by a benchmark default rate defined based on the credit
score distribution of the underlying mortgages. Again, we then take the ratio of the lender’s
SPM to the overall SPM in the area. The SPM is only available at the state and national
level and at a two-year horizon after origination (“Mix-Adjusted 2 Year Default”).
Our analysis focuses on the difference in default rates between FinTech lenders and
other lenders. We compute the difference by taking by taking the weighted average of
FinTech relative default rates using origination volume by region and lender as weights and
subtracting one. This measure yields zero if there no differences in default rates between
FinTech lenders and other lenders. We use a difference-in-means test to examine the null
hypothesis that FinTech lender default rates are the same as other lenders.
Table 4 reports the results. Column (1) presents the relative difference in default rates
for FinTech lenders using 1-year default as the default measure. In Panel A, we find that
loans originated by FinTech lenders are 35% less likely to default than comparable loans
originated by non-FinTech lenders. The coefficient is almost unchanged when using MSAlevel data instead of state-level data and when using the 2-year default rate instead of
the 1-year default rate (col. 2). The coefficient remains statistically significant, albeit the
effect is smaller (-25.5%) when using the mix-adjusted default rate, based on the SPM, as
the outcome variable (col. 3). We find quantitatively similar results when restricting the
sample to high-market share regions (Panel B), when considering home purchase loans or
refinances separately (Panel C), for loans to underserved neighborhoods (Panel D), and when
considering a longer sample period (Panel E). Overall, we find no evidence that FinTech loans
are risker than non-FinTech loans; in fact, they appear to default less often.

B.

Loan-level analysis of FHA default rates

We complement this evidence with a loan-level analysis of data on FHA mortgages securitized
into Ginnie Mae MBS. The main advantage of the Ginnie Mae data relative to the FHA NW

16

data is that they include a rich set of loan and borrower characteristics (e.g., the borrower’s
credit score and the loan-to-value ratio). This allow us to investigate whether FinTech lenders
target specific borrower types based on their riskiness and whether differences in default
rates can be explained by differences in observable characteristics. A disadvantage of the
Ginnie Mae data is that they only include the identity of the MBS issuer, not the mortgage
originator. Hence, the data do not perfectly identify which loans come from FinTech lenders.
However, the issuer and originator are typically the same and a comparison to HMDA
suggests mismeasurement is concentrated among small lenders.26
Our sample consists of data from September 2013 (when the Ginnie Mae data first become
available) until May 2017. We restrict the sample to 30-year fixed-rate mortgages, which are
by far the most common FHA loan type. We estimate the following OLS regression:
Defaultijst = α + βFinTechj + γControlsijst + ijst

(2)

where Defaultijst on loan i by lender j in state s originated in month t is an indicator variable
equal to one if a loan ever becomes delinquent for 90 days or longer over our observation
period, FinTechj is an indicator variable equal to one for FinTech issuers, and Controlsijst is
a broad set of control variables such as origination month or state-by-origination month fixed
effects, loan purpose fixed effects, and other loan controls including borrower FICO score,
loan-to-value ratio (LTV) and debt-to-income ratio (DTI).27 We cluster standard errors at
the issuer-origination month level.
Table 5 presents the results. Column (1) controls for origination-month fixed effects
only and finds that FinTech borrowers are 1.29 percentage points less likely to default than
non-FinTech borrowers, equivalent to 35% of the overall default rate of 3.65%. This result
is very similar to the estimates based on FHA NW data. Column (2) adds loan purpose
fixed effects. The effect declines to 0.91 percentage points, or 27%, but remains statistically
26

For some small FinTech lenders, the number of MBS-issued loans is substantially smaller than their
number of originated loans in HMDA, implying that they sell a significant portion of their loans to other
firms before issuance. The effect on identifying FinTech loans should be limited given that this issue primarily
affects smaller lenders.
27
Other loan controls include the log of the loan amount and indicators for the number of borrowers, the
property type, whether the borrower received down payment assistance, and for whether a loan’s FICO,
LTV, or DTI are missing.

17

significant. This result reflects the fact that FinTech lenders issue more refinance mortgages
than home purchase mortgages, and that refinances tend to be less risky (especially those
not involving cash-out). In column (3), we add further loan level controls such as FICO
and LTV. We see that this has only a small incremental effect on the coefficient of interest,
implying that FinTech lenders do not originate loans that are less risky based on these
observable characteristics. Columns (4) and (5) split the sample by loan purpose; the effect
is slightly larger for home purchase mortgages, but is also sizable for refinances.28

C.

Are FinTech lenders cream skimming?

Our analysis of default rates finds no evidence that FinTech lenders originate riskier mortgages—
in fact, in the FHA market we find the opposite result. The difference in default rates varies
across specifications but is statistically significant in almost all of them and the magnitude
is economically large—default rates for FinTech-originated loans are about 25% lower in
column (3) of Table 5, which includes the largest set of controls, and ranges between 10-40
percent in the other specifications. The results are robust to using two different datasets
(FHA Neighborhood data and Ginnie Mae loan-level data) and to different sets of controls
for loan, borrower and location characteristics.
Our findings speak directly against the “lax screening” hypothesis. If anything, they suggest that the automated technologies used by FinTech lenders may screen borrowers more
effectively than the more labor-intensive methods used by other lenders (e.g., because the
automated systems directly check databases of original source documents, reducing the possibility of fraud). This reasoning has been emphasized by industry experts (e.g., Goodman,
2016), and to our knowledge we provide the first systematic evidence to support it.
Although superior screening of credit risk can be viewed as an advantage of FinTech
lending, it may also have negative consequences for some borrowers, or for the government,
due to “cream skimming” of the highest value customers. For example, cream skimming
could lead to ex ante credit rationing by weakening the credit quality of the remaining
28

In further (unreported) regressions, we have found that the relative effect size is fairly stable if we repeat
the regressions for each loan origination year 2013-2017. Furthermore, the Ginnie Mae data also contain
mortgages guaranteed by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA); for those loans, which default at lower
rates than FHA ones, the relative decrease in default hazard for FinTech-originated loans is again similar.

18

borrower pool—this mechanism is explored by Mayer et al. (2013) in the context of private
subprime mortgage lending. Alternatively, it could shift costs to the government if private
and public lenders compete for borrowers, an argument that has been made in the context
of FinTech lenders like SoFi in the student loan market29 .
In the context of mortgage lending in the current environment, it is unlikely that cream
skimming by FinTech lenders has economically significant effects. The reason is that during
our analysis period the vast majority of all risky mortgages in the U.S. are government insured
at a pre-set price, either by the FHA or other government agencies such as the Department of
Veterans Affairs. Consequently, cream skimming by FinTech lenders is unlikely to materially
affect credit access for remaining borrowers, who will still qualify for government insurance.
Even so, we estimate two specifications to investigate possible cream-skimming effects.
First, we examine whether a higher FinTech market share in a location helps to reduce
overall mortgage default risk in that location, as opposed to FinTech lenders just selecting
the lowest-default borrowers from a fixed pool. We also test whether the default advantage
of FinTech lenders diminishes as their market share increases. If the distribution of risky
borrowers is unchanged by the presence of FinTech lenders, then as their market share
increases in an area their performance advantage will diminish, as they expand their lending
to the more risky borrowers.
We present the results, based on the Ginnie Mae data from the previous subsection, in
columns (6) and (7) of Table 5. Column (6) estimates the direct effect of FinTech state-level
market share on default. Although the point estimate is negative, the effect is economically
small and statistically insignificant. This result suggests that there is no discernable effect
of an increased FinTech footprint on the overall default risk of borrowers receiving mortgage
credit. We note that the estimate has large standard errors; it would be interesting to revisit
this analysis in the future when the market share of FinTech lending is larger.
Column (7) adds the interaction of the FinTech lender indicator variable and local FinTech market share and finds that the coefficient on the interaction is negative and marginally
significant. This result suggests that the better default performance of FinTech mortgages
29

See e.g. https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-06-10/student-loan-refinancingboom-could-cost-u-s-taxpayers-billions.

19

in fact tends to be more pronounced in regions where FinTech has a larger market share. On
the other hand, however, in Panel B of Table 4, we find a lower FinTech default advantage in
markets where the lender has a high market share (although the difference is not statistically
significant, and even in these locations, FinTech default rates remain lower than the market
as a whole).
While somewhat mixed, none of the results suggest a robust positive relation between
market share and risk. In addition, we find no evidence that the lower default rate of FinTech
lenders disappears in locations where their market share is high. In sum, the findings suggest
that the lower default rates associated with FinTech lending is not simply due to positive
selection of low-risk borrowers.

D.

Are FinTech lenders charging higher interest rates?

Related, we can also use FHA loan-level data from Ginnie Mae to test whether FinTech
lenders charge higher or lower mortgage interest rates conditional on observables. Results
are shown in Table A.2 in the Internet Appendix. We find that FinTech lenders offer interest
rates which are 2.3bp lower overall—splitting the sample by loan purpose, the effect is 7.5bp
for purchase mortgages and effectively zero for refinances.30 Although these differences
are small in magnitude, the direction of the effect is consistent with the Buchak et al.
(2017) estimates for FHA loans (although they are cautious in drawing inferences from their
results because their FHA dataset includes fewer loan-level controls than the data used here).
However, it contrasts with Buchak et al.’s finding that FinTech lenders charge higher rates
for GSE mortgages. One possible explanation that could account for both sets of results,
and is in line with some of Buchak et al.’s other evidence, is that lower-income borrowers,
who are more likely to obtain FHA loans, are more price sensitive and less willing to pay a
premium for convenience.
30

We note that these coefficients are not particularly stable if we allow them to vary over time — in some
time periods the FinTech coefficient is positive and significant, but over others it is negative and significant.
A potential explanation is that movements in market interest rates may be reflected at different times on
rates on originated loans between FinTech and other lenders, due to differences in processing times. The
Ginnie Mae data, or the GSE data used by Buchak et al. (2017), does not easily allow one to cleanly control
for this.

20

V

Is FinTech Lending More Elastic?

We next study whether FinTech lenders are better able to accommodate shocks to mortgage demand. Mortgage application volumes in the U.S. fluctuate enormously over time,
primarily due to movements in interest rates that can lead to “refinancing waves.” There is
also substantial cross-sectional variation in demand for new mortgages, for example due to
differential housing market trends.
Managing volatility in mortgage applications is a key challenge for lenders. If a lender
receives more applications than their underwriting process can accommodate, their processing cycle times increase and they risk losing money (and future business) due to loans not
closing in a timely manner. Figure 2, which is similar to evidence in Fuster et al. (2017b),
illustrates two main points. First, as shown in panel (a), there is large variation in the level
of monthly applications, with the peak level being almost three times as high as the trough.
Application volume co-moves closely with borrowers’ average incentive to refinance, here
proxied by the difference between the average coupon rate on outstanding mortgages and
the 10-year Treasury yield. Second, panel (b) shows that fluctuations in median processing
times are sizable (from a low of 37 days to a high of 51 days), and that processing times are
strongly positively correlated with total mortgage applications.31
By automating, centralizing and standardizing much of the underwriting process, FinTech
lenders may conceivably increase the short-run elasticity of lending supply in response to
demand shocks. However, testing whether capacity constraints are less binding for FinTech
lenders presents a clear empirical challenge: the volume of applications a lender receives
is endogenous. For example, lenders may solicit applications when processing constraints
are slack and discourage applications when processing times are expected to be long. Both
behaviors would attenuate the relationship between applications and processing time and
obfuscate differences across lenders.
31

One exception: between October and December 2015, processing times increase even though applications
decrease. This is most likely due to the implementation of new loan disclosure rules (“TILA-RESPA Integrated Disclosure,” or TRID) on October 3, 2015. These new rules required many lenders to adjust their underwriting processes, resulting in delays. For more details, see e.g. https://www.wsj.com/articles/newmortgage-rules-may-spark-delays-frustration-1443519000.

21

A.

Demand shocks and processing time

We identify differences in supply elasticity by exploiting demand shocks that vary application
volumes independent of firm-specific conditions. We use time-series variation in total applications, which is primarily determined by macroeconomic factors, in particular long-term
interest rates, and is plausibly exogenous to the capacity contraints facing any individual
lender. We test whether FinTech mortgage processing times are less sensitive to variation in
total application volume by estimating the following regression using loan-level HMDA data
from 2010 through June of 2016:
Processing Timeijct = γApplicationst + βApplicationst × FinTechj + αj + δc + θControlsit + ijct (3)
where Processing Timeijct is the number of days between application and closing for mortgage
i from lender j in census tract c and application month t, Applicationst is the log of aggregate
mortgage applications in month t, FinTechj is an indicator variable equal to one for FinTech
lenders, αj and δc are vectors of lender and census-tract fixed effects, and Controlsit includes
borrower and loan controls similar to Table 3 as well as calendar month dummies to account
for seasonality and dummies for loan purpose (purchase versus refinancing). Standard errors
are clustered by lender-month.
Table 6 presents the results. The first two columns consider all originated loans; column
(1) controls only for lender dummies, while column (2) includes additional controls for loan
and borrower characteristics, location, and month. We find that FinTech lenders are about
half as sensitive to aggregate mortgage application volumes as other lenders. Quantitatively,
a 10% rise in overall application volume increases processing time by 1.3 days for non-FinTech
lenders but only 0.7 days for FinTech firms (based on column 2). Column (3) restricts the
sample to refinances, the market where FinTech lenders specialize and where interest rates
matter most for demand. We find that processing times for refinances are more sensitive
to aggregate volumes, but again FinTech lenders are only half as sensitive. Column (4)
considers all applications, including denied and withdrawn applications; again, the results
are similar. All results are statistically significant at the 1% level. Columns (5)-(7) repeat the
prior three specifications but restrict the sample to nonbanks. The degree to which FinTech
22

lenders are less sensitive to aggregate applications is not as large in this sample but the
magnitudes are still economically meaningful. FinTech lenders are 20-40% less sensitive to
aggregate volumes relative to nonbanks, again statistically significant at the 1% level except
for column (5), where p = 0.14.32
The differential sensitivity of FinTech lender processing times to application volume is
also illustrated visually in Figure 3. This binned scatter plot confirms that FinTech lenders
have shorter processing times on average, as already shown in Section III. More importantly, processing time for Fintech lenders is also less sensitive to demand for new mortgages
compared to banks and (to a lesser extent) other non-bank lenders. This lower sensitivity is
particularly apparent at the highest levels of application volume (when aggregate application
volume exceeds 1.2 million mortgages per month).

B.

Alternative demand shocks and processing time

We repeat the analysis using the weighted average coupon on the universe of fixed-rate MBS
less the 10-year Treasury yield (“Refi Incentive”) as our measure of mortgage demand, instead of log application volume.33 Our findings, presented in columns (1)-(3) of Table A.3 in
the Internet Appendix, are similar to those discussed above. A higher refinancing incentive
is significantly correlated with longer processing times across specifications, but processing
times for FinTech lenders are significantly less sensitive, if anything by a larger proportion
than in our main results. The consistency with our earlier findings is sensible given that
we show in Figure 2 that refinancing incentives are the key determinant of mortgage application volume. The result does, however, address any concerns that our earlier results are
affected by idiosyncratic shocks to individual large lenders that are large enough to influence
aggregate applications.
As alternative approach, we also construct a “Bartik-style” index of exposure to local
fluctuations in mortgage application volume based on the geography of lender activity. The
32

In unreported results, we consider specifications with time fixed effects and draw similar conclusions.
While it absorbs all time-series variation, this alternative specification does not allow us to observe the
uninteracted coefficient on aggregate application volume.
33
As in Fuster et al. (2017b), we use the 10-year Treasury rate rather than a market rate on new mortgages
in order to prevent endogeneity to concurrent supply conditions in the mortgage market.

23

index is calculated as the log of the weighted sum of county-level mortgage applications in
month t, where the weights are the lender’s average market shares in each county measured
over the entire sample period. The identification assumption is that application volumes in
a geographic area are exogenous to any given market participant’s share. We present the
results in in columns (4)-(6) of Table A.3 in the Internet Appendix. Processing times are
positively correlated with the proxy, although once again, less so for FinTech lenders when
we consider refinancing loans and all applications. There is no statistically significant effect
for the sample of all originated loans (col. 4).
Taking together, results based on two alternative measures of loan demand indicate that
FinTech lenders are less sensitive to exogenous demand shocks than other lenders, supporting
our main findings in Table 6.

C.

Demand shocks and application denial rates

A possible concern is that our results may reflect credit rationing. If FinTech lenders avoid
capacity constraints by becoming more selective and rationing credit when total mortgage
demand rises, their processing times may seem less sensitive to demand even if they are
not actually more elastic. We test this hypothesis by examining whether denial rates for
FinTech lenders are differentially sensitive to aggregate application volume. The regression
specification is identical to Eq. (3) above, except that the left-hand side variable is an
indicator variable equal to one if a loan application was denied and zero otherwise. The
sample includes all applications that were either approved or denied.
Table 7 presents the results. We find that FinTech lenders reduce denial rates by 1.1%
percentage points for each 10% increase in application volume (col. 1). The effect is similar
when focusing on refinance mortgages (col. 2), restricting the sample to nonbanks (col. 3),
and focusing on refinance mortgages among nonbanks (col. 4). These results are inconsistent
with credit rationing and instead provide further evidence that FinTech lenders’ credit supply
is more elastic than those of other lenders.34
34

In unreported results, we find that FinTech lenders on average have a roughly 2.5 percentage point higher
denial rate than banks (though the difference is statistically insignificant), and a 3.5 percentage higher denial
rate than other nonbank lenders (significant at p < 0.1), conditional on our typical set of controls. This
could reflect more stringent screening, or alternatively that with online applications, there is no “filtering”

24

We point out that the direct effect of application volume on denial rates is negative
across all specifications. This may seem counter-intuitive, although it likely reflects the fact
that when applications rise due to changes in interest rates, the average credit quality of
applicants improves.35

D.

Demand shocks and origination volumes

We also analyze whether mortgage origination volumes for FinTech lenders respond differentially to changes in total applications. Analysis of quantities over our short sample period
is difficult because there are differential trends in application volumes across lender types
and across individual firms within a type. We estimate a model in first differences to partial
out these trends:
∆Originationsjt = γ∆Applicationst + β∆Applicationst × FinTechj + αj + jt
where Originationsjt is the log of originated applications (by lender j for applications in
month t) and Applicationst is the log of aggregate application volume. Lender origination
changes are winsorized at the top and bottom 1% to mitigate the impact of extreme outliers.
We include lender fixed effects, αi , to allow for lender-specific differences in the average
growth rate over the analysis period. We restrict the sample to lenders who rank in the top
500 in volume at some point during the sample period.
We find no meaningful difference in origination sensitivity for FinTech lenders. As shown
in Table 8, FinTech origination volume appears equally sensitive to changes in aggregate
application volumes as those of all other lenders (col. 1 and 2) and nonbanks (cols. 3 and
4). Hence, similar to our results on denials, we find no evidence that the lower sensitivity
of FinTech lender processing times comes at the expense of lower originations due to credit
rationing; conversely, though, we do not see an obvious increase in origination growth for
by a loan officer that may discourage borrowers from applying when their chances of approval are low.
35
In line with this interpretation, Fuster and Willen (2010) show that denial probabilities fell for all
income levels in the wake of the first MBS purchase announcement by the Federal Reserve in late 2008
(when application volumes surged), and that average FICO scores (which are not in HMDA) increased
sharply.

25

FinTech lenders when application volume rises. Overall, we are cautious about drawing
strong conclusions from this analysis as it is quite difficult to establish lender-type specific
effects given the strong and nonlinear upward trend in the FinTech lender market share
during this period.

VI

FinTech and Mortgage Refinancing

This section examines whether the presence of FinTech lenders affects mortgage refinancing
behavior by borrowers. Prior work has shown that many borrowers do not refinance their
fixed-rate mortgages optimally; they commit errors either by failing to refinance when it is
in their financial interest to do so, or by refinancing even though the costs of doing so exceed
the benefits (e.g., Campbell, 2006; Agarwal et al., 2015; Andersen et al., 2015; Keys et al.,
2016). In addition to behavioral factors, intermediation frictions in the mortgage market
also contribute to inefficient refinancing patterns (e.g., Agarwal et al., 2017; Bond et al.,
2017; Scharfstein and Sunderam, 2016). These frictions weaken the “refinancing channel” of
monetary policy (e.g., Beraja et al., 2017; Di Maggio et al., 2016; Wong, 2016). Examining
the effect of FinTech on refinancing is thus important, since this is one channel through
which technological progress in the mortgage industry may have real effects on the economy.
Industry reports and academic research indicate that mortgage-backed securities backed
by FinTech loans do exhibit faster prepayment speeds than pools from other lenders, consistent with an effect of FinTech on the speed of refinancing (e.g., Goldman Sachs Research,
2016; Buchak et al., 2017). However, it is unclear whether this fact reflects faster-prepaying
borrowers selecting into mortgages from FinTech lenders, or whether FinTech lending directly
affects the likelihood of refinancing, thereby potentially affecting aggregate refinancing behavior. If FinTech mortgage lending does affect the market-wide propensity to refinance,
an important follow-up question is whether this is due to a reduction in errors of omission
(meaning that more borrowers who should refinance do so), or instead reflects an increase
in errors of commission (more borrowers refinance even when they should not). Below, we
assess this based on the optimal refinancing decision rule of Agarwal et al. (2013).
To measure refinancing behavior, we use data from Equifax’s Credit Risk Insight Servicing
26

McDash (CRISM) dataset, which merges McDash mortgage servicing records from Black
Knight with credit bureau data from Equifax. The sample period is January 2010 through
June 2016. The CRISM dataset provides information on loan and borrower characteristics
such as FICO score, CLTV, interest rate, and loan term, and features borrower identifiers
that allow us to track a borrower across loans and thereby identify mortgage refinancing.36
We focus on the 500 largest counties by loan volume. Details on the sample construction and
how we measure refinancing are provided in Section D of the Internet Appendix, where we
also confirm that the average refinance propensity we measure in our data is closely aligned
with variation over time in the volume of of refinancing loans in HMDA.

A.

Refinancing propensity

We measure the effect of FinTech lending on monthly refinancing propensities using the
following OLS regression:
Refi Propensityc,t = αc + αt + β · FinTechSharec,t−s + Γ · Xc,t + c,t

(4)

where Refi Propensityc,t is the share of mortgages in county c in month t that are refinanced
and FinTechSharec,t−s is the one-quarter-lagged four-quarter moving average market share
of FinTech mortgage lenders among refinance loans in a county. We include county fixed
effects, αc , to control for fixed unobservable differences in refinancing speeds across counties
and month fixed effects, αt , to control for aggregate conditions.37 The time-varying countylevel controls Xc,t include average FICO score, average CLTV, the average interest rate on
outstanding loans, and the share of outstanding loans that are FHA or VA loans. We run
the regressions separately for the sample of all outstanding loans, and restricting to 30-year
36

CRISM has previously been used to study refinancing by Beraja et al. (2017) and Di Maggio et al.
(2016).
37
Market shares are calculated based on HMDA. Results are similar if we use all loans, rather than just
refinances, to calculate the market share (although we view this alternative approach as less conceptually
appealing, because composition effects imply that the overall FinTech market share will be affected by the
relative volume of purchase loans versus refinances, which in turn is related to our outcome variable). Market
shares are calculated on a volume-weighted basis, although results are similar if we use loan-count weighted
shares instead. Similarly, our results are robust to using alternative timing conventions, such as the share
over the previous calendar year.

27

FRMs only. We cluster standard errors by county.
Table 9 shows that there is a positive and strongly statistically significant association
between refinancing propensities and FinTech market share. The estimate of 0.689 in column
(2) implies that an 8 percentage point increase in FinTech market share (corresonding to
moving from the 10th to 90th percentile of county averages in 2015) is associated with a
0.055 percentage point increase in the refinancing propensity, about a 10% increase relative
to the average monthly refinancing propensity over this time period of 0.54%. Thus, the
magnitude of the effect is economically meaningful.38
Figure 4 further illustrates the effect. Here we sort the counties into fixed terciles based
on their FinTech market share in the middle of our sample period (between mid-2012 to
mid-2013). We then plot the average refinance propensity in each tercile over time. We see
that in 2010, before the growth in FinTech lending, the tercile of counties where FinTech
lenders subsequently gained the most market share has the slowest refinancing speeds. The
refinancing propensity across the three terciles converge over time, however, coincident with
the growth in FinTech lending. This suggests that FinTech mortgage lenders have helped
“slow” refinancing counties to “catch up.”
In summary, our results show that the faster prepayment speeds on FinTech mortgages
are also reflected in overall market-wide local refinancing propensities, rather than just being
due to a selection of “fast” borrowers into FinTech loans. As a caveat on our results, we note
that, although our regressions condition on county and time fixed effects, the differential
growth in FinTech market share across counties may not be exogenous with respect to
refinancing propensities. For instance, it is possible that FinTech lenders predicted correctly
which geographic regions still had the most potential for higher refinancing volumes, and
advertised and expanded most intensively there. At the least, however, our results suggest
that a higher presence of FinTech lending leads to faster mortgage refinancing, perhaps by
reducing the transaction or time costs of refinancing.39
38

We have also replicated these regressions using HMDA data, where we use the log of the number of
refinance loans originated in a county-month as the dependent variable. The lagged FinTech market share
(controlling for county and month fixed effects) is again positively and significantly associated with refinance
originations, and the magnitude of the effect is comparable to the estimates in Table 9.
39
Our findings here have an interesting parallel to earlier work by Bennett et al. (2001), who find evidence
that technological innovation in the 1990s reduced refinancing frictions and increased mortgage refinancing
speeds.

28

B.

Refinancing optimality

We next examine whether the increase in refinancing speeds documented above is associated
with more optimal refinancing decisions. In other words, is it driven by higher refinancing
by borrowers with a high mortgage coupon rate relative to the available rate on new loans,
and who thus realize large savings in interest costs by refinancing (fewer errors of omission)?
Or is it due in large part to borrowers who refinanced more frequently but should not have
done so because the interest savings were small and outweighed by the costs of refinancing
(more errors of commission)?
To determine the breakeven interest rate differential beyond which a borrower should
refinance, we use the “square-root rule” of Agarwal, Driscoll, and Laibson (2013), henceforth
ADL.40 For this analysis, we restrict the sample to 30-year FRMs, since the ADL optimality
calculation was derived for FRMs; it does not apply to adjustable-rate loans. We note
that the ADL calculation embeds a number of assumptions about the costs and benefits of
refinancing; among these, it does not account for other common refinancing motives, such
as cashing out home equity, shortening the term of the loan, or refinancing from a mortgage
type that requires mortgage insurance (such as FHA loans) to one that does not. While the
ADL benchmark is very useful, it is ultimately a simplification.
Based on the ADL rule, we find, similar to Keys et al. (2016), that at certain points over
our sample period, a lot of borrowers should refinance. For instance, in late 2012, about 60%
of all 30-year FRM borrowers in our sample should have refinanced according to the ADL
benchmark, yet only a significantly smaller percentage did so. However, similar to Agarwal
et al. (2015), we find that among refinances that do occur, more than half are executed at a
rate differential that is too small when assessed against the ADL rule. Thus, at least when
compared to this benchmark, there is substantial scope for enhanced refinancing efficiency.
In Table 10, we estimate loan-level regressions similar to the county-level specifications
from above, but now separating outstanding mortgages into different bins depending on
how “in the money” the refinancing option is. Specifically, the “refi incentive” shown in
40

The square-root rule is a second-order approximation that comes close to the (more complicated) optimal
decision rule derived by ADL. As inputs to the calculation, we require assumptions on discount rates, tax
rates, moving probabilities, interest rate volatility, and (most importantly) the upfront costs associated with
refinancing; we use the same parameter values as ADL’s baseline calibration (following also Keys et al. 2016).

29

the table is equal to the difference between the outstanding mortgage rate and current
market rate, minus the optimal refinancing differential according to ADL.41 For instance, if
a borrower is currently paying 6.5%, the market interest rate is at 4.5%, and the optimal
refinancing differential is 1.5% based on the ADL formula, the borrower would have a 0.5%
positive refinancing incentive. If the market rate increases to 5.5%, the refinancing incentive
would become negative. Even though a refinancing in this situation would still reduce the
borrower’s monthly payments, the savings would not be sufficient to outweigh the fixed costs
of refinancing and the loss of option value.
Column (1) shows that for borrowers where the refinancing option is more than 1 percentage point out of the money, a higher local FinTech share has a marginally negative effect
on the likelihood of refinancing. The effect of a higher FinTech share then becomes positive,
and is highest for borrowers that are within 50 basis points of their optimal refinancing
differential (columns 3 and 4). The effect size then decreases again somewhat for borrowers
that have a large refinancing incentive according to ADL; these borrowers in many cases
have suboptimally failed to refinance for a long period of time (given that the refinancing incentive is driven by market interest rates, which drift only slowly through time). In industry
jargon, these borrowers are sometimes called “woodheads” (Deng and Quigley, 2012).
The results imply that an increased presence of FinTech lenders is most strongly associated with higher refinancing when the borrower’s incentive to refinance is either “at the
money” or just “in the money.” It does not appear that FinTech lenders induce an increase
in grossly inefficient refinancings (if anything, the reverse is true), although they also do not
spur a large increase in refinancing for the borrowers who would gain the most from doing
so.
We present additional evidence in Table A.4 of the Internet Appendix. Specifically we
examine refinances from 30-year FRMs to new 30-year FRMs, and find that a higher local
FinTech share is associated with a higher fraction of refinances that would be classified as
optimal; larger decreases in the interest rate a borrower is paying; and a higher fraction of
cash-out refinancings.
41

The FRM market rate is measured using the 30-year FRM rate from Freddie Mac’s Primary Mortgage
Market Survey, which is a standard source for academic research and policy analysis.

30

In sum, the results suggest that a higher share of FinTech lending is associated not
just with faster refinancing, but also more optimal refinancing decisions. However, this
effect appears somewhat weaker for the borrowers that would most benefit from additional
refinancing. Such borrowers may be less financially literate; we show in the next section
that proxies for financial literacy are negatively correlated with takeup of mortgages from
FinTech lenders. In some cases seemingly “woodhead” borrowers may face other obstacles
that prevent refinancing (e.g., a significant decline in income since the original mortgage was
received). To the extent that an increased FinTech share in the market overall continues to
lead to faster refinancing, it is in fact possible that borrowers who themselves are limited
in their sophistication or are otherwise unable to refinance may be worse off: in equilibrium
faster prepayment speeds will be priced in MBS valuations, which could feed through to
higher market mortgage rates.

VII

Who Borrows From FinTech Lenders?

The market share of FinTech lenders varies significantly by geography and across segments
of the mortgage market.42 In this section we estimate a simple model of the likelihood of
borrowing from a FinTech mortgage lender as a function of loan, borrower and location
characteristics. We then compare the cross-sectional patterns in the data to a number of
hypotheses about the drivers of the growth in FinTech mortgage borrowing.
We estimate a loan-level linear probability model using pooled HMDA data on mortgage
originations from 2010 to 2016:
FinTechi,c,t = αt + β · Controlsi,c,t + Γ · locationc + l,c,t

(5)

where FinTechi,c,t is equal to 100 if mortgage i in census tract c originated at time t was orig42

Table 2 provides univariate summary statistics about the characteristics of mortgages from FinTech
lenders. Figure E in the Internet Appendix maps the FinTech market share of mortgage originations in
2010 and 2016. This map highlights the substantial geographic variation in the market share of FinTech
lenders, as well as the widespread growth in technology-based lending over our sample period. One limitation
of HMDA is that market coverage outside of MSAs may be more limited, because very small lenders and
lenders that do not operate in MSAs do not need to report. However, our regression results in this section
are robust to restricting the sample to MSAs.

31

inated by a FinTech lender and zero otherwise, αt is a vector of time dummies, Controlsi,c,t
is a set of loan and borrower characteristics drawn from HMDA, and locationc is a set of
local geographic and socioeconomic variables measured at the census tract or county level,
drawn from a variety of sources including the U.S. Census, American Community Survey
and the FRBNY consumer credit panel. These location variables are measured in 2010, or
otherwise as early in time as possible, to minimize any concerns about reverse causality.
Data definitions and sources are provided in the Data Appendix.
We estimate this model separately for purchase mortgages and refinances, because the
determinants of demand may be quite different between the two, and because the market
share of FinTech lenders is significantly higher for refinances (Table 2). Since differences in
borrower characteristics between FinTech lenders and banks may be driven by regulatory
factors, we present each specification both including and excluding mortgages from banks.
In the specifications excluding banks, FinTech lenders are compared to other nonbanks, who
are regulated similarly and have the same funding model.

A.

Results

Estimates are presented in Table 11. Each continuous right-hand side variable is normalized
to have a standard deviation of one, so that magnitudes can be compared across variables.43
Below, we discuss the cross-sectional patterns relative to the predictions of four sets of
potential drivers of the growth in FinTech mortgage lending: (i) access to finance, (ii)
technology adoption and financial literacy, (iii) Internet access, and (iv) local mortgage and
housing market conditions.
Access to finance. We find no strong evidence that FinTech lenders disproportionately
cater to financially constrained borrowers (e.g., borrowers with low incomes or poor credit
43

Beyond the main variables of interest reported in the table, regressions also control for loan size (in logs),
dummies for loan type (jumbo, FHA, VA), dummies for coapplicant and investor loan, additional individuallevel race dummies, state dummies, and dummies for missing values for each variable with incomplete data
coverage. See Internet Appendix F for a full table of results including these variables. The table in the
Internet Appendix also presents results of univariate regressions in which the FinTech dummy is regressed
individually on each right-hand-side variable. The only additional control included in these univariate regressions is the vector of time dummies. Comparing the univariate and multivariate results helps to show
which results are robust to the inclusion or exclusion of other variables.

32

histories), particularly compared to other nonbanks. Although the FinTech market share
is higher in census tracts where mortgage borrowers have lower average credit scores, the
results for income and the share of FHA/VA-insured mortgages are mixed depending on
the type of loan and comparison group.44 As shown in Section IV, FinTech mortgages also
have comparatively lower default rates on FHA loans, suggesting they are not targeting the
riskiest borrowers. Nonbank lenders overall, including FinTech lenders, originate a significantly higher share of FHA and VA loans than banks, however (see Table 2 or the Internet
Appendix). Buchak et al. (2017) attribute the low levels of bank FHA lending to regulatory
and legal factors. FinTech lenders attract a higher share of female borrowers, although the
share of black or hispanic borrowers is lower in most specifications.45
Also related to access to finance, we test whether FinTech borrowing is higher in census
tracts with few physical bank branches. We measure branch access as the number of bank
branches within a 25 mile radius of the geographic midpoint of the census tract, based on
FDIC Summary of Deposits data. Even though the FinTech business model is focused on
online applications, we find that the share of FinTech borrowing is increasing in bank branch
density.
Technology adoption and financial literacy. Early technology adoption is often
concentrated in urban areas as well as among younger and more educated consumers. Indeed,
we find that the FinTech market share is higher in more urban neighborhoods, measured by
population density, although only for purchase mortgages (for refinances, the coefficient flips
sign across specifications).
Examining education and age directly, we find that the FinTech market share is increasing
in the fraction of adults with at least a bachelor’s degree. Interestingly, however, the share
of FinTech borrowing is increasing with average mortgage borrower age. Although this may
44

Among purchase mortgages, FinTech borrowers have higher incomes either compared to all lenders or
just nonbanks, and are also less likely to be FHA/VA guaranteed than loans from other nonbanks. For
refinances, FinTech borrowers have lower incomes and the fraction of FHA/VA insured loans is generally
higher. –see Internet Appendix F for the FHA and VA coefficients
45
Our estimates with regard to borrower gender and race should be treated with caution, because as
discussed earlier, a significant fraction of race and gender fields in HMDA are coded as missing or “NA”
for FinTech lenders. As a result, the measured shares of female and minority borrowers are likely to be a
lower bound. Using census tract variation in minority population from the 2010 Census, we find that the
FinTech share is lower in tracts with a high share of minority borrowers, although this is not always true in
the univariate specifications in the Internet Appendix.

33

seem counterintuitive, we have been told by industry practitioners that first-time mortgage
borrowers often prefer to interact face-to-face with a mortgage broker or loan officer, rather
than applying online, because they are less familiar with the steps involved; in other words
they are less financially experienced and literate (consistent with Agarwal et al., 2009, who
find that financial literacy increases with age up to individuals’ mid-50’s).
Internet access. As online services become more ubiquitous, there is growing concern
about the “digital divide”, meaning that inequality in access to Internet services may be exacerbating income and wealth inequality. We examine whether the availability of high-speed
Internet is a constraint on FinTech mortgage borrowing (where applications are generally
completed online), using two data sources: first, the fraction of households with high-speed
Internet access from the Census Bureau American Community Survey (available from 2013
by county); second, census-block data from the FCC and NTIA for the ten largest states
by population on the fraction of households with the option to connect to fiber or cable
Internet, which we aggregate by census tract.
Empirically, these two variables have opposite signs, and the coefficients are generally
small in magnitude. We conclude that lack of access to adequate Internet does not appear to be a significant constraint on the diffusion of technology-based mortgage lending.
This interpretation is also consistent with more detailed analysis described below about the
staggered rollout of Google Fiber in one local market.
Local mortgage and housing market conditions. As FinTech lending becomes
more widely available, it may be particularly beneficial in areas with long processing times.
Indeed, we find that a higher share of FinTech mortgage borrowing in census tracts where
mortgage processing times were slow ex ante, measured in 2010 prior to the growth in
FinTech lending.46 This result suggests that borrowers have turned to FinTech lenders in
part to alleviate bottlenecks in mortgage origination associated with “traditional” mortgage
lenders.47
46
We measure average processing time in 2010 conditional on borrower characteristics. Using 2010 HMDA
data, we regress processing time on loan and borrower characteristics. We then take the residuals from this
regression and aggregate them to the census tract level.
47
As discussed in Section III, the sign of this correlation also speaks against concerns that our earlier
processing time results are due to selection effects. If “fast processor” borrowers (conditional on observables)
are attracted to FinTech lenders, we would have expected a higher ex post FinTech share in neighborhoods
where 2010 processing times were faster than would be expected based on observables. In fact, however, we

34

We also examine whether FinTech mortgage borrowing is more prevalent in “hot” real
estate markets where prices are rising rapidly and quick closing may be more important.
Anecdotal evidence suggests that borrowers may be particuarly attracted to the convenience
and fast processing speeds of FinTech lenders in such markets.48 We find no empirical
support for this hypothesis; in fact, home price growth is negatively correlated with the
market share of FinTech lending for purchase mortgages (which are the relevant group to
consider for this hypothesis).
We examine whether the FinTech share is lower in neighborhoods with high average
home prices (measured in 2010). This hypothesis is motivated by the fact that FinTech
lenders rely on securitization for funding mortgages; as a result these lenders originate few
jumbo loans, which are difficult to securitize. This in turn means that FinTech lenders may
advertise less in high-home-price markets where jumbo mortgages predominate. There also
may be less social learning about the FinTech mortgage lending model in such markets. We
do indeed find that the likelihood of borrowing from a FinTech lender is lower in high home
price areas, conditional on loan size and other observables.

B.

Interpretation

We interpret our evidence as supporting the view that FinTech mortgage borrowers are
attracted to the faster processing times and greater convenience involved with online applications and partial automation of mortgage underwriting. This is consistent with the faster
growth of FinTech in census tracts with previously long mortgage processing cycle times and
the higher incomes and education of FinTech borrowers. It is also consistent with the high
share of refinances for FinTech lenders.49 We find no empirical support for the hypothesis
that FinTech lenders have grown by disproportionately targeting risky, marginal borrowers.
find that the opposite correlation is true in the data.
48
For example, a September 2015 The Street article titled “Online Mortgage Lenders Are Beating Traditional Bank Loans” highlights the shorter closing times of online lenders, and includes the following
quote from the CEO of the lender Bank of the Internet “We have very short underwriting term times and
that’s a plus for our purchase oriented borrowers – we give quick answers,” Garrabrants said. ”In a really
hot market, that’s important.” (see https://www.thestreet.com/story/13282079/1/online-mortgagelenders-are-beating-traditional-bank-loans.html).
49
The more standardized set of tasks involved in refinancing a mortgage may be the best fit for FinTech
lending at the current state of technology.

35

Despite the emphasis of the FinTech lending model on online applications and interactions,
we also find no evidence that younger borrowers or borrowers located in census tracts with
better Internet access are more likely to borrow from FinTech lenders.
We emphasize that we do not attach a strong causal interpretation to our results, given
the reduced-form nature of our analysis. Yet, we believe that the empirical relationships
documented here are a useful benchmark for further analysis.50

C.

Evidence from Google Fiber rollout

In addition to our reduced-form analysis, we also conduct an in-depth empirical analysis
of the potential causal effect of improved Internet access on FinTech lending. We exploit
the staggered entry of a new high-speed Internet provider in a single market, namely the
entry of Google Fiber in Kansas City starting in late 2012. Google Fiber is a large-scale
initiative by Google to establish a new Internet service provider. The first metro area that
Google Fiber entered was the Kansas City area, consisting of Johnson, Leavenworth, and
Wyandotte counties in Kansas and Cass, Clay, Jackson, and Platte counties in Missouri.
A major factor behind the selection of Kansas City was that households had poor access
to high-speed Internet prior to the entry of Google Fiber. High-speed Internet was only
available to a relatively small fraction of households over this period (cable and fiber Internet
from providers other than Google was limited), and there was a rapid expansion in highspeed Internet access over this time period as Google Fiber became available broadly across
the Kansas City area.
Using HMDA data, we analyze how the market share of FinTech lenders across different
neighborhoods in the Kansas City MSA evolved over this period, exploiting the staggered
rollout of Google Fiber across census tracts and controlling for time and census-tract fixed
effects. Results are presented in Internet Appendix G. Our main finding is that the discrete
improvements in Internet access generated by the entry of Google Fiber did not induce a
50

We note that, where comparable, our results are generally consistent with Buchak et al. (2017), who
estimate similar reduced-form regressions of the determinants of borrowing from FinTech lenders and other
nonbanks. For example, Buchak et al. (2017) also find that FinTech lenders originate a significantly higher
share of refinances compared to purchase mortgages, and have a high incidence of missing race and gender.
Besides differences in modelling choices, we also examine a number of determinants of FinTech demand
which Buchak et al. (2017) do not (e.g., bank branch density, borrower age, or Internet access).

36

higher share of FinTech borrowing. The results are often not statistically significant; in
the cases where they are significant they have the opposite sign to that predicted, due to a
migration in mortgage lending from nonbanks to banks.
Consistent with our earlier evidence, these results indicate that adequate Internet access is
unlikely to be a significant constraint on the diffusion of online mortgage lending, mitigating
concerns about the “digital divide” in this setting.

VIII

Conclusion

This paper presents new evidence on how technology is reshaping the U.S. mortgage market by studying the vanguard of technology-based lenders. Our results show that FinTech
lenders offer a faster origination process that is less sensitive to fluctuations in demand than
traditional lenders. These improvements are associated with an increase in the propensity to
refinance, especially among borrowers that are likely to benefit from it. We find no evidence
that FinTech lending is more risky.
Going forward, we expect that other lenders will seek to replicate the “FinTech model”
characterized by electronic application processes with centralized, semi-automated underwriting operations. However, it is unclear whether traditional lenders or small institutions
will all be able to adopt these practices as these innovations require significant reorganization and sizable investments. The end result could be a more concentrated mortgage market
dominated by those firms that can afford to innovate. From a consumer perspective, we
believe our results shed light on how mortgage credit supply is likely to evolve in the future. Specifically, technology will allow the origination process to be faster and to more
easily accommodate changes in interest rates, leading to greater transmission of monetary
policy to households via the mortgage market. Our findings also imply that technological
diffusion may reduce inefficiencies in refinancing decisions, with significant benefits to U.S.
households.
Our results have to be considered in the prevailing institutional context of the U.S.
mortgage market. Specifically, at the time of our study FinTech lenders are non-banks that
securitize their mortgages and do not take deposits. It remains to be seen whether we find
37

the same benefits of FinTech lending as the model spreads to deposit-taking banks and their
borrowers. Changes in banking regulation or the housing finance system may affect FinTech
lenders going forward. Also, the benefits we document stem from innovations that rely on
hard information; as these innovations spread, they may affect access to credit for those
borrowers with applications that require soft information or borrowers that require direct
communication with a loan officer. We leave these issues for future research.

38

References
Acharya, V. V., P. Schnabl, and G. Suarez (2013): “Securitization without risk
transfer,” Journal of Financial Economics, 107, 515–536.
Agarwal, S., G. Amromin, S. Chomsisengphet, T. Landvoigt, T. Piskorski,
A. Seru, and V. Yao (2017): “Mortgage Refinancing, Consumer Spending, and Competition: Evidence From the Home Affordable Refinance Program,” Working Paper 21512,
National Bureau of Economic Research.
Agarwal, S., J. Driscoll, D. Laibson, and X. Gabaix (2009): “The Age of Reason:
Financial Decisions over the Life Cycle and Implications for Regulation,” Brookings Papers
on Economic Activity, 30, 51–101.
Agarwal, S., J. C. Driscoll, and D. I. Laibson (2013): “Optimal Mortgage Refinancing: A Closed-Form Solution,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 45, 591–622.
Agarwal, S., R. J. Rosen, and V. Yao (2015): “Why Do Borrowers Make Mortgage
Refinancing Mistakes?” Management Science, 62, 3494–3509.
Andersen, S., J. Y. Campbell, K. M. Nielsen, and T. Ramadorai (2015): “Inattention and Inertia in Household Finance: Evidence from the Danish Mortgage Market,”
Working Paper 21386, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Badarinza, C., J. Y. Campbell, and T. Ramadorai (2016): “International comparative household finance,” Annual Review of Economics, 8, 111 – 144.
Bartlett, R., A. Morse, R. Stanton, and N. Wallace (2017): “Consumer Lending
Discrimination in the FinTech Era,” Working paper, UC Berkeley.
Bennett, P., R. Peach, and S. Peristiani (2001): “Structural Change in the Mortgage
Market and the Propensity to Refinance,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 33, 955–
975.
Beraja, M., A. Fuster, E. Hurst, and J. Vavra (2017): “Regional Heterogeneity
and Monetary Policy,” Staff Report No. 731, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Bond, P., R. Elul, S. Garyn-Tal, and D. K. Musto (2017): “Does Junior Inherit?
Refinancing and the Blocking Power of Second Mortgages,” Review of Financial Studies,
30, 211–244.
Buchak, G., G. Matvos, T. Piskorski, and A. Seru (2017): “Fintech, Regulatory
Arbitrage, and the Rise of Shadow Banks,” Working Paper 23288, National Bureau of
Economic Research.
Campbell, J. Y. (2006): “Household Finance,” Journal of Finance, 61, 1553 – 1604.
39

——— (2013): “Mortgage Market Design,” Review of Finance, 17, 1 – 33.
Choi, D. B., H.-S. Choi, and J.-E. Kim (2017): “Clogged Intermediation: Were Home
Buyers Crowded Out?” Working paper, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Collard-Wexler, A. and J. De Loecker (2015): “Reallocation and Technology: Evidence from the US Steel Industry,” American Economic Review, 105, 131–71.
D’Acunto, F. and A. G. Rossi (2017): “Regressive Mortgage Credit Redistribution in
the Post-crisis Era,” Working paper, University of Maryland.
DeFusco, A. A., S. Johnson, and J. Mondragon (2017): “Regulating Household
Leverage,” Working paper, Northwestern University.
Deng, Y. and J. M. Quigley (2012): “Woodhead Behavior and the Pricing of Residential
Mortgages,” Working Paper IRES2012-025, NUS Institute of Real Estate Studies.
Di Maggio, M., A. Kermani, B. J. Keys, T. Piskorski, R. Ramcharan, A. Seru,
and V. Yao (2017): “Interest rate pass-through: Mortgage rates, household consumption,
and voluntary deleveraging,” American Economic Review, 107, 3550–3588.
Di Maggio, M., A. Kermani, and C. Palmer (2016): “How Quantitative Easing Works:
Evidence on the Refinancing Channel,” Working Paper No. 22638, National Bureau of
Economic Research.
Drechsler, I., A. Savov, and P. Schnabl (2017): “The deposits channel of monetary
policy,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132, 1819–1876.
Freddie Mac (2016): “Your Step-by-Step Mortgage Guide: From Application to
Closing,” http://www.freddiemac.com/singlefamily/docs/Step_by_Step_Mortgage_
Guide_English.pdf, accessed 2017-08-15.
Fuster, A., P. Goldsmith-Pinkham, T. Ramadorai, and A. Walther (2017a):
“Predictably Unequal? The Effects of Machine Learning on Credit Markets,” Discussion
Paper 12448, CEPR.
Fuster, A., S. H. Lo, and P. S. Willen (2017b): “The Time-Varying Price of Financial
Intermediation in the Mortgage Market,” Staff Report 805, Federal Reserve Bank of New
York.
Fuster, A. and P. S. Willen (2010): “$1.25 Trillion is Still Real Money: Some Facts
About the Effects of the Federal Reserve’s Mortgage Market Investments,” Public Policy
Discussion Paper 10-4, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston.
Gete, P. and M. Reher (2017): “Mortgage Supply and Housing Rents,” Review of
Financial Studies, forthcoming.

40

Goldman Sachs Research (2015): “The Future of Finance,” https://www.planetfintech.com/file/167061, accessed 2018-01-15.
——— (2016): “The Mortgage Analyst: Prepays catching up to Quicken?
Not
so quick,” http://www.thebondbeat.com/bondbeat/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/
gs-TMA.pdf, accessed 2017-03-15.
Goodman, L. (2016): “Why Rocket Mortgage Won’t Start Another Housing Crisis,” Urban
Institute Urban Wire Blog, February 12. Accessed 2017-03-15.
Housing Wire (2015): “Guaranteed Rate Purchases Remains of Discover Home Loans,”
https://www.housingwire.com/articles/34986-guaranteed-rate-purchasesremains-of-discover-home-loans, accessed 2018-01-15.
——— (2017): “Quicken Loans’ Rocket Mortgage Finally a Fully Digital Mortgage Thanks
to Pavaso Partnership,” https://www.housingwire.com/articles/41498-quickenloans-rocket-mortgage-finally-a-fully-digital-mortgage-thanks-to-pavasopartnership, accessed 2018-01-15.
Jiang, W., A. A. Nelson, and E. Vytlacil (2014): “Securitization and Loan Performance: Ex Ante and Ex Post Relations in the Mortgage Market,” Review of Financial
Studies, 27, 454–483.
Keys, B., D. Pope, and J. Pope (2016): “Failure to Refinance,” Journal of Financial
Economics, 122, 482 – 499.
Keys, B. J., T. Mukherjee, A. Seru, and V. Vig (2010): “Did securitization lead
to lax screening? Evidence from subprime loans,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125,
307–362.
LaCour-Little, M. (2000): “The Evolving Role of Technology in Mortgage Finance,”
Journal of Housing Research, 11, 173–205.
——— (2007): “The Home Purchase Mortgage Preferences of Low- and Moderate-Income
Households,” Real Estate Economics, 35, 265–290.
Mayer, C., T. Piskorski, and A. Tchistyi (2013): “The inefficiency of refinancing:
Why prepayment penalties are good for risky borrowers,” Journal of Financial Economics,
107, 694 – 714.
Mian, A. and A. Sufi (2009): “The consequences of mortgage credit expansion: Evidence
from the US mortgage default crisis,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124, 1449–1496.
Oliver Wyman (2016): “The Future of Technology in Mortgage Originations,” White
paper.

41

Petersen, M. and R. Rajan (2002): “Does distance still matter? The information
revolution in small business lending,” Journal of Finance, 57, 2533 – 2570.
Philippon, T. (2016): “The FinTech Opportunity,” Working Paper 22476, National Bureau
of Economic Research.
Purnanandam, A. (2010): “Originate-to-distribute model and the subprime mortgage
crisis,” Review of Financial Studies, 24, 1881–1915.
Quicken Loans (2017a): “Quicken Loans and eOriginal Partner on Next Mortgage
Revolution,”
http://www.quickenloans.com/press-room/2017/10/17/quickenloans-eoriginal-partner-next-phase-digital-mortgage-revolution/,
accessed
2018-01-08.
——— (2017b): “Quicken Loans Continues Simplifying Mortgage Process, Allows
More Financial Information in Fewer Steps,” http://www.quickenloans.com/pressroom/2017/10/23/quicken-loans-continues-simplifying-mortgage-processallows-clients-share-financial-information-fewer-steps/, accessed 2018-01-06.
Scharfstein, D. and A. Sunderam (2016): “Market Power in Mortgage Lending and
the Transmission of Monetary Policy,” Working Paper, Harvard University.
Sharpe, S. A. and S. M. Sherlund (2016): “Crowding Out Effects of Refinancing on
New Purchase Mortgages,” Review of Industrial Organization, 48, 209–239.
Stein, J. (2002): “Information production and capital allocation: Decentralized versus
hierarchical firms,” Journal of Finance, 57, 1891 – 1921.
Syverson, C. (2011): “What Determines Productivity?” Journal of Economic Literature,
49, 326–65.
The Economist (2016): “A New Foundation: One of America’s Biggest Mortgage Lenders
is Not Like the Others,” May 26.
Wall Street Journal (2015): “FHA Offers Olive Branch to Hesitant Lenders,” September 1.
Wong, A. (2016): “Population Aging and the Transmission of Monetary Policy to Consumption,” Working paper, Northwestern University.

42

Appendix: Data Sources and Variable Definitions
Variable

HMDA
Log(income)
Log(loan size)
Loan-to-income (LTI)
Jumbo Loan [0,1]
Loan Type [0,1]
Loan purpose [0,1]
No Coapplicant [0,1]
Owner Occupied [0,1]
Gender [0,1]
Race & Ethnicity [0,1]
Processing Time
Log(application volume)
U.S. Census
% Black or Hispanic
Population density

Definition

Level of
Aggregation

Log of borrower income
Log of loan amount
Loan amount divided by borrower income
Indicator variable equal to one if loan amount exceeds FHFA conforming loan limit for the month of origination
Indicator variables for conventional, FHA, and VA loans. Conventional is omitted category in regressions.
Indicator variables for whether whether loan is a home purchase
loan or a refinancing
Indicator variable equal to one if no coapplicant on the mortgage
application
Indicator for the property being the borrower’s principal dwelling
Indicators for borrower gender being Female, Male, or Unknown
(unreported). Male is omitted category in regressions.
Indicators for race & ethnicity. Non-hispanic white is omitted
category in regressions.
Number of calendar days between the application date and action
date of a loan (based on restricted-use version of HMDA data).
Log of aggregate application volume

Individual
Individual
Individual
Individual

Percent of population identifying as Black, Hispanic, or both in
2010
Thousands of residents in thousands per square mile in 2010

Tract

American Community Survey
% bachelor degree
Percent of population 25 years or older with a bachelor’s or higher
degree in 2010
% with broadband sub- Percent of population with an Internet subscription other than
scription
dial-up (including DSL, cable, fiber optic, mobile broadband,
satellite, or fixed wireless) in 2010
Equifax
Credit score
Age

Zillow
Home price appreciation
Log(2010 home price)
NTIA/FCC
High speed internet coverage

Individual
Individual
Individual
Individual
Individual
Individual
Individual
National

Tract

Tract
County

Mean credit score of all individuals with a positive mortgage balance (measured as of 2014Q3)
Median age of individuals with a positive mortgage balance (measured as of 2014Q3)

Tract

Home price appreciation over the 12 months up to the month of
loan origination
Log of average home price as of January 2010

County

Percent of households with access to either cable or fiber services,
or Google Fiber, measured at a half-yearly frequency. Data is
collected from the NTIA from 2011 to mid-2014 and from the
FCC from end-2014 to end-2016. Data only available for the ten
largest US states.

Tract

43

Tract

County

Variable

Definition

Level of
Aggregation

FDIC Summary of Deposits
Bank branch density
Number of bank branches (in 000s) within a 25 mile radius of the
center of census tract in 2010
FHA Neighborhood Watch Early Warning System
One- and two-year com- Default rate (90+ days delinquent or teriminated in a claim as % of
parative default rate
loans) for FinTech lender i measured as the percent deviation from
the default rate for all FHA loans in the same geography and time
period. 1 year default rate considers only defaults occurring in the
first year of the mortgage life. For most analysis, performance is
measured over the sample period 2015:Q3 to 2017:Q3.
Mix-adjusted 2-year de- Based on the FHA supplementary performance measure (SPM,
fault rate
equal to the ratio of the lender’s two-year default rate to a benchmark default rate for a portfolio of loans with the same mix of
credit scores.) Mix-adjusted default rate is the ratio of the lender’s
SPM to the SPM for all FHA loans in the same geography and
time period.
Ginnie Mae loan-level data
Default
Indicator variable for whether FHA mortgage enters 90+ days
delinquency
FICO
Borrower credit score at origination
LTV
Ratio of loan amount to appraised property value
DTI
Ratio of total debt payment to borrower income
Equifax CRISM borrower level data
Coupon minus 10-year Difference between average coupon rate on outstanding mortgages
Treasury yield
and 10-year Treasury bond yield (used in Figure 2)
Refinancing propensity
Share of outstanding mortgages in month t that are refinanced in
month t+1
FICO
Borrower credit score (updated monthly), county average
CLTV
Combined loan-to-value ratio (sum of all mortgage liens divided
by updated home value)
Average current rate
Current mortgage coupon rate, county average
FHA/VA share
Share of FHA/VA mortgages in county
Author derived variables
2010 conditional process- Average processing time in 2010 (census tract average, residual
ing time
after regressing processing time in days on HMDA borrower &
loan characteristics)
Refinancing incentive
Difference between coupon rate and rate at which borrower would
be indifferent between refinancing and not refinancing based on
the ‘square root rule’ of Agarwal et al. (2013)

44

Tract

MSA,
state
or
national

MSA,
state
or
national

Individual
Individual
Individual
Individual

National
County
County
County
County
County

Tract

Individual

Figures and Tables
Figure 1: Number of FinTech mortgage lenders (according to our classification) over time

45

Figure 2: Application volume, interest rate, and processing time
(a) Mortgage application volume and interest rates

(b) Mortgage application volume and processing time

Figure shows the evolution of the number of applications for new loans in HMDA that result in loan originations (divided by the number of business days in a given month), plotted against (a) a proxy for borrowers’
refinancing incentive (the difference between the average coupon on outstanding mortgages and the 10-year
Treasury bond yield), and (b) the median processing time for new loan applications that result in loan
originations and were submitted in the same month.

46

Figure 3: Illustrating differences in processing times and elasticity to demand across lender
types.

60

Processing time (days)

55

50

45

40

35
800
Banks

900
1000
1100
1200
1300
Aggregate loan application volume (monthly, in 000s)
FinTech

1400

Other

Figure shows binned scatter plot (with linear fit) of processing times of originated loans against the volume
of aggregate loan applications by lender type, all measured in HMDA 2010-2016:Q2. Processing times and
application volume are first residualized with respect to the following variables: census tract indicators,
calendar month indicators, the log of applicant income, the log of the loan amount, indicators for FHA
loans, VA loans and jumbo loans, applicant race, gender, whether the loan is a refinance, whether the loan
has a coapplicant, whether a pre-approval was requested, the occupancy and lien status of the loan, the
property type, and a dummy indicating whether income is missing. Application volumes are then grouped
into 10 bins, and for each bin the mean of the residualized processing time is calculated and the mean
processing time is added, separately for the three lender types in our analysis.

47

Monthly Refinance Propensity (group average, %)

Figure 4: Refinancing propensities across counties with different levels of FinTech market
share

1.5

1

.5

0
2010m1

2011m1

2012m1

Lowest FinTech Tercile

2013m1

2014m1

Middle Tercile

2015m1

2016m1

Highest FinTech Tercile

Figure shows average monthly refinance propensities across three groups of counties, sorted based on countylevel FinTech market shares (among refinance loans) over mid-2012 to mid-2013. Data source: CRISM.

48

Table 1: FinTech and Top 20 Mortgage Originators in 2016, based on Home Mortgage
Disclosure Act (HMDA)
Rank

Type of
Lender

Lender Name

Volume
(Bn)

Market
Share (%)

FinTech
Since

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
...
23
39

Bank
FinTech
Bank
Bank
FinTech
Mtg
Bank
Mtg
Bank
Mtg
Bank
FinTech
Mtg
Mtg
Bank
Mtg
Mtg
Bank
Bank
Mtg

Wells Fargo
Quicken Loans
JPMorgan Chase
Bank Of America
Loandepot.com
Freedom Mortgage
US Bank
Caliber Home Loans
Flagstar
United Shore
Citibank
Guaranteed Rate
Finance of America
Fairway Independent
USAA Federal Savings
Guild Mortgage
Stearns Lending
Suntrust Mortgage
Primelending
Nationstar Mortgage

132.58
90.55
75.52
60.24
35.94
32.17
30.69
27.94
27.31
22.93
21.73
18.44
17.63
16.10
15.52
15.07
14.93
14.77
13.87
13.50

6.62
4.52
3.77
3.01
1.80
1.61
1.53
1.40
1.36
1.15
1.09
0.92
0.88
0.80
0.78
0.75
0.75
0.74
0.69
0.67

FinTech
FinTech

11.61
7.62

0.58
0.38

2014
2016

534

FinTech

Movement Mortgage
Everett Financial
(Supreme)
Avex Funding
(Better.com)

0.49

0.02

2016

2010

2016

2010

Bank = Depository Institution, Mtg = Non-bank Mortgage Lender, FinTech = FinTech Lender
Market share is based on dollar volume of originations in HMDA.

49

Table 2: Descriptive statistics by lender type, HMDA data 2010 - mid-2016
Banks

Non-bank lenders
Non-FinTech
FinTech
Mean p50 Mean p50

Mean

p50

121
1.96
0.34
0.66
0.05

86.00
1.80
0
1
0

102
2.46
0.52
0.48
0.02

82.00
2.40
1
0
0

102
2.34
0.22
0.78
0.02

0.86
0.09
0.05
0.88
0.67
0.25
0.45

1
0
0
1
1
0
0

0.61
0.28
0.11
0.92
0.69
0.27
0.52

1
0
0
1
1
0
1

0.71
0.20
0.09
0.92
0.59
0.26
0.50

All Lenders
Mean

p50

84.00
2.19
0
1
0

115
2.13
0.38
0.62
0.04

84.00
2.00
0
1
0

1
0
0
1
1
0
0

0.78
0.15
0.07
0.89
0.68
0.26
0.48

1
0
0
1
1
0
0

Originated Mortgages
Applicant Income
Loan amount / income
Home Purchase
Refinancing
Jumbo
Loan Type:
Conventional
FHA
VA
Owner Occupied
Male
Female
No Coapplicant
Race:
White
Black/African American
Asian
Other
Unknown
Processing Time
Observations

0.79
1
0.04
0
0.05
0
0.01
0
0.11
0
53.04 45.00
32,751,662

1
0.78
0.06
0
0
0.07
0
0.01
0
0.09
50.20 40.00
14,742,227

1
0.68
0.05
0
0
0.04
0
0.01
0
0.22
42.58 37.00
2,306,237

0.78
0.05
0.06
0.01
0.11
51.71

1
0
0
0
0
43.00
49,800,126

All Applications
Loan Outcome
Originated
Approved, Not Accepted
Denied
Withdrawn
Closed for Incompleteness
Processing Time
Observations

0.64
1
0.04
0
0.20
0
0.09
0
0.03
0
47.16 40.00
51,448,444

0.58
1
0
0.05
0.16
0
0.15
0
0.06
0
46.98 35.00
25,604,501

0.66
1
0
0.03
0.27
0
0.03
0
0.01
0
40.11 35.00
3,473,506

0.62
0.04
0.19
0.11
0.04
46.80

1
0
0
0
0
38.00
80,526,451

Table contains summary statistics of HMDA data by lender type, for loan applications from January 2010 through June 2016. “Banks” are
depository institutions, “Non-bank lenders” are non-bank mortgage lenders, and “FinTech” lenders are classified according to Section II.
In the first part of the table, summary statistics are calculated for originated mortgages only. In the second part of the table, statistics are
calculated for all applications, which include applications that ended up being originated, approved by the lender but not accepted by the
borrower, denied, withdrawn by the applicant before a decision was made, or closed for incompleteness. “Applicant Income” is in thousands
of USD and does not include missing values. ”Loan amount / income“ (LTI) is loan amount divided by applicant income; LTI is winsorized
at the 0.5% level and does not include missing values. “Jumbo” is an indicator for the loan amount being greater than the applicable FHFA
Conforming Loan Limit. “Owner Occupied” is an indicator for the property being the borrower’s principal dwelling. “No Coapplicant” is
an indicator for no coapplicant provided for the loan. Race: “Other” is an indicator for applicant race being American Indian, Alaskan,
Hawaiian, or Pacific Islander. “Unknown” is an indicator for race being unreported or “Not Applicable”. “Processing Time” is the number
of days between application date and action date of a loan. Loan outcomes: “Originated” are applications that were successfully originated.
“Approved, Not Accepted” are applications where the application was approved, but not accepted by applicant. “Denied” are applications
that were denied by originator. “Withdrawn” are applications that were withdrawn by the applicant before a credit decision was made.
“Closed for Incompleteness” are applications where the application file was closed for incompleteness.

50

Table 3: FinTech lenders and processing times: Loan-level results
Panel A: Purchase Loans
FinTech Lender

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

-7.93***
(0.52)

-8.33***
(0.43)

19,159,345
0.00
No
No
All Lenders

-9.43***
(0.61)
-0.55***
(0.04)
4.47***
(0.08)
0.65***
(0.15)
1.68***
(0.22)
3.17***
(0.22)
19,159,345
0.02
No
Yes
All Lenders

18,551,855
0.23
Yes
No
All Lenders

-9.24***
(0.48)
-1.00***
(0.03)
4.90***
(0.05)
0.27***
(0.10)
1.51***
(0.20)
5.29***
(0.15)
18,551,855
0.24
Yes
Yes
All Lenders

-7.46***
(0.45)
-0.44***
(0.06)
6.09***
(0.13)
-0.34***
(0.09)
1.91***
(0.30)
5.90***
(0.28)
7,185,042
0.34
Yes
Yes
Nonbanks

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

-9.99***
(0.59)

-13.64***
(0.57)
0.04
(0.09)
4.74***
(0.10)
5.83***
(0.46)
1.70***
(0.53)
7.06***
(0.23)
30,616,247
0.10
No
Yes
All Lenders

-10.82***
(0.79)

-14.61***
(0.71)
-0.17***
(0.06)
4.60***
(0.09)
5.67***
(0.40)
2.04***
(0.44)
7.23***
(0.21)
30,169,300
0.24
Yes
Yes
All Lenders

-9.32***
(0.53)
-0.25**
(0.12)
1.24***
(0.14)
5.48***
(0.29)
1.42***
(0.41)
9.71***
(0.17)
8,041,746
0.29
Yes
Yes
Nonbanks

Log(Applicant Income)
Log(Loan Amount)
FHA
VA
Jumbo
Observations
R2
Census Tract-Month
Loan Controls
Sample
Panel B: Refinance Loans
FinTech Lender
Log(Applicant Income)
Log(Loan Amount)
FHA
VA
Jumbo
Observations
R2
Census Tract-Month
Loan Controls
Sample

30,616,247
0.01
No
No
All Lenders

30,169,300
0.18
Yes
No
All Lenders

Table reports regressions of loan processing time (in days) on an indicator variable identifying FinTech
lenders, census tract-month fixed effects, loan controls and borrower controls. Data source: HMDA. The
sample consists of originated purchase loans in Panel A and refinancing loans in Panel B with application
dates from 2010 to 2016Q2. Displayed loan controls include the log of applicant income, the log of the loan
amount, indicators for FHA loans, VA loans and jumbo loans. Suppressed loan controls include applicant
race, gender, whether the loan has a coapplicant, whether a preapproval was obtained, the occupancy and
lien status of the loan, the property type, and a dummy indicating whether income is missing. Column (5)
excludes bank lenders. Standard errors reported in parentheses are clustered by lender-month. ***, **, *
indicate statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10%, respectively.

51

Table 4: Default rate for FinTech lenders, FHA loans (% deviation from region)
Default definition
1 Year
Default
A. All FHA loans
State level

2 Year
Default

Mix-Adjusted
2 Year Default

-35.0***
-35.8***
(3.8)
(3.9)
MSA level
-35.3***
-36.2***
(2.4)
(2.6)
B. High market share regions only (loans in top quartile markets by lender):
State level
-24.7***
-23.4***
(8.4)
(8.6)
MSA level
-19.8***
-20.5***
(6.0)
(6.1)
C. Disaggregated by purchase versus refinancing (all loans, state level)
Purchase
-14.8***
-17.1***
(3.6)
(4.3)
Refinancing
-30.6***
-27.5***
(2.6)
(3.5)
D. Disaggregated by neighborhood socioeconomic status (all loans, state level)
Underserved (low income/minority)
-33.5***
-32.4***
(4.5)
(4.4)
Not Underserved
-36.8***
-36.5***
(3.6)
(3.9)
E. All FHA loans: longer time series
National level
-44.7***
-45.6***
(4.8)
(4.5)
State level
-45.4***
-46.1***
(3.2)
(3.1)

-25.5***
(4.5)

-11.7
(9.9)

-10.1*
(5.9)
-40.3***
(2.4)
-25.3***
(4.4)
-25.4***
(4.3)
-32.7***
(5.7)
-33.4***
(3.9)

Table reports weighted average percent difference in default rate between mortgages from
FinTech lenders and all FHA mortgages originated in same time period and market (either MSA, state or national market). Values less than zero indicate lower default rates
for FinTech lenders. These statistics are calculated as the weighted average of compareir =
(def ault rateir /def ault rater )−1 across FinTech lenders i and regions r, weighting by lender
origination volume. In practice we calculate this weighted average by regressing compareir
on a constant term using weighted least squares. Default definition is either default within
first year, default within first two years, or the ‘mix-adjusted’ default rate which is based on
the supplementary performance metric, an adjusted default rate which takes into account
the credit score distribution of originations (see text for details). Sample period 2015:Q3 to
2017:Q3 except for panel E, where sample period is 2012:Q3 to 2017:Q3. Data extracted
from the FHA Early Warning System portal in December 2017. Robust standard errors
in parentheses; standard errors clustered by state in state-level regression using longer time
series (section E). ***, **, * indicate statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10%, respectively.
52

Table 5: FHA mortgage default regressions based on Ginnie Mae data.

FinTech

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

-1.29***
(0.13)

-0.97***
(0.13)

-0.93***
(0.14)

-1.51***
(0.13)

-0.79***
(0.11)

FinTech Share

(6)

-0.91***
(0.14)
-0.10
(1.00)

FT X FT share
FICO
LTV
DTI
Purpose FE
Month FE
State FE
MonthXState FE
Loan Controls
Mean Y
R2
Observations
Loan Sample

(7)

No
Yes
No
No
No
3.65
0.02
4097569
All

Yes
Yes
No
No
No
3.65
0.02
4097568
All

-0.04***
(0.00)
0.04***
(0.00)
0.06***
(0.00)

-0.05***
(0.00)
0.07***
(0.00)
0.07***
(0.00)

-0.03***
(0.00)
0.03***
(0.00)
0.04***
(0.00)

-0.04***
(0.00)
0.04***
(0.00)
0.06***
(0.00)

-1.70*
(0.98)
-0.04***
(0.00)
0.04***
(0.00)
0.06***
(0.00)

Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
3.65
0.04
4097544
All

Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
4.00
0.05
2966644
Purch.

Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
2.73
0.03
1130881
Refi

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
3.65
0.04
4097548
All

Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
3.65
0.04
4097544
All

Table reports regressions of indicator for a loan ever entering 90+ day delinquency on an indicator variable
identifying FinTech issuers (or the state-level FinTech market share, demeaned by month; or the interaction
of the FinTech indicator with FinTech market share), state-by-origination month fixed effects, loan controls
and borrower controls. The sample consists of FHA-insured 30-year fixed-rate mortgages originated over
June 2013 to May 2017, obtained from Ginnie Mae MBS monthly loan-level disclosures. Displayed loan
controls include the borrower FICO score, the loan-to-value ratio (LTV) and the debt-to-income ratio
(DTI). Suppressed loans controls include loan purpose type, the log of the loan amount, and indicators
for the number of borrowers, the property type, whether the borrower received down payment assistance,
and for whether FICO, LTV, or DTI are missing. Standard errors reported in parentheses are clustered by
issuer-origination month. ***, **, * indicate statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10%, respectively.

53

Table 6: Elasticity of processing time with respect to aggregate application volume: FinTech
vs. other lenders

ln(App. Vol.)
ln(App. Vol.) × FinTech

Observations
R2

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

11.76***
(0.52)
-7.55***
(1.46)

13.48***
(0.47)
-6.15***
(1.51)

18.88***
(0.67)
-9.57***
(1.80)

13.43***
(0.47)
-7.46***
(1.50)

8.85***
(0.45)
-2.06
(1.40)

13.60***
(0.81)
-4.45***
(1.67)

10.55***
(0.79)
-4.47***
(1.56)

49,775,550
0.14

49,775,312
0.20

30,615,852
0.25

80,495,817
0.17

17,024,138
0.20

8,927,175
0.16

29,048,184
0.16

Loan Controls
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Lender FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Census Tract FE
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Month FE
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Application Sample
Originated Originated
Refi
All
Originated
Refi
All
Lender Sample
All
All
All
All
Nonbanks Nonbanks Nonbanks
Table reports regressions of loan processing time (in days) on the log of aggregate monthly application
volume, an interaction with the FinTech indicator, loan controls, lender fixed effects, census-tract fixed
effects and calendar month fixed effects. Data source: HMDA. The sample is restricted to application
dates from 2010 to 2016:Q2. Columns (1), (2), and (5) include all originated loans; Columns (3) and (6)
include originated refinancing loans; and Columns (4) and (7) include all applications (including denied
and withdrawn applications). The sample of lenders includes all lender types in Columns (1)-(4) and
nonbanks only in Columns (5)-(7). Loan controls include the log of applicant income, the log of the loan
amount, indicators for FHA loans, VA loans and jumbo loans, applicant race, gender, whether the loan has
a coapplicant, whether a preapproval was obtained, the occupancy and lien status of the loan, the property
type, and a dummy indicating whether income is missing. Columns (4) and (7) also include indicators
for whether a loan was denied or withdrawn. Standard errors reported in parentheses are clustered by
lender-month. ***, **, * indicate statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10%, respectively.

54

Table 7: Elasticity of mortgage application denial probabilities with respect to variation in
aggregate demand for loans — FinTech vs. other lenders.

ln(App. Vol.)
ln(App. Vol.) × FinTech
Loan controls
Lender FE
Census Tract FE
R2
Observations
Application Sample
Lender Sample

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

-0.068***
(0.003)
-0.108***
(0.016)

-0.107***
(0.004)
-0.087***
(0.015)

-0.067***
(0.006)
-0.108***
(0.016)

-0.124***
(0.009)
-0.072***
(0.016)

Yes
Yes
Yes
0.18
68,793,269
All
All

Yes
Yes
Yes
0.18
44,728,223
Refi
All

Yes
Yes
Yes
0.27
23,538,398
All
Nonbanks

Yes
Yes
Yes
0.30
13,328,381
Refi
Nonbanks

Table reports regressions of indicator for loan application denial on the log of aggregate application volume,
an interaction with the FinTech indicator, loan controls, lender fixed effects, census-tract fixed effects and
calendar month fixed effects. Data source: HMDA. The sample is restricted to application dates from 2010
to 2016:Q2. Applications are included if they result in either a loan origination, in the application being
approved by the lender but not accepted by the borrower, or an application denial. The sample of lenders
includes all lender types in Columns (1)-(2) and nonbanks only in Columns (3)-(4). Loan controls include
the log of applicant income, the log of the loan amount, indicators for FHA loans, VA loans and jumbo
loans, applicant race, gender, whether the loan has a coapplicant, whether a preapproval was obtained,
the occupancy and lien status of the loan, the property type, and a dummy indicating whether income is
missing. Standard errors reported in parentheses are clustered by lender-month. ***, **, * indicate statistical
significance at 1%, 5%, and 10%, respectively.

55

Table 8: Elasticity of originations with respect to changes in aggregate volume: FinTech vs.
other lenders

∆ ln(App. Vol.)
∆ ln(App. Vol.) × FinTech

Observations
Adjusted R2
Month FE
Application Sample
Lender Sample

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

1.17***
(0.01)
-0.06
(0.07)

1.57***
(0.01)
0.06
(0.12)

1.17***
(0.01)
-0.06
(0.07)

1.71***
(0.02)
-0.08
(0.12)

52,030
0.35

51,311
0.35

24,450
0.32

23,831
0.33

Yes
Originated
All

Yes
Refi
All

Yes
Originated
Nonbanks

Yes
Refi
Nonbanks

Table reports regressions of the log change in lender-level originated loans on the log change in aggregate
application volumes, an interaction with the FinTech indicator, loan controls, lender fixed effects, censustract fixed effects and calendar month fixed effects. The unit of observation is lender-month. Data source:
HMDA. The sample is restricted to 2010 through 2016:Q2. Columns (1) and (3) include all originated loans;
columns (2) and (4) included originated refinancing loans. The sample of lenders includes all lender types in
columns (1) and (2) and nonbanks only in columns (3) and (4). Standard errors reported in parentheses are
White-Huber standard errors. ***, **, * indicate statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10%, respectively.

56

Table 9: FinTech market share and refinancing propensities: county-level results.

FinTech ShareQ−1 (MA)

(1)
All

(2)
All

(3)
30yr FRM

(4)
30yr FRM

1.121∗∗∗
(0.204)

0.689∗∗∗
(0.142)
0.067∗∗∗
(0.012)
-0.094∗∗∗
(0.007)
1.135∗∗∗
(0.059)
0.190
(0.315)

1.195∗∗∗
(0.223)

0.706∗∗∗
(0.157)
0.071∗∗∗
(0.013)
-0.104∗∗∗
(0.008)
1.202∗∗∗
(0.062)
0.185
(0.332)

Yes
Yes
0.54
0.78
39000

Yes
Yes
0.54
0.81
39000

Yes
Yes
0.59
0.76
39000

Yes
Yes
0.59
0.79
39000

Average FICO/10
Average CLTV/10
Average current rate
FHA/VA share
County fixed effects
Month fixed effects
Mean of dep var
R2
Obs.

Table regresses county-level monthly refinancing propensities (defined as the share of outstanding mortgages
in month t − 1 that are refinanced in month t, in percentage points) on the FinTech share in a county
(4-quarter rolling average, lagged one quarter; range [0,1]), county fixed effects, month fixed effects, and
average characteristics of outstanding loans in the county: FICO, updated combined loan-to-value ratios
(CLTV), average coupon rate, and the share of FHA/VA mortgages. Data sources: CRISM for refinancing
propensities and loan characteristics, HMDA for FinTech market shares. In columns (1) and (2), refinancing
propensities are calculated based on all loans; in columns (3) and (4), based on 30-year fixed-rate mortgages
only. Sample covers January 2010 through June 2016 for the largest 500 counties by count of outstanding
mortgages in December 2013 (see Appendix D for details). Standard errors reported in parentheses are
clustered by county. ***, **, * indicate statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10%, respectively.

57

Table 10: FinTech market share and refinancing propensities, by refinancing incentive bins.

Refi incentive (ADL)
FT ShareQ−1 (MA)
County FE
Month FE
Loan controls
Mean Y
R2
Obs.

(1)
< −1

(2)
[−1, −0.5)

(3)
[−0.5, 0)

(4)
[0, 0.5)

(5)
[0.5, 1)

(6)
≥1

(7)
All

-0.140*
(0.073)

1.028***
(0.200)

2.008***
(0.304)

1.985***
(0.353)

1.444***
(0.347)

0.507*
(0.267)

1.436***
(0.229)

Yes
Yes
Yes
0.12
0.00
64,866,392

Yes
Yes
Yes
0.46
0.00
42,085,823

Yes
Yes
Yes
0.85
0.01
38,988,748

Yes
Yes
Yes
1.04
0.01
29,249,088

Yes
Yes
Yes
1.05
0.01
19,039,098

Yes
Yes
Yes
0.78
0.01
20,745,039

Yes
Yes
Yes
0.59
0.00
214,996,787

Table regresses indicator for whether a borrower refinanced their loan in a given month on the FinTech share
in a county (4-quarter rolling average, lagged one quarter), county fixed effects, month fixed effects, and the
following loan controls: 5-point bins of CLTV, 20-point bins of FICO, a cubic function in the age of the
refinanced loan, the log of the balance of the refinanced loan, and an indicator for whether the refinanced loan
was an FHA/VA loan. Data sources: CRISM for refinancing propensities and loan characteristics, HMDA
for FinTech market shares. For columns (1)-(6), borrowers are separated into 6 bins depending on their
refinancing incentive based on the Agarwal et al. (2013) (ADL) calculation. Negative incentives (expressed
in percentage points of interest rates) mean that according to ADL a borrower should not refinance; positive
incentives mean they should refinance. The final column (7) pools all bins. Sample includes 30-year fixedrate mortgages only. Standard errors reported in parentheses are clustered by county. ***, **, * indicate
statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10%, respectively.

58

Table 11: Who Borrows from FinTech Mortgage Lenders?
Dependent variable: = 100 if originator is FinTech lender, = 0 otherwise
Purchases
Refinances
All
Nonbanks
All
Nonbanks
Borrower income and demography
Log(income)
0.104∗∗∗
0.701∗∗∗
-0.833∗∗∗
-0.159∗∗∗
(0.00650)
(0.0173)
(0.00725)
(0.0275)
Gender:
Female
0.0592∗∗∗
0.184∗∗∗
0.756∗∗∗
3.056∗∗∗
(0.00947)
(0.0208)
(0.0126)
(0.0379)
Unknown
2.887∗∗∗
10.13∗∗∗
6.728∗∗∗
24.99∗∗∗
(0.0421)
(0.117)
(0.0437)
(0.100)
Race and ethnicity:
Black
-0.306∗∗∗
-0.387∗∗∗
-0.415∗∗∗
1.166∗∗∗
(0.0254)
(0.0495)
(0.0291)
(0.0814)
Hispanic
-0.880∗∗∗
-1.577∗∗∗
-1.432∗∗∗
-1.982∗∗∗
(0.0200)
(0.0391)
(0.0250)
(0.0629)
Unknown
1.551∗∗∗
3.220∗∗∗
3.632∗∗∗
6.540∗∗∗
(0.0294)
(0.0658)
(0.0310)
(0.0710)
% black or hispanicTRACT
-0.228∗∗∗
-1.064∗∗∗
-0.256∗∗∗
-2.273∗∗∗
(0.0166)
(0.0394)
(0.0165)
(0.0501)
Access to finance
Credit scoreTRACT
-0.279∗∗∗
-0.731∗∗∗
-1.068∗∗∗
-3.002∗∗∗
(0.0192)
(0.0468)
(0.0193)
(0.0618)
Bank branch densityTRACT
0.467∗∗∗
0.954∗∗∗
0.275∗∗∗
0.479∗∗∗
(0.0262)
(0.0574)
(0.0201)
(0.0530)
Technology diffusion and adoption
Population densityTRACT
0.141∗∗∗
0.920∗∗∗
-0.0691∗∗∗
0.421∗∗∗
(0.0275)
(0.0697)
(0.0236)
(0.0607)
Borrower ageTRACT
0.119∗∗∗
0.340∗∗∗
0.263∗∗∗
0.869∗∗∗
(0.0168)
(0.0400)
(0.0169)
(0.0502)
% bachelor degreeTRACT
0.307∗∗∗
0.920∗∗∗
0.262∗∗∗
0.690∗∗∗
(0.0213)
(0.0529)
(0.0180)
(0.0553)
Internet access
% high speed coverageTRACT
0.101∗∗∗
0.255∗∗∗
0.0689∗∗∗
0.371∗∗∗
(0.0127)
(0.0316)
(0.0127)
(0.0461)
% with broadband subscriptionCTY -0.132∗∗∗
-0.487∗∗∗
-0.0344∗∗
-0.0551
(0.0179)
(0.0460)
(0.0167)
(0.0555)
Local housing market conditions
-0.0362∗∗∗
% home price appreciationCTY
(0.0114)
Processing time coefficientsTRACT
0.0182
(0.0111)
Log(2010 home price)CTY
-0.127∗∗∗
(0.0188)
Additional controls
Yes
Observations
20790255
Mean of Dependent Variable
2.888

-0.836∗∗∗
(0.0258)
0.205∗∗∗
(0.0269)
-0.688∗∗∗
(0.0471)
Yes
8901875
6.745

0.277∗∗∗
(0.0132)
0.588∗∗∗
(0.0119)
-0.812∗∗∗
(0.0213)
Yes
32936746
6.129

-1.258∗∗∗
(0.0382)
1.599∗∗∗
(0.0397)
-2.993∗∗∗
(0.0675)
Yes
9888845
20.41

Linear probability model based on HMDA data from 2010-16. All continuous right-hand size variables
normalized to have mean of zero and standard deviation of one. Superscripts TRACT and CTY indicate
variable is measured at the census tract or county level of aggregation, respectively, rather than at the
loan level. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered by census tract. Regressions include controls
for loan size, loan type, dummies for jumbo loan, coapplicant, owner occupied, other race categories, and
missing values for any variable with positive incidence of missing values. See Internet Appendix for full
results including coefficients on these variables as well as univariate regressions. See Data Appendix for
59 ∗∗∗ p < 0.01
variable definitions and sources.∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05,

