NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ENVIRONMENTAL POLICY, FULL-EMPLOYMENT MODELS, AND EMPLOYMENT:
A CRITICAL ANALYSIS
Marc A. C. Hafstead
Roberton C. Williams III
Yunguang Chen
Working Paper 24505
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24505

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2018

We thank Resources for the Future’s Carbon Pricing Initiative for financial support, and seminar
participants at the AERE Summer Meeting, the Paris School of Economics, and Resources for the
Future for helpful comments. Portions of the work were also supported by the USDA National
Institute of Food and Agriculture (Hatch project 1009838). The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Marc A. C. Hafstead, Roberton C. Williams III, and Yunguang Chen. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Environmental Policy, Full-Employment Models, and Employment: A Critical Analysis
Marc A. C. Hafstead, Roberton C. Williams III, and Yunguang Chen
NBER Working Paper No. 24505
April 2018
JEL No. E24,H23,J64,Q52,Q58
ABSTRACT
This paper assesses the use of full-employment computable-general equilibrium (CGE) models to
predict the labor-market effects of environmental policy. Specifically, it compares the predictions
of a standard full-employment CGE model with those of a new search-CGE model with laborsearch frictions and resulting unemployment (but that is otherwise identical to the fullemployment model). The search-CGE captures key labor market details, including a distinction
between the extensive margin of labor demand (the number of employees) and the intensive
margin (the number of hours each employee works). We find that some key results are robust
across the two models, such as the reallocation of labor across sectors in response to a carbon tax
and the overall change in total labor demand. However, the full-employment model seriously
overestimates the economy-wide net change in the number of jobs (by a factor of more than 2.5
for a carbon tax with revenues returned lump-sum to households, and by a factor of almost 3.5
when carbon tax revenues are used to reduce payroll taxes).
Marc A. C. Hafstead
Resources for the Future
1616 P St NW
Washington, DC 20036
Hafstead@rff.org

Yunguang Chen
1616 P St NW
Washington, DC 20036
YGChen@rff.org

Roberton C. Williams III
Department of Agricultural and Resource Economics
University of Maryland
Symons Hall
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
roberton@umd.edu

1. Introduction
On June 1, 2017, in a speech announcing that the United States would exit the Paris
agreement, President Trump cited estimates from a study by NERA Economic
Consulting, claiming that “compliance with the terms of the Paris accord … could cost
America as much as 2.7 million jobs in 2025.”1 However, that study (Bernstein et al.
(2017)) relies on a computable general equilibrium (CGE) model of the US economy
that, like almost all CGE models used for policy analysis, assumes full employment.2
How can a full-employment model predict job losses? Can we trust those estimates? And
given that full-employment CGE models are widely used to examine environmental
policy, how should we view other estimates from those models?
Full-employment CGE models have numerous shortcomings for analyzing labormarket effects of policy. First, full-employment models assume that labor markets fully
clear, and thus fail to account for frictional, structural, or cyclical unemployment.
Second, full-employment models aggregate labor into total hours worked, and thus do not
distinguish between the number of employees (the extensive margin) and the number of
hours each employee works (the intensive margin). As a result, full-employment models
can model changes in the total hours of work demanded by each sector, but not changes
in the number of workers in each industry. Finally, changes in the total quantity of labor
in full-employment CGE models are typically driven by changes in labor supply (a
representative household choosing to work less through a labor-leisure choice). However,
in the absence of any other way to generate “job loss” estimates, some CGE practitioners
convert changes in labor quantity into “full-time equivalent” (FTE) jobs by dividing by a
constant hours/FTE worker figure and report the change in FTE jobs as a “job loss” or
“job gain.” This implies that the percentage change in “jobs” under this method equals

1

https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-fix/wp/2017/06/01/transcript-president-trumps-remarks-onleaving-the-paris-climate-deal-annotated/?utm_term=.415fb02bb2b0.
2
There are other issues related to the NERA study and its use to justify leaving the Paris accord. Indeed, a
subsequent NERA press release stated that “NERA’s study was not a cost-benefit analysis of the Paris
Agreement, nor does it purport to be one” (http://www.nera.com/news-events/press-releases/2017/neraeconomic-consultings-study-of-us-emissions-reduction-polici.html). Our paper focuses on the broader issue
of using a full-employment model to estimate labor market effects of policy, and thus does not address
those other issues.

3

the percentage change in total hours.3
The primary goal of this paper is to assess the use of full-employment models to
predict the effect of environmental policies (or any other government policy) on both
aggregate employment and employment across sectors. Specifically, we ask which results
from such models are robust to the inclusion of a more realistic model of the labor market
and which are not. To do this, we extend a multisector full-employment CGE model to
include a labor-search friction as in Hafstead and Williams (2018). This change both
introduces frictional unemployment and allows us to disaggregate total labor demand for
each sector into workers and hours per worker. We impose a carbon tax as a sample
environmental policy in both our search-CGE model and the otherwise identical fullemployment CGE model. We then evaluate where the two models produce similar labor
market outcomes and where they differ, with a focus on the key mechanisms driving the
differences across models.
We find that estimated changes in the aggregate quantity of labor are very similar
across models, suggesting that adding frictional unemployment does not significantly
alter the aggregate result: the search-friction model picks up changes in involuntary
unemployment, but these are offset by a somewhat smaller voluntary labor-supply
response to policy, leaving the overall result almost unchanged. However, we find that
FTE calculations significantly overestimate changes in the number of employed workers
caused by environmental policies or tax policies, because the FTE approach misinterprets
changes in hours per worker (which go in the same direction as the change in the
aggregate number of workers) as a larger change in the number of workers. In our central
case comparisons, we find that an FTE calculation from the full-employment model
overestimates both the job loss from a carbon tax with lump-sum rebates and the
offsetting job gain from using carbon tax revenues to reduce labor tax rates, in each case
by a factor of over 2.5. Interestingly, the FTE approach still works reasonably well for
estimating sector-level changes in jobs, because those sector-level changes are driven
primarily by demand shifts across sectors, which are similar between models, and those
3

For example, assume that a policy reduces total labor demand (in hours) in a given industry by 10 percent
and that the industry employs 100,000 workers. The FTE calculation would imply job losses of 10,000.
Note that this calculation implicitly assumes that all adjustment in total hours is on the number of workers
by implicitly assuming that hours per worker are unchanged.

4

shifts are much larger in magnitude (for the typical sector) than changes in hours per
worker.
This paper makes two main contributions relative to prior work. First, by showing
which employment-related results from environmental CGE models are robust to a more
realistic model of the labor market and which are not, the paper provides useful guidance
for how much trust one should place in predictions from such models. And second, the
paper substantially advances the development of search-friction environmental CGE
models, moving beyond the highly stylized one- and two-sector models currently in the
literature (e.g., those in Shimer 2013, Aubert and Chiroleu-Assouline 2017, and Hafstead
and Williams 2018) to a more detailed many-sector model.
The next section of this paper describes both the search-CGE model and the
parallel full-employment model. Section 3 explains the data and the calibration of the
model. Section 4 compares the central-case results between the two models. Section 5
considers extensions to the baseline models, and Section 6 concludes.

2. Two Numerical Models
Our search-CGE model is an extension of the two-sector model in Hafstead and Williams
(2018). The key element of this model is the inclusion of a search friction as in Pissarides
(1985) and Mortensen and Pissarides (1994). The search friction introduces labor market
dynamics and unemployment into the model. Firms incur costs (in the form of workers
devoted to recruiting) of finding workers. When there is a match between a firm and an
unemployed worker, they negotiate over the wage and hours, and the worker begins work
in the next period. Workers become unemployed through an exogenous job destruction
rate. In equilibrium, the job creation and job destruction processes determine the
unemployment rate.
The search-CGE model extends the highly stylized two-sector Hafstead and
Williams model in four significant respects. First, we add an explicit government sector
that produces government services. Federal, state, and local governments employ more
than 16 percent of all employees, and we allow for the government to face the same
matching problem as private industries. Second, we disaggregate the private sector into
5

22 industries, and we allow those industries to vary along a wider range of dimensions,
whereas in Hafstead and Williams (2018) the industries differ in size and pollution
intensity, but are otherwise symmetric. Third, we allow for intermediate inputs into
production, which allows us to examine not just how emissions taxes affect the taxed
industry, but also effects on upstream and downstream sectors. This also allows us to
model emissions reductions via substitution across intermediate inputs in the production
function. Fourth, we introduce a foreign economy that engages in international trade with
the domestic economy, allowing us to investigate the role of trade in the employment
impacts of environmental models.
We compare that model to a parallel full-employment model. The fullemployment is identical to the search-CGE model except for the search friction. In the
full-employment model, the labor market always clears, with the wage adjusting such that
the hours of labor the household wants to supply always equals total labor demand from
firms. We maintain the same specification for government and the same production nest
with intermediate inputs.
2.1. Search-CGE Model
2.1.1. Matching Process
The matching process follows Hafstead and Williams (2018), which in turn is a
multisector generalization of Shimer (2010). The measure of workers is normalized to 1.
The total number of workers in sector j is n j .4 Total employment is n = ∑ n j and the
j

measure of unemployed workers, the unemployment rate, is 1− n . Let v j denotethe
number of recruiters employed in each sector. The total number of matches in each sector
j, m j , is a function of total recruiting effort in sector j, total recruiter effort in all
industries, and the number of unemployed workers (who search indiscriminately across

4

We use subscript j (and k) to refer to sectors generally (private or public). Subscript i refers to the private
sector industries, and subscript g refers to the public sector.

6

sectors). Following Hafstead and Williams, we employ a multisector constant-returns-toscale matching function,

⎛
⎞
m j = υ j (1− n ) (v j h j ) ⎜ ∑ vk hk ⎟
⎝ k
⎠
γj

−γ

j

(1)

where υ j and γ j are the matching efficiency and match elasticity parameters and v j h j
represents the total recruitment effort (number of recruiters times hours worked) for
sector j. Matches are increasing in the number of unemployed workers and the sector’s
own recruitment efforts but are decreasing in other sectors’ recruitment efforts. In other
words, matches in a given sector are increasing in supply (unemployed workers) and
demand from that sector, but decreasing in the level of competition from other sectors for
those workers. Note that if all sectors have the same υ j and γ j parameters, this matching
function implies that the total number of job matches ( ∑ m j ) will be a Cobb-Douglas
j

function of the number of unemployed workers and the aggregate level of recruiting
effort.
Let H j denote recruiter productivity in sector j (the number of sector-j workers
that can be hired with one unit of recruiting effort), and let φ j denote the probability an
unemployed worker finds a job in sector j. By definition, the total number of matches
must be equal to both recruitment effort times recruiter productivity, m j = (v j h j )H j , and
the number of unemployed workers times the probability of finding a job, m j = (1− n )φ j .
Using equation (1), we can define sectoral recruiting productivity and the sectoral job
finding probability as

H j = υ j (θ )

−γ

φ j = υ jθ j (θ )

(2)

j

−γ

j

(3)

where θ j = (v j h j ) / (1− n ) is the sector-specific ratio of recruiting effort to unemployed
workers and θ = ∑θ j represents the ratio of total recruiting effort to unemployed
j

workers. The latter term is often referred to as labor market tightness in the search-andmatching literature: if the market becomes tighter on aggregate through either fewer
7

unemployed workers or more recruitment effort, employers find it harder to fill jobs,
whereas workers are more likely to find a job.
2.1.2. Households
As is standard in the search-and-matching literature, we use a representative household
framework (see, for example, Merz 1995). A representative household is also standard in
the full-employment CGE literature (see, for example, Goulder et al. 2016). In the searchCGE model, this framework assumes full insurance across workers such that the marginal
utility of consumption is constant across workers regardless of past or current
employment status. Workers in industry j work h j hours and receive an hourly wage w j .
Hours and wages are bargained between employees and employers each period as
described in Section 2.1.5, and therefore hours and wages are independent of length of
employment. Unemployed workers work zero hours but receive unemployment
compensation, b . In our policy simulations, unemployment compensation is held fixed
in real terms such that any policy-induced change in employment is not due to changes in
unemployment compensation. The households own the firms and have access to statecontingent claims, B , where Q denotes the price of an Arrow security that delivers one
unit of consumption in the subsequent period. As is standard in both full-employment
multisector CGE models and one-sector search-and-matching models, household utility is
increasing in aggregate consumption, C , and decreasing in hours worked. Here we use a
separable utility function in aggregate consumption and hours,

U(C,h) = log(C) − ψ

h1+ χ
1+ χ

(4)

where ψ represents the labor disutility parameter and (1 / χ ) represents the Fritsch
elasticity of labor supply. For simplicity, we assume that the disutility of labor does not
vary across sectors.
Aggregate consumption is a constant elasticity of substitution (CES) composite of
consumption of each industry-specific good, which itself is a composite of domestically
produced and foreign-produced goods. Given this constant-returns-to-scale nest, demand
for industry-specific consumption and the domestic-foreign mix of consumption for each
8

good can be solved for independently of aggregate consumption. Given the domestic and
foreign price for each good, pid and pif , and the exchange rate e , consumers choose an
optimal domestic-foreign mix for each good to minimize the unit cost of the
consumption, p̂i . Given the price of each consumption good, the household then chooses
the mix of consumption goods to minimize the unit cost of aggregate consumption, p .5
Given the distribution of workers at the beginning of the period, the bargained
levels of wages and hours, the current level of assets, and the expected job-finding
probability, households choose aggregate consumption and future assets to maximize
life-time discounted utility

⎪⎧
⎪⎫
V (B,n j ) = max C,B′ ⎨∑U(C,h j ) + (1− n )U(C,0) +β E ⎡⎣V ( B′, n′j ) ⎤⎦ ⎬
⎪⎩ j
⎪⎭

(5)

subject to the budget constraint,

pC + QB′ ≤ ∑ (1− τ L )n j w j h j + (1− n )pb + B + T

(6)

j

and the law of motion for employment by sector

n′j = (1− π j )n j + φ j (1− n ), ∀ j

(7)

where β is the discount factor, τ L is the tax rate on labor income, T is government lumpsum transfers (taxes if negative), and π j is the exogenous rate of job destruction in sector
j each period.
The first-order condition with respect to future assets and the envelope condition
with respect to current assets are

λQ = βVB′
VB = λ

(8)

respectively, where λ is the Lagrange multiplier on the budget constraint and VB is the
marginal value of an additional worker. Combining these first-order conditions, the Euler
equation expresses the value of the Arrow security,

Q=β

λ′
.
λ

(9)

The first-order condition with respect to consumption determines aggregate consumption,
5

See the appendix for a complete derivation of consumer good demand problem.

9

U c = pλ

(10)

where U c denotes the derivative of utility with respect to consumption.
In search-and-matching models, a key variable is the value of employment in each
sector to the household. This value is expressed as the difference between the value of a
worker in sector j and the value of being unemployed,

Vn j = U(C,h j ) − U(C,0) + λ ⎡⎣(1− τ L )w j h j − pb ⎤⎦ + (1− π j )β EVn′j − φ

(11)

The value of employment is equal to the utility and compensation differentials between
employed workers in sector j and unemployed workers, plus the continuation value of
being employed in the next period, less the opportunity cost of being employed,

φ = β ∑φ j EVn′j . This opportunity cost plays a key role in the wage-bargaining process
j

described in Section 2.1.5, as workers are more likely to value a job in sector j if jobs in
other sectors are harder to get or become less valuable as a result of environmental
policy.
2.1.3. Private Industry
The private sector is represented by 22 distinct industries. In each industry, a
representative firm produces a specific good using a nested CES production function that
utilizes labor and intermediate inputs. The industries are listed in Table 1 in section 3.1.
Each is classified as either an energy industry (E) or a materials industry (M). Oil&gas
extraction, Coal mining, Electric power, Natural gas distribution, and Petroleum refining
and coal products are all classified as energy industries, and the remaining industries,
including government enterprises, are classified as materials industries.
Figure 1 displays the nested production function for each representative firm. At
the bottom level, domestic and foreign intermediate inputs are aggregated into an
intermediate input composite. The intermediate input composites are aggregated into
energy and material input composites. Then these energy and material input composites
are aggregated into an aggregate intermediate input composite. At the top level, labor and
the aggregate intermediate input composite are combined to produce the final good. The
outer nest of the production function is
10

yi = fi (hi li , I i )

(12)

where li is the number of workers devoted to production, the total number of workers less
the number of recruiters, li = ni − vi , and I i denotes the aggregate intermediate input
composite.
Figure 1. Diagram of the Nested Production Function

Given the nested production structure, the representative firm chooses inputs at
each level of the nest to minimize unit prices for each nest. Therefore, given the unit price
for the aggregate intermediate input composite for each industry, piI , firms solve for the
optimal inputs of labor and aggregate intermediate inputs independently of the choices at
each lower nest. The complete description of cost-minimizing input decisions is
described in the appendix.
Firms inherit a stock of workers each period, ni . In each period, firms allocate
workers between production and recruitment. Let vi = vi / ni denote the recruiter ratio (the
fraction of workers allocated to recruitment). Output can then be defined in terms of the
stock of workers and the recruiter ratio, yi = fi (hi ni (1− vi ), I i ) . Firms must trade off

11

between more production today and making more new hires today (which enables more
production in the future), taking as given the endogenous recruitment productivity, H i .
Firms choose the recruiter ratio and aggregate intermediate inputs to maximize
the value of the firm; as the household owns the firms, future-period profits of all firms
are discounted at the discount factor Q from the household problem (a no-arbitrage
condition guarantees the same rate of return on ownership of private-sector firms). For
each industry i, the Bellman equation is
J(ni ) = max Ii ,vi ≥0 { pid fi (hi ni (1− vi ), I i ) − (1+ τ P )hi ni wi − piI I i + E [QJ(ni′)]}

(13)

and the equation of motion for employment is

ni′ = (1− π i )ni + H i vi hi ni .

(14)

where pid represents the producer price for the good produced by industry i, and τ P
represents employer payroll taxes. Firms set total aggregate intermediate inputs to satisfy
the first-order constraint,

pid fI ,i = piI

(15)

where fI ,i denotes the derivative of the outer-nest function with respect to aggregate
intermediate inputs.
Firms add recruiters until the marginal cost of additional recruiting equals the
benefit of recruiting H i hi new workers for the following period; the first-order condition
is
pid fL,i = H i E ⎡⎣QJ n′i ⎤⎦

(16)

where fL,i represents the marginal value of an additional hour of production, and

E ⎡⎣QJ n′i ⎤⎦ denotes the current period value of an additional worker in the following period.
The value of an additional worker is equal to the marginal revenue of an additional
worker, less the compensation, plus the expected value of the worker in the following
period, conditional on the worker not separating from the firm. From the envelope
condition with respect to the number of workers, the marginal value of an additional
worker for a firm is

J ni = pi fL,i hi − (1+ τ P )wi hi +(1-π i )E ⎡⎣QJ n′i ⎤⎦ .
12

(17)

2.1.4. Government
The representative government serves two purposes. First, the government produces
public goods. Second, the government collects labor and payroll taxes and pays
unemployment benefits to unemployed workers. Public goods are produced using a
nested production structure identical to that of the private firms. The outer nest of the
government function is

g = fg (hglg , I g )

(18)

where lg is the number of workers devoted to production, the total number of workers
less the number of recruiters, lg = ng − vg , and I g denotes the aggregate intermediate
input composite. For simplicity, we assume that the level of total public goods
production, g , is exogenously fixed.
Identically to the private firms, the government chooses inputs at each level of the
nest to minimize intermediate input costs. Let pgI denote the unit price of intermediate
inputs. Given a stock of workers ng , the problem of the government is to choose
recruitment and aggregate intermediate inputs to minimize the cost of providing the fixed
level of public goods. The problem of the government can be written as

{

G(ng ) = max I g ,vg ≥0 −(1+ τ P )hg ng wg − pgI I g +E ⎡⎣QG(ng′ ) ⎤⎦

}

(19)

subject to equation (18) and the law of motion for employment

ng′ = (1− π g )ng + H g vg hg ng .

(20)

The government takes as given the endogenous recruiter productivity, H g . The firstorder condition for the government sector intermediate inputs is
pg fI ,g = pgI

(21)

where pgd refers to the shadow value on the domestic government constraint that public
goods production must be (greater or) equal to g . The first-order condition with respect to
government recruitment is
pgd fL,g = H g E [QGn′ ]

13

(22)

Here, fL,g represents the marginal value of an additional hour of government production,
and E [QGn′ ] denotes the current period value of an additional worker to the government
in the following period.6 The marginal value of an additional worker is
Gn = pgd fL,g hg − (1+ τ P )hg wg + (1− π g )E [QGn′ ]

(23)

The government must satisfy a government budget constraint each period such
that lump-sum transfers are equal to the difference between total tax revenue and total
spending (on unemployment benefits, labor costs, and intermediate inputs costs)

T = ∑ (τ L + τ P )h j w j n j − (1− n )pb − (1+ τ P )hg ng wg − pgI I g

(24)

j

2.1.5. Wage Bargaining
In each period, both private firms and the government enter a bargaining process with
their workers (either those previously employed or those newly hired) to determine hours
and wages. Following Hafstead and Williams (2018), we assume a Nash bargaining
process in which employers and employees set working hours to maximize the surplus
value of a match (the combined value of the worker to the firm and the job to the
worker), and set the wage to split that surplus according to bargaining shares.7
Maximizing the match surplus implies that the marginal value of an additional hour of
work to the firm is equal to the disutility of an additional hour of work to the worker.
Hours must satisfy the following condition for each sector (public and private):
(1− τ L )λ p dj fL, j = (1+ τ P )ψ h chi
j

(25)

Following Hafstead and Williams, the equilibrium after-tax pay for a worker in sector j is

(1− τ L )h j w j =

⎡
⎤
1− τ L
(1− η ) ⎢ p dj fL, j h j + ∑ pkd fL,kθ k ⎥
1+ τ P
⎣
⎦
k

χ
⎡ψ h1+
⎤
j
+η⎢
+ pb ⎥
⎣ λ 1+ χ
⎦

6

(26)

Additional workers are valuable to the government to the extent that they ease the constraint that public
goods production must be greater or equal to g.
7
For a complete description of the bargaining problem, see Shimer (2010) for a one-sector model. The
government Nash bargaining problem mirrors the private-sector problem, replacing market-clearing prices
with the shadow value of the government production constraint.

14

where η refers to the bargaining power of the employer. The wage is increasing in the
marginal revenue of an additional employee, how likely unemployed workers are to find
jobs, the disutility of work, and the value of unemployment benefits. Those last two
determine the flow value of unemployment. As shown by Hagedorn and Manovskii
(2008), a high flow value of unemployment relative to after-tax earnings implies small
relative changes in the wage and large relative changes in employment in response to
changes in the marginal revenue of employment. As environmental policy affects the
marginal revenue of employment in certain industries, this flow value will be important
in determining the equilibrium employment response in the search-CGE model.
2.1.6. Foreign Economy
A single foreign economy represents the rest of the world (ROW). The foreign economy
mirrors the domestic economy in all respects, although the scale of the ROW economy is
larger. Workers match with jobs in 22 private-sector industries (each with a single
representative firm) or the government sector. The representative household consumes a
mix of foreign or domestic produced goods, chosen to minimize the cost of the aggregate
consumption good, and chooses aggregate consumption to maximize household utility,
conditional on wages, hours, and job-finding probabilities. The foreign sectors also utilize
a mix of domestic and foreign goods as part of the intermediate input cost minimization
problem. Firms choose recruitment and total intermediate inputs to maximize the value of
the firm over time, conditional on the current stock of workers, wages, hours, and the
recruiter productivity, and the government makes similar decisions to minimize the cost
of providing a fixed quantity of public goods. Workers and firms bargain over hours and
wages in the same manner as in the domestic economy.
The price of foreign goods is denoted by pif . The exchange rate, e, converts
domestic currency into the foreign currency such that the prices for domestic goods faced
by the foreign agents are pid e and the prices for foreign goods faced by domestic agents
are pif / e . We assume balanced trade, with the exchange rate adjusting such that the

15

values of imports and exports are equal in each period, as defined in the discussion of
market-clearing below.
2.1.7. Market Clearing
Markets clear for each private good when total output equals consumption of
domestically produced goods plus total intermediate input use plus government
intermediate inputs plus exports. Let cid denote the domestic household demand for
goods produced by domestic sector i. Let I i d denote domestic intermediate input demand
for goods produced by domestic sector i (as opposed to I i , the aggregate intermediate
input composite for sector i) and let I i g denote domestic government spending on
intermediate inputs from domestic sector i. Finally let exi denote total exports (to both
the foreign households and foreign industry) from domestic sector i. Domestic prices pid
adjust to clear domestic markets, with the condition

yi = cid +I i d + I i g + exi

(27)

for each sector i.8
Let cif denote foreign household demand for foreign good i, I i f denote foreign
intermediate input demand for goods produced by foreign industry i, I i g, f denote foreign
government intermediate input demand for goods produced by foreign industry i, and imi
denote the domestic imports of foreign goods (by domestic household and domestic
industry). Foreign prices pif adjust such that foreign markets clear, with the condition

yif = cif +I i f + I i g, f + imi

(28)

for each foreign industry i. The exchange rate adjusts to ensure balanced trade, where the
total value of exports equals the total value of imports

∑ p ex = ∑ ( p
d
i

i

f
i

i

/ e) imi

(29)

i

There is no market for public goods, but the constraint on the provision of the
public good introduces a market-clearing-like condition: the shadow price pgd is “market8

See the appendix for an exact derivation of elements in the market-clearing conditions.

16

clearing” if and only if the constraint g = fg (hg ng (1− vg ), I g ) is binding. An identical
condition holds for the foreign government with shadow price pgf .

2.2. Full-Employment Model
To aid in the comparison of our search-CGE models and full-employment models, we
build a parallel full-employment CGE (or FE-CGE) model. In most respects the models
are identical. Here we specify the key differences.
2.2.1. Households
A representative household chooses consumption, labor supply (in total hours worked),
and savings to maximize an intertemporal utility function,

⎪⎧
⎪⎫
V (B) = max C,ℓ,B′ ⎨∑U(C,ℓ) +β E [V ( B′ )]⎬
⎩⎪ j
⎭⎪

(30)

subject to the budget constraint

pC + QB′ ≤ (1− τ L )wℓ+B-T .

(31)

The representative household has the same period utility function in aggregate
consumption and labor supply and identical preferences over sector-specific goods.
With the exception of labor supply, the household first-order conditions in the
full-employment model are identical to those in the search-CGE model. The first-order
condition with respect to labor supply is

−U ℓ = wλ

(32)

2.2.2. Private Industries
Representative firms in the private industries have the same production nest as in the
search-CGE model. Without specific workers in the full-employment model, the labor
input li refers to total hours demanded by private industry i. The FE-CGE production
function is
17

yi = fi (li , I i ) .

(33)

Given the wage w and optimal intermediate input price, piI , the first-order conditions for
the representative firm from the static profit-maximization problem are

pid fL,i = (1+ τ P )w

(34)

pi fI ,i = piI .

(35)

2.2.3. Government
In the FE-CGE model, the government has the same production nest as in the searchCGE model. As with private industries, the labor input lg denotes total hours demanded
by the government sector. The government production function is

g = fg (lg , I g ) .

(36)

Given the wage and the optimal intermediate input price pgI , the government chooses
total labor input and the level of intermediate inputs to minimize the cost of achieving the
production constraint. The first-order conditions from the static cost-minimization
problem are
pgd fL,g = (1+ τ P )w

(37)

pgd fI ,g = pgI

(38)

where again pgd denotes the shadow value on the production constraint. The government
budget constraint does not include unemployment benefits; total lump-sum transfers are
the difference between revenues and spending on inputs (including labor) to provide the
public good,

T = ∑ (τ L + τ P )l j − (1+ τ P )lg − pgI I g

(39)

j

2.2.4. Market Clearing
The search-CGE market-clearing conditions also apply to the full-employment model.
The FE-CGE model adds an additional market-clearing condition: labor market clearing.
18

The wage rate w adjusts such that total labor demand from all sectors (public and private)
equals labor supply from the household,

∑l

j

=ℓ

(40)

j

2.3. Emissions and Emissions Taxes
We account for carbon dioxide emissions at the point where domestic and foreign
primary fossil fuels—Oil&gas extraction (og) and Coal mining (coal)– first enter as
intermediate inputs into production. This accounting method implicitly includes both
direct emissions from the combustion of these fuels by the purchasing industry and any
emissions from the combustion of secondary fuel outputs sold further downstream to
other industries or the household (households do not directly purchase primary fossil
fuels). For example, the combustion of refined petroleum products is attributed to the
petroleum refiner industry that purchases Oil&gas extraction as an input into production.
This accounting method must therefore adjust for the import and export of secondary
fuels, such as refined products, such that total emissions are consistent with data for US
emissions related to consumption. Total emissions are

e = ∑ ⎡⎣ µog, j I og, j + µcoal, j I coal ⎤⎦ + eimport − eexport

(41)

j

where the set of emissions coefficients, µ , are calibrated to match combustion-related
carbon dioxide emissions by source, and the emissions associated with the import or
export of secondary fuels are represented by eimport and eexport , respectively. Emissions
prices are introduced in proportion to the emissions coefficients on all purchases of
primary fossil fuels as intermediate inputs and the imports of secondary fossil fuels.9

3. Data and Calibration
Primary data and parameters are combined in both models to create the primary dataset.
Secondary parameters (i.e., CES share parameters) are then calibrated to re-create the
9

Currently, we do not rebate secondary fuel producers for the export of secondary fuels that are combusted
abroad.

19

benchmark year data in the absence of environmental policy. Here we briefly summarize
the data sources and primary parameter calibration procedure.
3.1. Data
Both models are calibrated to 2015 data. Data on input use by sector, consumption by
households, and labor input by sector are aggregated from the 2015 Bureau of Economic
Analysis (BEA) Make and Use Tables from the Annual Industry Accounts.10 Industryspecific separation rates are derived by averaging monthly total separation rates for each
industry grouping in the Job Opening and Labor Turnover Survey from the Bureau of
Labor Statistics. Table 1 displays these industry-specific separation rates. We calibrate
emissions coefficients to match emissions data from the Energy Information
Administration (EIA).
We assume that the foreign economy is symmetric to the domestic economy, but
is three times larger than its domestic counterpart.

10

https://www.bea.gov/industry/io_annual.htm
In some cases, the level of aggregation in the two models in this paper do not correspond one to one with
the summary-level industry aggregation in the BEA annual data. In these cases, the detailed-level industry
aggregation in the 2007 Benchmark Accounts is used to disaggregate the summary-level data. Inputs of
Oil&Gas extraction and Coal mining are revised to be consistent with EIA data on energy inputs and prices
by industry.

20

Table 1. Separation Rates and Labor Share by Industry

Industry
Oil&gas extraction
Coal mining
Other mining
Mining support services
Electric power
Natural gas distribution
Petroleum refining and coal products
Water/sewage utilities
Agriculture
Construction
Durable manufacturing
Nondurable manufacturing (excl. refining)
Wholesale trade
Retail trade
Transportation and warehousing
Information
Finance, insurance, real estate (incl. housing)
Professional business services
Education and health
Leisure and hospitality
Other services
Government (incl. enterprises)

Separation
rate

% of total labor
compensation

4.6
4.6
4.6
4.6
3.2
3.2
2.3
3.2
4.6
4.7
2.0
2.3
2.4
4.7
3.2
2.8
2.3
5.2
2.6
6.1
3.6
1.5

0.16
0.04
0.07
0.52
0.66
0.18
0.17
0.03
0.54
5.10
5.85
2.95
4.66
4.95
3.17
2.79
8.37
18.34
12.33
4.70
3.84
17.63

3.2. Common Primary Parameters
The time period in the model is one month. The discount factor is calibrated to be
consistent with an annual interest rate of 4 percent. In both models, the Frisch elasticity
of labor supply is set equal to 1. As discussed in Hall and Milgrom (2008), this represents
a middle ground between estimates found for middle-aged men and other single-earner
families (0.7) and higher elasticities found for young men and married women. In both
models, the disutility of work parameter is calibrated to be consistent with the labor
supply elasticity and data on total labor supplied. The tax on labor is set to 0.31, a rate
that approximates the average marginal combined federal and state income tax rate plus
the employee payroll tax contribution. The payroll tax is set to 0.06, representing the
employer share of payroll taxes. We apply an elasticity of substitution across
21

consumption goods to be a conservative 0.75 (full-employment CGE models like that of
Goulder and Hafstead 2017 use a value of 1). Elasticities of substitution in production are
taken from Jorgenson and Wilcoxen (1996).
3.3. Labor Market Parameters
For labor market parameters in the search-CGE model, we follow Hafstead and Williams
(2018) by assuming relatively standard search-friction parameters. We start by using a
steady state unemployment rate of 5 percent and a recruiter productivity ( H j ) of 25 that
!
is equal across all sectors, and fix hours in the public sector ( hg ) such that employees
spend one-third of their time working.11 Following Hall and Milgrom (2008), we set the
match elasticity equal to 0.5, and following Shimer (2010), we set the Nash bargaining
parameter equal to 0.5.12
Conditional on these assumptions, we then implement a calibration procedure to
solve for the disutility of work parameter (ψ ), the level of unemployment benefits (!b ),
the match efficiency parameter by sector ( υ j ), and hours per worker in private sector ( hj )
!
!
that are consistent with the model equations and asymmetric separation rates across
sectors.13

4. Comparison of Model Results
Both the search-CGE and FE-CGE models are dynamic, but the FE-CGE model
immediately converges to its steady state in the first period of the policy (because it
11

Silva and Toledo (2009) estimate that the cost of recruiting a single worker is equal to approximately 12
percent of a worker’s monthly wage. Adjusting for hours (one-third), this implies that one recruiter can hire
25/3 workers per month.
12
In models without taxes, setting the bargaining parameter equal to the match elasticity ensures the Hosios
condition such that the equilibrium level of unemployment is efficient from the social planner’s
perspective. However, in the presence of preexisting taxes on labor, the Hosios condition does not hold
even when these parameters are equal.
13
This calibration strategy implies that hours per worker vary across sectors because of differences in
marginal products of labor and that the marginal value of employment in each sector ( Vn ) varies across

!

sectors.

22

j

includes no labor adjustment frictions, and neither model incorporates capital). Therefore,
we compare only the steady states of the two models. Figure 2 displays how carbon
emissions respond to carbon prices (with carbon-pricing revenue returned via lump-sum
rebates) across the two models. The two lines are identical, and the differences in labor
markets do not affect the elasticity of emissions reductions with respect to the carbon
price.
Figure 2. Emissions Reductions by Carbon Price, Lump-Sum Rebates

$120
Search-CGE Model

FE-CGE Model

$ per metric ton CO2

$100
$80
$60
$40
$20
$0
0%

5%

10%

15%

20% 25% 30% 35%
Emissions Reductions

40%

45%

50%

4.1. Aggregate Employment Impacts
Figure 3 displays one of the central results of our paper: the change in the unemployment
rate caused by imposing carbon taxes (with lump-sum rebates) in the two models, and
how that varies with stringency (expressed as the level of emissions reductions with
respect to reference case emissions). Because the FE-CGE model does not model
unemployment, we compute this change based on a FTE-type calculation (similar to the
23

approach in other studies that address employment changes using a full-employment
model). First, we calculate the change in FTE jobs that is equivalent to the change in the
total quantity of labor from the FE-CGE model. Then we convert that into an implied
change in the unemployment rate, holding fixed the size of the labor force and assuming
a 5 percent baseline unemployment rate.
Figure 3. Change in Unemployment Rate by Level of Stringency, Lump-Sum Rebates

1.6%
Search-CGE Model

FE-CGE Model

Change in Unemployment Rate

1.4%
1.2%
1.0%
0.8%
0.6%
0.4%
0.2%
0.0%
0%

5%

10%

15% 20% 25% 30%
Emissions Reductions

35%

40%

45%

50%

In each model, unemployment rises as the environmental policy becomes more
stringent, but the FE-CGE model dramatically overestimates the change in the
unemployment rate relative to the search-CGE model at all levels of stringency. For
example, at 20 percent emissions reductions, the FE-CGE implies an increase in the
unemployment rate of about 0.5 percentage points, whereas the search-CGE model
implies an increase of 0.2 percentage points—the FE-CGE model estimates an increase
2.5 times greater than the search-CGE model’s estimate. On an absolute basis, the

24

difference between the two estimates is increasing with stringency, though the ratio of the
two is decreasing with stringency.
Figure 4 makes the same comparison, but with carbon pricing revenue returned
via payroll tax cuts instead of lump-sum transfers.14 Under both models, the change in the
unemployment rate is very small if the carbon tax revenue is used to finance reductions in
payroll taxes. But again, the FE-CGE model significantly overestimates the employment
response to the tax cuts relative to the search-CGE model. In the search-CGE model, the
unemployment impact is essentially zero across a range of stringencies. At 20 percent
reductions, the unemployment rate increases by slightly more than 0.01 percentage points
in the search-CGE model, versus an increase much closer to 0.1 percentage points in the
FE-CGE model.
Figure 4. Change in Unemployment Rate by Level of Stringency, Labor Tax Cuts

1.5%

Search-CGE Model

FE-CGE Model

Change in Unemployment Rate

1.3%
1.1%
0.9%
0.7%
0.5%
0.3%
0.1%
-0.1%
0%

5%

10%

15%

20% 25% 30% 35%
Emissions Reductions

14

40%

45%

50%

We define revenue neutrality in each model such that the real value of lump-sum transfers is unchanged
from the benchmark calibration. This definition uses revenues to offset both decreases in labor and payroll
tax revenues and increases in government spending (on inputs in both models and unemployment benefits
in the search-CGE model). Alternatively, we could define revenue neutrality such that revenues are
unchanged, with a decline in lump-sum transfers to offset increased government spending. Results with this
alternative specification are quantitatively similar.

25

Figure 5 shows the difference between the responses of the unemployment rate to
the environmental policy under lump-sum rebates and under payroll tax cuts, or, in other
words, how the payroll tax cuts affect the unemployment rate. These results demonstrate
that the revenue-recycling effect on unemployment is much smaller in the search-CGE
model than in the FE-CGE model. Therefore, the FE-CGE model, relative to the searchCGE model, overestimates how much unemployment responds to both carbon pricing
and payroll tax changes.
Figure 5. Difference in Change in Unemployment Rate
between Lump-Sum Rebate and Labor Tax Cuts, by Level of Stringency

0.0%

Search-CGE Model
FE-CGE Model

Change in Unemployment Rate

-0.2%
-0.4%
-0.6%
-0.8%
-1.0%
-1.2%
-1.4%
-1.6%
0%

5%

10%

15% 20% 25% 30%
Emissions Reductions

35%

40%

45%

4.2. Employment Impacts across Sectors
To investigate the source of the differences in aggregate unemployment impacts across
models, we now disaggregate the results along two dimensions, breaking out each of the
26

23 sectors, and dividing the change in labor supply in the search-CGE model into the
change in number of workers and change in hours per worker. Table 2 displays those
disaggregated results for a $40 carbon tax with lump-sum rebates.15
Table 2. Long-Run Changes in Workers, Hours per Worker, and Total Labor Input
$40 Carbon Tax with Lump-Sum Rebates

Sector
Oil&gas extraction
Coal mining
Other mining
Mining support services
Electric power
Natural gas distribution
Petroleum refining and coal products
Water/sewage utilities
Agriculture
Construction
Durable manufacturing
Nondurable manufacturing (excl.
refining)
Wholesale trade
Retail trade
Transportation and warehousing
Information
Finance, insurance, real estate (incl.
housing)
Professional business services
Education and health
Leisure and hospitality
Other services
Government enterprises
General government
All sectors

Search-CGE Model
Number
Hours
of
per
Labor
workers
worker
input
–25.25%
–0.66%
–25.72%
–36.38%
–0.66%
–36.77%
–3.13%
–0.66%
–3.73%
–20.27%
–0.66%
–20.77%
–5.48%
–0.64%
–6.06%
–5.03%
–0.64%
–5.62%
–9.09%
–0.63%
–9.65%
–0.66%
–0.64%
–1.27%
–1.56%
–0.66%
–2.18%
–1.23%
–0.66%
–1.85%
–1.38%
–0.62%
–1.98%

FE-CGE
Model
Labor
input
–25.59%
–36.67%
–3.58%
–20.64%
–5.90%
–5.47%
–9.51%
–1.12%
–2.01%
–1.70%
–1.80%

–1.30%

–0.63%

–1.90%

–1.72%

–0.70%
0.58%
–2.16%
0.13%

–0.63%
–0.66%
–0.64%
–0.63%

–1.31%
–0.05%
–2.77%
–0.48%

–1.13%
0.11%
–2.61%
–0.32%

0.04%

–0.63%

–0.57%

–0.39%

–0.52%
0.75%
0.42%
0.40%
–0.12%

–0.67%
–0.63%
–0.68%
–0.64%
–0.61%

–1.14%
0.13%
–0.22%
–0.22%
–0.73%

–1.00%
0.31%
–0.08%
–0.06%
–0.55%

0.75%

–0.61%

0.14%

0.15%

–0.34%

–0.64%

–0.95%

–0.82%

A $40 carbon tax with lump-sum rebates is similar to the carbon dividend policy outlined by the Climate
Leadership Council, an organization with founding members that include Republican statesmen such as
James Baker and George Schultz.
15

27

A number of key results emerge from Table 2. First, the search-CGE model
predicts a more negative change (larger drop or smaller increase) in total labor demand in
every industry than the FE-CGE model, although the differences are small. The searchCGE model effectively adds an additional margin along which labor can respond, thus
making the total quantity of labor more responsive to the carbon tax. Second, the FECGE model predicts a more negative change in employment (larger drop or smaller
increase) in each sector than the search-CGE model (assuming that one interprets the FECGE change in labor demand as a change in the number of employees, as is common in
the CGE literature). This difference arises because hours per worker fall in every industry
in the search-CGE model. By implicitly assuming no change in hours per worker in the
interpretation of the FE-CGE model results, CGE practitioners overestimate the change in
the number of workers. As a result, the overall drop in employment is overestimated as
well. This same issue causes the two models to produce different estimates for the sign of
the change in jobs in a substantial fraction of industries: the FE-CGE model predicts an
employment increase in only one private-sector industry (retail trade) and the government
sector; in the search-CGE model, employment increases in 6 of the 22 private-sector
industries and the government sector.16
However, in other respects, the two models generate relatively similar results.
The rough ranking of industries (from relatively large job losses to small losses or gains)
is essentially the same between the two models, because both models pick up the same
underlying effect of substitution away from carbon-intensive goods. And the magnitude
of the difference in the estimated change in jobs for any given industry is relatively small.
Thus, if the goal is simply to identify relative shifts in employment, or to get a rough
estimate of the effect on a particular industry, it doesn’t make much difference which
model one uses. But because the FE-CGE model yields systematically more negative
effects on employment in every industry, they add up to a substantial difference in the
aggregate estimates, even if those differences are relatively small for each industry taken
by itself.
16

The government’s production of services is held fixed. With low elasticities of substitution, the
government displays only a small change in total labor demand. However, the government must increase
employment to offset the reduction in hours per worker that is relatively constant across sectors.

28

The differences across models are generally due to the assumption in the FE-CGE
model that all adjustments occur on the extensive margin. In the benchmark search-CGE
model, the intensive margin hours per worker response is responsible for approximately
two-thirds of the total labor response to the carbon tax with lump-sum rebates. In Section
5, we investigate the robustness of these results.
Table 3. Long-Run Changes in Workers, Hours per Worker, and Total Labor Input
$40 Carbon Tax with Labor Tax Cuts

Sector
Oil&gas extraction
Coal mining
Other mining
Mining support services
Electric power
Natural gas distribution
Petroleum refining and coal products
Water/sewage utilities
Agriculture
Construction
Durable manufacturing
Nondurable manufacturing (excl.
refining)
Wholesale trade
Retail trade
Transportation and warehousing
Information
Finance, insurance, real estate (incl.
housing)
Professional business services
Education and health
Leisure and hospitality
Other services
Government enterprises
General government
All Sectors

Search-CGE Model
Number
of
Hours per
Labor
workers
worker
input
–24.86%
–0.15%
–24.97%
–36.09%
–0.15%
–36.18%
–2.69%
–0.15%
–2.83%
–19.87%
–0.15%
–19.98%
–5.05%
–0.14%
–5.18%
–4.68%
–0.14%
–4.81%
–8.77%
–0.14%
–8.89%
–0.28%
–0.14%
–0.42%
–1.07%
–0.15%
–1.21%
–0.83%
–0.15%
–0.97%
–0.90%
–0.14%
–1.04%

FE-CGE
Model
Labor
input
–24.95%
–36.16%
–2.81%
–19.96%
–5.15%
–4.79%
–8.87%
–0.39%
–1.18%
–0.94%
–1.00%

–0.79%

–0.14%

–0.93%

–0.90%

–0.25%
1.03%
–1.74%
0.54%

–0.14%
–0.15%
–0.14%
–0.14%

–0.39%
0.89%
–1.88%
0.39%

–0.36%
0.92%
–1.85%
0.42%

0.51%

–0.14%

0.37%

0.40%

–0.12%
1.22%
0.82%
0.84%
0.34%

–0.15%
–0.14%
–0.15%
–0.15%
–0.14%

–0.26%
1.08%
0.68%
0.69%
0.20%

–0.24%
1.11%
0.70%
0.72%
0.23%

0.29%

–0.14%

0.15%

0.15%

–0.05%

–0.15%

–0.19%

–0.17%

29

Table 3 makes the same comparison, but for the case in which carbon tax revenue
is used to cut payroll taxes (rather than returned lump-sum as in Table 2). Most of the
qualitative results remain the same. Again, the search-CGE model predicts a larger
absolute change in total labor demand in each sector due to the addition of the search
friction (though the difference is quantitatively small). And again, because the FE-CGE
model interprets all changes in labor demand as changes in the number of workers, the
FE-CGE model predicts a more negative change in jobs in every industry than the searchCGE model.
In this case, though, the two models agree on the sign of job changes in each
industry: each model predicts increases in employment in seven private-sector industries
and the government sector. And while the search-CGE estimate of the drop in hours per
worker is much smaller under payroll tax reductions than under lump-sum rebates
(because the payroll tax cut raises the after-tax marginal value of working another hour,
thus offsetting most of the effect of the carbon tax), the same is true for the extensive
margin, and thus the relative importance of the intensive margin actually increases. The
change in hours is responsible for about 75 percent of the economy-wide change in total
labor input. As a result, the FE-CGE model predicts a decrease in the number workers
that is nearly 3.5 times greater than the search-CGE prediction.

5. Sensitivity Analysis
To assess the robustness of our model comparison results, we look at how sensitive they
are to changes in a variety of parameter and modeling assumptions. First, we test standard
CGE parameters such as the elasticities of labor supply and household consumption, the
production elasticity between labor and intermediate inputs, and trade elasticities.
Second, we vary key search parameters such as the wage-bargaining shares, the match
elasticity, and recruiter productivity. Finally, we test whether altering our assumption for
constant real unemployment benefits affects the key results.
Three major observations emerge from the sensitivity analysis. First, sensitivity
analysis on standard CGE parameters shows that the FE-CGE model consistently yields
higher estimates of the aggregate long-run unemployment impact of carbon pricing than
30

the search-CGE model, regardless of the value of standard CGE parameters. The
bargaining process in the search-CGE model allows for adjustments in hours and wages
that ultimately mitigate the decreased demand for labor caused by the carbon-pricing
policy. This intuition is also reflected in the sensitivity analysis on key search parameters:
alternative specifications that reduce the size of the bargaining set tend to lead to higher
estimated unemployment impacts in the search-CGE model in response to carbonpricing-induced reductions in labor demand. In the case of bargaining power, higher
employer bargaining power sufficiently restricts the wage and hours response to the
carbon tax such that the FE-CGE model underestimates the unemployment impact
relative to the search-CGE model. Finally, the search-CGE results are sensitive to how
unemployment benefits are modeled. Using a fixed replacement rate, as opposed to a
fixed real benefit level, significantly decreases estimated effects on unemployment in the
search-CGE model, leading to a much larger difference from the FE-CGE model
estimates.
5.1. Standard CGE Parameters
Table 4 displays the change in long-run unemployment from a $40 carbon tax across a
range of standard CGE parameters for both models and recycling options. The elasticity
of labor supply captures the response of hours worked to changes in the real wage rate.
Although higher labor supply elasticities increase the responsiveness of hours worked to
changes in the real wage rate in both the search-CGE and FE-CGE models, this has
opposite effects on the change in unemployment in the two models. In the search-CGE
model, if workers are more willing to change their hours of work, more of the adjustment
will be on the intensive margin (hours worked), and thus less is needed on the extensive
margin (employment). On the other hand, increasing the labor supply elasticity in the FECGE model causes the representative household to be more responsive to the real wage,
leading to a larger reduction in labor supply. Because the FTE calculations interpret
changes in representative agent labor supply as a change in employment, increasing the
elasticity of labor supply results in an increased reduction in FTE employment, resulting
in a higher estimated unemployment rate.

31

Unemployment impacts of emissions taxes are largely independent of both the
household elasticity for consumption and production elasticity between labor and
intermediate inputs in both search-CGE and FE-CGE models. As the elasticities increase,
the increase in the unemployment rate slightly declines across both models and revenue
recycling designs, compared with the central case. For the consumption elasticity, the
income effect outweighs the substitution effect: making it easier to substitute from highpollution-intensity consumption goods to low-pollution-intensity consumption goods
further decreases high-pollution-intensity employment, but this decline is offset by a
higher real income for the household. For the production elasticity of substitution
between labor and intermediate inputs, an increased elasticity slightly decreases the
impacts of a $40 carbon tax by shifting production inputs away from more expensive
dirty intermediate inputs to labor. An increase in the substitution effect thus helps offset
decreases in demand caused by the carbon tax.
Trade elasticities represent how easily consumers and producers can substitute
between domestic and foreign-made goods or inputs.17 Higher trade elasticities increase
the negative impacts of an emissions tax on high-pollution-intensity industries because it
becomes easier to substitute to imported dirty goods, further reducing domestic
production and labor demand in those industries. However, this is offset by larger gains
in clean industries. As a result, the overall change in the unemployment rate is relatively
insensitive to the trade elasticity in both the search-CGE and FE-CGE models.

17

In our alternative trade elasticity simulations, we increase both the domestic consumer and producer
elasticities between domestic and foreign goods and the foreign consumer and producer elasticities between
domestic and foreign goods.

32

Table 4. Sensitivity Analysis on Standard CGE Parameters ($40/ton carbon tax)

Lump-sum rebate
Change of unemployment rate from
reference case (5%)
Central case

Labor tax cut

SearchCGE
Model
0.320%

FE-CGE
Model
0.777%

SearchCGE
Model
0.047%

FE-CGE
Model
0.158%

Labor supply
elasticity

50% higher (1/χ = 1.5)
50% lower (1/χ = 0.5)

0.260%
0.406%

0.909%
0.540%

0.041%
0.052%

0.194%
0.102%

Household
elasticity for
consumption

50% higher (𝜎 ! = 1.125)

0.308%

0.752%

0.043%

0.150%

50% lower (𝜎 = 0.375)

0.333%

0.804%

0.051%

0.168%

Production
elasticity for
labor and int.
inputs

50% higher (𝜎 ! = 0.75)

0.311%

0.768%

0.039%

0.150%

40% lower (𝜎 ! = 0.3)

0.327%

0.784%

0.054%

0.165%

Trade
elasticity

50% higher (𝜎 !" = 2.25)
50% lower (𝜎 !" = 0.75)

0.343%
0.194%

0.753%
0.843%

0.091%
–0.130%

0.200%
–0.027%

!

5.2. Labor Market Parameters
Table 5 displays the change in long-run unemployment caused by a $40 carbon tax for
the search-CGE model across alternative search-CGE labor market parameter values. For
comparison, we display results from the FE-CGE even though that model doesn’t include
search parameters, and therefore those results do not change.
Bargaining power determines how the surplus from a job match is split between
employees and employers. If employer bargaining power is high ( η > 0.5 ), then (all else
equal) a policy-induced reduction in the marginal value of a worker ( J n ) leads to a larger
decline in recruitment effort, increasing the employment response. Conditional on the
relative flow value of unemployment, increased bargaining power also limits both the
wage and hours responses to the policy. Less flexible hours increase the employment
response to policy by increasing the extensive margin response, and less flexible wages
decrease the reallocation of workers from relatively dirty industries to relatively clean
33

industries. In our high-bargaining-power specification, the increase in unemployment is
greater than the increase in unemployment in the FE-CGE model. This is the only
specification that deviates from our central result that the FE-CGE model overestimates
unemployment impacts relative to the search-CGE model.
Table 5. Sensitivity Analysis on Labor Market Parameters ($40/ton carbon tax)

Lump-sum rebate
SearchCGE
Model
0.320%

FECGE
Model
0.777%

SearchCGE
Model
0.047%

FECGE
Model
0.158%

50% higher ( η = 0.75)

0.962%

0.777%

0.143%

0.158%

50% lower ( η = 0.25)

0.078%

0.777%

0.010%

0.158%

Change of unemployment rate from
reference case (5%)
Central case
Nash
bargaining
parameter
Match
elasticity
Recruiter
productivity

Labor tax cut

50% higher ( γ

j

= 0.75)

0.159%

0.777%

0.021%

0.158%

50% lower ( γ

j

= 0.25)

0.477%

0.777%

0.073%

0.158%

50% higher ( H j = 37.5)

0.501%

0.777%

0.074%

0.158%

50% lower ( H j = 12.5)

0.137%

0.777%

0.019%

0.158%

The matching elasticity indicates how the number of job matches will change with
a given change in recruiting effort. Increasing the elasticity increases the ability of the
low-pollution-intensity industries to hire workers who lost jobs in the high-pollutionintensity industries. As a result, the unemployment impact decreases when match
elasticity increases.
Recruiter productivity is an endogenous function of matching efficiency, the ratio
of total recruiter effort to the number of unemployed workers (labor market tightness),
and match elasticity, but in the calibration process, we calibrate the match efficiencies to
be consistent with prespecified benchmark recruitment productivities. Higher benchmark
productivities imply higher match efficiencies; higher match elasticities imply that job
matches are more sensitive to changes in labor market tightness and that any given
change in the value of a job match will have a greater effect on the level of
unemployment. In other words, higher match efficiency implies lower recruiting costs,
34

and thus it requires a larger change in labor-market tightness to offset any given change
in the value of a match. As a result, the unemployment impact increases when recruiter
productivity/match efficiency is higher. Further, as recruitment productivity approaches
infinity, recruiting costs converge to zero and the search-CGE model results will
converge to the FE-CGE model results.
5.3. Unemployment Benefits

In the search-CGE model, unemployed workers receive nominal unemployment benefits

pb each period, implying real benefits equal b . In the calibration procedure, b is
calibrated to be consistent with our data and other calibration assumptions. The value of

b in the search-CGE model is 0.369; this value implies a benchmark replacement rate of
about 38.9 percent (nominal unemployment benefits as a percentage of nominal average
after-tax earnings). This value is larger than the 25 percent value used by Hall and
Milgrom (2008) but closely matches the value used in other studies, such as Amaral and
Tasci (2013).18 In the search-CGE model, real benefits b are held fixed, and therefore the
replacement rate increases with the carbon tax (a higher carbon tax rate implies a higher
price level and lower average after-tax real wages). In the $40 carbon tax case, for
example, the replacement rate increases to 42.7 percent.

18

As shown in Hafstead and Williams (2018), the benchmark replacement rate is a function of the elasticity
of labor supply. If we increase the elasticity of labor supply, the calibrated replacement rate would fall.
Hafstead and Williams found that Frisch elasticity of 2 was consistent with a replacement rate of 25 percent
in a similar model.

35

Figure 6. Change in Unemployment Rate by Level of Stringency under Two Unemployment Benefit
Assumptions, Lump-Sum Rebates

0.8%
Search-CGE Model with Fixed Real Benefit

Change in Unemployment Rate

0.7%

Search-CGE Model with Fixed Replacement Rate

0.6%
0.5%
0.4%
0.3%
0.2%
0.1%
0.0%
0%

5%

10%

15%

20% 25% 30% 35%
Emissions Reductions

40%

45%

50%

Alternatively, the search-CGE model could hold the replacement rate fixed and
allow the real value of unemployment benefits b to vary in response to the carbon tax.
Figure 6 displays the unemployment rate for carbon taxes with lump-sum rebates across a
range of stringencies under both unemployment benefit assumptions. At all levels of
stringency, the search-CGE model with fixed replacement rate predicts significantly less
unemployment than our benchmark search-CGE model with fixed real benefits. The fixed
replacement rate effectively lowers the value of unemployment benefits and therefore
lowers the flow value of unemployment. This reduced value of unemployment increases
the value of a job ( Vn ) and reduces equilibrium wages. As a result, relative to the fixed
benefit search-CGE model, the fixed replacement rate search-CGE model leads to smaller
carbon-tax-induced increases in the unemployment rate because wages are more flexible.

36

Thus, if replacement rates were held fixed, then FE-CGE models would overestimate the
employment impacts of a carbon tax by an even greater magnitude.
This exercise also demonstrates the importance of unemployment benefit
assumptions when the wage bargain depends on the value of unemployment benefits, a
result that is potentially quite important for the rapidly growing body of research on
environmental policy–employment modeling.

6. Conclusions
The political debate over environmental policy puts tremendous importance on how
policy affects jobs. Climate activists argue that environmental policies will create new
“green jobs,” while opponents deride such policies as “job-killers.” In the absence of
better tools, some economists have converted estimated changes in aggregate labor hours
from widely used full-employment environmental CGE models into estimates of changes
in FTE jobs—even though such models neither model the number of jobs nor consider
involuntary unemployment.
This paper looks at how robust the conclusions from such models are to more
realistic models of the labor market. It extends the Hafstead and Williams (2018) searchfriction model from a highly stylized two-sector model to a more detailed environmental
CGE model and compares results from that model with those of an otherwise equivalent
full-employment CGE model. We find that estimates of the aggregate changes in labor
quantity and the shifts across industries are relatively robust to this change: while results
differ between the two models, the magnitude of those differences is modest. However,
the full-employment model estimates the net change in the aggregate number of
employed workers to be roughly 2.5 times the estimate from the search-friction model,
because the full-employment model misinterprets voluntary changes in hours worked per
worker as changes in the number of jobs.
These results demonstrate that one should exercise great caution in using
estimates of the aggregate change in the number of jobs from full-employment models.
However, they also suggest that the full-employment assumption is not a substantial
problem for estimates of sector-level job changes or changes in total labor hours.
37

Aside from implying that FTE job loss estimates seriously overstate effects on
jobs, our results also suggest that carbon taxes have relatively small net effects on
employment: the search-friction model finds that a $40 carbon tax with lump-sum rebates
would decrease total jobs by about 0.34 percent. If revenues were used to reduce labor
taxes (payroll or personal wage taxes), the same $40 carbon tax would decrease total jobs
by about 0.05 percent.
These results are generally robust across alternative specifications, though there
are a few exceptions. Higher employer bargaining power would increase the search-CGE
net employment effect, and holding the unemployment benefit replacement rate constant
(as opposed to the real level of benefits, as in our base specification) would decrease the
search-CGE net employment effect.
However, while this research showed which employment results are robust to
differences in assumptions between the two models we considered, it cannot evaluate
which model is more likely to generate accurate predictions. In the absence of other
information, we would argue that the search-friction model’s far less unrealistic
microfoundations are likely to yield better estimates, but that is ultimately an empirical
question, and that empirical question is difficult to answer. As shown by Hafstead and
Williams (2018), general-equilibrium effects cause a fundamental identification problem
for empirical work on these issues, so reduced-form empirical work will generally be
seriously biased. Thus one useful direction for future research would be to bring together
empirical work with general-equilibrium modeling, such as that in this paper, both to
improve empirical estimates and to test some of the predictions of general-equilibrium
employment models.

38

References
Amaral, P., and M. Tasci. 2013. “The Cyclical Behavior of Equilibrium Unemployment
and Vacancies across OECD Countries.” Working paper. Cleveland, OH: Federal
Reserve Bank of Cleveland.
Aubert, D., and M. Chiroleu-Assouline. 2017. “Environmental Tax Reform and Income
Distribution with Imperfect Heterogeneous Labor Markets.” PSE Working Paper No.
2017-27. Paris: Paris School of Economics.
Bernstein, P., S. D. Tuladhar, W. D. Montgomery, and B. Ramkrishnan. 2017. “Impacts
of Greenhouse Gas Regulations on the Industrial Sector.” Washington, DC: NERA
Economic Consulting.

Goulder, L.H., and M.A.C. Hafstead. 2017. Confronting the Climate Challenge: US
Policy Options. New York: Columbia University Press.
Goulder, L.H., M.A.C. Hafstead, and R.C. Williams III. 2016. “General Equilibrium
Impacts of a Federal Clean Energy Standard.” American Economic Journal: Economic
Policy 8(2): 186–218.
Hafstead, M.A.C. and R. C. Williams III. 2018. “Unemployment and Environmental
Regulation in General Equilibrium.” Journal of Public Economics, 160: 50-65.
Hagedorn, M., and I. Manovskii. 2008. “The Cyclical Behavior of Equilibrium
Unemployment and Vacancies Revisited.” American Economic Review 98 (4): 1692–
1706.
Hall, R. E., and P. R. Milgrom. 2008. “The Limited Influence of Unemployment on the
Wage Bargain.” American Economic Review 98 (4): 1653–74.

39

Jorgenson, Dale W., and Peter J. Wilcoxen. 1996. “Reducing U.S. Carbon Emissions: An
Econometric General Equilibrium Assessment.” In Reducing Global Carbon Dioxide
Emissions: Costs and Policy Options, eds. Darius Gaskins and John Weyant. Energy
Modeling Forum, Stanford University, Stanford, Calif.
Merz, M. 1995. “Search in the Labor Market and the Real Business Cycle.” Journal of
Monetary Economics 36 (2): 269–300.
Mortensen, D. T., and C. A. Pissarides. 1994. “Job Creation and Job Destruction in the
Theory of Unemployment.” Review of Economic Studies 61 (3): 397–415.
Pissarides, C. A. 1985. “Short-Run Equilibrium Dynamics of Unemployment, Vacancies,
and Real Wages.” American Economic Review 101 (6): 2823–43.
Silva, J.I., and M. Toledo. 2009. “Labor Turnover Costs and the Cyclical Behavior of
Vacancies and Unemployment.” Macroeconomic Dynamics 13(Supplement 1): 79–96.
Shimer, R. 2010. Labor Markets and Business Cycles. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
———. 2013. “A Framework for Valuing the Employment Consequences of
Environmental Regulation.” Working paper. Chicago: University of Chicago.

40

