                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     FINANCIAL FRICTIONS AND TRADE DYNAMICS

                                          Paul Bergin
                                           Ling Feng
                                          Ching-Yi Lin

                                       Working Paper 24503
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w24503


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2018




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Paul Bergin, Ling Feng, and Ching-Yi Lin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Financial Frictions and Trade Dynamics
Paul Bergin, Ling Feng, and Ching-Yi Lin
NBER Working Paper No. 24503
April 2018
JEL No. F4

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper demonstrates theoretically that a financial shock can have very persistent effects on
international trade. Motivation is taken from the aftermath of the dramatic trade collapse in
2008-9, which despite a substantial recovery, has left a persistently slower growth rate in trade.
We find conditions under which a transitory financial shock significantly reduces the investment
by firms in entering the export market, and that this can have long-lasting effects on the range of
goods exported and hence overall trade. Important to our mechanism are endogenous capital
structure decisions by firms in response to the financial shock, and firm entry investment that
requires traded goods. This mechanism provides an example of how firm dynamics can serve as a
potent propagation mechanism, generating very long-lasting effects of transitory macroeconomic
shocks.

Paul Bergin                                                   Ching-Yi Lin
Department of Economics                                       National Tsing Hua University
University of California, Davis                               Department of Economics
One Shields Ave.                                              lincy@mx.nthu.edu.tw
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
prbergin@ucdavis.edu

Ling Feng
School of Finance
Shanghai University of Finance and Economics
777 Guoding Road, Shanghai, China, 200433
feng.ling@mail.shufe.edu.cn
1.   Introduction


     While the level of international goods trade largely has recovered from the

dramatic collapse in 2008-9, there appears to be a longer run impact in the form of a

persistently slower growth rate in trade compared to the trend before the crisis. As

seen in Table 1, the average annual growth rate in US exports for 2012-14 was less

than a third of the average annual growth rate for the five years preceding the crisis

(3.1% versus 10.1%). This paper will study the role that extensive margin dynamics

can play as a mechanism translating a transitory financial shock into a longer-run

decline in trade. Previous empirical research on the trade collapse has downplayed the

role of the extensive margin, finding it contributed ten percent or less of the fall in

trade in 2009 (see Behrens et al. 2013, and Bricongne et al. 2012). Column two of

Table 1 confirms this impression, where the fall during 2009 for two measures of

extensive margin, the number of goods-country combinations with positive exports

and the number of exporters, respectively, are a tenth and a quarter of the fall in

export value. However, Table 1 also considers a data set extended to more recent

years, and column four shows that the shortfall in growth rate (comparing post-crisis

to pre-crisis averages) in the extensive margin is up to one-half of the magnitude of

the shortfall in export growth. We conclude that, while firm dynamics and changes in

the extensive margin may move modestly in the short run, they appear to be persistent,

and in the medium to long run these persistent effects in the extensive margin are a

significant component of the fall in overall exports.

     In some respects this relationship is surprising. Paravisini et al. (2015) claims

that the financial crisis involves shocks to working capital not sunk entry costs, as this

is what is needed to explain the given effect on overall trade volume, and further,

shocks to short term capital directly affect the intensive rather than extensive margin.
                                            1
Our model is consistent with their overall conclusion, in that the type of financial

shock we choose to use impacts directly the working capital needed for production.

However, Bergin et al. (2016) shows in a closed economy model that a shock to short

term working capital costs can have strong indirect implications for the financing of

firm sunk entry costs through endogenous changes in firm capital structure. This

paper will develop a two-country dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE)

model with endogenous capital structure to study how a financial shock can lead to

both a large temporary fall in trade volume and a drop in extensive margin of trade
                                                       1
that has long-lasting effects on trade volume.

      We     draw     additional      empirical     motivation       from an        empirical vector

autoregression, identifying the dynamic effects of financial shocks on the margins of

trade in recent historical data. Using multiple measures of trade and of the financial

shock, the impulse response point estimates indicate a sharp downturn in trade,

followed by a partial recovery but protracted shortfall in trade relative to the original

level. Impulse responses for the extensive margin indicate a similar downturn and

lingering effect. Our theoretical model will generate this pattern of responses, and will

offer an explanation of how they are related to each other, in particular, how the

persistent effect on the stock of exporting firms can act as a propagation mechanism

for trade volume.

      Two key mechanisms drive the theoretical result. The first is that shocks to costs


1
  While Paravisini et al. (2015) do not find evidence in firm-level data for a direct effect of financial
shocks on the extensive margin of trade, this result is conditional on the use of instruments to control
for indirect effects on the extensive margin coming from, as they state, changes in the level in export
demand, and changes in input costs. They explicitly say that their result does not reject potential
explanations where: “a deterioration in credit conditions lowers the equilibrium size and profitability of
each export flow, which, in turn, may reduce the probability of entering new markets— as we find
when the period of analysis is extended to two years (Table 8, Panel 5).” (p353) Consequently, the
empirical evidence of Paravisini et al. does not bear on the mechanism we propose, since we do not
specify a direct effect of credit shock on entry, but rather that the credit shock affects entry indirectly
through the channels of a rise in input costs for the investment good used for entry, a reduction in
expected future export sales and profits, and through capital restructuring.
                                                    2
of financing working capital lead firms to alter their capital structure from debt to

more expensive equity financing. Evidence for such capital restructuring during the

financial crisis has been provided by Jermann and Quadrini (2012), and Bergin et al.

(2016) has shown it has important implications for firm entry. An adverse financial

shock takes the usual form of a tightening of the collateral constraint for borrowing

working capital during a period, which reduces the scale of firm production. Since

equity is used as collateral, the shock creates an incentive for firms to reallocate firm

financing away from intertemporal debt toward equity financing. Because equity is a

more costly form of firm financing, this capital structure reallocation raises the

effective cost of financing the sunk investment cost of entering the export market, and

hence deters potential entrants. This mechanism thus addresses the problem in past

research that a transitory shock affecting short run profits alone does not sufficiently

reduce the overall present value of the stream of all future profits in order to have a

significant effect on the level of firm entry. By translating this short-run financing

shock to raise instead the effective sunk cost, the shock is able to significantly

discourage new entry. Due to the fairly slow dynamics in the stock of firms, such a

fall in new entry can have long-lasting effects on the number of exporters. A drop in

the number of home export varieties available to foreign consumers, relative to the

number of foreign domestic varieties, reduces demand for home exports in our model,

leading to a long-lasting drop in export volume.

     The second key mechanism is that entry investment includes a substantial share

of traded goods. The literature has long recognized that capital goods represent a

substantial portion of trade flows, and that the volatility of investment helps explain

the high volatility in trade flows, including in the recent financial crisis. (See Boileau

1999, Eaton and Kortum 2001, Engel and Wang 2011, and Alessandria et al. 2010.) In

the context of our model, including entry investment in the trade volume allows the
                                            3
change in extensive margin to contribute to trade dynamics in two ways. First, it adds

to the initial fall in trade on impact of the shock. This fact is something that was

appreciated in past work noted above studying the initial trade collapse. But a second

effect, novel to our work, is that it also can have a powerful impact on the persistence

of trade dynamics through a vicious circle. A drop in the extensive margin of trade

lowering the number of varieties of imported goods available for investment raises the

cost of investment, which lowers entry in future periods, which in turn raises the cost

of future investment, etc. This persistent drop in the extensive margin of trade then

translates into a persistent effect on trade volume.

     Results from model simulation imply a large impact effect on trade, which partly

dies away quickly, but leaves a persistent component that dies away very slowly.

Simulations show this persistence in trade volume is related to an extensive margin

that gradually worsens and is quite persistent. They also show the worsening price

index of imports and hence for investment noted above. Experiments confirm that

both mechanisms, capital restructuring to raise entry cost, and entry costs in units of

traded goods, are necessary for our model to generate theoretical impulse responses

that look like the empirical responses, in terms of impact effect and persistence. A

calibration exercise indicates that this mechanism potentially could explain a

substantial share of the persistent effect on trade observed in our empirical VAR.

     More broadly, this paper makes a useful contribution to the theoretical literature

on firm dynamics. This literature has demonstrated special interest in the question of

how firm entry dynamics can be a new source of propagation for macroeconomic

shocks. (See Ghironi and Melitz (2005), and Bilbiie, Ghironi and Melitz (2012).) The

mechanism in our model provides an example of how firm dynamics at the extensive

margin of trade can serve as a highly potent propagation mechanism, generating very

long-lasting effects of transitory financial shocks.
                                            4
      The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 documents some

new stylized facts regarding the extensive margin of trade during the financial crisis.

Section 3 explains the mechanics of the DSGE model. Section 4 calibrates the model,

interprets simulation results, and conducts sensitivity analyses to identify key

channels of the mechanism. Section 5 concludes.


2.    Empirical Motivation


     We characterize the dynamic responses of the margins of trade to a financial shock

by estimating a 7-variable vector autoregression model. A VAR is useful in that it can

control for other shocks, such as shocks to monetary policy. It also characterizes

dynamics in terms of impulse responses that are directly comparable to those

produced by our theoretical DSGE model.

     The VAR includes monthly 6-digit HS disaggregate U.S. export and import flow

data with 238 trade partners running from 2002:1 to 2016:11 from USA Trade Online

provided by the U.S. Census Bureau. This is used to measure trade flows, and permits

computation of the extensive margin of trade as the number of different categories

traded with a given country in a month. This sample period includes the recent crisis

and recovery. Given the short time span, we procured export and import data at a

monthly frequency in order to maximize the level of statistical significance. The VAR

model is estimated with variables in the following order: the logarithm of industrial

production, the logarithm of CPI, the federal funds rate, the 3-month interbank

lending rate, the logarithm of the extensive margin of trade, the logarithm of total

trade, and the logarithm of S&P500 index. For robustness, we will also estimate

VARs for exports and imports separately, in place of the trade variable.

      The strategy for identification of the financial shock closely follows that in

Bergin et al. (2016). The interbank lending rate is used as a measure of tightness of
                                           5
financial conditions over time as in Chor and Manova (2012), as it is a broad measure

of financial liquidity in the economy. We represent an exogenous financial shock as

an innovation to the lending rate orthogonal to contemporaneous movements in other

macroeconomic variables, including the federal funds rate. These variables are

included to help disentangle the effects on the lending rate due to monetary policy

from the effects of an exogenous financial shock. We follow Eichenbaum and Evans

(1995) and Bernanke and Mihov (1998) to assume that output and consumer prices

are not contemporaneously affected by monetary policy shocks, and thus specify a

VAR ordering federal funds rate after industrial production and CPI. To examine how

financial shock affect the extensive margin of trade, total trade and stock prices, we

follow Bergin and Corsetti (2008) to put the extensive margin of trade after the

variables representing shocks discussed above, which allow the data to speak as to

whether this variable responds in the initial period of shocks or with a lag. We order

stock prices last to allow for the possibility that stock prices respond quickly to new

information.2

    The impulse responses are reported in Fig. 1, along with two-standard error bands.

These show that the lending rate has negative and significant impacts on the extensive

margin of trade and total trade. The effect on the extensive margin of trade is delayed,

with the peak response coming 3 months after the shock. The effect on the total

exports is larger in magnitude and later in timing, with the peak effect at 8 to 9

months after the shock. The impulse response is consistent with a highly persistent

effect on trade, in that the point estimates of the impulse responses do no fully return

to the starting point, even when the horizon of the impulse responses is doubled to

2
  A well-known disadvantage of using a Cholesky decomposition on the reduced-form residuals is that
results can be sensitive to the ordering of variables, calling into question the validity of the restrictions
used for identification. In addition, ordering restrictions typically are not derived from a theoretical
model. Robustness checks reported in section A of a supplementary online appendix show that our
conclusions are robust to alternative orderings.
                                                     6
120 months. (However, wide confidence bands preclude claims of statistical

significance in the long run.)

     Figs. 2 and 3 estimate the impacts of financial shock on exports and imports

separately. The impulse responses of the extensive margins of exports and imports are

both very persistent, however, the significance of impacts on the extensive margin of

imports is longer-lasting than that on the extensive margin of exports.

     For robustness, we also consider VARs that replace innovations in the interbank

rate with an innovation in the Chicago Fed National Financial Conditions Index as an

indicator of the financial shock. The results shown in Appendix Fig. A1 to A3 are very

similar to our benchmark model. However, the impacts of financial shock on the

extensive margin of trade and total trade are even somewhat more persistent than the
              3
benchmark.


3.    Model


      The theoretical model considers two symmetric countries, Home and Foreign. In

each country there are five sectors: (1) a perfectly competitive final goods sector

whose goods will be consumed domestically, (2) a perfectly competitive investment

goods sector whose goods will be used for export market entry investment, (3) a

monopolistically competitive intermediate goods sector where some producers are

exporters and the rest are non-exporters, (4) a representative investor who finances

domestic intermediate firms through equity purchases, and (5) a representative worker


3
  The Appendix also reports results for a panel VAR exercise, in which we redefine the measure of
extensive margin to track the number of products rather than the combination of products and country,
so that the country dimension is available for use for cross-sectional information. The cross sectional
information does not narrow the confidence bands for the variables of interest, trade and the extensive
margin. See Appendix Fig. 4. Only when we reduce the number of estimated parameters in the VAR by
reducing the number of variables to 3, are we able to find a statistically significant negative long run
effect of the shock on the extensive margin of trade. This specification also redefines the shock by
interacting the Libor rate with a dummy indicating the crisis period after 2008. See Appendix Fig. 5.
                                                   7
who supplies labor to domestic intermediate firms and purchases bonds from these

firms.

       The intermediate firms are financially constrained as they may default on their

borrowing for wage payments. To smooth production, the intermediates may change

their capital structure through equity and bond issuance as described in Jermann and

Quadrini (2012). Non-exporters may choose to become exporters after paying a sunk

entry cost. For simplicity we assume that for a given country the total mass of firms in

the intermediate goods sector is constant, fixed at a mass of unity, but that the number

of these firms that engage in export activity varies endogenously. For simplicity, we
                            4
assume balanced trade.

       Below we describe the economy in the Home country; the economy in the

Foreign country is analogous. All foreign variables are indicated by a superscript ‘*’.

For a given country, we denote exporters and non-exporters with a subscript ' x ' or '

nx ' respectively. Prices are in common currency. As our focus is on real variables, the

model abstracts from money and nominal exchange rates.


3.1 Timeline


       The timeline of the economy is shown in Table 2. Each period starts with four

aggregate state variables: the technology shocks ( A t , A t* ), and the financial shocks


(  t ,  t* ).   We will describe the financial shocks (  t ) in more detail in the next


4
  Perri and Quadrini (2016) introduce international asset trade in equities in a two country model with
financial shocks and capital restructuring. However, our model differs in introducing nontraded goods,
including some goods which are traded in some states and nontraded in others, which prevents us from
using the standard modeling of equity trade used in Perri and Quadrini. Further, introducing
international financial integration in our model would not confer the benefit it does in their model,
whereby it endogenously transmits financial shocks internationally, to make the tightness of the
financial constraint co-move perfectly across countries. This is because collateral in our model is
specified in terms of equity rather than capital, and the financial shock enters directly in the firm Euler
equation.
                                                     8
section.

     There is a unit mass of firms in the intermediate goods sector, with fraction nxt 1

that are exporters, and fraction 1  nxt 1 that are non-exporters at the end of period

t  1 . In period t , after paying a sunk entry cost, next non-exporters enter the export

market, so the mass of exporters becomes nxt 1  next , and the mass of non-exporters

     begin
are nnxt    1   nxt 1  next  , where nnxt
                                            begin
                                                  represents the non-exporter number at the

beginning of period t . Following Bergin et al. (2016), we assume that new exporters

hire labor, produce goods and issue corporate bonds in the initial period of entry. As in

Bergin et al. (2016), this specification preserves the property that all firms, both

incumbents and new entrants, are homogeneous and face the same enforcement

constraint. New exporters differ from incumbent exporters in that they have a matured

debt position like their non-exporter counterparts, since new exporters existed as

non-exporters in the preceding period. New exporters also differ from incumbent

exporters in that they must pay a sunk entry cost.

     At this point in time, all firms make production and financial decisions. They

hire labor and make wage payments before revenue realization, issue corporate bonds

and equities and produce goods. The household receives wage income and bond

                                                               end
repayment, and the investor receives equity returns from the nenxt 1 surviving



non-exporters and the nxt 1 surviving exporters; in the mean time they make

                               begin
financial investment over the nnxt   non-exporters and the nxt 1  next exporters.

     At the end of period t , after all markets have cleared, an exogenous death shock

applies    to    the     firms    with   a   probability   of    . So now there are

nxt  1    nxt 1  next    surviving exporters and        end
                                                                nnxt = 1    nnxt
                                                                                 begin
                                                                                         surviving
                                                 9
non-exporters, each of which will enter period t  1 with a matured debt repayment

bxt or bnxt respectively. To maintain the assumption of a unit mass of firms, after the


death shock at t a mass of 1  nxt  nnxt
                                      end
                                          , that is,                                     firms are born into the

domestic market as non-exporters automatically without incurring any additional
        5
cost.

        So the dynamics of exporters and non-exporters in the home country is as

follows:

                                             nxt  1    nxt 1  next                                        (1)

                                               begin
                                              nnxt    1   nxt 1  next                                        (2)

                                                    end
                                                   nnxt = 1    nnxt
                                                                    begin
                                                                                                                   (3)



3.2 Final goods sector: Consumption and Investment


3.2.1 Consumption



        The overall consumption goods index ( C t ) is a CES aggregator of home and

foreign varieties:
                                                                                                           
                           nxt1  next 1        1
                                                                    1
                                                                               n*xt 1  ne*xt
                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                            1
                     Ct              cdxit di                cnxit di  
                                                                    
                                                                                               c fxit di  ,
                                                    nxt 1  next
                                                                                                         
                             0                                                0



where c d x it denotes the varieties produced by the home exporter hxit consumed

domestically by the home consumers, representing fraction nxt 1  next of all home


varieties. Likewise c n x it is the goods produced by domestic non-exporter nxit ,


5
  It is assumed that newly born non-exporting firms inherit the debt position of the dying
non-exporting firms they replace.
                                           10
representing fraction 1   nxt 1  next  of home varieties. And c fx it denotes the


varieties produced by the foreign exporter fxit consumed by the home country,


representing fraction n*xt 1  ne*xt of all foreign varieties. For reference, we can write

this overall consumption index in terms of sub-aggregates:
                                                                                             
                                                            1    1  1
                                                                       
                                                     Ct  CHt  CFt  ,
                                                                      

where CHt is a CES aggregator of all home varieties,

                                                                                                            
                                      nxt1  next 1        1
                                                                               1
                                                                                        1
                               CHt              cdxit di                  
                                                                             cnxit di  ,
                                                               nxt 1  next
                                                                                     
                                        0



and CFt is a CES aggregator of imported foreign varieties,

                                                                     
                                  n*xt1  ne*xt 1   1                      
                           CFt                c fxit di    n*xt 1  ne*xt  1 c fxit .
                                                          
                                    0



where the second equalities are from the symmetric equilibrium as shocks in the

economy are at the aggregate level and common to all firms of the same type.

      The corresponding consumer price indices are thus given by:
                                                                                            1
                                                     Pt   PHt1  PFt1  1                                          (4)

                                                                                                                    1

                                PHt                                                                     di 
                                              nxt 1  next                   1                                    1
where                                                         1
                                                              p      di                           1
                                                                                                    p                    ,   (5)
                                       0                    dxit            1 nxt 1  next    nxit
                                                                                                              

or equivalently PHt1   nxt 1  next  pd1xit  1  nxt 1  next  p1nxit
                                                                              
                                                                                  ,

                                                                          1

                              PFt                         di    n*xt 1  ne*xt 1 p fxit
                                                                                                             1
                                         nxt 1  next
                                          *          *
                                                                    1
                                                          
and                                                    p1fxit                                                                (6)
                                       0
                                                                  

for homogeneous firms. Here, Pt is the domestic aggregate consumer price level,

PHt is the price level of the home composite, PFt is the price of the imported foreign
                                                                     11
composite, and phxit , pnxit and p fxit are the prices (faced by home consumers) of

individual varieties produced by home exporers, home non-exporters and foreign

exporters.

     The implied relative demand functions for home country are
                                                           
                                                P 
                                          CHt   Ht  Ct                        (7)
                                                 Pt 
                                                           
                                                P 
                                          CFt   Ft  Ct                        (8)
                                                 Pt 
                                                           
                                                  p 
                                        cnxit     nxit  CHt                   (9)
                                                   PHt 
                                                           
                                                  p 
                                        cdxit     dxit  CHt                  (10)
                                                   PHt 
                                           
                                   p                                
                        c fxit     fxit  CFt   n*xt 1  ne*xt 1 CFt    (11)
                                    PFt 

Analogous conditions apply to the foreign country.


3.2.2 Investment



     In period t , each of the next new exporters must pay an entry cost, KtE , to

enter the export market. So the total investment expenditure on entry in Home country

is given by

                                                It  next KtE .                 (12)

     Analogous to the aggregate consumption index above Ct , we assume the

production of investment good for entry is a CES aggregator of home and foreign

varieties, given by
                                                   12
                                                                                 
                                             1  1             1  1   1
                                      I t    I Ht  1    I Ft  ,
                                                                       

where 1   is the degree of bias to imported foreign goods, reflecting the

dependence of home firms on local inputs when entering foreign market. Here, I Ht

is a CES aggregator of all home varieties,
                                                                                     
                                 nxt1  next 1        1
                                                                          1
                                                                                   1
                         I Ht              idxit di                  
                                                                        inxit di  ,
                                                          nxt 1  next
                                 0                                             

and I Ft is a CES aggregator of imported foreign varieties,

                                                        
                             n*xt1  ne*xt 1   1                      
                     I Ft                i fxit di    n*xt 1  ne*xt  1 i fxit .
                             0                      

     The corresponding investment price index is thus given by
                                                                             1
                                      PIt   PHt1  1    PFt1  1 .            (13)

The implied relative demand functions for home country are
                                                                 
                                                       P 
                                              I Ht    Ht  It                             (14)
                                                        PIt 
                                                                      
                                                           P 
                                           I Ft  1     Ft  I t                        (15)
                                                            PIt 
                                                                
                                                        p 
                                              inxit     nxit  I Ht                        (16)
                                                         PHt 
                                                                
                                                        p 
                                              idxit     dxit  I Ht                        (17)
                                                         PHt 
                                                  
                                       p                                 
                            i fxit     fxit  I Ft   n*xt 1  ne*xt 1 I Ft           (18)
                                        PFt 

Analogous conditions apply to the foreign country.


                                                        13
3.2 Worker preferences and optimization


     The representative worker derives utility from consuming the basket of final

goods ( Cwt ), and disutility from labor supply ( Lt ) in each period, and maximizes

expected lifetime utility,

                                                                                      1 
                          
                                                                                     Cwt     L1
              max E0   tU (Cwt , Lt ),              with         U (Cwt , Lt )           t ,
                         t 0                                                        1     1 

where   0 is the worker’s degree of risk aversion,    0,1 is the worker’s

discount factor, and  is the relative weight of labor in the utility function.

     The worker receives income from providing labor services ( Lt ) at the real wage

rate ( wt ), and holding matured corporate bonds of the ( nxt 1 ) domestic exporters ( bxit 1 )

             end
and of the nenxt 1 non-exporters ( bnxit 1 ), respectively. The worker then purchases



consumption ( Cwt ), and updates its corporate bond investment to the ( nxt 1  next )

                        begin                                                                         1
domestic exporters and nnxt   domestic non-exporters with a price at                                     . Note that,
                                                                                                      Rt

workers are indifferent to the bonds issued by non-exporters or exporters as these two

types of bonds bear identical risks and identical prices. Later we will explain more

about this.

     The period budget constraint may thus be written as


               Cw,t 
                         nxt 1  next  bxt  nnxtbeginbnxt    wt L t +nxt 1bxt 1  nnxt
                                                                                          end
                                                                                              1bnxt 1 .
                                 Rt                   Rt                                               .


From the constraint, we see that worker receives financial income from the nxt 1

                         end
surviving exporters and nnxt 1 surviving non-exporters from last period, but



purchases corporate bonds from the nxt 1 surviving exporters, the next new
                                                           14
                   begin
exporters and the nnxt   non-exporters.

     The worker maximizes his expected lifetime utility subject to the budget

constraint, leading to the following first-order conditions:

                                           U Cwt wt  U Lt  0                           (19)


                                      1    Et U C Rt   U C
                                                       wt 1           wt
                                                                                         (20)

where Eq. (19) is the labor-consumption tradeoff condition, and Eq. (20) is the Euler

equation for holding exporter and non-exporter bonds. As household is indifferent

between the bonds issued by exporter and non-exporter, Eq. (20) applies to both types

of home firms.


3.3 Investor preferences and optimization


     The representative investor derives utility from consuming the basket of final

goods ( CIt ) in each period, and maximizes his expected lifetime utility:

                               
                                                                            CIt1 I
                   max E0   U (CIt ),
                                     t
                                                  with         U (CI ,t )           ,
                                                                            1  I
                                     I
                              t 0



where  I  0 is the investor’s degree of risk aversion, and  I   0,1 is the

investor’s discount factor.

     The investor makes equity investment in domestic intermediate firms. He

purchases equities of the nxt 1 surviving exporters, the next new exporters and the

 begin
nnxt   non-exporters, and receives incomes from last period equity investment on the

                                    end
nxt 1 surviving exporters and the nnxt 1 surviving non-exporters. The period budget



constraint may thus be written as:


                                                 15
    CIt   nxt 1  next  qxt sxt  nnxt
                                       begin
                                             qnxt snxt  nxt 1sxt 1  qxt  d xt   nnxt
                                                                                        end
                                                                                            1  qnxt  d nxt  (21)



where sxt and snxt are the stock shares purchased from exporters and non-exporters

respectively, q xt , qnxt , are the market stock prices, and d xt and d nxt are the

dividends received from owning shares issued by domestic exporters and

non-exporters respectively, all in units of final goods. As intermediate firms are fully

owned by domestic investor, sxt  snxt  1 in equilibrium.

     The optimization implies the following first-order conditions:

                                I 1    Et U C    It 1
                                                                 qxt 1  d xt 1   U C   It
                                                                                                    qxt        (22)

                               I 1    Et U C   It 1
                                                               qnxt 1  dnxt 1    U C qnxt
                                                                                               It
                                                                                                               (23)

where Eqs. (22-23) are the Euler equations for holding shares issued by domestic

exporters and non-exporters.

     As in Perri and Quadrini (2016), we assume that the investor is less patient than

worker,  I   . Because firms are owned by the investor, the higher discounting rate

of investor implies that in equilibrium firms borrow from the worker.


3.4 Intermediate goods sector


3.4.1      Enforcement constraint


     Each intermediate firm issues one-period corporate bonds (denoted by bxit for

exporters, or bnxit for non-exporters) or adjusts their dividend payouts (denoted by

d xit , or d nxit ) to maximize their firm values. As the investor (equity holder) is less

patient than the worker (debt holder), firms prefer debt financing to equity financing

(in steady state) because the cost of external financing through bond issuance is lower
                                                              16
than the cost through equity issuance.

     In addition to the inter-period corporate bonds, each firm also borrows an

intra-period loan at the amount of wt lxit or wt lnxit as labor market requires working

capital being paid before the realization of revenue. The intra-period loan is repaid at

the end of the period and there is no interest. As firms may default on the intra-period

loan repayments, their borrowing is restricted by the firm’s end-of-period equity value

perceived by the credit market:

                                            t Et ( mt 1Vxit 1  bxit )  wt lxit             (24)


                                           t Et ( mt 1Vnxit 1  bnxit )  wt lnxit           (25)

                             U CI ,t 1
where mt 1   I 1                    is the discount factor as the firms are essentially owned
                              U CI ,t


by the investor through equity purchases, and Et (mt 1Vxit 1 ) (or Et (mt 1Vnxit 1 ) ) is the

                                                   6
firm’s end-of-period equity value.                     The lenders are willing to lend only if the

perceived liquidation value of the equity asset ( t Et (mt 1Vxit 1 ) or t Et (mt 1Vnxit 1 ) ) in

case of default is sufficient to cover the loaned amount ( wt lxit or wt lnxit ). Note that,

the liquidation value of equity asset is determined not only by the firm’s end-of-period

equity value but also by the liquidity of the credit market, captured by the stochastic

variable  t and t  1 due to liquidation loss. When the credit market condition

worsens (  t falls), lenders might have difficulty in liquidating the firm asset and

consequently impose tighter constraints on firm borrowing.



6
   The idea with financially constrained working capital needs is not new, and can be widely seen in
literature, such as in Jermann and Quadrini (2009, 2012). The collateral constraint is not derived from
an optimal credit contract. Instead, it may come from the limited enforcement that prevents lenders
from collecting more than a certain fraction of the firm’s collateral asset value.
                                                    17
3.4.2 Incumbents’ production and pricing



     The variety ( y n x it ) produced by non-exporters will be used domestically for

consumption ( c n x it ) and for entry investment ( i n x it ). The resource constraint for

non-exporters is thus given by:

                                        y n x it  c n x it  i n x it .                     (26)

     The variety ( y x it ) produced by exporters will serve two markets for two

purposes, the domestic market ( y d x it ) for consumption ( c d x it ) and for entry


investment ( i d x it ), and the foreign market ( y h* x it ) for consumption ( c h* x it ) and for

entry investment ( i h* x it ). When shipping abroad, only a fraction 1     0 ,1  of

the exports will arrive at the destination. The resource constraint for exporters is thus

given by:

                                       y x it  y d x it  y h* x it .                       (27)

where

                                        y d x it  c d x it  i d x it .                     (28)
                                                      *
                                                     chxit  ihxit
                                                              *
                                            *
                                           yhxit                  .                         (29)
                                                        1 
     Each firm produces a unique variety, requiring only one factor, labor. The

production functions are thus:

                                             y x it  A l x it ,                              (30)

                                            y n x it  A l n x it ,                           (31)

where A is the aggregate productivity common to all firms, and lxit (or lnxit ) is the

input of labor by exporter (or non-exporter) i .
                                                   18
     Firm dividends are given by:

                                                                            b 
                                d x it   d x it   h*x it   b x it  1  x it  ,                                       (32)
                                                                             Rt 

                                                                         b       
                                    d n x it   n x it   b n x it  1  n x it  ,                                        (33)
                                                                          Rt 

where the operation profits  d x it ,  h*x it ,  n x it are defined as:

                                          p d x it                y
                            d x it               y h x it  w t d x it ,                                                   (34)
                                          Pt                        A

                                 p h* x it *
                    h*x it               y h x it 1     w t l h*x it ,                                                (35)
                                 Pt

                                                     p n x it
                                  n x it                    y n x it  w t l n x it .                                      (36)
                                                     Pt
     The value functions of the firms, representing the beginning of period firm value

before dividends are paid, are thus,

                 V x it  b xit  1           m ax                       { d x it  E t ( m t  1V xit  1  b xit )} ,   (37)
                                          p d xu t , p h* xit , b    xit



                V n x it  b n x it  1   m a x { d n x it  E t ( m t  1V n x it  1  b n x it )} .                    (38)
                                             p n x it , b   n x it



The last term in brackets is the end of period firm value, which is also the measure of

equity prices: qxit  Et  mt 1Vxit 1  bxit   and qnxit  Et (mt 1Vnxit 1  bnxit ) . Exporter

(non-exporter) i chooses the price levels sold in home and in foreign countries,

         *
pdxit , phxit ( pnxit ), and its issue of debt, bxit ( bnxit ), to maximize its firm value, Eq.

(37) (Eq.(38)), subject to the enforcement constraint, Eq. (24) (Eq. (25)), the resource

constraint, Eq. (27-29) (Eq. (26)), the production function, Eq. (30) (Eq. (31)), the

dividend equation, Eq. (32) (Eq. (33)), and the demand for individual varieties, Eqs.

(10-11) and (17-18) (Eqs. (9) and (16)).

     The optimization implies the following pricing rules and the multiplier

                                                                           19
associated with the enforcement constraint:
                              pdxit     wt
                                            1   xit  ,                            (39)
                               Pt      1 A
                             *
                            phxit            wt
                                                    1   xit    ,                  (40)
                             Pt       1 1    A

                                 pnxit     wt
                                               1  nxit  ,                         (41)
                                  Pt      1 A
                                         1
                                             Et mt 1
                                         Rt
                                  xit                ,                               (42)
                                          t Et mt 1

                                       nxit   xit ,                                 (43)

where  nxit and  xit are the Lagrange multipliers associated with the enforcement

constraint for non-exporters and exporters, respectively. As the investor is indifferent

between the bonds issued by exporters and non-exporters, the two multipliers are

identical. The multiplier is the shadow price of the intra-period loan on firm value and

measures the relative cost of bond financing ( 1 Rt ) to equity financing ( Et mt 1 ) for a

financially constrained firm adjusted by the financial market condition. When a firm

increases its bond issuance, it raises dividend payout today but simultaneously suffers

an opportunity cost of tightening financial constraint due to falling equity value.

     The enforcement constraint, Eqs. (24-25), shows that a firm can relax its

constraint by reducing its bond issuance today. The benefit from bond reduction is

two-fold. First, according to the firm value Eqs. (37-38), a one unit drop of debt

issuance today would increase the firm’s end-of-period value by an amount of Et mt 1 .

Second, the rise in end-of-period value would increase the firm’s borrowing capacity

on working capital by an amount of t Et mt 1 .

     However, there is also a cost of bond issuance reduction as it reduces the firm’s

                                               20
cash flow and hence reduces the firm’s beginning-of-period value by an amount of
1
   . To what degree the enforcement constraint would be relaxed relies on the direct
Rt
                                                           1
benefit and cost of debt reduction on firm value (             Et mt 1 ) and the associated
                                                           Rt

contribution to working capital finance ( t Et mt 1 ).



The presence of the enforcement constraint adds a wedge term, 1   xt (or 1   dt ),

to a typical pricing rule, as shown in Eqs. (39-41). The wedge term represents the

credit channel introduced by the financing constraint. As shown in Eq. (42), a

worsening financing condition (a fall in t ) is associated with a rising t , which

implies a rising goods price according to Eqs. (39-41), holding all else constant. In

other words, an adverse financial shock lowers liquidation value of a firm and makes

its enforcement constraint tighter, thus a firm sets a higher price because its effective

marginal costs increase.


3.4.3 New exporters’ production and pricing



As we stated in Section 3.1, among the 1  nxt 1 non-exporters at the beginning of

period t , next will become new exporters, so these new exporters have a matured

debt position the same as their non-exporter counterparts. To enter the export market,

these new exporters must pay a sunk entry cost K tE , and then they face enforcement

constraints, make production and financing decisions like their incumbent exporter

counterparts.

     For a marginal non-exporter who decides to become exporters, his/her firm value

is as follows:
                                               21
                                                                           dnxit  Et (mt 1Vnxit 1  bnxit ) 
                             Vnxit  bnxit 1         max                  new                         new 
                                                                          d xit  Et (mt 1Vxit 1  bxit ) 
                                                     new * new
                                                    pdxit , pxit   ,b new
                                                                      xit




                              new
where the retained earnings d xit is given by:

                                                                                           new
                                                                                          bxit  P
                                         new
                                       d xit   nxit   hxit
                                                          *new
                                                                bnxit 1                      It K tE .                (44)
                                                                                           Rt    Pt

                            *new
                           phxit
with that  hxit
            *new
                                 *new
                                 yhxit 1    wt lhxit
                                                     *new 7
                                                          .
                            Pt

        The marginal firm will be indifferent between the choices of being exporter and

being non-exporter, implying that:


                                                                                                                              
                                                                                     new
                                                                                          It KtE  Et mt 1Vxit 1  bxit 
                                                                                    bxit  P
    d nxit  Et (mt 1Vnxit 1  bnxit )   nxit   hxit
                                                       *new
                                                             bnxit 1                                                new

                                                                                     Rt    Pt

After a few steps of transformation, we have the free entry condition as follows:

                                      *new PIt 1 E   1                        new
                                                         Kt 1 )    Et mt 1   bxit  bnxit 
                   PIt E
                      Kt  Et (mt 1   hxit 1                                                                         (45)
                   Pt                             Pt 1         Rt            

The value of the new exporter is thus given by:

                                    Vitnew  bnxit 1   d xit
                                                            new
                                                                                
                                                                 Et mt 1Vxit 1  bxit
                                                                                     new
                                                                                         .                              (46)

        We allow for the possibility of a congestion externality associated with
               8
firm entry :



7
   The model implicitly assumes that the debt of exiting non-exporters is inherited by newly born
non-exporters. But equation (44) implies that the additional debt of exiting exporters relative to
non-exporters disappears. The online appendix describes an alternative specification where the extra
debt of exporters is passed exogenously on to newly entering exporters. As shown in the appendix, our
results are almost the same as for the benchmark specification.
8
   See also Bergin and Lin (2012) and Lewis (2009) for discussions of this model feature. Our
functional specification of entry costs more closely resembles that in Lewis (2009) in specifying the
rise in entry cost as a function of the number of new entrants, motivated in terms of an imperfectly
elastic supply of a factor specific to product entry such as advertising. Bergin and Lin (2012) also
allows for the possibility of a congestion externality in entry but specifying the rise in entry cost as a
function of total number of active firms. Their specification is in line with Berentsen and Waller (2009),
which was motivated using a matching externality found in Rocheteau and Wright (2005) and common
in monetary search models.
                                                   22
                                                         
                                             ne 
                                      K  K  xt  .
                                        t
                                         E     E
                                                                                         (47)
                                             next 1 

Here, K E is the steady state level of sunk entry costs, and next describes the

number of new exporters who compete with each other in entering the export market.

This functional specification of entry costs has been motivated in terms of an

imperfectly elastic supply of a factor specific to product entry such as advertising.

     We now turn to the financing and pricing/production decision of the new

exporters. Just as for the existing exporters, the new exporters maximize the

beginning-of-period firm value (Eq. 46, in this case) subject to the retained earnings

equation, (Eq. 44), the enforcement constraint facing exporters, (Eq. 24), and the

demand for individual varieties, Eqs. (10-11) and (17-18). Because the enforcement

constraint here is not affected by the initial bond position, the first order conditions

are the same as for an existing exporter (Eqs. 39-42). We thus conclude that the

                                                                           new
choice variables of the new exporters are the same as for the incumbents: bxit  bxit ,

pdxit  pdxit
         new
              ,  xit   xit
                          new
                              . From the demand equations for individual varieties, that is,


Eqs. (10-11) and (17-18), we then have that market demand for the goods of new

                                                        new
exporters is identical to that of exporters, and hence yxit  yxit , and lxitnew  lxit . That

is, new exporters and existing exporters make identical decisions on production and

financing.



3.5 Equilibrium

                                             23
       Shocks are common to all firms from a given country; thus, this study solves the

symmetric equilibrium in which firms in the same sector from a given country behave

identically. As firms of the same type hire the same amount of labor in production and

labor is immobile across countries, the market clearing condition for labor is thus

given by:

                                      Lt  1   nxt 1  next   lnxt   nxt 1  next  lxt .                                (48)

       Overall consumption combines that of both the investor and worker:

                                                       Ct  CIt  Cwt .                                                          (49)

Balanced trade requires:

                                      nxt 1  next  phxit
                                                        *     *
                                                             yhxit   n*xt 1  ne*xt  p fxit y fxit                            (50)

For reference, GDP will be defined:
                                                                              PIt
                                                          GDPt  Ct              It .
                                                                              Pt

       The financial shock is log-normally distributed as follows:

                                        log t  log    (log t 1  log  )    ,t                                         (51)

where  A,t and   ,t are technology and financing innovations, respectively, which

are i.i.d. random variables with homoscedastic variances. We don’t allow spillovers of

shocks across borders.

       Equilibrium is a sequence of the following 100 endogenous variables: nxt , next ,

 end    begin
nnxt , nnxt   , Pt , PHt , PFt , pdxit , pnxit , p fxit , Ct , CHt , CFt , cnxit , cdxit , c fxit I t , KtE , I Ht , I Ft , PIt , i fxit ,

inxit , idxit , Cwt , wt , Lt , Rt , CIt , qxt , qnxt , d xt , d nxt , Vxt , lxt , Vnxt , lnxt , y xt , ynxt , ydxt , y fxt ,  dxt ,

 fxt ,  nxt , bxt , bnxt , xt , nxt , Vxtnew , d xtnew , and their foreign counterparts. The 100

equilibrium conditions are Eqs. (1-49) with their foreign counterparts, the balance
trade condition Eq. (50), and choice of the home consumption bundle as the
                                                                  24
numeraire: Pt  1 , summarized in Appendix 1.



4    Quantitative analysis


To analyze the full response paths of firm entry, equity prices and other key

macroeconomic variables in response to financial shocks, we log-linearize the system

around the unique deterministic steady state. We calibrate parameters and numerically

solve the log-linearized model for the dynamic responses to exogenous shocks using

the method of generalized Schur decomposition.


4.1 Parameter values


     Table 3 lists the parameters in the benchmark setting. The two economies are

symmetric in terms of parameter values. We set   0.995 and  I  0.978 to

capture an annual bond return of 2% and an annual stock return of 8%. The risk

aversion of the worker and the investor are set at    I  2 (Arellano, Bai and

Kehoe, 2012). The exogenous death shock probability is set at   0.025 to match

the 10% annual job destruction rate in the U.S. data as documented in the literature

(for instance, in Bernard et al. (2010)). We follow Ghironi and Metliz (2005), Bernard

et al. (2003) and Bilbiie, Ghironi and Melitz (2012) in setting the elasticity of

substitution among all varieties, both domestic and imported, to   3.8 . The same

calibration is used for the aggregation of goods for use in investment:   3.8 .

     The relative utility weight of labor is set at   3.409 and the inverse of Frisch

labor supply elasticity is set at  =0.5 to capture an elasticity of 2, which is used in

Arellano, Bai and Kehoe (2012) and is in the range commonly estimated in micro-

and macroeconomic work as reported by Rogerson and Wallenius (2009).

                                          25
     Sunk entry costs and iceberg costs are set to imply jointly a steady state where 21%

of firms export (from Ghironi and Melitz, 2005) and exports represent 18% of GDP,

taken from author calculations as the average for OECD counties in the Comtrade

data base. This implies K E  1.5 and   0.014 . The entry adjustment cost

curvature parameter is calibrated at   4.2 as in Bergin and Lin (2012). Given

limited evidence on the share of imports in export entry investment expenditure, we

will consider the full range of values in sensitivity analysis in Section 4.3.1; the

benchmark version will specify international market entry cost takes the form of all

imported goods.

     As our focus is on the impact of financial shocks on trade persistence, we fix the

technology shock at its mean level, that is, A  1 without loss of generality.

Parameter values for financial shocks are taken from Jermann and Quadrini (2012). A

period is identified as a quarter, and the mean and the persistence of financial shock

are set at   0.1634 , and   0.1634 , respectively. For purposes of simulation,

   0.05 in order to replicate the drop in real US GDP during the 2007-9 financial

crisis.


4.2 Impulse responses for the benchmark model


     We follow Perri and Quadrini (2016) in studying the effects of a global financial
                                                                 9
shock impacting the home and foreign country.                        Impulse responses for the

benchmark model specification are reported in Fig. 4. The magnitude of the shock is

set to replicate the approximately 5% fall in US GDP following the 2007-9 financial

9
  Although the model of Perri and Quadrini (2016) introduces financial integration which links the
Lagrange multipliers on the collateral constraint of firms in both counties, they nevertheless need to
assume financial shocks that are exogenously perfectly correlated across countries in order to generate
international co-movement in financial flows.
                                                  26
crisis. Falling collateral value due to the worsening credit makes it harder for firms to

finance working capital to hire workers for production. As a result, labor demand falls,

lowering wages and employment, as seen in the figure. Since workers invest in

corporate bonds, the drop in their income also raises firms’ financing cost through

bond issuance. As market demand for individual varieties falls, firms’ production and

sales drop as well. Although the falling wage to a certain degree compensates firms’

market stance in terms of reducing their production cost, firms expect less profit from

worse aggregate economy, which is reflected in falling equity values, reported in the

figure as an average over all home firms. All these variables return fairly quickly to

their long run steady states as the shock dissipates.

     The figure shows a pronounced fall in exports in the initial periods, larger in

magnitude than the fall in GDP. The ratio of the change in exports to that in GDP is

3.0, which is quite close to the ratio of 3.8 observed for U.S. data during the financial

crisis. The other striking feature of the impulse response in exports is that its fall is

also much more persistent than that in GDP. In fact, after a fairly quick partial

recovery, exports linger below the steady state for a very long period of time. This

behavior is similar to that observed in the empirical VAR above. To understand the

model’s ability to generate this particular combination of short run and long run

dynamics, we must first explain the dynamics of firm financing and firm entry, which

we turn to next.

     Important to our argument, firms respond to the worsening credit market with a

strategy of capital restructuring. They reduce bond issuance and postpone dividend

payouts today, as observed in the figure. This moderates the fall in equity value and

hence helps ease the tightening financial constraint. Given that firms are switching

from previously cheaper bond financing to relatively more expensive equity financing,

this capital restructuring increases the effective entry cost in the export entry
                                            27
condition faced by potential non-exporters who are otherwise willing to become

exporters. This leads to the substantial fall in entry to the export market observed in

Fig. 4, which is consistent with what was observed in the empirical VAR for the

extensive margin of trade. Previous work in Bergin et al. (2016) has shown that a

transitory fall in expected future firm profits is not sufficient to generate the large fall

in firm entry observed during the financial crises, as it has too small effect on the total

present discounted value of all future firm profits in the entry condition, Eq. (45). Our

model reproduces the large fall in firm entry instead by explaining how the shock

affects the effective sunk entry cost, which also appears in the entry condition.

     A prominent feature observed in the empirical impulse responses in section 2

was a gradual but persistent fall in the extensive margin. This persistence is consistent

with what we see in Fig. 4. While persistence arises in part from the congestion

externality noted above, it also arises from the fact that the investment price index

rises progressively over time, as seen in the figure. In the benchmark model the

investment price index, which is the same as the import price index, rises due to the

fall in the number of traded varieties available as imports, akin to a love of variety

effect. We thus see a vicious circle in which a fall in export entry in both countries

resulting from the global financial shock makes the cost of entry higher, which further

reduces entry for future periods, which raises the entry cost further, etc. The figure

demonstrates that this mechanism can be a powerful propagation channel.

     These dynamics of the extensive margin of trade now help us understand the

dynamics of total exports in the model. First, the short run fall in trade in the periods

after the shock is particularly steep in part due to the dramatic fall in investment

demand for imports coming from the dramatic fall in firm entry investment. This

reflects the common mechanism in intertemporal models that investment, due to its

volatility and greater concentration in traded goods, tends to be a prominent source of
                                            28
                    10
trade dynamics.          In the present model, investment takes the form of firm entry costs.

In addition, as the number of imported varieties shrinks relative to domestic varieties

in the overall consumption index, given that our elasticity of substitution between all

varieties is the same regardless of country of origin, a fall in extensive margin

translates into a nearly proportionate fall in trade as a share of consumption

expenditure. For both these reasons, the fall in investment and consumption demand

for imports, the fall in extensive margin contributes to the short run fall in trade.

       Second, the fact that the extensive margin remains below its steady state value

for a very long time explains the very persistent effect on trade in the long run. Again,

the fact that firm entry remains below its steady state for a long time means there is a

prolonged shortfall in investment demand for imports and progressively rising

investment price. And again, the fact the number of firms remains below steady state

for a very protracted time means the share of import varieties in the overall

consumption bundle remains low, so trade remains low as a share of overall

consumption.

       While the benchmark experiment focuses on a global shock impacting both

countries symmetrically, Fig. 5 reports dynamics for a shock hitting just the home

country. The persistence in exports is even more extreme in this case, with almost no

tendency for the long run effect to dissipate. However, the magnitude of the effect in

the initial periods now is smaller than in the benchmark case and smaller than the

change in home GDP in percentage terms. The reason is that the fall in the variety of

home exports affects the price index of foreign rather than home investment. Further

the shock does not lead to a fall in foreign GDP or foreign firm export entry, as the

fall in wages is able to compensate for the loss of variety in the foreign investment

price index. This example illustrates that goods market linkages are not enough to
10
     See Boileau (1999), Eaton and Kortum (2001), Engel and Wang 2011, and Alessandria et al. (2010).
                                                  29
strongly transmit a financial shock, and more complex international financial linkages
                         11
would be required.            Given that international transmission is a challenging current

research question in its own right and not the purpose of this study, we will continue

to focus on a symmetric global shock in the subsequent experiments.


4.3 Sensitivity Analysis


4.3.1         Share of imports in investment goods


        As there is no clear evidence to use in calibrating the share of imports in new

firm entry investment,  , it is appropriate to conduct sensitivity analysis for this

parameter. Fig. 6 reports impulse responses for a version of the model that makes the

opposite assumption to that in our benchmark economy, assuming no imported goods

in the investment goods bundle (   1 ). The fall in exports is smaller in magnitude

than in the benchmark model, no more volatile than GDP, and the degree of

persistence appears to be less, though exports are still somewhat more persistent than

GDP. These export dynamics reflect the smaller magnitudes and persistence in the

extensive margin, and the fact that the investment price index now falls, given that it

does not include import prices.

        One way to quantify the persistence in exports is to look at the impulse response

value at the ten year mark after the shock, given that we are now about ten years after

the financial crisis. We take this value as a ratio to the maximum (in absolute value)

impulse response value. As a gauge, the empirical VARs in section 2 imply a

persistence ratio of either 0.16 or 0.22 for overall trade, depending on which of the

definitions of the shock is used. The benchmark model implies a very generous degree


11
     For example, international banks as in Kollmann et al. (2011)

                                                    30
of persistence, with a ratio of 0.45 of the impact effect lasting 10 years. The model of

Fig. 6 with no imports in investment implies a persistence ratio of 0.15, which is a bit

shy of the range implied by the empirical VARs.

      To fill in the picture for the middle range, Fig. 7a plots the persistence ratio for

versions of the model that calibrate the import share  for value in between 0 and 1.

The figure shows that to achieve the degree of persistence in the empirical VAR the

model requires a modest share of imports in the investment bundle ( 1   ) of 60% at

the upper range, down to as little as 20%. While there is no clear evidence regarding

the empirically plausible value for this parameter, Cavallari (2013) chooses a 0.6

(   0.4 ) as a plausible value for the share of imports in domestic entry investment.

This calibration would easily allow our model to replicate the degree of persistence in

export responses to a financial shock observed in the empirical VAR. We conclude

that the presence of imports in the investment bundle is important for generating the

high degree of persistence observed in data, but that the share of imports need not be

unreasonably high to achieve the minimum objective.

      To illustrate this point, Fig. 7b plots impulse responses for the model (using

  0.4 ) and the empirical VAR together at a common quarterly frequency. The

standard deviation of the shock in the model was calibrated so that the maximum

impact in absolute value of the simulation matches that of the empirical VAR, rather
                                                                                   12
than to match the particular magnitude following the 2008 crisis.                       We note that

while the model impulse response shows a great deal of persistence, it fails to

replicate the hump shape dynamics seen in the early periods of the empirical impulse

response.

      While persistence is fairly robust to a lower import content of entry investment,


12
   The empirical VAR uses all fluctuations in the Libor rate to help identify financial shocks, not just
the large shock of the 2008 crisis.
                                                 31
the impact volatility of exports is more sensitive. Fig 7c. reports the ratio of the

maximum effect on exports to that in GDP, showing that it falls fairly rapidly from

the value of 3 in the benchmark calibration   0 , to levels around 1.5 for a value of

  0.4 . Recall that the empirical VAR implied a ratio of 3.8.


4.3.2     Export goods in investment bundle


     While our benchmark model specifies investment goods as a bundle biased

toward home imports, one might also conjecture that the investment bundle for entry

into a foreign market could alternatively be biased toward foreign imports, that is,

home exported goods that the firm takes with them to the foreign destination. In

principle, given that our model and shock is symmetric, our mechanism of rising

import and export prices should work equally well for this specification.

     To implement this idea, suppose production of investment goods for entry needs

all home produced varieties, but different weights are given to the goods produced by

non-exporters and by exporters, given by
                                                                                               
                               1 nxt 1  next 1                 1                1
                                                                                                1
                                                idxit di  1   dx 
                                                                              1
               I t  I Ht     dx                                      nxt1 next nxit  ,
                                                                                      i
                                                                                           di
                              
                                     0
                                                                                              

where dx is the degree of bias to exporter produced goods. The corresponding

investment price index is then given by
                                                                                                       1

             PIt   dx  nxt 1  next  p1dx  1   dx  1   nxt 1  next   p1nx  1 ,   (52)

and the implied relative demand functions for home country are
                                                                         
                                                              p 
                                        inxit    1   dx   nxit  I Ht                                   (53)
                                                               PIt 

                                                                    
                                                           p 
                                            idxit     dx  dxit  I Ht                                      (54)
                                                            PIt 

                                                        32
Analogous conditions apply to the foreign country.

      Fig. 8 reports the impulse responses where more weight is assigned to goods

produced by home exporters with dx  0.75 and nx  0.25 (cases with high

shares of exports proved numerically difficult to solve). Exports fall more on impact

than does GDP, and exports show a greater degree of persistence, but these features

are somewhat weaker than in the case of entry costs in units of imported goods. The

persistence ratio reported above takes the value 0.28, less than in the benchmark case,

but sufficient to match that of the empirical VARs.


4.3.3 Role of capital restructuring and congestion externality


      To confirm the importance of capital restructuring to our result, we simulate a

case where no intertemporal bonds are traded, and firm financing is by equity issue

only. This means that firms do not respond to the financial shock by decreasing

reliance on bond financing, and thus do not raise the cost of financing export entry.

Fig. 9 shows that our result completely disappears in the absence of capital
                13
restructuring.       Firm entry now rises upon the shock rather than falling. This leads to

a substantial rise in trade, as consumers have access to a wider range of imported

goods varieties. This result demonstrates that capital restructuring is an absolutely

essential part of our explanation for the persistent fall in trade.

      Finally, we investigate the role of entry cost curvature, representing a congestion

externality, summarized in the parameter  . Fig. 10 reports impulse responses for

exports for a variety of values for this parameter. The main effect is that a higher

value of  amplifies the fall in trade in the initial period. This is because the fall in

new firm entry, nex leads to a progressively larger fall in entry cost, K E . So even if

13
   A slightly different calibration of parameters is needed in this case in order to ensure the existence
of a steady state.
                                                    33
a higher  mutes the fall in nex , the even greater amplification of the fall in K E

leads to a larger fall in investment expenditure, which is the product of the two,

nex  K E . The larger fall in investment expenditure then leads to a larger fall in trade.

In any case, trade falls for all values of  , and the figure shows that this parameter

does not diminish the degree of long-run persistence in the effect of the shock on

exports.


5.   Conclusions


     Recent experience has shown that a transitory financial shock can lead to lingering,

persistent effects on international trade. This paper argues that this phenomenon may be

understood in part in terms of persistent dynamics in the extensive margin of trade,

arising from the decision of firm to enter the export market. Empirical evidence indicates

that while the extensive margin played a small role in the dramatic initial effects of the

financial shock on trade volume, it is quantitatively a greater part of the long run effect

observed in data and our empirical VARs. One key element to our explanation is an

endogenous capital structure decision by firms in response to the financial shock. As

firms shift from cheaper bond financing toward more expensive equity financing in order

to relax the collateral constraint for short-term borrowing, it raises the cost of long term

financing for export entry investment. A reduction in the extensive margin translates to a

lower volume of trade, as imported varieties represent a smaller share of the varieties

available to consumers. This interacts with a second key element, a bias in the

composition of entry investment expenditure toward imported goods. A reduction in

imported varieties raises the investment price index, further raising entry cost and

reducing the extensive margin in future periods.

     A calibration exercise indicates that this mechanism potentially could account for a
                                            34
substantial share of the persistent component of the fall in trade volume observed in the

wake of the financial crisis. Even reasonable shares of imports in the investment goods

bundle imply a high degree of persistence of the shock on the extensive margin. This

finding does not gainsay the potential role of other economic or even political factors in

generating persistence. But it does suggest that the extensive margin, viewed as

peripheral with regard to the dramatic trade collapse in 2007-9, warrants greater attention

with regards to the persistent effects of this crisis on trade.




                                             35
References

Alessandria, George, Joseph Kaboski, and Virgiliu Midrigan, 2010, “The Great Trade
Collapse of 2008-09: An Inventory Adjustment?” IMF Economic Review, Vol. 58, pp.
254-294.

Arellano, Cristina and Bai, Yan and Kehoe, Patrick J, 2012, “Financing Frictions and
Fluctuations in Volatility,” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Research
Department Staff Report 466.

Behrens, Kristian, Gregory Corcos, and Giordano Mion, 2013, "Trade Crisis? What
Trade Crisis?," The Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 95, No. 2, pp. 702-709.

Berentsen, A., and Waller, C., 2009, “Optimal Stabilization Policy with Endogenous
Firm Entry,” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis working paper 2009-032.

Bergin, Paul R., and Giancarlo Corsetti, 2008, "The Extensive Margin and Monetary
Policy," Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 55, No. 7, pp. 1222-1237.

Bergin, Paul R., Ling Feng, and Ching-Yi Lin, 2016, "Firm Entry and Financial
Shocks." The Economic Journal, forthcoming.

Bergin, Paul R. and Lin, Ching-Yi, 2012, “The Dynamics Effects of Currency Union
on Trade,” Journal of International Economics, Vol. 87, No. 2, pp. 191-204.

Bernanke, Ben S. and Ilian Mihov, 1998, "Measuring Monetary Policy." The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 113, No. 3, pp. 869-902.

Bernard, A., Eaton, J. B. Jensen, and S. Kortum, 2003, “Plants and Productivity in
International Trade,” American Economic Review, Vol. 93, pp. 1268-1290.

Bernard, Andrew B and Redding, Stephen and Schott, Peter K, 2010, “Multi-product
Firms and Product Switching,” American Economic Review, Vol, 100, No. 1, pp. 70–
97.

Bilbiie, Florin O. and Ghironi, Fabio and Melitz, Marc J, 2012, “Endogenous Entry,
Product Variety, and Business Cycles,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 120, No. 2,
pp. 304-345.

Boileau, Martin, 1999, “Trade in Capital Goods and the Volatility of Net Exports and the
Terms of Trade,” Journal of International Economics, Vol. 48, No. 2, pp. 347–365.

Bricongne, Jean-Charles, Lionel Fontagne, Guillaume Gaulier, Daria Taglioni, and
                                          36
Vincent Vicard, 2012, “Firms and the Global Crisis: French Exports in the Turmoil,"
Journal of International Economics, Vol. 87, No. 1, pp. 134-146.

Cavallari, L., 2013, “Firms’ Entry, Monetary Policy and the International Business
Cycle, Journal of International Economics, Vol. 91, pp. 263–274.

Chor, Davin, Manova, Kalina, 2012, "Off the Cliff and Back? Credit Conditions and
International Trade During the Global Financial Crisis," Journal of International
Economics, Vol. 87, pp. 117-133.

Eaton, J. and S. Kortum, 2001, “Trade in Capital Goods,” European Economic Review,
Vol. 45 No. 7, pp. 1195–1235.

Eichenbaum, Martin and Charles L. Evan, 1995, “Some Empirical Evidence on the
Effects of Shocks to Monetary Policy on Exchange Rates,” The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, Vol. 110, No. 4, pp. 975-1009.

Engel, Charles and Jian Wang, 2011, ”International Trade in Durable Goods:
Understanding Volatility, Cyclicality, and Elasticities,” Journal of International
Economics, Vol. 83, pp. 37-52.T

Ghironi, Fabio, and Marc J. Melitz, 2005, “International Trade and Macroeconomic
Dynamics with Heterogeneous Firms,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 120, pp.
865-915.

Jermann, Urban and Quadrini, Vincenzo, 2009, “Macroeconomic Effects of Financial
Shocks,” NBER Working Paper 15338.

Jermann, Urban and Quadrini, Vincenzo, 2012, “Macroeconomic Effects of Financial
Shocks,” American Economic Review, Vol. 102, No. 1, pp. 238-271.

Kollmann, Robert, Zeno Enders, and Gernot J. Müller, 2011, “Global Banking and
International Business Cycles” European Economic Review, Vol. 55, pp. 407-426.

Lewis, V., 2009, “Business Cycle Evidence on Firm Entry,’ Macroeconomic
Dynamics, Vol. 13, No. 5, pp. 605-624.

Paravisini, Daniel, Veronica Rappoport, Philipp Schnabl, and Daniel Wolfenzon, 2015,
“Dissecting the Effect of Credit Supply on Trade: Evidence from Matched
Credit-Export Data,” Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 82, No. 1, pp. 333-359.

Perri, Fabrizio and Quadrini, Vincenzo, 2016, “International Recessions.”
http://www.fperri.net/PAPERS/irecessions_latest.pdf
                                         37
Rocheteau, G., and Wright, R., 2005, ”Money in Search Equilibrium, in Competitive
Equilibrium, and in Competitive Search Equilibrium”, Econometrica, Vol. 73, pp.
175-202.

Rogerson, Richard and Wallenius, Johanna. 2009, “Micro and Macro Elasticities in a
Life Cycle Model with Taxes,” Journal of Economic Theory, Vol. 144, No. 6, pp.
2277-2292.




                                       38
                   Table 1. Average annual growth rates for U.S. exports


                                               (1)              (2)          (3)             (4)
                                             2003-7            2009        2012-14         (3) - (1)
Exports                                      10.1%           -19.8%          3.1%           -7.0%
Extensive margin (good-country)               2.5%            -2.3%          0.1%           -2.4%
Number of exporters                          3.6%             -4.6%          0.2%           -3.4%
Source: annual data from the U.S. Census Bureau and author computations.1




1
  Annual exports is measured by adding up export value across all HS-level export goods. The
extensive margin of exports is measured as the number of variety exported in HS disaggregated data.
The same category of goods but exported to different counties are counted as different varieties. Data
on HS-level U.S. exports are from Schott's International Economics Resource Page, which were
purchased from the U.S. Census Bureau. Data on the number of exporters are from Profile of U.S.
Importing and Exporting Companies provided by the U.S. Census Bureau.
                                                39
Table 2       Timeline for Home Country
Beginning of t                      Before death shock                                Death shock                                         Beginning   of
                                                                                                                                          t 1

                                                                                                                                                     
(1) Four shock variables:           n xt 1 Incumbentexporters: (1) wage (1) Mass of exporters before death shock:
                                                                                                                   (1) 1  nxt  nnxt
                                                                                                                                  end

                                *   payments made through intra-period loan; n xt 1  ne xt
technology shocks ( At , A );   t
                                     (2) financing choice (bond and equity (2) Mass of exporters after death shock: newborns       as
                                     issuance) and revenue realization                                              non-exporters
financial shocks (  t ,  t* )                                                 nxt  1    nxt 1  next 
                                      next non-exporters becoming exporters:                                        (2) Repeating the
(2)       n xt 1     surviving (1) make production and financing                                                   whole process
exporters;                1  nxt 1 decisions as exporters; (2) a matured debt
non-exporters among which: position as exporters

                                            1   nxt 1  next 
 end                                 begin                                            (3) Mass of non-exporters before death
nnxt 1               survived,     nnxt                             non-exporters:
                                                                                      shock: nnxt  1   nxt 1  next  ;
                                                                                              begin

                                    make production and financing decisions
1  nxt 1  nnxt
              end
                  1 newborns
                                                                                      (4) Mass of non-exporters after death shock:
                                                                                       end
                                                                                      nnxt  1    nnxt
                                                                                                       begin



                                    Worker:     Consumption            and    bond (5) Mass           of       all   surviving   firms:
                                    investment;
                                                                                      nxt  nnxt
                                                                                             end
                                                                                                 1
                                    Investor: Consumption              and   equity
                                    investment;



                                                                               40
Table 3        Parameterization

Description
Worker Relative risk aversion                            2
Investor Relative risk aversion                         I  2
Worker discount factor                                    0.995
Investor discount factor                                 I  0.978
Substitution elasticity in the consumption bundle         3.8
Substitution elasticity in the investment bundle          3.8
Probability of death shock                                0.025
Entry costs                                             K E  1.5
Congestion Externality in Entry                           4 .2
Weight of labor disutility in utility function            3.409
Inverse of labor supply elasticity                        0.5
Iceberg trade cost                                        0.014
Enforcement parameter                                     0.1634
Persistence: financing shock                              0.97




                                                   41
Fig. 1. Impulse Responses to Innovation in Interbank Rate : Trade
                      Industrial Production                                                          CPI                                                        Federal Funds Rate
.002                                                                .0010
                                                                                                                                          .12
.001                                                                .0005
                                                                                                                                          .08
.000
                                                                    .0000
                                                                                                                                          .04
-.001
                                                                    -.0005                                                                .00
-.002
                                                                                                                                          -.04
                                                                    -.0010
-.003
                                                                                                                                          -.08
-.004                                                               -.0015
                                                                                                                                          -.12
-.005                                                               -.0020
        5   10   15   20   25    30   35   40   45   50   55   60            5   10   15   20   25   30    35   40   45   50   55   60           5   10   15   20    25    30     35   40   45   50   55   60



                                LIBOR                                                 The Extensive M argin of Trade                                                      Trade
   .2                                                                .002                                                                .008


                                                                     .001                                                                .004
   .1

                                                                     .000                                                                .000
   .0
                                                                     -.001                                                               -.004

  -.1
                                                                     -.002                                                               -.008


  -.2                                                                -.003                                                               -.012
        5   10   15   20   25    30   35   40   45   50   55   60            5   10   15   20   25   30    35   40   45   50   55   60           5   10   15   20    25    30     35   40   45   50   55   60



                           Stock Index                                                                                                                              months
                                                                                                months
.005


.000


-.005


-.010


-.015


-.020
        5   10   15   20   25    30   35   40   45   50   55   60


                      months



Note: Data are at monthly frequency, based on 6-digit HS disaggregate U.S. export and import flows, running
from 2002:1 to 2016:11




                                                                                                 42
Fig. 2. Impulse Responses to Innovation in Interbank Rate: Exports
                      Industrial Production                                                           CPI                                                         Federal Funds Rate
.002                                                                 .0010                                                                   .16

.001                                                                                                                                         .12
                                                                     .0005
                                                                                                                                             .08
.000
                                                                     .0000
                                                                                                                                             .04
-.001
                                                                     -.0005                                                                  .00
-.002
                                                                                                                                            -.04
                                                                     -.0010
-.003
                                                                                                                                            -.08
-.004                                                                -.0015
                                                                                                                                            -.12

-.005                                                                -.0020                                                                 -.16
        5   10   15   20    25    30   35   40   45   50   55   60            5   10   15   20   25   30    35   40   45   50   55   60            5   10   15   20   25     30   35   40   45   50   55   60



                                 LIBOR                                                 The Extensive M argin of Exports                                                    Exports
   .3                                                                 .003                                                                .0050

                                                                      .002                                                                .0025
   .2
                                                                      .001
                                                                                                                                          .0000
   .1                                                                 .000
                                                                                                                                          -.0025
   .0                                                                 -.001
                                                                                                                                          -.0050
                                                                      -.002
  -.1
                                                                      -.003                                                               -.0075

  -.2                                                                 -.004                                                               -.0100
        5   10   15   20    25    30   35   40   45   50   55   60            5   10   15   20   25   30    35   40   45   50   55   60            5   10   15   20   25     30   35   40   45   50   55   60



                             Stock Index
                                                                                                 months                                                               months
.010

.005

.000

-.005

-.010

-.015

-.020
        5   10   15   20    25    30   35   40   45   50   55   60



                           months



Note: Data are at monthly frequency, based on 6-digit HS disaggregate U.S. export flows, running from 2002:1
to 2016:11




                                                                                                  43
Fig. 3. Impulse Responses to Innovation in Interbank Rate: Imports
                      Industrial Production                                                          CPI                                                        Federal Funds Rate
.002                                                                .0005                                                                 .12

.001                                                                                                                                      .08
                                                                    .0000
.000                                                                                                                                      .04

-.001                                                               -.0005                                                                .00

-.002                                                                                                                                     -.04
                                                                    -.0010
-.003                                                                                                                                     -.08

-.004                                                               -.0015                                                                -.12
        5   10   15   20   25    30   35   40   45   50   55   60            5   10   15   20   25   30    35   40   45   50   55   60           5   10   15   20   25     30   35   40   45   50   55   60



                                LIBOR                                                 The Extensive M argin of Imports                                                   Imports
   .2                                                                .002                                                                .008


                                                                     .001                                                                .004
   .1

                                                                     .000                                                                .000
   .0
                                                                     -.001                                                               -.004

  -.1
                                                                     -.002                                                               -.008


  -.2                                                                -.003                                                               -.012
        5   10   15   20   25    30   35   40   45   50   55   60            5   10   15   20   25   30    35   40   45   50   55   60           5   10   15   20   25     30   35   40   45   50   55   60



                           Stock Index                                                          months                                                              months
.005



.000



-.005



-.010



-.015
        5   10   15   20   25    30   35   40   45   50   55   60




                       months


Note: Data are at monthly frequency, based on 6-digit HS disaggregate U.S. import flows, running from 2002:1
to 2016:11.




                                                                                                 44
       Fig. 4. Impulse responses for benchmark theoretical model

          Exports
            hex                           GDP
                                          GDP                         Export Share
                                                                        tradesh
  0                              0                              0

-0.1                       -0.05                              -0.1

-0.2                           -0.1                           -0.2
          20   40      60               20    40     60                 20     40     60
         New Exporters                Number Exporters                Invt Price Index
            nex                               nx                             PI
  0                              0                            0.04

-0.5                       -0.05                              0.02

 -1                            -0.1                             0
         20    40      60               20     40        60            20    40    60
       New Exporter Value               Investment                     Consumption
               KE                              I                             C
0.1                              0                              0

  0                            -0.5                        -0.02

-0.1                            -1                         -0.04
          20         40   60            20         40    60             20        40    60

         quarters                             quarters                 quarters


           Labor
             L                            Wage
                                           w                          EquityqPrice
0.1                              0                             0.1

  0                        -0.05                                0

-0.1                           -0.1                           -0.1
          20    40    60                20   40          60             20
                                                                       Foreign 40
                                                                               GDP 60
            Dividends                     Bonds
               d                              b                        GDPstar
0.2                              0                              0

                           -0.02
  0                                                        -0.05
                           -0.04
-0.2                                                          -0.1
         20     40     60                20 Exporters
                                      Foreign 40    60                  20    40      60
        Foreign Exports                                              Foreign Entry Inv
               fex                       nxstar                           Istar
  0                              0                              0

-0.1                       -0.05                              -0.5

-0.2                           -0.1                             -1
          20         40   60            20         40    60             20        40    60

           quarters                      quarters                            quarters



                                         45
Fig. 5. Impulse responses for benchmark theoretical model, home country shock

              Exports
                hex                           GDP
                                              GDP                        Export Share
                                                                           tradesh
      0                             0.1                          0.05

   -0.02                             0                             0

   -0.04                           -0.1                    -0.05
              20   40      60               20    40     60                20     40      60
             New Exporters                Number Exporters               Invt price index
                 nex                              nx                            PI
     0.5                             0                           0.05

      0                         -0.02                              0

    -0.5                      -0.04                           -0.05
             20    40      60                20     40      60            20    40    60
           New Exporter Value                Investment                   Consumption
                   KE                             I                             C
   0.05                             0.5                          0.05

      0                              0                             0

   -0.05                           -0.5                       -0.05
              20         40   60             20        40   60             20         40   60
              quarters                       quarters                        quarters


               Labor
                 L                            Wage
                                               w                         EquityqPrice
     0.1                            0.2                           0.2

      0                              0                             0

    -0.1                           -0.2                          -0.2
              20    40   60                  20   40        60             20
                                                                          Foreign 40
                                                                                  GDP 60
               Dividends                       Bonds
                   d                              b                       GDPstar
     0.2                             0                           0.05

      0                         -0.01                              0

    -0.2                      -0.02                       -0.05
             20     40      60               20 Exporters
                                          Foreign 40    60                 20    40      60
            Foreign Exports                                             Foreign Entry Inv
                   fex                       nxstar                          Istar
      0                            0.01                           0.2

   -0.02                             0                             0

   -0.04                        -0.01                            -0.2
              20         40   60             20        40   60             20         40   60

                quarters                       quarters                    quarters



                                             46
Fig. 6. Impulse responses for model with no imported goods in investment

           Exports
             hex                           GDP
                                           GDP                        Export Share
                                                                        tradesh
    0                           0.05                          0.05

-0.02
                                  0                             0
-0.04
                          -0.05                         -0.05
           20   40      60               20    40     60                 20    40      60
          New Exporters                Number Exporters               Invt price index
             nex                               nx                       -3 PI
                                                                     10
    1                             0                             0

                            -0.02                               -2
    0
                            -0.04                               -4
   -1
          20    40      60                20     40      60            20    40    60
        New Exporter Value                Investment                   Consumption
                KE                             I                             C
  0.1                             1                             0

    0                             0                        -0.02

 -0.1                             -1                       -0.04
           20         40   60             20        40   60             20       40   60
          quarters                       quarters                         quarters


            Labor
              L                            Wage
                                            w                         EquityqPrice
 0.05                             0                            0.2

    0                       -0.05                               0

-0.05                           -0.1                          -0.2
           20    40   60                  20   40        60             20
                                                                       Foreign 40
                                                                               GDP 60
            Dividends                       Bonds
                d                              b                       GDPstar
  0.2                             0                           0.05

    0                       -0.02                               0

 -0.2                      -0.04                       -0.05
          20     40      60               20 Exporters
                                       Foreign 40    60                 20    40      60
         Foreign Exports                                             Foreign Entry Inv
                fex                        nxstar                         Istar
    0                             0                             1

-0.02                       -0.02
                                                                0
-0.04                       -0.04
                                                                -1
           20         40   60             20        40   60             20       40   60

            quarters                      quarters                      quarters



                                          47
Fig. 7a. How persistence of exports dynamics varies for lower shares of trade in entry cost*
               0.5
              0.45
               0.4
              0.35
               0.3
              0.25
               0.2
              0.15
               0.1
              0.05
                 0
                     0                0.2           0.4             0.6              0.8       1
                              share of local goods in investment bundle (  )

* The metric of persistence is the value of the impulse response for exports in year 10 divided by the
   maximum impulse response.




Fig. 7b. Impulse responses for extensive margin of trade, empirical VAR and model simulation
                     0.006
                     0.004
                     0.002
                         0                                                                   quarters
                               1              11               21               31
                     ‐0.002
                     ‐0.004
                     ‐0.006
                     ‐0.008
                      ‐0.01
                     ‐0.012



** Solid (blue) line is VAR impulse response, with two standard error confidence bands (dashed red).     Black
   (large dash) line is model simulation.




                                                          48
Fig. 7c. How volatility of exports varies for lower shares of trade in entry cost**
              3.5

                3

              2.5

                2

              1.5

                1

              0.5

                0
                    0             0.2              0.4           0.6            0.8             1

                                        share of imports in investment goods (1-  )


** The metric for volatility is the ratio of impulse response value in period 1 (the maximum effect) for exports
   divided by that for GDP.




                                                         49
Fig. 8. Impulse responses for model with exported goods in entry investment

            Exports
              hex                           GDP
                                            GDP                         Export Share
                                                                          tradesh
     0                           0.1                              0

 -0.05                             0                         -0.05

  -0.1                           -0.1                           -0.1
            20   40      60               20    40     60                  20    40      60
           New Exporters                Number Exporters                Invt price index
              nex                               nx                        -3 PI
                                                                       10
     1                             0                              0

                                                                  -2
     0                       -0.05
                                                                  -4
    -1                           -0.1
           20    40      60               20     40        60            20    40    60
         New Exporter Value               Investment                     Consumption
                 KE                              I                             C
   0.1                             1                            0.05

     0                             0                              0

  -0.1                            -1                         -0.05
            20         40   60            20         40    60             20       40   60
             quarters                      quarters                         quarters


             Labor                          Wage                        EquityqPrice
                 L                           w
   0.1                           0.2                             0.2

     0                             0                              0

  -0.1                           -0.2                           -0.2
            20    40   60                 20   40          60             20
                                                                         Foreign 40
                                                                                 GDP 60
             Dividends                      Bonds
                 d                              b                        GDPstar
   0.2                             0                             0.1

     0                       -0.02                                0

  -0.2                      -0.04                               -0.1
           20      40     60               20 Exporters
                                        Foreign 40    60                  20    40      60
          Foreign Exports                                              Foreign Entry Inv
                 fex                       nxstar                           Istar
     0                             0                              2

 -0.05                       -0.05                                0

  -0.1                           -0.1                             -2
            20         40   60            20         40    60             20       40   60
             quarters                           quarters                    quarters




                                           50
               Fig. 9. Impulse responses for model with no bonds

           Exports                           GDP                      Export Share
             hex                      10-3 GDP                          tradesh
0.02                             4                             0.02

0.01                             2                             0.01

   0                             0                               0
           20   40      60              20    40     60                 20     40      60
          New Exporters               Number Exporters                Invt price index
                nex                             nx                          PI
 0.5                           0.05                            0.01

   0                                                             0

 -0.5                            0                          -0.01
          20    40      60                 20     40      60           20    40    60
        New Exporter Value                 Investment                  Consumption
                KE                              I                           C
0.05                            0.5                            0.01

   0                             0                               0

-0.05                          -0.5                         -0.01
           20        40   60               20        40   60           20         40   60




               Labor                        Wage                      EquityqPrice
        10-3     L                           w
   5                           0.05                            0.04

   0                             0                             0.02

  -5                    -0.05                                    0
           20    40   60                   20    40    60              20
                                                                       Foreign40     60
                                                                               Exports
            Dividends                      Foreign GDP
                 d                         -3
                                           GDPstar                          fex
                                      10
 0.1                             5                             0.02

0.05                             0                             0.01

   0                             -5                              0
           20 Exporters
        Foreign 40    60                 20    40      60              20         40   60
                                      Foreign Entry Inv
            nxstar                           Istar
0.04                            0.1

0.02                             0

   0                           -0.1
           20        40   60               20        40   60



                                           51
Fig. 10. Export impulse response for various parameterizations of congestion externality


          -0.05
                                =0
            -0.1


          -0.15
                          = 4.2


            -0.2


          -0.25                = 10


            -0.3


          -0.35


            -0.4
                   0             10    20        30         40         50         60




                                               52
6. Appendix Table: Equilibrium Conditions


                 Benchmark Economy: New Entrants Entry Simultaneously With Production

                 (1) nxt  1    nxt 1  next 
Firm Dynamics


                 (2) nnxt  1   nxt 1  next 
                      begin




                 (3) nnxt  1    nnxt
                      end             begin



Demand and CPI                                              1
                 (4) Pt   PHt1  PFt1 1

                                                                                               1

                 (5) PHt                                                            di 
                               nxt 1  next                 1                               1
                                             p1dxit di                         
                                                                                p1nxit
                            0                             1 nxt 1  next            
                                                                1

                 (6) PFt    xt1 xt p1fxit di    n*xt 1  ne*xt 1 p fxit
                                                                                           1
                               n  ne *       *
                                                    1
                                          
                            0                   
                                                  
                            PHt 
                 (7) CHt        Ct
                            Pt 
                                             
                            PFt 
                 (8) CFt    Ct
                            Pt 
                                                  
                                 p 
                 (9) cnxit       nxit  CHt
                                  PHt 
                                                       
                                    p 
                 (10) cdxit         dxit  CHt
                                     PHt 
                                                       
                                    p                                
                 (11) c fxit        fxit  CFt   n*xt 1  ne*xt 1 CFt
                                     PFt 
Entry
                 (12) It  next Kt
                                             E
Investment
                                                                       1
                 (13) PIt   PHt1  1    PFt1 1




                                                                    53
                                        
                            PHt 
             (14) I Ht         It
                            PIt 
                                               
                                   PFt 
             (15) I Ft  1          It
                                   PIt 
                                       
                             p 
             (16) inxit      nxit  I Ht
                              PHt 
                                       
                             p 
             (17) idxit      dxit  I Ht
                              PHt 
                                       
                             p fxit                          
                                    I Ft   nxt 1  next  I Ft
                                                 *         * 1
             (18) i fxit
                             PFt 
Worker
             (19) UCwt wt ULt  0

             (20)  1    Et U Cwt 1 Rt   U Cwt


             (21) CIt   nxt 1  next  qxt sxt  nnxt qnxt snxt  nxt 1sxt 1  qxt  dxt   nnxt 1  qnxt  dnxt 
Investor                                             begin                                         end




             (22)  I 1    Et U CIt 1  qxt 1  d xt 1    U CIt qxt


             (23)  I 1    Et U CIt1  qnxt 1  d nxt 1    U CIt qnxt


             (24) t Et (mt 1Vxit 1  bxit )  wt lxit
Financial
Constraint

             (25) t Et (mt 1Vnxit 1  bnxit )  wt lnxit

Incumbents
             (26) ynxit  cnxit  inxit


             (27) yxit  ydxit  yhxit
                                         *




             (28) ydxit  cdxit  idxit

                               *
                              chxit  ihxit
                                       *
                   *
             (29) yhxit 
                                 1 

                                                       54
(30) yxit  Al
             t xit ,



(31) ynxit  Al
              t nxit ,

                                          bxit 
(32) d xit   dxit   hxit
                        *
                               bxit 1       
                                          Rt 
                                    b 
(33) d nxit   nxit     bnxit 1  nxit 
                                     Rt 

                 pdxit            y
(34)  dxit           yhxit  wt dxit
                 Pt                At
                  *
                 phxit
(35)  hxit
       *
                       *
                       yhxit 1     wt lhxit
                                            *

                 Pt

                 pnxit
(36)  nxit           ynxit  wt lnxit
                 Pt

(37) Vxit  bxit 1   max
                         *
                            {dxit  Et (mt1Vxit1  bxit )}
                        pdxut , phxit ,b xit


(38) Vnxit  bnxit1   max {dnxit  Et (mt1Vnxit1  bnxit )}.
                           pnxit ,bnxit


        pdxit    wt
(39)                1 xit 
         Pt  1 At

         *
        phxit           wt
(40)                           1  xit 
         Pt      1 1   At

        pnxit    wt
(41)                1 nxit 
         Pt  1 At

            1
                Et mt 1
            Rt
(42) xit 
             t Et mt 1
(43)  nxit   xit




                                               55
New Entrants
                                                                   bxitnew PIt E
                  (44)    d new
                            xit   nxit       *new
                                                 hxit   bnxit1          Kt
                                                                    Rt Pt
                                      *new
                                     phxit
                         hxit
                          *new
                                           *new
                                           yhxit 1     wt lhxit
                                                                *new

                                      Pt
                                                *new PIt 1 E   1                         new
                                                                   K t 1 )    Et mt 1   bxit  bnxit 
                           PIt E
                  (45)        K t  Et ( mt 1   hxit 1 
                           Pt                               Pt 1          Rt            

                  (46) Vitnew  bnxit 1   d xitnew  Et  mt 1Vxit 1  bxitnew  
                                                         

                  (47) K tE  K E  ne xt 
                                           ne xt 1 

                  (48) Lt  1  nxt 1  next   lnxt   nxt 1  next  lxt
Market Clearing

                  (49) C t  C It  C w t

                                                       n*xt 1  ne*xt  p fxit y fxit
Balanced Trade
                  (50)  nxt 1  next  phxit
                                          *     *
                                               yhxit

Normalization     (51) Pt  1




                                                                56
Appendix Fig. 1 Impulse Responses to National Financial Conditions Index: Trade
                        Industrial Production                                                        CPI                                                         Federal Funds Rate
.002                                                                .0005

.001                                                                                                                                         .1
                                                                    .0000
.000

-.001                                                               -.0005                                                                   .0

-.002                                                               -.0010
-.003                                                                                                                                       -.1
                                                                    -.0015
-.004

-.005                                                               -.0020                                                                  -.2
        5   10    15   20   25   30   35   40   45   50   55   60            5   10   15   20   25   30    35   40   45   50   55   60            5   10   15   20   25    30     35   40   45   50   55   60



                 National Financial Conditions Index                                  The Extensive M argin of Trade                                                      Trade
 .20                                                                 .002                                                                .0050

 .15                                                                                                                                     .0025
                                                                     .001
 .10                                                                                                                                     .0000

 .05                                                                 .000                                                                -.0025

 .00                                                                                                                                     -.0050
                                                                     -.001
 -.05                                                                                                                                    -.0075

 -.10                                                                -.002                                                               -.0100
        5   10    15   20   25   30   35   40   45   50   55   60            5   10   15   20   25   30    35   40   45   50   55   60            5   10   15   20   25    30     35   40   45   50   55   60



                            Stock Index
.010

.005

.000

-.005

-.010

-.015

-.020
        5   10    15   20   25   30   35   40   45   50   55   60




Note: Data are at monthly frequency, based on 6-digit HS disaggregate U.S. export and import flows, running
from 2002:1 to 2016:11.




                                                                                                 57
Appendix Fig. 2 Impulse Responses to National Financial Conditions Index: Exports
                        Industrial Production                                                        CPI                                                        Federal Funds Rate
.002                                                                .0010                                                                   .2

.001                                                                .0005
                                                                                                                                            .1
.000
                                                                    .0000
-.001
                                                                    -.0005                                                                  .0
-.002
                                                                    -.0010
-.003
                                                                                                                                           -.1
-.004                                                               -.0015

-.005                                                               -.0020                                                                 -.2
        5   10    15   20   25   30   35   40   45   50   55   60            5   10   15   20   25   30    35   40   45   50   55   60           5   10   15   20   25     30   35   40   45   50   55   60



                 National Financial Conditions Index                                  The Extensive M argin of Exports                                                   Exports
 .20                                                                 .003

 .16                                                                 .002                                                                .004

 .12
                                                                     .001
 .08                                                                                                                                     .000
                                                                     .000
 .04
                                                                     -.001
 .00                                                                                                                                     -.004

 -.04                                                                -.002

 -.08                                                                -.003                                                               -.008
        5   10    15   20   25   30   35   40   45   50   55   60            5   10   15   20   25   30    35   40   45   50   55   60           5   10   15   20   25     30   35   40   45   50   55   60



                            Stock Index
.010

.005

.000

-.005

-.010

-.015

-.020
        5   10    15   20   25   30   35   40   45   50   55   60




Note: Data are at monthly frequency, based on 6-digit HS disaggregate U.S. export flows, running from 2002:1
to 2016:11.




                                                                                                                58
Appendix Fig. 3 Impulse Responses to National Financial Conditions Index: Imports

                        Industrial Production                                                        CPI                                                        Federal Funds Rate
.002                                                                .0005                                                                 .12

.001                                                                                                                                      .08
                                                                    .0000
                                                                                                                                          .04
.000
                                                                    -.0005                                                                .00
-.001
                                                                    -.0010                                                                -.04
-.002
                                                                                                                                          -.08
                                                                    -.0015
-.003                                                                                                                                     -.12

-.004                                                               -.0020                                                                -.16
        5   10    15   20   25   30   35   40   45   50   55   60            5   10   15   20   25   30    35   40   45   50   55   60           5   10   15   20   25     30   35   40   45   50   55   60



                 National Financial Conditions Index                                  The Extensive M argin of Imports                                                   Imports
 .20                                                                 .002                                                                .008


 .15                                                                 .001                                                                .004


 .10                                                                 .000                                                                .000


 .05                                                                 -.001                                                               -.004


 .00                                                                 -.002                                                               -.008


 -.05                                                                -.003                                                               -.012
        5   10    15   20   25   30   35   40   45   50   55   60            5   10   15   20   25   30    35   40   45   50   55   60           5   10   15   20   25     30   35   40   45   50   55   60



                            Stock Index
.004


.000


-.004


-.008


-.012


-.016
        5   10    15   20   25   30   35   40   45   50   55   60




Note: Data are at monthly frequency, based on 6-digit HS disaggregate U.S. import flows, running from 2002:1
to 2016:11




                                                                                                                59
Appendix Fig. 4 Panel VAR with 7 Variables
                                                                                        Response to Cholesky One S.D. Innovations ?2 S.E.
                        Industrial Production                                                                        CPI                                                                 FederalFRunds Rate
                      Response of LIP_US to LIBOR3M_US                                             Response of LCPI_NEW to LIBOR3M_US                                                Response of FFR to LIBOR3M_US
.0000                                                                              .0000                                                                            .02

-.0005                                                                                                                                                              .01
                                                                                  -.0002
                                                                                                                                                                    .00
-.0010
                                                                                  -.0004
                                                                                                                                                                    -.01
-.0015
                                                                                  -.0006                                                                            -.02
-.0020
                                                                                                                                                                    -.03
                                                                                  -.0008
-.0025                                                                                                                                                              -.04

-.0030                                                                            -.0010                                                                            -.05
                 5     10    15    20   25   30   35   40   45   50   55   60                  5    10    15   20   25   30   35   40   45   50   55   60                      5    10   15    20   25   30   35   40   45   50   55   60



                 Respons e of LIBOR3M_US to LIBOR3M_US                                             Response of LTNCODE to LIBOR3M_US                                               Response of LTRADEV to LIBOR3M_US
                                        Libor                                                        Ext. Margin of Trade                                                                           Trade
      .20                                                                           .004                                                                        .010

      .15
                                                                                    .002                                                                        .005

      .10
                                                                                    .000                                                                        .000
      .05
                                                                                   -.002                                                                        -.005
      .00

                                                                                   -.004                                                                        -.010
      -.05

      -.10                                                                         -.006                                                                        -.015
                 5     10    15    20   25   30   35   40   45   50   55   60                  5    10    15   20   25   30   35   40   45   50   55   60                      5    10   15    20   25   30   35   40   45   50   55   60


                     Response of LSP500_US to LIBOR3M_US
                                   Stock Index
  .000



 -.004



 -.008



 -.012



 -.016
                 5     10    15    20   25   30   35   40   45   50   55   60




Appendix Fig. 5 Panel VAR with 3 Variables
                                                                                 Response to Cholesky One S.D. Innovations ?2 S.E.
        Response of DF08S_AFTER_LIBOR3M_US to
                             Crisis*Libor                                                           Ext. Margin of Trade                                                                        Trade
              DF08S_AFTER_LIBOR3M_US                                            Res ponse of LTNCODE to DF08S_AFTER_LIBOR3M_US Res pons e of LTRADEV to DF08S_AFTER_LIBOR3M_US
.3                                                                              .004                                                                        .004

                                                                                .002
                                                                                                                                                            .000
.2
                                                                                .000
                                                                                                                                                            -.004
.1                                                                              -.002
                                                                                                                                                            -.008
                                                                                -.004
.0
                                                                                                                                                            -.012
                                                                                -.006

-.1                                                                             -.008                                                                       -.016
             5   10     15    20   25   30   35   40   45   50   55   60                   5   10    15   20   25   30   35   40   45   50   55   60                       5   10   15    20   25   30   35   40   45   50   55   60




                                                                                                                                   60
