                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      MORTGAGE-BACKED SECURITIES AND THE FINANCIAL CRISIS OF 2008:
                          A POST MORTEM

                                          Juan Ospina
                                          Harald Uhlig

                                      Working Paper 24509
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24509


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2018




This research has been supported by the NSF grant SES-1227280. We are grateful to the research
assistance by Avigail Kifer at a very early, but crucial first stage of this paper. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Juan Ospina and Harald Uhlig. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Mortgage-Backed Securities and the Financial Crisis of 2008: a Post Mortem
Juan Ospina and Harald Uhlig
NBER Working Paper No. 24509
April 2018
JEL No. G01,G21,G23,G24

                                         ABSTRACT

We examine the payoff performance, up to the end of 2013, of non-agency residential mortgage-
backed securities (RMBS), issued up to 2008. We have created a new and detailed data set on the
universe of non-agency residential mortgage backed securities, per carefully assembling source
data from Bloomberg and other sources. We compare these payoffs to their ex-ante ratings as
well as other characteristics. We establish seven facts. First, the bulk of these securities was
rated AAA. Second, AAA securities did ok: on average, their total cumulated losses up to 2013
are 2.3 percent. Third, the subprime AAA-rated segment did particularly well. Fourth, later
vintages did worse than earlier vintages, except for subprime AAA securities. Fifth, the bulk of
the losses were concentrated on a small share of all securities. Sixth, the misrating for AAA
securities was modest. Seventh, controlling for a home price bust, a home price boom was good
for the repayment on these securities. Together, these facts provide challenge the conventional
narrative, that improper ratings of RMBS were a major factor in the financial crisis of 2008.


Juan Ospina
Banco de la Republica de Colombia
juan.jose.ospina@gmail.com

Harald Uhlig
Dept. of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 E 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
huhlig@uchicago.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w24509
1      Introduction
       post mortem: an examination of a dead body to determine the cause of death1

    Gradually, the deep financial crisis of 2008 is in the rearview mirror. With that, standard
narratives have emerged, which will inform and influence policy choices and public perception
in the future for a long time to come. For that reason, it is all the more important to examine
these narratives with the distance of time and available data, as many of these narratives were
created in the heat of the moment.
    One such standard narrative has it that the financial meltdown of 2008 was caused by an
overextension of mortgages to weak borrowers, repackaged and then sold to willing lenders
drawn in by faulty risk ratings for these mortgage back securities. To many, mortgage backed
securities and rating agencies became the key villains of that financial crisis. In particular,
rating agencies were blamed for assigning the coveted AAA rating to many securities, which
did not deserve it, particularly in the subprime segment of the market, and that these ratings
then lead to substantial losses for institutional investors, who needed to invest in safe assets
and who mistakenly put their trust in these misguided ratings.
    In this paper, we re-examine this narrative. We seek to address two questions in particular.
First, were these mortgage backed securities bad investments? Second, were the ratings wrong?
We answer these questions, using a new and detailed data set on the universe of non-agency
residential mortgage backed securities (RMBS), obtained by devoting considerable work to
carefully assembling data from Bloomberg and other sources. This data set allows us to examine
the actual repayment stream and losses on principal on these securities up to 2014, and thus
with a considerable distance since the crisis events. In essence, we provide a post-mortem on a
market that many believe to have died in 2008. We find that the conventional narrative needs
substantial rewriting: the ratings and the losses were not nearly as bad as this narrative would
lead one to believe.
    Specifically, we calculate the ex-post realized losses as well as ex-post realized return on
investing on par in these mortgage backed securities, under various assumptions of the losses
for the remaining life time of the securities. We compare these realized returns to their ratings
in 2008 and their promised loss distributions, according to tables available from the rating
agencies. We shall investigate, whether ratings were a sufficient statistic (to the degree that
a discretized rating can be) or whether they were, essentially, just “noise”, given information
already available to market participants at the time of investing such as ratings of borrowers.
    1 The market for non-agency residential mortgage backed securities pretty much died with the financial crisis: new issuance

slowed to a trickle. Thus, the title.




                                                              1
   We establish seven facts. First, the bulk of these securities was rated AAA. Second, AAA
securities did ok: on average, their total cumulated losses up to 2013 are 2.3 percent. Third, the
subprime AAA-rated segment did particularly well. Fourth, later vintages did worse than earlier
vintages, except for subprime AAA securities. Fifth, the bulk of the losses were concentrated
on a small share of all securities. Sixth, the misrating for AAA securities was modest. Seventh,
controlling for a home price bust, a home price boom was good for the repayment on these
securities.
   Table 10 presents more detailed results for these returns, depending on the market segment
and assumptions regarding terminal value: these results are presented in greater detail in
subsection 5. The most important result here may be that various categories of AAA securities
provided an internal rate of return of about 2.44% to 3.31% on average, depending on the
assumptions regarding their terminal value. The yield on 10-year treasuries in 2008 was between
3 and 4 percent: the difference is surely smaller than what the standard crisis narrative seems
to suggest. It mattered quite a bit, whether the mortgages were fixed rate or floating rate. We
do not deny that losses occurred and that these were magnitudes larger than those that should
be expected of AAA securities. However, we suggest that these data on the realized returns on
AAA RMBS present an interesting challenge to researchers, seeking to place these securities at
the center of the storm, tossing world-wide financial markets into the abyss.
   Losses were considerably larger on securities with ratings other than AAA. We examine
them in considerable detail. Some were practically wiped out as a group, despite rather stellar
non-AAA ratings ex ante. The total market share of these securities was below 14 percent of the
market for non-agency RMBS, however. Moreover, we calculate that the the total losses on all
non-agency RMBS amounted to less than 350 billion dollars: less than 2.5 percent of US GDP
or less than half a percent annualized over that period, and quite a bit less than the amount
devoted to the 2009 American Recovery and Reinvestment Act or “stimulus” package. We
suggest that it is an interesting challenge to craft a theory of a world-wide recession, triggered
by the these losses.
   We should emphasize that we only examine non-agency residential mortgage backed se-
curities. Agency-backed securities were backed implicitly by the tax payer and explicitly by
programs of the Federal Reserve Bank. Therefore their role in the crisis was largely a matter
of policy, and investors did not expect losses on investments in these securities to be large. By
contrast, the non-agency portion really was the “wild west” of that market, and provides the
most stringent restrictions for challenging the conventional narrative. Also, we do not inves-
tigate higher layers of leveraging and repackaging, such as, say, AAA-rated collateralized debt
securities, backed by a basket of lower-rated mortgage-backed securities. Note that losses here


                                                2
are just redistributing the losses of the original RMBS. There are a variety of other securities
that got their share of blame. None have received quite the attention of non-agency residential
mortgage backed securities, though, which are the focus here.
    The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides a discussion of the related literature.
Section 3 discusses our unique and novel data set, and how we assembled it. Subsection 4
contains our analysis. Subsection 4.1 examines the ratings, in particular their relationship and
their predictive value for future losses. Subsection 4.2 examines the depth, probability and
distribution of losses. In subsection 4.6 we explore errors in rating from an ex post perspec-
tive, and the degree of rating reversals, where securities with higher ratings experienced larger
losses than those with lower ones. Subsection 5 examines the resulting annualized returns on
an investment at par value, under a range of assumptions on the terminal value. Section 6
concludes.


2     Related Literature
Our paper is mainly related to the extensive literature that studies securitization, housing
markets, and their role in the unfolding of the financial crisis of 2008. Our paper is closely
related to papers that give more importance to non-sumbrime segments of the market as key
determinants of the crisis. Adelino et al. (2016) and Adelino et al. (2017), provide evidence
that middle-class borrowers with above-subprime credit scores increased their delinquencies in
mortgages during the crisis and were key in understanding the crisis. In addition, Albanesi et al.
(2017) explain that credit growth between 2001 and 2007 and mortgage delinquencies during
the crisis were driven by mid to high credit score borrowers, while debt issued to high risk
borrowers was virtually constant. Moreover, the prime segment disproportionately defaulted
on their mortgages, mainly because of the role played by real estate investors who maximized
leverage motivated by the prospect of capital gains. These results are consistent with our
results that Alt-A securities and Prime securities, especially in the AAA-rated group, did by
many measures worse than AAA subprime securities. In line with these papers, our results cast
doubt on the so-called “subprime view” of crisis.
    Our paper is also related to the literature that explores losses and returns on mortgage-
backed securities during the crisis. Partly due to data being more readily available, partly
due to the fact that unconventional monetary policy made them part of the Fed’s balance
sheet, and partly due to their importance as a fraction of the MBS market, most studies have
focused on the agency mortgage-backed securities. Diep et al. (2017) focus on the cross-section
of agency MBS returns, how prepayment risk is priced, and how risk premia changes over


                                                3
time. Boyarchenko et al. (2017) study variation on agency MBS spreads over time and across
securities, finding that cross-sectional return patterns are explained by pre-payment risk while
the time series variation is mostly accounted for a factor that depends on MBS supply and credit
risk. Our paper, in contrast, focuses on the returns of the non-agency market and links them to
credit risk, which is absent in agency MBS. Unlike for the agency MBS, our return computations
cannot be based on trading prices, and traditional empirical asset pricing analysis is impossible.
Despite these limitations, our paper makes the contribution of providing measures of returns
and how they relate to potentially risk-priced characteristics. As pointed out by Vickery and
Wright (2013), there are key institutional characteristics of the agency MBS market that makes
its liquidity higher, and while issuances and activity in the non-agency segment of the market
remained robust, they declined in the non-agency market. The results of our study suggest
points at some features of the non-agency market that have determined this decline. A salient
one is the narrative that subprime-AAA securities had large losses, which further diminishes
the liquidity and appetite for the non-agency market. A set of papers, including Barnett-Hart
(2009), Beltran et al. (2013), Cordell et al. (2012), has set its attention on the non-cash segment
of the market, documenting losses on CDOs and more derivative-like structures. There seems
to be agreement on the large losses suffered by CDOs and how rating agencies may have failed
to assess the risk in their AAA tranches. Our paper shows, however, that losses on CDOs
are not coming from widespread losses on MBS, and that the extent of misratings of agency
AAA-rated MBS is not comparable to that of CDOs.
   Another strand of the literature studies the role and pertinence of credit ratings. A key
issue of ratings is what they mean for investors and society as a whole. Our paper, does
show that ratings had useful information about the fundamentals of securities, but our results,
suggest that credit ratings were not sufficient statistics for non-agency MBS losses (in line with
Ashcraft et al. (2011)). Some researchers have proposed that AAA securities are treated like
money, and that the AAA-subprime crisis is more of a run on money-like instruments than
                       2
a default story.           For example, McDonald and Paulson (2015) document this interpretation
as a possibility for the AIG crisis. However, Chernenko et al. (2014) examine micro-data of
insurance companies and mutual funds holdings of fixed income securities and show that not all
investors treated all AAA-rated securitizations the same way, and that some of them understood
that they could represent different underlying risks. This means that even though the AAA
money-like interpretation is a possibility, it may not be the entire story. The fact that the AAA
rating is an insufficient statistic is reinforced by Stanton and Wallace (2011) who document that
prices for the AAA ABX.HE index CDS during the crisis were inconsistent with any reasonable
   2 We   thank Arvind Krishnamurthy for pointing this as a possible explanation of some of our results



                                                               4
assumption for mortgage default rates, and that these price changes are only weakly correlated
with observed changes in the credit performance of the underlying loans in the index.
    Finally, there is a literature that explores how securitization helped to create conditions for
the crisis to happen and how securitization standards are related to the so-called mortgage crisis.
Examples of this literature include Keys et al. (2009), Keys et al. (2010) and Keys et al. (2012).
These papers build on substantial evidence that securitization contributed to bad lending by
reducing incentives of lenders to carefully screen borrowers, and explore different aspects of the
securitization process that could have been affected by this moral hazard problem. They find
that regulation had the effect of increasing moral hazard as more regulated banks faced less
market discipline. They also find that securitization did lower screening standards: loans with
higher FICO scores tend to have higher probabilities of default and a higher probability of being
securitized. Finally they show that certain loans, particularly those with higher FICO scores
also tend to be easier to securitize and they tend to spend less time on a lender’s balance sheet.
The fact that loans with higher FICO scores had bigger probabilities of defaults is in line with
our findings that subprime-AAA securities seemed to have loss rates that were lower than those
of AAA-AtlA securities. The fact that loss rates and probabilities of default for AAA-subprime
did not increase in the run-up to the crisis as they did for prime and Alt-A securities, further
supports the channels stressed by this literature on how the process of securitization could have
influenced the crisis. Unlike these papers, our paper sheds some light on the extent to which
credit ratings, another aspect of the securitization process, was a sufficient statistic for the risk
involved in investing in mortgage-backed securities.


3     The data
We seek to investigate the market for residential non-agency mortgage-backed securities. These
securities are excluded from guarantees or insurance by the government agencies “Fannie Mae”
(FNMA), “Freddie Mac” (FHLMC) or “Ginnie Mae” (GNMA) due to certain characteristics,
such as “jumbo loans” exceeding the limit of, say, $ 333,700 in 2004, loans on second properties
such as vacation homes, insufficient documentation or borrowers with credit history problems.
At the end of 2003, non-agency MBS/ABS had an outstanding amount of $ 842 billion ,
constituting 20% of the entire market for MBS, with agency-backed securities constituting the
other 80%.
    For our investigation, a major challenge was to obtain a suitable data set for these securities.
The market is characterized by considerable decentralization. While the appointed trustees of a
deal are responsible for providing investors with detailed information about the performance of


                                                 5
the loans underlying the securities every month, there is no centralized repository that collects
and organizes the data3 . In terms of prices, many of these securities do not trade very often,
and when they do so the transactions are over-the-counter. This makes it impossible to obtain
a suitable time series of transaction prices for individal deals4 .
     As there was no readily available, organized data source, we constructed the main data
ourselves. We start from the Mortgage Market Statistical Annual 2013 Edition by Inside Mort-
gage Finance5 . This publication in Volume II, Table A, Non-Agency MBS Activity, contains a
complete list of the RMBS deals, completed over the years 2006-2012. For each deal, the name,
the original issuer, the original amount and a few other characteristics are listed. There are a
total of 2824 such deals. However, information such as cash flow or losses is not provided here.
For our further data base construction, we obtain data from Bloomberg.
     For each deal listed by the Mortgage Market Statistical Annual 2013 edition, we search for
that deal on Bloomberg. The matching sometimes required a bit of a search, and we managed to
find nearly 96 percent of the original list, by principal amount. Once we found the appropriate
deal entry, we look for all deals that have similar names going forward and going back in time.
Bloomberg lists the deal manager for the original deal. We then also search for all mortgage
backed securities from this deal manager from 1987 onwards. Proceeding in that manner, we
find a total of 8615 deals, going back to 1987 rather than just 2006, as in the Statistical Annual.
In this way we hope to have minimized the number of deals that we may be leaving out. Each
deal generates approximately 17 separate securities or bonds on average, usually with different
ratings, for a total of 143,232 securities, each of which we seek to track. Their total principal
amount is 5,842 billion dollars. Further details are in Table 1. Table 2 provides an overview of
the data we obtained for each security.

                                                [Insert Table 1 about here]

                                                [Insert Table 2 about here]

     In this manner, we obtain as complete a universe of RMBS securities emerging from these
deals, as seems possible, as well as information about their ratings and monthly cash flow and
losses. We downloaded the various pieces of information, security by security, and assembled it
into a spread sheet, readable by MATLAB for further analysis. The process took several months
to complete, largely due to the download restrictions of Bloomberg. In order to understand our
data base construction further, appendix C provides a sample of the information available from
     3 Some   companies including Corelogic and Blackbox Logic collect and sell information and analytic tools to market participants
     4 Now   the Financial Regulatory Authority (FINRA) provides some summary statistics on prices and volume of daily transac-
tions.
     5 Information   about this source can be found here http://www.insidemortgagefinance.com/books/


                                                                  6
the Statistical Annual as well as from Bloomberg, how to read the available information and
some details on how we constructed our data base. The on-line database appendix contains a
detailed step by step description of how we built our data. A replication kit is available from
the authors for those that seek to replicate our analysis.
    Table TA1 in the technical appendix compares the deals in our final database with those
in the Statistical Annual. Panel A of that table provides evidence that our database contains
about 94% of the deals and about 96% of the issued amount across different types of securities
over the 2006-2012 period, which is the available period in the 2013 edition of the Statistical
Annual. The fraction covered by our data is about the same across different market segments.
Panel B shows the coverage by market segment over time to show that not only the coverage
is high overall, but also that it is high consistently over time. The high matching rate for this
time period, and the procedure that we followed to search for securities, give us confidence that
our conclusions will not follow from having a selected sample.
    We complemented this main data set with data on RMBS price indices as well as house
prices. For RMBS prices we obtain the ABX.HE indexes from Markit6 , which are built to
represent CDS transactions on Subprime RMBS issued in 2006 and 2007 for different credit
rating levels. Finally, we use publicly available house price data at the state level from Zillow
to build some of our control variables.7


3.1      Database description
Our constructed database contains information for more than 143 thousand RMBS, which
were issued between 1987 and 2013 and are part of about 8,500 securitization deals. Table 1
shows the issuance activity over time. The table shows the boom in activity in terms of deals,
bonds, market participants (issuers), and deal size from the early 2000s through 2007, and the
corresponding collapse after 2008. Most of the deals after 2008 correspond to resecuritizations.
    About 99% of the securities in our data, which represent 97% of the dollar principal amount,
are private-label (non-agency), non-government backed,8 non-CDO securities. We will limit our
analysis to these securities throughout the paper.
    The collected information can be grouped into groups. The first group is the cash flow time
series information. This constitutes the bulk of our data. Given downloading limits imposed
by Bloomberg, we had to spend several months downloading this information chunk by chunk.
For each security we observe the interest payments, principal payments, outstanding balance,
    6 Informationabout these indexes and how to purchase the data is available here https://www.markit.com/Product/ABX
    7 Thisdata can be downloaded at http://www.zillow.com/research/data/
    8 The government backed securities include agency securities and also non-agency securities whose underlying mortgages are

backed by the Federal Housing Administration (FHA) and the U.S department of Veterans Affairs (VA)



                                                              7
the coupon rate and the losses each month after issuance. The second group of variables
allows to identify the security and describe some of its characteristics. These include the
Cusip ID, deal names, deal managers names, dates of issuance, coupon type and frequency,
maturity date, type of tranche, notional amounts, as well as the credit rating assigned by up
to 5 different credit rating agencies upon issuance. A third group of variables is related to
the collateral of the securities, i.e. the underlying mortgages. These include information on
the composition of the mortgages by type of rates (adjustable rates vs fixed rate mortgages),
by type of occupancy (vacation home, family home, etc), by purpose of the mortgage (equity
take out, refinance, purchase), or by geography (at the state level). This group of variables
also includes information commonly used to assess the risk of pools of mortgages. We observe
moments of the distribution of the credit scores, loan size, and loan to value ratios across the
mortgage loans underlying a deal. A final group of variables include variables that can help
us classify securities (for example agency vs non-agency, residential vs non-residential MBS)
and commonly used metrics in mortgages backed security analysis such as weighted average
maturity (WAM), weighted average coupon (WAC), and weighted average life (WAL). In the
on-line appendix we list and describe all the variables in the raw data.

                                               [Insert Table 1 about here]


3.2       Classifying Securities into Market Segments
The most common classification used in the market and one that has determined the narratives
of the crisis yields three main categories of MBS: Sub-prime, Alt-A, and Prime (or jumbo)9 .
This classification is available from the Mortgage Market Statistical Annual and it is based on
the classification of the bulk of the underlying loans into the same three categories. In general,
an RMBS predominantly backed by subprime loans will be classified as a Subprime RMBS.
    Prime non-agency mortgages are jumbo loans that are not qualified for agency guarantees
because of their size. Alt-A or Alternative A are loans in the middle of the credit spectrum,
with missing documentation or with other characteristics that make them ineligible for agency
securitization. Subprime loans are loans further down the credit quality spectrum, to the point
that they too are ineligible for agency backing. In practice, the classification of a security (and
the underlying loans) was the result of the market practice in the securitization business and
not a contractual characteristic of the security. This means that we do not have an official
field that provides the classification, and therefore we perform the classification ourselves. The
     9 There are other classifications that we largely ignore. As one example, there is the Scratch & Dent category. These are loans

of borrowers with the lowest FICO scores, which sometimes could have been originated outside the underwriting guidelines. These
will generally fall under the sub-prime category



                                                                 8
classification criteria often used by banks involved the FICO score, loan-to-value ratios (LTV),
loan size, and the documentation supporting the loan, with the FICO score being the main
characteristic.
    In order to classify the securities in our database, we used the fact that the Mortgage Market
Statistical Annual provides a classification for the deals issued after 2005 to learn from our data
what FICO score (or other characteristic) would provide an appropriate classification criteria.
Figure 1 compares that classification for deals issued after 2005 to the mean FICO scores, loan
sizes and LTVs available from Bloomberg. Clearly the FICO score is the key distinguishing
characteristic, although size also provides information. Figure TA1 as well as related figures
in the technical appendix further supports this claim. Given the distributions of the FICO
scores statistics in Figure 1 and Figure TA1, we found cutoffs that we then used to classify each
security in the database as Prime, Alt-A, and Subprime.

                                           [Insert Figure 1 about here]


4      Seven Facts

4.1      Fact 1: the bulk of these securities was rated AAA
Table TA2 in the technical appendix describes the credit rating activity in our database based
on the assignment of a rating upon issuance. More than 62% of the securities (which represent
85% by value of principal) had at least 2 ratings. For our analysis, we summarize the ratings
by the different agencies into a single index, as follows. We abstract from the rating qualifiers
“-” and “+”. So for example a BBB+ for us is a BBB and an A- is an A. This should not
be too problematic since an A- should be closer to an A than to a BBB. Whenever a security
has 2 or more ratings from different agencies we average the rating. For instance, if agency 1
rates it as AAA, and rating agency 2 as AA, and rating agency 3 as AAA, the bond will be
AAA.10 For the case of two agencies, one rating a bond as AAA and one as AA, we solved the
tie upwards, so the bond would be AAA. These discrepancies are not common in the data.
    With table 3, we can now document our first fact: The great majority of non-agency
RMBS securities were assigned a AAA rating upon issuance. The table shows the total
principal amount in billions of Dollars and in terms of percent of the total by rating category.
Almost 87% of the principal amounts had the highest rating of AAA. Most of the other rated
securities were investment grade securities (BBB or higher). Those rated below constituted
    10 This clearly requires a mapping of the different ratings across agencies. We used the mapping provided by the Bank of

International Settlements, which is available here http://www.bis.org/bcbs/qis/qisrating.htm



                                                             9
less than 2% of the market by principal value. Table TA3 in the technical appendix contains
additional detail.

                                               [Insert Table 3 about here]


4.2       Fact 2: AAA securities did ok.
A loss occurs, when a scheduled payment is not made or when there is a complete default on the
remaining principal and stream of payments. The losses that we observe, are the realized losses
as defined in the oficial prospectus of the MBS. The losses are reported in the monthly reports
that deal managers send to investors. The losses from defaulted loans first reduce excess cash
flow, then reduce the level of overcollaterilization, and to the extent they exceed the amount
of excess interest and overcollateralization following distributions of principal on the payment
date, are allocated to reduce the principal amount according to the level of subordination of
the bond in the capital structure of the deal. We observe the time series of the losses suffered
month by month by each of the securities in our data. This allows us to calculate the cumulative
losses at different points in time and study the differences across ratings, vintages, and market
segments. The results presented here are weighted by the original principal amounts of the
RMBS’s. The technical appendix complements this with unweighted results.

                                               [Insert Table 4 about here]

    Table 4 provides a breakdown of the cumulated losses until December 2013 by ratings
subcategory. The first column essentially repeats the first column of table 3. The numbers are
now somewhat smaller, since the securities involved in table 3 are all the non-agency RMBS
of our database, this is, all securities issued between 1987 and 201311 , whereas the calculations
for table 4 only used securities issued up to 2008. From here onwards all the results only use
securities issued through 2008. Table TA4 in the technical appendix provides additional detail.
We have also plotted the losses over time and according to rating subcategories: these plots
are provided in the technical appendix as figures TA2 and TA3. The summary of these plots is
that losses started to occur only after the end of 2007 and the onset of the financial crisis, and
that they look like having mostly converged until the end of December 2013, except perhaps
for the losses on the AAA securities. As of December 2013, AAA securities taken together still
had $341 billion of cushion coming from lower-rated bonds. Given that all the losses over 6
years from 2008 to 2013 (both included) did not reach this amount and given the recovery of
     11 Including the information up to 2013 for the activity of agencies is to provide a complete description of our data. Given the

fall in securitization activity after 2008, the numbers change a little bit, but the messages do not.



                                                                10
the US economy, we We therefore conjecture with some confidence, that the final loss numbers
will be somewhat, but not substantially higher, once one calculates them in, say, 2040.
    Table 4 documents our second fact: AAA securities did ok: on average, their total
cumulated losses up to 2013 are 2.3 percent. This also emerges from section 5 below,
where we examine the realized returns in greater detail. Losses for other rating segments were
substantially higher, e.g. reaching above 50 percent for non-investment grade bonds. Here,
it may be good to bear in mind our first fact, however, that the bulk of securities was rated
AAA, as is evident once again from table4. The overall cumulated losses on all RMBS until
December 2013 amounted to 6.5 percent. It was the AAA segment in particular that drew
the most attention in the discussions regarding ratings. Nobody should be utterly surprised
to incur losses on non-investment grade bonds, for example. We therefore focus our discussion
here on the AAA segment, while not denying the substantial losses in the other segments.
    Cumulative losses of 2.2% of principal on AAA-rated securities surely is a large amount,
                                                                                                             12
given that rating. Such losses after six years may be expected for, say, BBB securities                           , and
not for AAA securities. AAA securities are meant to be safe securities, and losses should be
extremely unlikely. From that vantage point, an average 2.2% loss rate is certainly anything
but “ok”. We have chosen this label not so much in comparison to what one ought to expect
from a AAA-rated security, but rather in comparison to the conventional narrative regarding
the financial crisis, which would lead one to believe that these losses had been far larger.
Ultimately, of course, different judgements can be rendered from different vantage points: our
main goal here is to simply summarize the facts.


4.3     Fact 3: the subprime AAA-rated segment did particularly well.
                                          [Insert Table 5 about here]

    We break down the analysis by market segment defined by loan type (Prime, Alt-A, and
Subprime). Table 5 shows the results and documents the third fact: the subprime AAA-
rated RMBS did particularly well. AAA-rated Subprime Mortgage Backed Securities were
the safest securities among the non-agency RMBS market. As of December 2013 the principal-
weighted loss rates AAA-rated subprime securities were on average 0.42% We do not deny
that even the seemingly small loss of 0.42% should be considered large for any given AAA
security. Nonetheless, we consider this to be a surprising fact given the conventional narrative
for the causes of the financial crisis and its assignment of the considerable blame to the subprime
market and its mortgage-backed securities. An example of this narrative is provided by Gelman
   12 see the table available from Moody’s in in figure TA9 and also available per http://siteresources.worldbank.org/

EXTECAREGTOPPRVSECDEV/Resources/570954-1211578683837/Bielecki_Moodys_Rating_SME_transactions.pdf


                                                         11
and Loken (2014)13 : “We have in mind an analogy with the notorious AAA-class bonds created
during the mid-2000s that led to the subprime mortgage crisis. Lower-quality mortgages —that
is, mortgages with high probability of default and, thus, high uncertainty—were packaged and
transformed into financial instruments that were (in retrospect, falsely) characterized as low
risk”.


4.4       Fact 4: later vintages did worse than earlier vintages, except for
          subprime AAA securities
                                               [Insert Table 6 about here]

                                               [Insert Table 7 about here]

    We calculate the average loss rate and its standard deviation per vintage and rating, see
table 6 as the vintage-specific counterpart to table 4, or even per vintage-rating-mortgage-type
category, see table 7 as the vintage-specific counterpart to table 5. Loss rates mostly rose for
later vintages. For example, while there were nearly no losses on AAA-rated securities issued
before 2003, their cumulated losses rose to nearly 5 percent for securities issues in the years 2006-
2008. It probably does not come as a surprise that later vintages did worse. What may still be up
to interpretation is whether this bad performance of the late-vintage RMBS occurred due to the
bad luck of issuing securities based on mortgages at the peak of the housing boom, or whether
some rating drift was at work. We shall return to that issue, when discussing our seventh fact.
What is particularly remarkable here, however, is the stability of the loss rates for the AAA-
subprime segment, as the last three columns of the top line of table 7 or the lowest line of the
left panel in the middle row of figure TA6 shows: loss rates there were below 0.7% even for the
subprime-AAA RMBS issued in the years 2006-2008. These tables, the figure and the remarks
thus establish our fourth fact: later vintages did worse than earlier vintages, except
for subprime AAA securities. Thus, even when controlling for the vintage, it remains a
fact that AAA-rated Prime and Alt-A RMBS exhibit loss rates that are worse than AAA-
rated subprime-RMBS, while the performance for lower ratings is comparable. We view this
as providing supportive evidence for the lower screening effort exerted by financial institutions
that found easier to securitized and sell loans of higher-quality borrowers, as documented by
Keys et al. (2009, 2010, 2012).
   13 We have chosen this quote because it is quite representative of the conventional narrative during the crisis and useful for our

purposes. We have not chosen it as a critique of the article by Gelman and Loken (2014), whose subject of interest is not the RMBS
market per se




                                                                12
4.5      Fact 5: the bulk of the losses were concentrated on a small share
         of all securities.
                                          [Insert Figure 2 about here]

    The standard deviations shown in, say, table 7 imply that not all securities behaved the
same. Indeed, figure 2 shows that the loss distribution is nearly bimodal. The left panel shows
the loss distribution across all RMBS, weighted by principal amount. About 65 percent of the
securities lost nothing or less than 5 percent, whereas nearly 20 percent of all securities lost
more than 95 percent or even everything. The right panel of figure 2 shows that distribution
broken down by credit rating. One can see the same bimodality, rating-by-rating. For the
AAA-rated securities, we obviously obtain a much larger share in the “near-to-no” losses bin,
but even there, the worst bin contains more securities, weighted by principal amount, than
those bins for losses anywhere between 40 and 80 percent. A similar statement in reverse holds
for the non-investment grade bonds. With this, we establish our fifth fact: the bulk of the
losses were concentrated on a small share of all securities.


4.6      Fact 6: the misrating for AAA securities was modest
In this section, we examine the relationship of the ex-ante ratings and other bond characteristics
to the ex-post performance. This may help shed light on the question of the appropriateness of
the ratings. Obviously, we only see one particular history unfold, and all securities were subject
to one large aggregate turn of events: one therefore needs to read this comparison with the
appropriate grain of salt.
    We present two exercises. In the first exercise, we compare the realized losses of securities
to Moody’s expected losses by rating. Moody’s has published a table of “Idealized Cumulative
Expected Loss Rate” which we present as reference in the technical appendix in figure TA9.14
For example, in 10 years a BBB- security would be expected to have a loss rate of approximately
3.35%. For each security, we assign an “ex-post rating” based on its actual realized loss rate,
converting it into the rating using the loss table by Moody’s at the six-year horizon to 10-year
horizon, depending on the vintage of the security. For a 2008 security we use the six-year
horizon, for a 2007 a seven year horizon, and so forth. So, if a given security had a realized
loss rate between the AAA and the AA expected loss rate on Moody’s table (between 0.0055%
and 0.22% in 10 years), the security receives an ex-post rating of AA. We then compare the
   14 The table is originally available here https://www.moodys.com/sites/products/productattachments/marvel_user_guide1.

pdf or herehttp://siteresources.worldbank.org/EXTECAREGTOPPRVSECDEV/Resources/570954-1211578683837/Bielecki_Moodys_
Rating_SME_transactions.pdf




                                                           13
ex-ante rating with the ex-post rating. Figure 3 presents the resulting distributions. The solid
line is the fraction of securities by original rating (ex-ante), whereas the dotted line shows the
distribution of the constructed ex-post rating. Overall, the share AAA ratings is the same in
both distributions, though there are more securities receiving investment grade ratings ex-ante
rather than ex-post.

                                   [Insert Figure 3 about here]

                                   [Insert Figure 4 about here]

    Figure 4 shows the fraction of securities for which ex-ante and ex-post ratings coincide
(labeled as Correct Rating), those for which the ex-post rating is higher than the ex-ante rating
(labeled as Deflated Rating), and those for which the ex-post rating is lower than the ex-ante
rating (labeled as Inflated Rating). While about 75% of AAA securities had little to no losses,
thus justifying their ex-ante ratings ex post, securities with ratings A and below had a large
fraction of inflated ratings. Figure TA10 in the technical appendix provides a three-dimensional
version. These two figures reflect the bimodality of the loss distribution, summarized by our
fifth fact.
    In the second exercise, we wish to understand, whether the ratings could have been
improved upon at the time, aside from the overall extent of the losses examined above. We
seek to calculate the extent to which the inclusion of additional covariates X, available at the
time of rating, for a higher-ranked security predicts larger loss probabilities than observed on
average for lower-ranked securities. We call this a ratings reversal. Obviously, the information
in these covariates would have been useful ex ante only to the extent that their influence on
the losses ex post was understood. This is unlikely to be fully the case. One should therefore
view our exercise as the best possible scenario for potentially improving on the ex-ante ratings.
    More precisely, for any given α ∈ [0, 1], which we shall call the loss threshold, as well as for
each rating, say AAA, we first seek to estimate P (Loss > α | AAA) and P (Loss > α | AAA, X),
given the crisis of 2008. For the former, we estimate this probability with the fraction of AAA-
securities, whose losses exceeded α at the end of 2013. For the latter and for each security i
rated AAA and with covariates Xi , construct the observation

                                           Yi = 1Lossi >α

indicating, whether the losses for security i exceeded α or not. As covariates, we made use of
the available covariates in our data that we deemed possible predictors of the losses, so as to
capture what the rating actually adds or misses. Examples include the information we have on

                                                14
FICO scores and LTV ratios. The available covariates were briefly listed in subsection 3.1 and
described in detail in section 2 of the on-line database appendix15 . We then estimate a linear
probability model, per linear regressing these observations Yi on the covariates Xi . Different
values for α generally result in different estimates.
   For the ratings AAA and AA, say, we define the gain from including covariates X compared
to the raw probability difference as

                                            E [|P (Loss > α|AAA, X) − P (Loss > α | AAA)|]
                   GainAAA,AA (α) =                                                                              (1)
                                                P (Loss > α | AAA) − P (Loss > α | AA)

where the outer expectation is taking an expectation over the random covariates X. We estimate
the numerator by the sample average of P̂ (Loss > α|AAA, Xi ) − P̂ (Loss > α | AAA) for all
AAA-rated securities i and the probability estimators explained above. We likewise define
GainAAA,A (α), GainAA,A (α), etc.. We define the probability of rating reversals for AAA-rated
securities to AA securities as

                 ReversalAAA,AA (α) = P (P (Loss > α | AAA, X) > P (Loss > α | AA))

where the outer probability is likewise taken as an expectation over the random covariates X.
We estimate Reversal(α) by calculating the fraction of all AAA-rated securities i, for which
P̂ (Loss > α | AAA, Xi ) exceeds P̂ (Loss > α | AA), with P̂ (·) denoting the estimator of P (·)
explained above. We likewise construct estimators for ReversalAAA,A (α), ReversalAA,A (α),
etc.. We explore different values for α to fully understand the landscape of these gains and
rating reversals.

                                               [Insert Table 8 about here]

                                             [Insert Table TA5 about here]

   Panel A of Table 8 reports estimates of the gains given by equation 1, for all the pairwise
comparisons between a given rating and ratings below it for investment grade RMBS. We see
that covariates did carry information that would have been useful to predict losses, and to
assign ratings, particularly for the AA, A, and BBB ratings. For AAA ratings, we some gains
from the covariates only for low values of alpha. The estimates of rating reversals is reported in
panel B of Table 8. It turns out that the value of α matters considerably. If α = 0, then we find
a 40 percent probability of rating reversal. To understand this, consider the probability of the
occurrence of any loss, as shown in table TA5. It turns out that AAA securities were actually
  15 For   a detailed list of the covariates employed, refer to MBS Project/Replication/DefaultsAnalysis/Step7


                                                                15
somewhat more likely to incur losses than AA securities: the overall fractions are 28 percent
versus 16 percent. We know already, however, that losses on AAA securities are typically small,
if they occur at all. Figure 2 shows that the distribution for AAA securities puts more weight
on small losses compared to the distribution for other investment grade securities. Thus, as α
is increased to, say, 10%, we find a rating reversal probability of only 3%.
   A loss threshold of α = 0 is perhaps very stringent to judge the appropriateness of the
rankings, especially in light of the crisis. Perhaps a loss threshold of α = 0.1 or 10%, for which
rating reversals are now rare, is quite large, in particular for highly rated securities, though
perhaps not dramatically large, given the unfolding of the crisis and given our purposes here.
Overall we judge that the rating agencies got the rankings about right, in particular for the
AAA-rated securities. We therefore summarize the findings from both exercises as our sixth
fact: the misrating for AAA securities was modest.
   This interpretation and these numbers come with a number of caveats, of course. First, the
construction of the securities often implies mechanically, that lower-ranked securities will be hit
with losses before that happens to higher-ranked securities. The ranking of securities for any
given deal is therefore very unlikely to be incorrect (assuming that rating agencies did indeed
check the loss sequencing): the comparison here is more interesting regarding the consistency
of rankings for securities across deals. Second, all our inference is conditional on the crisis of
2008: this is the only set of observations we got. We obviously cannot infer anything here
about the appropriateness of the ratings or their rankings across all potential futures from 2007
on forward. Finally, we have used the realized losses to estimate the weight on information
available a priori, in order to check for rating reversals. Obviously, the rating agencies did not
have that information at hand at the time when they had to give their assessments.


4.7    Fact 7: a home price boom was good for repayments.
Given our fourth fact, can we therefore conclude that ratings deteriorated over time and that
rating agencies became more generous? This certainly has been a theme in much of the con-
ventional narrative of the crisis. Given the evidence compiled for our forth fact, we cautiously
share the view that rating standards have indeed deteriorated in the run-up to the crisis. More-
over, these results are consistent with the findings of Adelino et al. (2015), who argue that
middle income borrowers had an increasing relative role in mortgage delinquencies and defaults
in the run-up to the crisis. These results are also consistent with the idea that securitization
contributed to bad lending by reducing incentives of lenders to carefully screen borrowers, and
that lower screening standards happened for relatively high FICO scores as those loans were
easier to securitize as argued by Keys et al. (2010).

                                                16
   The deterioration in performance could also have been due to bad luck, though. Consider
a security issued long before the peak of the house price boom, and compare it to an otherwise
identical security issued just at the peak. The former security is less likely to be subject to
losses, since the 2013 value of the underlying home relative to the original purchase price is
higher for the former compared to the latter. If one views the arrival of the house price decline
as a random event, unrelated to current level of house prices, one could argue that the resulting
higher losses for the later vintages were just a stroke of bad luck, and not the result of a more
liberal rating.

                                   [Insert Table 9 about here]

   To explore this issue, we exploit the cross-state variation in house price developments as well
as the state-specific performance of the RMBS. For each security in our data set, we know the
top five states in terms of the locations of the underlying mortgages, and the fraction of the total
principal invested there. In table 9, we estimate a linear regression of the cumulative loss as a
fraction of initial principal on the change in house prices, both during the run-up phase from
2000-2006 as well as the crash-phase from 2006-2009. To find the house price change relevant
for each RMBS, we have averaged the house price changes over the five top states in which
that security was invested, using the relative investment shares to calculate these averages. Our
preferred specifications are in columns (3) and (4). There, we find that the increase in house
prices decreased losses, but that the subsequent decrease in house prices increased losses for
the security. According to column (4), say, an additional increase of house prices from 2000 to
2006 decreased losses by 0.18 percent of principal, while an additional decline of house prices
from 2006 to 2009 by one percent increased losses by 0.53 percent. Column (3) provides a
rather similar answer. If only the price increase is included or if state dummies are included,
with the weights given by the investment shares, these effects (rather naturally) disappear. We
summarize the key insight with our seventh fact: controlling for a home price bust,
a home price boom was good for the repayment on these securities. The results
show that it is really the bust, not the boom, which adversely affected the repayments. As
an implication, securities issued at a later date were exposed to more of the bust and less to
the boom, making their losses more likely. Fact 4 holds up even after controlling for the house
price boom and bust. The results of the technical appendix shown in figures TA5 through TA8
control for house prices. It does seem, that the credit rating agencies did lower their standards,
notwithstanding the fact shown here that exposure to house prices did affect repayments and
may have been (at least partially) missed in the rating process.



                                                17
5     Returns
AAA securities in particular play a special role, in that they are considered to be safe invest-
ments. It should be clear from the facts presented so far, that they were not safe, as a group,
and that some indeed defaulted dramatically. A complementary perspective is to ask, how
much money investors gained or lost from holding these securities to maturity, i.e. to calculate
their rates of returns. This is the purpose of this section. Only investment-grade securities were
sold at par: so we focus on these.
    We have calculated these returns in two ways. The first is to calculate the internal rate of
return. This is the rate r that solves net present value equation

                                              T
                                              X i t + pt                   T VT
                                      P0 =                       t   +                               (2)
                                              t=1    (1 + r)             (1 + r)T

where P0 is the initial value of the security and equal to the principal amount, it is the monthly
cash flow corresponding to interest payments, pt is the monthly cash flow corresponding to
principal paydown, and T VT is the terminal value at some date T . The second is to calculate
the implied premium θ over a benchmark interest rate rt , solving

                                T
                                X             i t + pt                          T VT
                         P0 =                                  t +                           T   (3)
                                t=1       1 + rtt   bill
                                                           +θ             1 + rtt   bill
                                                                                           +θ

This perspective may be particularly appropriate for floating-interest rate mortgages. For the
benchmark rt , we are using the 3-month Treasury Bill. Note that we do not take into account
risk prices or term premia in either calculation.
    We set T to be December 2013, given our data set. We observe the original principal amount
P0 , payments it as well as pt , but we do need to make assumptions regarding the terminal value
T VT . The natural candidate for the terminal value is the outstanding principal balance at time
T , which is part of the monthly information that we have for each security. To that end, it is
important to understand how past losses affect the outstanding principal value in the data. In
a typical prospectus for an RMBS one can find the explanation: realized losses are applied to
reduce the principal amount and “if a loss has been allocated to reduce the principal amount
of your class of certificates, you will receive no payment in respect of that reduction.” From
this we conclude that the principal balance recorded in the data at date T already incorporates
losses on principal that have occured previously rather than leaving them on the book. However
it is possible that there needs to be some additional discounting of the outstanding principal
value, because additional losses may be expected in the future. We therefore examine three


                                                            18
different scenarios regarding the terminal value, and assume that all securities are valued at 80%,
90% and 100% of the principal outstanding as of December 2013. In the technical appendix,
we provide results for an additional three scenarios, to examine robustness. For the fourth
scenario, we assume that each security trades at a loss equal to the loss rate it has suffered up
to that point. For the fifth, we assume that each security trades at a loss equal to the mean
loss rate of the securities with the same original credit rating and same vintage. The sixth is
similar to the fifth, except for using the median loss rate rather than the mean. The overall
results did not seem to change much.

                                            [Insert Figure 5 about here]

                                            [Insert Table 10 about here]

                                            [Insert Table 11 about here]

   To provide a perspective for the (first) three scenarios shown here, we consulted information
provided by FINRA for the month of December 2013, see figure 5. In 2009, the Financial
Industry Regulatory Authority (FINRA) made a proposal to collect data for ABS, CDO, and
MBS securities.16 Now daily reports going back to May 2011 with the number of transactions,
trade volume, and statistics on transaction prices are publicly available.17 . From these reports
one can see that, as of December 2013, investment-grade securities were mostly trading with
prices above 90, and non-investment grade with prices above 75 and generally above 80. We
therefore consider our range from 80 to 100 percent to be reasonable.
   Table 10 presents results for the realized internal rate of return calculations, for the first
three scenarios regarding the terminal value. These results are echoed by the corresponding
premium calculations in table 11. It may therefore suffice to comment on the first of these two
tables. The most important result here may be that AAA securities provided an internal rate of
return of about 2.44% to 3.31%, depending on the scenario. It mattered quite a bit, whether the
mortgages were fixed rate or floating rate. For fixed rate mortgages, AAA securities returned
between 3.6 and 4.8 percent, depending on the market segment and assumptions regarding
the terminal value. For floating rate mortgages, AAA securities returned between 0.4 and
3.8 percent. These results show about a 2 percentage point realized premium of Prime over
Subprime securities. This may be surprising at first given that we showed that losses in subprime
securities were not particularly worse than in other segments and for AAA were actually lower.
One reason behind this is the fact that the fraction of floating rate bonds (almost 90%) in
  16 https://www.finra.org/newsroom/2009/finra-proposes-expanding-trace-reporting-asset-backed-securities
  17 Reports   are available and can be downloaded at http://tps.finra.org/idc-index.html


                                                            19
the subprime segment was higher than the fraction of floating rate bonds in the Alt-A (about
62%) and Prime (about 46%) segments. In a period of low interest rates like the one we
consider, floating rate bonds did worse than fixed rate bonds. Overall, though, these returns
and premia on AAA RMBS strike us as rather reasonable. It surely is an interesting challenge
to construct a theory around these realized returns, which despite being positive above the
risk free benchmark, the conventional narrative puts them at the heart of what resulted in
a disaster for the world-wide financial system. Finally, tables TA7, TA8, TA9, TA10 in the
technical appendix show calculations of the return premium based on individual securities as
opposed to pooling cash flows together.


6      Discussion and Conclusion
We have examined the payoff performance, up to the end of 2013, of non-agency residential
mortgage-backed securities (RMBS), issued up to 2008. For our analysis, we have created a
new and detailed data set on the universe of non-agency residential mortgage backed securities,
per carefully assembling source data from Bloomberg and other sources. We have compared
these payoffs to their ex-ante ratings as well as other characteristics. We have established seven
facts. Together, these facts call into question the conventional narrative, that improper ratings
of RMBS were a major factor in the financial crisis of 2008 as well as create an intriguing
quantitative challenge to theorists seeking to explain the meltdown of the world-wide financial
system due to the performance of highly rated RMBS.


References
Adelino, M., A. Schoar, and F. Severino (2015): “Loan Originations and Defaults in
    the Mortgage Crisis: The Role of the Middle Class,” Working Paper.

——— (2016): “Loan originations and defaults in the mortgage crisis: The role of the middle
    class,” The Review of Financial Studies, 29, 1635–1670.

——— (2017): “Dynamics of Housing Debt in the Recent Boom and Great Recession,” Tech.
    rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.

Albanesi, S., G. De Giorgi, and J. Nosal (2017): “Credit growth and the financial crisis:
    A new narrative,” Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.




                                               20
Ashcraft, A., P. Goldsmith-Pinkham, P. Hull, and J. Vickery (2011): “Credit
  Ratings and Security Prices in the Subprime MBS Market,” American Economic Review,
  101, 115–119.

Barnett-Hart, A. K. (2009): “The story of the CDO market meltdown: An empirical
  analysis,” Ph.D. thesis, Harvard University.

Beltran, D. O., L. Cordell, and C. P. Thomas (2013): “Asymmetric information and
  the death of ABS CDOs,” .

Bessembinder, H., W. F. Maxwell, and K. Venkataraman (2013): “Trading Activity
  and Transaction Costs in Structured Credit Products,” Financial Analysts Journal, 69, 55–
  67.

Boyarchenko, N., A. Fuster, and D. Lucca (2017): “Understanding mortgage spreads,”
  .

Chenghuan Sean, C. (2013): “Empirical Analysis of Credit Ratings Inflation as a Game of
  Incomplete Information,” Working Paper, Federal Reserve Board of Governors.

Chernenko, S., S. G. Hanson, and A. Sunderam (2014): “The rise and fall of demand
  for securitizations,” Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.

Cordell, L., Y. Huang, and M. Williams (2012): “Collateral Damage: Sizing and As-
  sessing the Subprime CDO Crisis,” Working Paper, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia.

Diep, P., A. L. Eisfeldt, and S. Richardson (2017): “The Cross Section of MBS Re-
  turns,” .

Gelman, A. and E. Loken (2014): “Ethics and Statistics: The AAA Tranche of Subprime
  Science,” Chance, 27, 51–56.

Keys, B. J., T. Mukherjee, A. Seru, and V. Vig (2009): “Financial regulation and
  securitization: Evidence from subprime loans,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 56, 700–
  720.

——— (2010): “Did Securitization Lead to Lax Screening? Evidence from Subprime Loans,”
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125, 307–362.

Keys, B. J., A. Seru, and V. Vig (2012): “Lender Screening and the Role of Securitization:
  Evidence from Prime and Subprime Mortgage Markets,” Review of Financial Studies, 25,
  2071–2108.

                                                 21
McDonald, R. and A. Paulson (2015): “AIG in Hindsight,” Working Paper 21108, Na-
  tional Bureau of Economic Research.

Piskorski, T., A. Seru, and J. Witkin (2015): “Asset Quality Misrepresentation by
  Financial Intermediaries: Evidence from the RMBS Market: Asset Quality Misrepresentation
  by Financial Intermediaries,” The Journal of Finance, 70, 2635–2678.

Stanton, R. and N. Wallace (2011): “The Bear’s Lair: Index Credit Default Swaps and
  the Subprime Mortgage Crisis,” Review of Financial Studies, 24, 3250–3280.

Vickery, J. I. and J. Wright (2013): “TBA trading and liquidity in the agency MBS
  market,” .




                                            22
7     Figures and Tables

Table 1: RMBS Database: Deals, Securities, Nominal Amounts by Year of Issuance
 This table reports some figures that describe the size of our database of Residential Mortgage Backed Securities by year of
 issuance. All the information comes from Bloomberg. The securities included in our final database were issued between 1987
 and 2013.


    Year     No. Deal Managers          No. Deals     No. MBS      Notional ($ Billion)    Average Deal Size ($ Million)
 1987 - 1999        35                     858          9,462             244.2                       284.6
    2000            20                     227          2,724              93.8                       413.2
    2001            23                     397          5,815             179.9                       453.1
    2002            30                     574          8,255             314.0                       547.1
    2003            30                     788         12,420             475.1                       603.0
    2004            30                    1,106        15,787             723.4                       654.1
    2005            29                    1,361        22,017            1,005.2                      738.5
    2006            39                    1,563        27,184            1,237.4                      791.7
    2007            35                    1,027        19,143             936.1                       911.5
    2008            20                     108          1,541             103.3                       956.4
    2009            17                     151          5,660             170.6                      1,129.9
    2010            17                     135          6,089             155.9                      1,154.5
    2011            13                     101          3,182              68.3                       676.5
    2012            11                     92           1,789             36.5                        396.9
    2013            13                     127          2,164              98.7                       776.9
  All Years         83                    8,615        143,232           5,842.3                      678.2




                                                            23
                                          Table 2: Database Variables
This table lists some of the data and variables that we gathered from Bloomberg and the 2013 Mortgage Market Statistical
Annual about each of the non-agency Residential Nortgage backed Securities in our data. Section 2 in the on-line data
appendix contains a detailed description of the variables in our dataset.



Security Identification                                   Credit Rating
Cusip ID                                                  Current and Original Ratings (5 agencies)
Deal Name                                                 Other Security Characteristics
Deal Manager                                              Credit Support at Issuance
Issuer Company                                            Original Principal Amount
Security Classification                                   Collateral Description
Deal Type (eg. CMBS, RMBS)                                Mortgage Purpose (% Equity Takeout, Refinance)
Collateral Type (eg. Home, Auto, Student)                 LTV Distribitution (min, max, mean, 25th, 50th,75th)
Collateral Type (eg. ARM vs FRM)                          Credit Score Distribution (min, max, mean, 25th, 50th,75th)
Agency Backed (yes, no)                                   Mortgage Size Distribution (min, max, mean, 25th, 50th,75th)
Agency (eg. Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac)                      MBS metrics 1: Weighted Average Coupon
Dates                                                     MBS metrics 2: Weighted Average Life
Issue Date                                                MBS metrics 3: Weighted Average Maturity
Pricing Date                                              Fraction of adjustable-rate (ARM) and fixed-rate (FRM) mortgages
Maturity Date                                             Occupancy (% of Owner, Investment, Vacation)
Security Description                                      Geographic Information
Bond type (e.g. Floater, Pass-through, Interrest Only)    Fraction of mortgages in top 5 states
Tranche Subordination Description                         Cash Flow and Losses
Coupon Type (e.g. Fixed, Floating)                        Monthly Interest and Prinicipal Payment
Coupon Frequency (e.g. Monthly)                           Monthly Outstanding balance
Coupon Index Rate (e.g. 3M-libor)                         Monthly Losses




         Table 3: Non-Agency RMBS 1987-2013: Credit Rating Composition
This table shows the total of principal amounts by credit rating. The credit rating corresponds to the rating assigned to a bond
upon issuance. If several ratings were given, we have taken an average. This table illustrates fact 1: The great majority of
non-agency RMBS securities were assigned a AAA rating upon issuance. The calculations in this table include all securities
in the database, even those issued after 2008.


                                         Rating               $ Billion Pct.
                                         AAA                    4,535.1 86.9
                                         AA                       297.0 5.7
                                         A                        212.3 4.1
                                         BBB                      118.4 2.3
                                         BB                        40.1 0.8
                                         B                         13.6 0.3
                                         CCC                         0.3 0.0
                                         CC                          0.6 0.0
                                         C                           3.3 0.1
                                         Rated                  5,220.5 91.7
                                         Not Rated                472.1 8.3




                                                              24
Figure 1: Distribution of Mean FICO Score, Loan Size, and LTV by Type of Loan

                         0.25
                                       Subprime
                          0.2          Alt-A
                                       Prime
             Frequency



                         0.15


                          0.1


                         0.05


                            0
                            500         550         600              650                   700              750              800        850
                                                                     Mean FICO Score


                          0.3                                                            0.7
                                                          Subprime                                         Subprime
                         0.25                                                            0.6
                                                          Alt-A                                            Alt-A
                                                          Prime                          0.5               Prime
                          0.2
             Frequency




                                                                             Frequency
                                                                                         0.4
                         0.15
                                                                                         0.3
                          0.1
                                                                                         0.2
                         0.05                                                            0.1

                            0                                                              0
                                0       1000       2000              3000                      0      20       40       60         80   100
                                    Mean Mortgage Loan Size                                                    Mean LTV


 This figure plots the distribution of the mean FICO score, the mean mortgage loan size and the mean loan to value ratio
(LTV) for Residential Mortgage Backed Securities issued between 2006 and 2012 and classified by type of mortgage backing
the securities. The classification is done based on information in the Statistical Annual while the data on scores, loan size and
LTV is from Bloomberg.




                  Table 4: RMBS Losses as of December 2013, by credit rating.
This table shows the principal amount at issuance as well as the cumulated losses, as of December 2013, broken down by
credit rating. We exclude all the MBS bonds for which the original principal amount is only a reference or that can distort
our computations. The excluded bonds include bonds with zero original balance, excess tranches, interest-only bonds, and Net
Interest Margin deals (NIM). Only bonds issued up to 2008 are part of the computations.



                                                    Principal Amount                               Losses     Percentage
                                    All RMBS                  4,965.6                              313.7              6.3
                                    AAA                       4,402.4                              94.9               2.2
                                    AA                         263.7                                87.4              33.1
                                    A                          144.9                                56.3              38.8
                                    BBB                        101.6                               47.7               46.9
                                    NIG                        53.1                                 27.9              52.6



                                                                        25
Table 5: RMBS Losses as of December 2013, by credit rating and mortgage type.
This table shows the principal amount at issuance as well as the cumulated losses, as of 2013, broken down by credit rating
and mortgage type (Prime, Alt-A, and Subprime).



                                            Principal Amount           Losses      Percentage
                         All Securities
                         Prime          1,238.7      37.5                              3.0
                         Alt-A          1,327.3     145.2                              10.9
                         Subprime       1,196.0     119.1                              10.0
                         AAA Rated Securities
                         Prime          1,172.7      14.8                               1.3
                         Alt-A          1,210.0      78.9                               6.5
                         Subprime        979.5        4.3                               0.4
                         Investment Grade Ex-AAA Securities
                         Prime            54.0       18.4                              34.0
                         Alt-A            96.5       55.3                              57.3
                         Subprime        203.9      104.8                              51.4
                         Non-Investment Grade Securities
                         Prime            12.0        4.3                              36.2
                         Alt-A            20.8       10.9                              52.7
                         Subprime         12.7       10.0                              78.7




                                                           26
            Table 6: Principal-Weighted Losses in RMBS and Credit Ratings
This table shows regressions of the cumulative loss as fraction of initial principal as of December 2013 on credit rating dummy
variables. The regressions are weighted by the principal dollar amount upon issuance of each RMBS. The constant of the
regression corresponds to AAA securities, and we have renamed the constant as AAA. The first column shows the results for
the entire sample, i.e. all securities issued since 1987 through 2008. The next 3 columns split the sample by year of issuance
into three periods.



   Credit Rating                Full Sample              Before 2003              2003 - 2005              2006-2008
   AAA                            0.0218***                   0.0002                 0.0034***              0.0483***
                                   (0.0006)                  (0.0001)                 (0.0007)               (0.0011)
   AA                             0.3096***                    0.001                 0.1180***              0.5091***
                                   (0.0025)                  (0.0008)                 (0.0028)               (0.0043)
   A                              0.3620***                 0.0055***                0.2000***              0.6572***
                                   (0.0033)                  (0.0008)                 (0.0036)               (0.0062)
   BBB                            0.4480***                 0.0334***                0.3152***              0.6655***
                                   (0.0040)                  (0.0013)                 (0.0041)               (0.0072)
   BB                             0.4923***                 0.0653***                0.4886***              0.5136***
                                   (0.0064)                  (0.0029)                 (0.0075)               (0.0102)
   B                              0.5812***                 0.0938***                0.6989***              0.5619***
                                   (0.0117)                  (0.0042)                 (0.0147)               (0.0182)
   CCC                            0.7360***                 0.4125***                0.4102***              0.9465***
                                   (0.0867)                  (0.0558)                 (0.0987)               (0.1361)
   CC                             0.2036***                   0.1364                   0.0251               0.2005***
                                   (0.0562)                  (0.0964)                 (0.1228)               (0.0719)
   C or Below                     0.3863***                 0.0661***                0.6607***              0.3604***
                                   (0.0225)                  (0.0227)                 (0.1665)               (0.0274)
   Observations                      93,902                   19,230                   38,381                  36,291
   R-squared                         0.3217                   0.0852                   0.2972                   0.485
   Standard errors in parentheses
   ∗p < 0.10, ∗ ∗ p < 0.05, ∗ ∗ ∗p < 0.01




                                                             27
                          Table 7: Losses and Credit Ratings by Vintage Group and Type of Mortgage Loan
     This table presents principal-weighted regressions of the cumulative loss as fraction of initial principal as of December 2013 on credit rating dummy variables for all the
     RMBS in our database issued through 2008 classified by the type of mortgage loan underlying the securities and by 3 vintage groups.


                                            Prime                                              Alt-A                                         Subprime
       Rating            Before 2003      2003 - 2005      2006 - 2008      Before 2003      2003 - 2005     2006 - 2008        Before 2003 2003 - 2005 2006 - 2008
       AAA                   0.0000         0.0032***       0.0259***           0.0002         0.0076***       0.0953***            0.0004          0.0013        0.0068***
                            (0.0001)         (0.0008)        (0.0015)          (0.0003)         (0.0015)        (0.0015)           (0.0008)        (0.0018)        (0.0020)
       AA                    0.0001         0.2242***       0.5841***          0.0045**        0.2097***       0.7824***            0.0007        0.0348***       0.6260***
                            (0.0007)         (0.0052)        (0.0093)          (0.0019)         (0.0060)        (0.0080)           (0.0040)        (0.0061)        (0.0061)
       A                     0.0006         0.2837***       0.3071***         0.0080***        0.3620***       0.7260***          0.0151***       0.1566***       0.7600***
                            (0.0011)         (0.0075)        (0.0117)          (0.0027)         (0.0094)        (0.0119)           (0.0050)        (0.0077)        (0.0078)
       BBB                 0.0039***        0.3065***       0.2957***         0.0267***        0.4728***       0.5161***          0.0718***       0.3609***       0.8654***
                            (0.0013)         (0.0088)        (0.0146)          (0.0033)         (0.0115)        (0.0117)           (0.0058)        (0.0091)        (0.0094)
       BB                  0.0163***        0.2850***       0.2303***         0.0499***        0.6415***       0.3546***          0.1113***       0.5755***       0.8861***
                            (0.0021)         (0.0095)        (0.0143)          (0.0054)         (0.0173)        (0.0144)           (0.0199)        (0.0191)        (0.0166)
       B                   0.0336***        0.7159***       0.8828***         0.0863***        0.7765***       0.4816***          0.2448***       0.5133***       0.7463***
                            (0.0026)         (0.0165)        (0.0344)          (0.0075)         (0.0254)        (0.0193)           (0.0419)        (0.0580)        (0.0495)
       CCC                      -           0.2474**        0.9484***         0.9710***        0.6840***       0.8850**                -           0.3836**       0.9931***
                            (0.0754)        (0.1091)         (0.2731)          (0.0866)         (0.1954)       (0.3523)            (0.0977)        (0.1949)        (0.1512)
       CC                       -                0.0109          -                 -                -          0.6322***               -            0.1189             -
                            (0.1109)            (0.0951)     (0.2628)          (0.1027)         (0.0977)        (0.1078)           (0.1027)        (0.3823)        (0.5566)
       C or Below               -           0.7679***         0.9687          0.4963***             -          0.3112***               -            0.3775         0.9932**
                            (0.1215)         (0.1359)        (0.5928)          (0.0449)         (0.0219)        (0.0241)           (0.1369)        (0.3712)        (0.5020)




28
       Observations           4,095             13,366        8,015             2,908            8,226           16,001             1,363           6,028           11,314
       R-squared             0.0554             0.3468       0.4182             0.1571           0.4329          0.4975             0.1432          0.3217          0.7052
       Weighted                Yes               Yes           Yes               Yes              Yes             Yes                Yes             Yes             Yes
       Standard errors in parentheses
       ∗p < 0.10, ∗ ∗ p < 0.05, ∗ ∗ ∗p < 0.01
                                          Table 8: Credit Rating Reversals
Panel A presents the calculation of equation (1). Panel B presents the incidence of credit rating reversals. Using our estimated
probability model that uses the covariates in our database we compute the fraction of securities of a given credit rating for
which we would have predicted a probability of loss bigger than the probability of loss of a lower credit rating if we had had
all the information upon issuance. For example, for AAA that switched to AA we compute the fraction of RMBS such that
P (Loss > α|AAA, X) > G(α) = P (Loss > α|AA)).



                                     Panel A: Gains from Including Other Covariates
                          α=0              α = 0.05         α = 0.1         α = 0.25       α = 0.5       α = 0.75         α = 0.9
      Principal Value Weighted
      AAA vs AA            1.65              0.47            0.24             0.12          0.08           0.04             0.03
      AAA vs A             2.26              0.58            0.28             0.14          0.08           0.04             0.03
      AAA vs BBB           0.82              0.32            0.17             0.09          0.06           0.03             0.02
      AA vs A              -8.52             -6.76           -6.69           -11.29        -20.50         -59.50      -   -699.95
      AA vs BBB            2.27              2.54            2.77             2.59          2.79           2.62             2.54
      A vs BBB             1.90              1.94            2.07             2.32          2.82           3.02             3.11

                                          Panel B: Credit Rating Reversals
                                α=0             α = 0.05        α = 0.1         α = 0.25       α = 0.5       α = 0.75         α = 0.9
  Principal Value Weighted
  AAA switched to AA               49.9              13.9             1.0          0.3            0.3           0.0             0.0
  AAA switched to A                54.5              21.4             2.3          0.3            0.3           0.0             0.0
  AAA switched to BBB              31.2               2.8             0.4          0.3            0.2           0.0             0.0
  AA switched to A                 75.4              73.2            72.8         71.7           69.0          67.4            66.1
  AA switched to BBB               63.8              63.1            63.1         62.8           60.9          59.2            57.8
  A switched to BBB                67.4              67.7            67.9         68.1           68.5          67.3            65.4




                                                                      29
                                    Figure 2: Distribution of Loss Size for All RMBS


                                             Panel A: All RMBS                                                      Panel B: By Credit Rating
                          0.7                                                                             1                                              0.5
                                                                                                                           AAA Loss < 5%
                                                                                                                           IG Ex-AAA Loss < 5%
                                                                                                                           Non-IG Loss < 5%
                          0.6                                                                                              AAA
                                                                                                                           Investment Grade Ex-AAA
                                                                                                                           Non-InvestmentGrade


                          0.5
                                                                                Fraction With Loss < 5%




                                                                                                                                                               Fraction With Loss > 5%
                          0.4
              Frequency




                          0.3




                          0.2




                          0.1




                            0                                                                             0                                              0
                                0      0.2       0.4   0.6       0.8   1                                      0      0.2     0.4      0.6     0.8    1
                                    Loss as a Fraction of Principal                                               Loss as a Fraction of Principal


Panel A presents the distribution of cumulative losses as of December 2013 as a fraction of the original principal amount
for all the RMBS in our database issued from 1987 through 2008. Panel B shows the distribution of cumulative losses as of
December 2013 as a fraction of the original principal amount for different groups of RMBS based on the type of the underlying
mortgage loans.




                                                                           30
                                          Figure 3: Ex-Ante vs Ex-Post Ideal Ratings



                              90
                                                                                                   Ex-Ante Rating
                                                                                                   Ex-Post Ideal Rating
                              80


                              70


                              60
 Fraction of Securities (%)




                              50


                              40


                              30


                              20


                              10


                               0
                               AAA   AA          A        BBB             BB               B              CCC          CCC below
                                                        Credit Rating Level


In this figure, for each security, we compare the original credit rating (which we call here Ex-Ante Rating) to the rating that
ex-post we would have assigned given the security’s realized loss using Moody’s idealized Expected Loss Table by Rating, which
we present in Figure TA9 in the technical appendix. The solid line shows the fraction of securities that was assigned each
rating level. The dotted line shows the fraction of securities that should have gotten each rating level based on their loss as a
fraction of original principal. The calculations are all weighted by dollar value of principal




                                                                31
                              Figure 4: ”Right” and ”Wrong” Ratings Based on Moody’s Ideal Ratings



                              90
                                       Correct Rating
                                       Inflated Rating
                              80       Deflated Rating



                              70


                              60
 Fraction of Securities (%)




                              50


                              40


                              30


                              20


                              10


                               0
                               AAA      AA               A     BBB          BB              B              CCC          CCC below
                                                             Credit Rating Level


This figure compares the original rating of each security to the rating we would have assigned ex-post based on Moody’s idealized
Expected Loss Table by Rating. If the two ratings coincide, we say that the security was correctly rated. If the original rating
is higher than what it should have been based on realized losses, we say that the security had an inflated rating. Finally, if the
original rating is lower than what it should have been based on realized losses, we say that the security had a deflated rating.
The calculations are all weighted by dollar value of principal.




                                                                     32
                Figure 5: Summary Statistics of Prices Collected by FINRA


                   Investment Grade                                             Non-Investment Grade
        105                                                        100

                                                                     90
        100
                                                                     80
Price




         95                                                          70

                                                                     60
         90                         Weighted Mean
                                    25th Pctile
                                                                     50
                                    75th Pctile
         85                                                          40
          2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017                          2011    2012    2013    2014     2015    2016    2017


              Investment Grade Pre-2005                                    Investment Grade 2005-2007
        105                                                        105

        100                                                        100

         95                                                          95
Price




         90                                                          90

         85                                                          85

         80                                                          80
          2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017                          2011    2012    2013    2014     2015    2016    2017




This figure shows summary statistics of daily transaction prices collected by the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority from
May 2011 through May 2016 on Non-Agency MBS. The plots at the top break up the statistics by Investment Grade and
Non-Investment Grade, while the plots at the bottom break up the statistics by groups of vintages only for Investment Grade
securities. FINRA produces this information daily since 2011. The lines in the different figures correspond to 22-day moving
averages (daily monthly averages) of the daily values reported by FINRA. Here we report the principal weighted average and
the 25th and 75th percentiles of the average transaction price. The daily reports are available here http: // tps. finra. org/
idc-index. html




                                                             33
                                   Table 9: House Prices and Loss Rates
This table presents linear regressions to study the relation between the the cumulative loss as fraction of initial principal as of
December 2013 and changes in house prices.         The variables on the RHS include the variables ∆HP 2000-2006 and ∆HP
2006-2009 which is the appreciation of house prices between 2000 and 2006 and between 2006 and 2009 in the five states that
for each MBS have the highest share of the underlying mortgages.


                                             (1)              (2)              (3)             (4)              (5)
          ∆HP 2000 - 2006                0.073***                         -0.218***        -0.178***         -0.021
                                           0.003                            0.010            0.012            0.027
          ∆HP 2006 - 2009                                -0.203***         -0.63***        -0.532***        0.342***
                                                           0.006             0.021           0.020            0.061
          AA                                                                               0.426***         0.423***
                                                                                             0.003            0.003
          A                                                                                0.493***         0.488***
                                                                                             0.004            0.004
          BBB                                                                              0.555***         0.55***
                                                                                             0.005           0.005
          BB                                                                                 0.5***         0.492***
                                                                                              0.007           0.007
          B                                                                                0.599***         0.594***
                                                                                             0.013            0.012
          CCC                                                                              0.749***         0.74***
                                                                                             0.087           0.086
          CC                                                                               0.496***         0.493***
                                                                                             0.089            0.087
          C or Below                                                                       0.324***         0.305***
                                                                                             0.023            0.022
          Subprime                                                                         0.009***          -0.003*
                                                                                             0.002            0.002
          Alt-A                                                                            0.049***         0.032***
                                                                                             0.002            0.002
          Contstant                      0.011***           -0.001        0.019***         -0.038***        0.059***
                                           0.002            0.002           0.002            0.005            0.007
          State Dummies                      No              No               No               No             Yes
          Weighted Dummies                   No              No               No               No             Yes
          Observations                     93,902          93,902           93,902           71,316          71,316
          R-squared                        0.0059          0.0107           0.0156           0.4345          0.4513
          Weighted                          Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes
          Standard errors in parentheses
          ∗p < 0.10, ∗ ∗ p < 0.05, ∗ ∗ ∗p < 0.01


                                                               34
Table 10: Internal Rate of Return Calculations From Issuance to 2013 by Credit
                 Rating and for AAA also by Type of Mortgage.
This table presents Internal Rate of Return (IRR) calculations for the RMBS in our database by type of mortgage loan. The
IRR solves equation 2. Here we report annualized rates. We present the computation under different assumptions about the
terminal value of each security as of December 2013. The 3 columns assume that the security is sold at 80%, 90% and 100%
of the outstanding principal amount as of December 2013 respectively. The calculation was done by pooling together the cash
flowsof all bonds and creating a super bond.



                   Return Statistic                     80% TV          90% TV          100% TV
                   By Credit Rating
                   AAA                                     2.44             2.89             3.31
                   AA                                      -7.90           -7.01            -6.21
                   A                                      -10.92          -10.10            -9.35
                   BBB                                    -13.56          -12.80           -12.11
                   Inv. Grade Ex AAA                       -9.01           -8.15            -7.38
                   By Type of Mortgage
                   AAA Prime                                3.61            3.98             4.33
                   AAA SubPrime                             1.61            2.14             2.62
                   AAA AltA                                 1.37            2.01             2.61
                   Fixed Rate MBS
                   AAA Prime Fixed                          4.25            4.56             4.84
                   AAA SubPrime Fixed                       4.86            4.96             5.04
                   AAA AltA Fixed                           3.64            4.13             4.58
                   Floating Rate MBS
                   AAA Prime Floating                       3.03            3.45             3.83
                   AAA SubPrime Floating                    1.45            1.97             2.44
                   AAA AltA Floating                        0.42            1.12             1.76




                                                           35
Table 11: Premium θ From Issuance to 2013 by Credit Rating AAA also by Type
                                of Mortgage.
This table presents premium calculations for the RMBS in our database by credit rating using the 3-month Tbill rate as
benchmark. The premium IRR solves equation 3. We present the computation under different assumptions about the terminal
value of each security as of December 2013. The 3 columns assume that the security is sold at 80%, 90% and 100% of the
outstanding principal amount as of December 2013 respectively. The calculation was done by pooling together the cash flows
of all bonds and creating a super bond.



                   Return Statistic                     80% TV         90% TV          100% TV
                   By Credit Rating
                   AAA                                     0.84             1.39             1.86
                   AA                                      -9.45           -8.61            -7.66
                   A                                      -12.37           -11.6            -10.9
                   BBB                                    -15.16           -14.3           -13.56
                   Inv. Grade Ex AAA                      -10.56           -9.75            -8.83
                   By Type of Mortgage
                   AAA Prime                                2.16           2.48             2.78
                   AAA SubPrime                             0.06           0.54             1.17
                   AAA AltA                                -0.23           0.51             1.16
                   Fixed Rate MBS
                   AAA Prime Fixed                          2.7            2.96             3.39
                   AAA SubPrime Fixed                      3.41            3.46             3.49
                   AAA AltA Fixed                          2.04            2.63             3.13
                   Floating Rate MBS
                   AAA Prime Floating                      3.01            3.42             3.84
                   AAA SubPrime Floating                   1.46            1.92             2.39
                   AAA AltA Floating                       0.4             1.09             1.77




                                                           36
