                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      DOES SCIENTIST IMMIGRATION HARM US SCIENCE? AN EXAMINATION
                             OF SPILLOVERS

                                         Ajay Agrawal
                                         John McHale
                                          Alex Oettl

                                      Working Paper 24519
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24519


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    April 2018




We thank Bill Kerr, Joshua Gans, Avi Goldfarb, Will Strange, Scott Stern, William Lincoln, and
Mercedes Delgado as well as seminar participants at Universidad Carlos III de Madrid, Harvard,
and National University of Ireland, Galway for helpful comments. This research was funded by
the Centre for Innovation and Entrepreneurship at the Rotman School of Management, University
of Toronto, the Martin Prosperity Institute, the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council
of Canada, Science Foundation Ireland, and the Kauffman Junior Faculty Fellowship. All errors
are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Ajay Agrawal, John McHale, and Alex Oettl. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Does Scientist Immigration Harm US Science? An Examination of Spillovers
Ajay Agrawal, John McHale, and Alex Oettl
NBER Working Paper No. 24519
April 2018
JEL No. F22,J61,O33,O34

                                         ABSTRACT

The recruitment of foreign scientists enhances US science through an expanded workforce but
could also cause harm by displacing better connected domestic scientists, thereby reducing
localized knowledge spillovers. We develop a model in which a sufficient condition for the
absence of overall harm is that immigrant scientists generate at least the same level of localized
spillovers as the domestic scientists they displace. To test this condition, we conduct an
experiment in which each immigrant hypothetically displaces an appropriately matched domestic
scientist. Overall, we do not find evidence that immigrant scientists harm US science by
crowding out better-connected domestic scientists.

Ajay Agrawal                                    Alex Oettl
Rotman School of Management                     Scheller College of Business
University of Toronto                           Georgia Institute of Technology
105 St. George Street                           800 West Peachtree Street, NW
Toronto, ON M5S 3E6                             Atlanta, GA 30308
CANADA                                          Alexander.Oettl@scheller.gatech.edu
and NBER
ajay.agrawal@rotman.utoronto.ca

John McHale
108 Cairnes Building
School of Business and Economics
National University of Ireland, Galway
Ireland
john.mchale@nuigalway.ie
1     Introduction

Innovation relies on access to knowledge. Thus, knowledge flow patterns influence innovation
and hence productivity and economic growth. As a result, factors that influence knowledge
flow patterns are important to understand. One such factor is immigration. In particular,
immigrants may have different types of peer networks that influence how their knowledge
travels across time and space. An extensive empirical literature documents that knowledge
flows are geographically localized (Jaffe et al., 1993; Thompson and Fox-Kean, 2005) and
that this is likely because knowledge flow patterns are influenced by intricate networks of
peers who are often co-located (Agrawal et al., 2006; Waldinger, 2010). Thus, it’s plausible
that if immigrant scientists displace domestic scientists, then they could cause overall harm
to US science by generating fewer localized spillovers because immigrants’ relationships and
thus knowledge flows are more internationally-oriented. This could occur even if immigrants
are equally or more productive than the domestic scientists they displace. We examine the
possibility of differential knowledge flows here.
    In recent decades, US science has become increasingly internationalized, with rapid
growth in the number of foreign-born scientists and engineers (Stephan, 2012). Between
2003 and 2013, the number of immigrant scientists increased from 0.7 million to 1.1 million
(Lan et al., 2015). In the physical sciences, the number of immigrant scientists increased
by 17,000 while the number of US-born scientists actually decreased by 13,000 (Table 1).
With a downward-sloping demand curve for scientists and an upward sloping supply curve
for US-born scientists, standard market analysis predicts that there will be displacement of
US-born scientists (Borjas, 2007; Borjas and Doran, 2012).
    A central theme of the economics of immigration literature has been the measurement of
wage and employment displacement effects (Borjas, 2005; Kerr and Kerr, 2011; Peri, 2012;
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine, 2016). A large body of work has



                                               1
also explored the aggregate productivity effects of immigration. In the “canonical model”
(see, e.g., Borjas, 2014), the existence of aggregate gains from immigration depend on the
displacement of native workers. The relatively small aggregate gain implied by this model
has led researchers to look for evidence of externalities, especially in the form of knowledge
spillovers (Hunt and Gauthier-Loiselle, 2010; Kerr and Lincoln, 2010; Peri, 2012; Peri et
al., 2013). This has in turn led to an emphasis on peer networks that support knowledge
exchange, work that connects to the large body of evidence that documents the importance of
local knowledge spillovers (Freeman et al., 2015; Agrawal et al., 2015). But if local networks
are critical to knowledge exchange within US science, an inflow of immigrants that displaces
native workers could disrupt local knowledge networks if the immigrants are less connected
to US science than the domestic scientists they displace. This raises an intriguing additional
possibility of harm: US science suffers because immigrants are less well-connected to US
science than the native born they displace. Essentially, scientist immigration could weaken
the domestic knowledge networks that are critical to US scientific advancement.
   We begin by developing a simple model of the market for scientists. A sufficient condition
for the absence of immigration-induced harm to domestic science (as opposed to domestic
scientists) is that immigrant scientists generate as least the same level of localized spillovers
to the US scientific community as the domestic scientists they displace. In other words,
there is no differential in the localized spillovers generated by immigrant versus domestic
scientists. Next, we test this condition by conducting a hypothetical experiment in which
each immigrant scientist is assumed to fully displace an appropriately matched US scientist.
We then compare the level of citations by the US scientific community to publications by
the now-US-residing immigrant scientist versus the matched (hypothetically displaced) US
domestic scientist.
   In the model, the combination of displacement and differential spillovers could harm US
science. However, empirically, when we compare the relative citation patterns of domestic


                                               2
and immigrant scientists, we find that although the US scientific community is much less
likely to cite the matched immigrant while they are in their original home country – the
differential in spillovers is significant pre-immigration – their propensity to do so increases
dramatically after the scientist immigrates to the US.1 In fact, the US scientific community
is equally likely to cite an immigrant and a domestic scientist after the immigrant has moved
to the US. In the context of our model, this absence of differential spillovers is a sufficient
condition for the absence of harm. It is important to note that these are aggregate results.
We do observe lower spillovers to the US scientific community from immigrants who move
to universities with more co-nationals and from those who arrive from non-English speaking
countries.
       We further extend our analysis to focus on scientists in the right tail of the productivity
distribution: “star scientists.” A growing literature within the economics of science reports
evidence that stars generate a disproportionate level of knowledge externalities (Azoulay
et al., 2010; Waldinger, 2010; Oettl, 2012). With this subsample of elite scientists, the
immigrant-generated spillover deficit disappears even more rapidly. In fact, soon after arriv-
ing, star immigrants generate more localized spillovers than their domestic peers on average.
       We structure the remainder of the paper as follows. In the next section we develop a
simple model of the market for scientific labor that provides a useful framework for ex-
amining the welfare implications of scientist immigration. The model allows for domestic
scientist displacement and differential spillovers from domestic versus immigrant scientists.
We describe our empirical strategy in Section 4 and our data and matching methodology in
Section 5. We present our results in Section 6. We conclude in Section 7 with a discussion
of the limitations of our findings.
   1
    We define an immigrant scientist as one who publishes at least their first paper in a country other than
the US and then at some later point begins publishing in the US. We define a domestic scientist as one who
publishes their first paper in the US and then continues to publish in the US. Thus, a domestic scientist
may be foreign-born. These definitions are appropriate for our purpose as we are concerned with scientists’
social networks rather than their country of origin.



                                                     3
2       A Model of the Market for Scientists with Displace-

        ment and Differential Spillovers

We develop a simple model of the market for scientists in a given country and examine
factors influencing the social welfare implications of immigration. The model allows for the
displacement – or “crowding out” – of domestic scientists as a result of the immigration
of scientists. We adopt the ex ante social welfare perspective of the receiving country and
thus ignore the welfare gains to immigrant scientists. Social welfare is thus measured by
aggregate social surplus accruing to non-immigrant domestic residents; we do not focus on
the distribution of that surplus. The model also allows for possible differential spillovers
from domestic and immigrant scientists. We show it is possible for domestic social welfare
to be harmed by immigration as a result of displacement if the difference between domestic
and immigrant spillovers is large enough, even if immigration expands the overall size of
the active scientific workforce. However, we show that a sufficient condition for immigration
to improve domestic social welfare is that there is no difference in the size of per-scientist
spillovers between domestic and immigrant scientists.


2.1     Basic market setup

We begin with specifications for labor supply and labor demand in the market for scientific
labor. For simplicity, we assume that the units of labor are homogenous and each unit
is a working scientist, although we later allow for differential spillovers between domestic
and immigrant labor units.2 The supply of domestic scientists, Lsdomestic , is a positive linear
function of the wage, w:
    2
     The model is easily extended to allow for broader heterogeneity by defining labor units in efficiency
(i.e., productivity-adjusted) units. Spillovers then also would be measured per efficiency unit, so that more
productive scientists are assumed to generate more spillovers.




                                                     4
                                           Lsdomestic = φ0 + φ1 w.                                          (1)

       Immigrant labor units, I, are supplied perfectly inelastically3 (possibly due to visa-related
limitations), so the total supply of labor is:4


                                          Lstotal = φ0 + φ1 w + I.                                          (2)

       Total labor demand, Ld , is a negative function of the wage:


                                              Ld = θ0 − θ1 w.                                               (3)

       The inverse of the labor demand function is also the marginal private value function.
However, we also assume that there are positive spillovers associated with each unit of
scientific labor employed. The per-scientist spillover (or externality) is equal to z (≥ 0),
which is initially common across domestic and immigrant scientists. The marginal social
value relationship is then given by:


                                                    1
                                         M SV =        (θ0 − L) + z.                                        (4)
                                                    θ1


2.2       Baseline social surplus in the absence of immigration

As a preliminary step to establishing the effects of immigration on the market for scientific
labor, we first examine the market equilibrium and social welfare in a no-immigration base-
line. We graph the market equilibrium in Figure 1. The equilibrium wage and employment
   3
      The assumption here is that the number of immigrants admitted is determined by a government policy
choice (e.g. a cap on visas that are issued) and thus the number admitted is not responsive to the wage.
However, all the qualitative results of the model are the same if we assume that the supply curve of immigrants
is upward sloping. In particular, it remains true that a sufficient condition for the absence of harm is that
there is that there is no difference in the domestic spillovers from domestic and immigrant scientists.
    4
      In an efficiency-unit version of the model, the level of immigration is also measured in efficiency units.


                                                       5
levels are:


                                                      θ 0 − φ0
                                              w∗ =             .                            (5)
                                                      φ1 + θ1


                                                    φ0 θ1 + φ1 θ0
                                            L∗ =                  .                         (6)
                                                      φ1 + θ1

   Total social surplus from trade in the scientific labor market is the area between the
inverse labor supply curve and marginal social value curve up to the equilibrium quantity of
labor. This surplus is equal to:

                              Z    L∗                            
                          ∗         1                  1
                        S =           (θ0 − L) + z − (L − φ0 ) dL.
                             0     θ1                  φ1
                                                                                      (7)
                              φ0 θ1 + φ1 θ0      φ0 θ1 + φ1 θ0
                          =                                      +z .
                                φ1 + θ1              2φ1 θ1
   The total social surplus is given by the sum of areas A, B, and C in Figure 1. The
existence of the positive externality means that the market equilibrium employment level is
lower than the efficient (i.e., social-surplus-maximizing) level, where the latter is determined
by the intersection between the labor supply curve and the marginal social value curve.


2.3     Social surplus with immigration but with identical spillovers

        for domestic and immigrant scientists

We next allow for positive immigration but initially assume that spillovers, z, are identical
for domestic and immigrant scientists. We graph this case in Figure 2. The new equilibrium
wage and employment levels are:


                                                    θ0 − φ0 − I
                                            w∗∗ =               .                           (8)
                                                      φ1 + θ1



                                                       6
                                                 φ0 θ1 + φ1 θ0 + φ1 I
                                         L∗∗ =                        .                     (9)
                                                       φ1 + θ1

   It is also useful to identify the employment level of domestic scientists at the new equi-
librium with immigration:


                                                           φ0 θ1 + φ1 θ0 − φ1 I
                             L∗∗∗ = φ0 + φ1 w∗∗ =                               .          (10)
                                                                 θ1 + φ1

   Notice that the domestic displacement is equal to:


                                                             φ1
                                             L∗ − L∗∗∗ =           I.                      (11)
                                                           φ1 + θ1

   There is no displacement if φ1 is equal to zero, so that the domestic labor supply is
perfectly inelastic. To determine total social surplus, it is useful to separate out the surplus
due to domestic versus immigrant scientists. Using Equation (10), the part due to domestic
scientists is given by:

                              Z   L∗∗∗                                 
                 ∗∗                    1                    1
                Sdomestic   =             (θ0 − L) + z − (L − φ0 ) dL
                                       θ1                 φ
                              0
                                                       1                        
                                φ0 θ1 + φ1 θ0 − φ1 I      φ0 θ1 + φ1 θ0          I
                            =                                               +z+            (12)
                                      φ1 + θ1                 2φ1 θ1            2θ1
                                                                    
                                        φ1 z                  φ1
                            = S∗ −               I−                      I 2,
                                      φ1 + θ1           2θ1 (φ1 + θ1 )
   where the last line makes use of Equation (7).
   Because we are taking the perspective of the welfare of the receiving country, we exclude
the surplus accruing directly to immigrant scientists. Domestic social surplus accruing from
immigrants is thus the difference between the marginal social value curve and the post-
immigration wage line (Equation (8)), where it is assumed that immigrants are the marginal
labor suppliers. This surplus is given by:



                                                       7
                                                  Z    L∗∗                     
                                  ∗∗                      1                  ∗∗
                                 Simmigrant     =            (θ0 − L) + z − w ) dL.
                                                   L∗∗∗   θ1
                                                                                                                                  (13)
                                                           1
                                                = zI +           I 2.
                                                          2θ1
   Total social surplus is found by summing the two components. After some cancellation,
this yields:

                                                                                                               
                 ∗∗           ∗∗              ∗∗                 ∗             θ1 z                     1
                Stotal   =   Sdomestic   +   Simmigrant   =S +                             I+                         I 2.          (14)
                                                                             φ1 + θ1                2(φ1 + θ1 )

   Noting that total social surplus depends positively on both the level and the square of
the level of immigration, the surplus is increasing at an increasing rate with the level of
immigration. The size of the gain will also depend positively on the size of the per-unit
spillover, z, with a positive interaction between the size of the spillover and the level of
immigration. The gain in social surplus is shown by the area enclosed by the dark black line
in Figure 2.


2.4     Social surplus with immigration but with differential spillovers

        for domestic and immigrant scientists

We next examine the case where the spillover from domestic scientists, z D (≥ 0), differs from
the spillover from immigrant scientists, z I (≥ 0), where it is assumed that z D ≥ z I . The total
social surplus is now:



                                                              θ1 z I − φ1 (z D − z I )
                                                                                                                     
    ∗∗           ∗∗               ∗∗               ∗                                                         1
   Stotal   =   Sdomestic    +   Simmigrant    =S +                                             I+                           I 2.   (15)
                                                                      φ1 + θ1                            2(φ1 + θ1 )

   Compared to the case of equal spillovers, an examination of Figure 3 shows a loss of
social surplus on units that would have been supplied by domestic scientists in the absence

                                                                     8
of displacement. The lower spillovers from immigrant scientists also reduces the size of the
gain from immigration, although there is still a direct gain in social surplus that is increasing
non-linearly in the level of immigration. The overall impact on social surplus will depend
on the relative sizes of these gains and losses. If the gap between z D and z I is large enough,
it is possible that the displacement of domestic scientists reduces social surplus overall,
notwithstanding the larger total size of the scientific workforce.
   We now can identify from Equation (15) two distinct sufficient conditions for immigration
                                                                                 ∗∗
not to reduce domestic social surplus given any level of immigration (i.e., for Stotal ≥ S ∗ ).
First, there will be no harm if there is no domestic displacement, i.e., φ1 = 0. Second, and
central to the empirical part of the paper, there will be no harm if there is no difference
between the domestic and immigrant spillover, i.e., z D − z I = 0.
   Using Equation (15), we also can identify the necessary and sufficient condition for the
absence of harm from immigration. This condition is:


                                    φ1 z D
                                                                    
                               I                           1
                              z ≥            −                           I.                 (16)
                                  (φ1 + θ1 )           2(φ1 + θ1 )

   The “break-even” level of immigrant spillover is then the level of z I at which Equation
(16) holds with equality. We graph the break-even in Figure 4 as a function of the level of
immigration. The break-even level is declining in the level of immigration, reaching zero at
an immigration level of 2φ1 z D . Given that the size of the immigrant spillover is assumed to be
bounded from below at zero (i.e., the spillover is not negative), any immigration level above
this level is associated with a net benefit regardless of the level of domestic displacement.
   Summing up this section, we have found in the context of a simple market model with
spillovers that it is possible that immigration harms domestic social welfare (as measured
by the total surplus accruing to ex ante domestic residents from trade in the scientific labor
market). This result requires both the displacement of domestic scientists by immigrants



                                               9
and lower spillovers from immigrants compared with domestic counterparts. However, the
size of the spillover required from immigrant scientists to avoid immigration harming social
welfare is decreasing in the level of immigration. Notwithstanding displacement effects, a
sufficient condition for scientist immigration not to reduce ex ante domestic social welfare in
the model is therefore an absence of differential spillovers.
    As presented, the model applies to the general market for scientists. One could apply a
narrower version to the segment of the market limited to employment at leading research
universities. Displacement is then more naturally thought of as domestic scientists moving
to lower-ranked universities, as found for example in Borjas and Doran (2012) as a result of
the inflow of ex-Soviet mathematicians. In this case, we still would expect spillovers from
displaced domestic scientists. However, if we assume that a faculty position in a leading uni-
versity provides a privileged position in terms of the opportunities for relationship/network
development5 – and that domestic scientists are culturally or linguistically better positioned
to take advantage of those opportunities – then downward institutional displacement could
still be associated with a loss of aggregate spillovers and social welfare that again must be
weighed against the direct gains from scientist immigration. The search for evidence on pos-
sible differential spillovers from domestic and immigrant scientists motivates the empirical
work in the remainder of the paper.
   5
     For example, positions at leading universities may provide faculty members with more graduate students.
The pool of former graduate students then becomes a natural pool for matching with collaborators. In
Agrawal et al. (2015), we develop a model in which scientists form the best match from the pool of former
graduate students. Even where each potential former graduate student collaborator is drawn from a given
uniform distribution, simply having more graduate students – and thus more draws – increases the expected
value of collaboration. We then show that improvements in collaboration technology, which we assume to
scale up the value of collaboration, are more valuable for scientists with more graduate students and thus
more draws from which to find the best match.




                                                    10
3     The Prevalence and Impact of Immigrant Scientists

      on US Science

Immigrant scientists make up a large and growing proportion of the US scientific workforce.
Table 1 shows estimates of the size of the workforce in science occupations in 2003 and 2013.
The estimates are drawn from the National Science Foundation’s Scientists and Engineers
Statistical Data System (SESTAT), which is in turn based on the National Survey of Col-
lege Graduates (NSCG) and the Survey of Doctoral Recipients (SDR). Overall, immigrant
scientists made up an estimated 22 percent of the US science workforce in 2003, rising to 27
percent in 2013. The largest immigrant percentages are in non-social science fields, with im-
migrants in 2013 comprising 29 percent of computer and mathematical scientists, 28 percent
of biological, agricultural and environmental life scientists, and 25 percent of physical and
related scientists. The largest increase in share over the period was for physical and related
scientists, which rose from 20 percent in 2003 to 25 percent in 2013.
    A significant literature has explored the performance of immigrant scientists and engineers
in the US labor market and also their impact on US economic performance. Hunt and
Gauthier-Loiselle (2010) observe both positive direct and indirect effects of highly skilled
immigrants on US innovation. Using the 2003 National Survey of College Graduates they
find that immigrants patent at roughly double the rate of natives. A one percentage point
increase in the college-educated immigrant share in the population leads to a six percent
increase in patents per capita. However, they note that this could overstate the effects of
immigration if there are displacement effects, or understate it if there are positive spillovers.
Using a state-level analysis to correct for these biases, they find that a one percentage
increase in the share of immigrant college graduates in the population leads to a 9-18 percent
increase in patents per capita. Kerr and Lincoln (2010) find that cities and firms that
disproportionately utilized H-1B visa holders increased employment and patenting relative


                                               11
to peers. Peri (2012) finds evidence that immigrants to the US have increased total factor
productivity. Combining various impacts, he finds that an increase in 1 percent in high-
skilled population in a state due to immigration, increases income per worker by 1 percent
in that state. Peri et al. (2013) report that a H-1B driven increase in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) workers increases the wages of both STEM and non-
STEM workers at the city level. Using data from the American Community Surveys of 2009
and 2010, Hunt (2015) finds that immigrant engineers that are successful in finding work in
engineering occupations outperform the native-born based on both educational attainment
and earnings. Piecing together various data sources, Stephan (2010) documents the high
prevalence and impact of immigrant scientists at US Universities. A “conservative estimate”
is that immigrants comprise “at least 25 percent of tenure-track faculty and make up over
43% of graduate students and 60 percent of post docs” (Stephan, 2010, p. 85). She also
estimates that 44% of first authors on papers are immigrants. This impact is also apparent
for the most prestigious publications; for example, 44 percent of first authors of US papers
in Science are immigrants.
   Recognizing that immigrant scientists may be less connected to other US scientists than
the native-born counterparts they potentially displace, the focus of our empirical analysis
is a hypothetical experiment in which an immigrant scientist is assumed to fully displace a
matched US scientists with the same observed characteristics. Indirect evidence suggests that
US scientists do successfully integrate into US-based knowledge networks. In an important
paper, Ganguli (2015) finds that when Soviet-era scientists moved to the US, citations by US
scientists to their Soviet-era work increased, indicating they were able to successfully form
connections to the US-based scientific community.
   A possible limitation of our approach is that a proportion of immigrant scientists come
to the US as doctoral or post-doctoral students, and many of these will not have published
prior to their move. We cannot identify these scientists as immigrants in our data set.


                                             12
However, it is reasonable to suppose that, due to their arrival at an early career stage, these
scientists will be at least as well connected to US knowledge networks as those who come to
the US after their publication career had started. The hypothetical full displacement effect
should be lower for these scientists. Focusing on scientists who had begun their publishing
career prior to emigrating should thus provide a reasonable upper bound on the size of the
hypothetical displacement effect.
    We finally reiterate that the assumption of full displacement of a US-born scientist is
an extreme assumption. It is likely that the number of displaced scientists is less than the
number of immigrants. Based on the findings of Borjas and Doran (2012), an empirically
relevant but less dramatic mode of displacement is for the displaced US scientists to find em-
ployment at lower-ranked institutions or to less competitive fields Borjas and Doran (2015).
To the extent that working at highly ranked institutions provides a privileged position of
access to US knowledge networks and US-born scientists are better able to avail of the result-
ing opportunities for knowledge exchange, this form of displacement could also negatively
impact on the performance of US science. However, such downward displacement should
have less of an adverse effect than the full displacement baseline, again suggesting that the
assumption of full displacement provides a reasonable estimated upper bound of the extent
of harm through impaired US knowledge networks.



4     Empirical Strategy

In the model, a sufficient condition for the absence of harm is that the US scientific commu-
nity draws equally from knowledge generated by foreign recruits as they do from knowledge
generated by the domestic scientists the immigrants may displace. This holds true even with
full displacement. Our empirical strategy is to conduct a hypothetical experiment in which
a foreign recruit displaces a matched domestic scientist, where we match scientists based


                                              13
on career age (years since first publication), productivity (number of citation-weighted pub-
lications), and field (six distinct fields described below). We then examine the number of
citations from the US scientific community - our measure of localized knowledge flows - to
immigrants compared to their matched domestic counterparts.
    As a preliminary step, we first examine the number of citations from the US scientific
community to immigrants before they move compared to their domestic matches. Next,
turning our attention to how knowledge flows from immigrants to the US scientific community
change over time, we compare the number of citations from the US scientific community
to immigrants before versus after the immigrants move to the US. Finally, focusing on
differential knowledge flows that may provide evidence of immigrant harm to US science - the
core of our analysis - we examine the number of citations from the US scientific community
to immigrants compared to their domestic matches. A finding of no difference would be
consistent with the hypothesis of no harm to domestic science even with full displacement.



5     Data and Matching Methodology

Our primary objective is to compare spillover patterns between domestic and immigrant
scientists. Thus, we must identify scientists, their type (domestic or immigrant), and their
spillovers. We use publication data to do this. Our primary source is the ISI Web of
Science (WoS). We begin by collecting publications in six fields: 1) evolutionary biology,
2) mathematics, 3) economics, 4) neuroscience, 5) immunology, and 6) psychology. We
collect all publications in the journals classified by the ISI Journal Citation Reports as being
associated with each of those fields. In Table 2, we list the number of journals associated
with each field and the number of papers we collect from this set of journals over the period
1979-2008. In terms of the number of publications, neuroscience and immunology are the
two largest fields (825,048 and 639,439 papers, respectively) and evolutionary biology and


                                              14
psychology are the two smallest (114,190 and 191,333 papers, respectively). We identify
9,641 scientists that immigrated into the US, which represents 4.1% of our sample of all
active scientists across the globe. We present descriptive statistics of our star subsample
in Table 3. For the star subsample, we identify 1,896 immigrant scientist who make up
10% of the sample of all global star scientists. This is consistent with the US attracting a
disproportionate share of high-quality foreign born scientists.
   Figure 5 presents a map showing the origins of all immigrant scientists in our sample.
While the top 5 origin countries (in order: United Kingdom, Canada, Japan, Germany, and
France) are responsible for over 58% of all US immigrant scientists, we observe emigration
from a total of 69 countries in our sample.


5.1    Identifying scientists

We conduct most of our analyses at the scientist-year level. So, using the publication data
described above, we identify the set of scientists in each of the six fields. One data challenge
with this process is that WoS data do not provide unique identifiers for scientists. In other
words, the data do not distinguish between two different people who have the same name.
Thus, we must disambiguate scientific authors. To do so, we employ an approach developed
by Tang and Walsh (2010). The heuristic utilizes backward citations of focal papers to
estimate the likelihood of the named author being a particular person. For example, if two
papers reference a higher number of the same papers (weighted by how many times the paper
has been cited, i.e., how popular or obscure it is), then the likelihood of those two papers
belonging to the same author is higher. We attribute two papers to the same author if both
papers cite two or more rare papers (fewer than 50 citations) in both papers. We repeat
this process for all papers that list non-unique author names (i.e., same first initial and last
name). We exclude scientists who do not have more than two publications linked to their
name. In Table 2, we list the number of unique scientists we identify in each field. Once

                                              15
again, immunology and neuroscience are the two largest fields (84,649 and 91,405 scientists,
respectively). The two smallest fields are evolutionary biology and psychology (9,619 and
9,805 scientists, respectively). Scientists enter the panel when they publish their first paper.
We identify their location and status (star or not) on an annual basis.


5.2     Defining stars

We define stars as scientists in the 90th percentile in a given year and discipline in terms
of their accumulated stock of citation-weighted paper output over the preceding years. To
calculate a scientist’s accumulated stock of citation-weighted paper output, we begin by
identifying the set of papers they published in the years preceding the focal year. We then
weight these papers by the number of citations they receive during our study period. For
example, if a scientist published four papers by 1990 and these papers received 10, 20, 15, and
40 citations by 2008 (the final year of our study period), then that scientist’s accumulated
stock of citation-weighted paper output would be 85 in 1990. While we define a scientist’s
contribution on an annual basis, our measure of stardom is time-invariant whereby we classify
a scientist as a star if the scientist has ever been above the 90th percentile (approximately 15%
of scientists).6 Furthermore, stars are defined relative to the other scientists in our sample
in the same discipline. When we do analyses of the full sample (across all disciplines), we
utilize the star categorization determined from the within-field analysis. Although citation
practices vary across fields, scientists in the 90th percentile are disproportionately more
productive than the median scientist across all fields as seen in Figure 6.
   6
    Results are very similar if we conduct our analyses using a time-varying definition of star scientists
whereby we only classify scientists as stars in years in which their stock of citation-weighted paper output
exceeds the 90th percentile.




                                                    16
5.3    Identifying scientist locations

Using the unique author identifiers generated in the process described above for each paper,
we then attribute each scientist to a particular institution for every year of activity. Scientists
are active from the year they publish their first paper to the year they publish their last
paper. Here again, we must overcome a data deficiency inherent within the WoS data; until
recently, the WoS did not link institutions listed on an article to the authors. Instead,
we impute author location using reprint information that provides a one-to-one mapping
between the reprint author and the scientist’s affiliation. In addition, we take advantage of
single institution publications that allow us to directly link authors to institutions.


5.4    Defining immigration

With information on each scientist’s location in each year, we identify the country of each
scientist’s institution. Domestic scientists are those who start their career in the US and
never emigrate. Immigrant scientists are those who start their career in a country other than
the US and some year after their first publication immigrate to the US.


5.5    Outcome measure

Our outcome measure of interest is knowledge flows. We identify all papers published by
the focal scientist in the focal year for each scientist-year. From this set of papers, we count
the number of forward citations (citations made to the focal paper by other papers in the
future). We classify each forward citation as domestic if the first author of the future paper
that references the focal paper is from the US and not-domestic otherwise.
   While a large literature exists on the localization of knowledge flows (Feldman, 2000;
Ganguli, 2015) , we choose to circumscribe the flow of citations at national borders for two
reasons. First, this study directly speaks to the debate in immigration policy which is set at


                                                17
the national level. The US federal government as an entity cares about growing the spillover
“pie” within the US and is less concerned about how the benefits of this pie are allocated
across space within the US, per se. Second, and relatedly, federal science funding also
adopts a very similar model by which it cares about advancing the US scientific enterprise
in aggregate and is less focused on distributional concerns.


5.6     Matching

Immigrant and domestic scientists may systematically differ along a range of dimensions
hindering insightful comparisons between the two groups. As such, we identify a subset
of both immigrant and domestic scientists who are on the common support of a vector of
covariates related to scientific productivity in the year of the immigrant’s move to the US.
More specifically, for all immigrant scientists who immigrate to the US in year t, we identify
a domestic scientist match in year t who is in the same field, has a similar quality-weighted
stock of publications, was equally as productive in year t, and has a similar career age.7 We
make use of the of the Coarsened Exact Matching (CEM) methodology first developed by
Iacus et al. (2012). Table 4 shows balance between immigrant and domestic scientists of our
matched covariates across both the full and star sample.



6       Results

6.1     Comparisons of matched pairs

Our knowledge flow measure is the number of times the US scientific community cites the
focal scientist. Under the hypothetical scenario of full displacement of an equivalent domestic
    7
    By making use of publication data to infer scientist location, we consequently also use publication data
to infer mobility. That is, we can only identify the first year that a scientist immigrated to the US in the
year that they first published a paper in the US.




                                                    18
scientist, we test for significant differences between the number of citations to the work of the
immigrant and their (hypothetically displaced) domestic match. We look at all immigrants
and also, separately, the subset of immigrant stars.
   For each sample, we make three distinct comparisons. First, we compare pre-move im-
migrants with their domestic matches. This allows us to understand spillover differentials
to the US scientific community before the move takes place. Second, we compare pre- and
post-move immigrants. This allows us to understand the way the immigrant’s connection
to US science changes upon moving to the US. Third, we compare post-move immigrants
with their domestic matches. This is our main comparison, and it allows us to understand
how localized knowledge flows would be affected even with full displacement of an equivalent
domestic scientist.
   In Figure 7 we provide a graphical depiction of all three comparisons and also compare
across the full and star samples. The general picture that emerges is that pre-move immi-
grants produce significantly less knowledge flows to the US scientific community than their
domestic matches. However, this gap tends to disappear with the move as immigrants ap-
pear to quite rapidly integrate with the US scientific community. Post move, the number of
citations from the US scientific community to the immigrants’ work is at least as large as to
their domestic matches.
   Tables 5 and 6 provide formal tests for our three comparisons for the full and star-only
samples, respectively. The top panel of each table compares pre-move immigrants with their
domestic matches. We look separately at total citations, US citations, and the share of
US citations of total citations. Indicating the success of the matching procedure, there is
no significant difference in total citations for the immigrants and their domestic matches.
However, the domestic matches have significantly higher US citations and higher shares of
US citations in total citations. This difference is particularly pronounced for the star sample,
where on average domestic matches receive more than 10 additional citations from the US


                                               19
scientific community compared to pre-move immigrants.
   The bottom panel of each table tests for differences in citations to the work of immigrants
pre- and post-move. Post-move immigrants receive significantly more total citations and US
citations and also receive a higher share of US citations of their total citations for both the
full and star-only samples.
   The middle panel of each table compares post-move immigrants with their domestic
matches – our central comparison. Post-move immigrants receive a larger number of citations
from the US scientific community compared to their domestic matches (difference in full
sample = 0.47, p-value = 0.15; difference in star sample = 2.58, p-value = 0.06). While
domestic matches still display a higher share of US citations to their total citations, the
difference is not statistically significant.
   Overall, using citations as our measure, immigrants are found to produce at least an
equivalent level of knowledge flows to the US scientific community as the matched domestic
scientists who they hypothetically displace. At least by this measure, there is no evidence
that scientist immigration would harm US science even with full displacement.


6.2    Factors mediating the integration of immigrant scientists into

       US science

Recognizing that not all immigrant scientists will be equally well-positioned to generate
knowledge flows for the US scientific community, we next explore how sensitive our main
result is to plausible factors mediating the connection of immigrants to US science networks.
Where a factor is plausibly linked to a weaker (stronger) relationship to US scientists, a find-
ing of a smaller (larger) “immigrant premium” gives us greater confidence that the difference
between the matched pairs provides a meaningful measure of different spillover potential be-
tween immigrants and the domestic scientists they (hypothetically) displace.



                                               20
   We examine two candidate-mediating factors. The first is the prevalence of co-nationals
at the destination institution. A higher prevalence of co-nationals is likely to be associated
with more limited connections to US scientists (McPherson et al., 2001). Such differential
integration is supported by findings that co-ethnicity supports knowledge flows (see, e.g.,
Agrawal et al., 2008), so that the close proximity of co-nationals could reduce the incentive
for the immigrant to form connections with US scientists. The second is where the use of
English is common in the immigrant’s country of origin. Proficiency in English should be
positively associated with the ability of the immigrant to connect with US scientists. A large
literature has documented that proficiency in English is positively associated with success in
English-speaking destination-country labour markets (see, e.g., Chiswick and Miller, 1995;
Dustmann and Fabbri, 2003).
   We show the results of these difference-in-difference analyses in Tables 7 and 8. We focus
in particular on the difference in post-move US cites between immigrants and their domestic
matches for both the full and star samples (Columns 2 and 5). In Table 7, we first compare
the size of this “immigrant premium” when the immigrants have at most a single diaspora
colleague with the case where they have two or more such colleagues. For the full sample,
when immigrants are relatively isolated, there is a statistically significant positive immigrant
premium; but there is a statistically significant negative premium (or discount) when the
immigrant is co-located with two or more diaspora colleagues. The null of no difference
between these premiums is strongly rejected (p-value = 0.001). For the star sample, the
size of the positive premium for the relatively isolated immigrants is even more pronounced
than in the full sample. However, the effect is not statistically significant when there are
two or more diaspora colleagues. The null of no difference between these premiums is again
strongly rejected (p-value = 0.001).
   In Table 8 we repeat these comparisons of the “immigrant premium” based on whether
the immigrant comes from a country where the use of English is common or not. For the full


                                              21
sample, the premium is only marginally statistically significant where the immigrant comes
from a country where English is common. However, there is no statistically significant effect
for immigrants from countries where english is uncommon. The p-value for the null of no
difference between the two cases is 0.072. Interestingly, for the star sample, we cannot reject
the null of no difference between the two cases (p-value = 0.251). This may reflect the fact
that strong English ability is common among stars regardless of whether they come from a
country where the use of English is common or not.
    Overall, the results of these difference-in-difference analyses are generally consistent with
our priors. Immigrant scientists tend to perform better in terms of connections to US science
when they are relatively isolated from co-nationals and also come from countries where the
use of English is common, although the latter effect is not evident for stars.



7     Concluding Comments

The search for evidence of native wage and employment displacement effects has been a
major theme of the immigration literature. More recently, in an attempt to better identify
the benefits of high-skilled immigration, more attention has focused on knowledge spillovers
to native workers. But this raises a new possibility of harm if local knowledge networks are
disrupted by arrivals who displace domestic workers who are better embedded in knowledge-
sharing networks. To explore the possibility of such displacement, we use citation patterns
to answer a simple question: Are immigrant scientists less connected to the US scientific
community than the domestic scientists they displace? We find that although immigrant
scientists are significantly less connected than their domestic matches pre-immigration, con-
vergence is rapid post-immigration. Overall, we do not find evidence of harm to domestic
science through a knowledge network disruption channel.
    We conclude by noting some possible limitations of our findings and important areas


                                               22
for further research. First, while we use state-of-the-art matching techniques to identify our
domestic matches for immigrant scientists, there is an inevitable residual concern that actual
scientists displaced by immigrant arrivals are better connected to domestic scientists than
these identified matches. It may also be that universities engaged in recruiting immigrant
scientists are selecting those who are most likely to increase their productivity after arrival,
increasing both the total knowledge spillovers they produce and also those that flow to the
US.
   Second, while we believe that forward citations provide the best measure of knowledge
connections between scientists, other possibilities exist. One alternative is co-authorships
with US scientists. Preliminary results suggest that immigrant scientists have fewer post-
arrival co-authorship relationships with US scientists than their domestic matches. But
conditional on a co-authorship relationship with a US scientist, the quality of the output as
measured by forward citations to the work is higher for immigrant-domestic collaborations.
The nature of this quantity/quality tradeoff and also the relative importance of citation
and co-authorship metrics as measures of connections between scientists requires further
exploration.
   Third, the diaspora and English-language results point to the kind of variables that
mediate the integration of immigrant scientists into US knowledge networks. More work is
needed to better understand the integration process and the public or organizational policies
that might facilitate it.
   Finally, although scientists who publish are a key component of US knowledge networks,
further work is required to confirm that immigration-related network disruption effects do
not cause greater harm in other knowledge sectors. An advantage of examining scientific
papers is that a natural paper trail of connections is provided through citation patterns.
Patent citations may allow for an extension of the approach used here to explore network
disruption effects in other parts of the US knowledge system.


                                              23
References
Agrawal, Ajay, Devesh Kapur, and John McHale, “How do spatial and social proximity
 influence knowledge flows? Evidence from patent data,” Journal of Urban Economics, 2008, 64
 (2), 258 – 269.

  , Iain Cockburn, and John McHale, “Gone but not forgotten: Knowledge flows, labor
  mobility, and enduring social relationships,” Journal of Economics Geography, 2006, 6 (5), 571–
  591.

  , John McHale, and Alexander Oettl, “Collaboration, Stars, and the Changing Organization
  of Science: Evidence from Evolutionary Biology,” in “The changing frontier: rethinking science
  and innovation policy,” The University of Chicago Press, Chicago, October 2015. University of
  Toronto mimeo.

Azoulay, Pierre, Joshua Graff Zivin, and Jialan Wang, “Superstar Extinction,” Quarterly
 Journal of Economics, 2010, 125 (2), 549–589.

Borjas, George, “The Labor-Market Impact of High-Skill Immigration,” The American Economic
 Review, 2005, 95 (2), 56–60.

  , “Do Foreign Students Crowd Out Native Students from Graduate Programs,” in Ronald G.
  Ehrenberg and Paula E. Stephan, eds., Science and the University, University of Wisconsin Press,
  Madison, 2007.

   and Kirk B Doran, “The Collapse of the Soviet Union and the Productivity of American
  Mathematicians*,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2012, 127 (3), 1143–1203.

Borjas, George J, Immigration economics, Harvard University Press, 2014.

   and Kirk B Doran, “Cognitive mobility: Labor market responses to supply shocks in the
  space of ideas,” Journal of Labor Economics, 2015, 33 (S1), S109–S145.

Chiswick, Barry R and Paul W Miller, “The endogeneity between language and earnings:
 International analyses,” Journal of labor economics, 1995, 13 (2), 246–288.

Dustmann, Christian and Francesca Fabbri, “Language proficiency and labour market per-
 formance of immigrants in the UK,” The Economic Journal, 2003, 113 (489), 695–717.

Feldman, Maryann P, “Location and innovation: the new economic geography of innovation,
  spillovers, and agglomeration,” The Oxford handbook of economic geography, 2000, 1, 373–395.

Freeman, Richard, Ina Ganguli, and Raviv Murciano-Goroff, “Why and Wherefore of
  Increased Scientific Collaboration,” in “The changing frontier: rethinking science and innovation
  policy,” The University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 2015.

Ganguli, Ina, “Immigration and Ideas: What Did Russian Scientists “Bring” to the United
 States?,” Journal of Labor Economics, 2015, 33 (S1), S257–S288.



                                                24
Hunt, Jennifer, “Are Immigrants the Most Skilled US Computer and Engineering Workers?,”
 Journal of Labor Economics, 2015, 33 (S1), S39–S77.

   and Marjolaine Gauthier-Loiselle, “How Much Does Immigration Boost Innovation?,”
  American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2010, 2 (2), 31–56.

Iacus, Stefano M., Gary King, and Giuseppe Porro, “Causal Inference without Balance
  Checking: Coarsened Exact Matching,” Political Analysis, 2012, 20 (1), 1–24.

Jaffe, Adam B., Manuel Trajtenberg, and Rebecca Henderson, “Geographic Localization
  of Knowledge Spillovers as Evidenced by Patent Citations,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  August 1993, 108 (3), 577–598.

Kerr, Sari Pekkala and William R Kerr, “Economic impacts of immigration: A survey,”
 Finnish Economic Papers, Finnish Economic Association 1-32, Spring 2011, 24 (1), 1–32.

Kerr, William R and William F Lincoln, “The Supply Side of Innovation: H-1B Visa Reforms
 and US Ethnic Invention,” Journal of Labor Economics, 2010, 28 (3), 473–508.

Lan, Flora, Katherine Hale, and Emilda Rivers, “Immigrants’ Growing Presence in the U.S.
  Science and Engineering Workforce: Education and Employment Characteristics in 2013,” NSF
  15-328, National Science Foundation 2015.

McPherson, Miller, Lynn Smith-Lovin, and James M Cook, “Birds of a feather: Homophily
 in social networks,” Annual review of sociology, 2001, 27 (1), 415–444.

National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine, The Economic and Fiscal
 Consequences of Immigration, The National Academies Press, Washington, DC, 2016.

Oettl, Alexander, “Reconceptualizing stars: Scientist helpfulness and peer performance,” Man-
 agement Science, 2012, 58 (6), 1122–1140.

Peri, Giovanni, “The effect of immigration on productivity: Evidence from US states,” Review
  of Economics and Statistics, 2012, 94 (1), 348–358.

  , Kevin Shih, and Chad Sparber, “STEM workers, H1B Visas and Productivity in US
  Cities,” 2013. Working Paper.

Stephan, Paula, “The “I” s have it: Immigration and innovation, the perspective from academe,”
  Innovation Policy and the Economy, 2010, 10 (1), 83–127.

  , How Economics Shapes Science, Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2012.

Tang, Li and John P Walsh, “Bibliometric fingerprints: Name disambiguation based on ap-
  proximate structure equivalence of cognitive maps,” Scientometrics, 2010, 84 (3), 763–784.

Thompson, Peter and Melanie Fox-Kean, “Patent citations and the geography of knowledge
 spillovers: A reassessment,” American Economic Review, 2005, 95 (1), 450–460.

Waldinger, Fabian, “Quality matters: The expulsion of professors and the consequences for PhD
 student outcomes in Nazi Germany,” Journal of Political Economy, 2010, 118 (4), 787–831.

                                             25
Figure 1: Market Equilibrium and Total Social Surplus, No Immigration




                                 26
       Figure 2: Market Equilibrium and the Gain in Social Surplus from Immigration




Note: The per-scientist externality is assumed to be equal to z for domestic and immigrant scientists.




                                                             27
Figure 3: Market Equilibrium and the Gain and Loss of Social Surplus when the per Scientist
Externality is Lower for Immigrant Scientists




                                            28
Figure 4: The Level of the Per-Scientist Externality for Immigrant Scientists for No Change
in Social Surplus to Occur as a Result of Immigration




                                            29
     US immigration by source country
                                              Figure 5: US scientist immigration by source country. N = 9,641




                                                                                                               298
                                                                                     1                                                                       19
                                                                                                                     92
                                                                                                       50
                             1,402                                                                                   2
                                                                                                       93
                                                                                                                      1
                                                                                              1,624 915 124
                                                                                                                             3
                                                                                                 495           125 23
                                                                                                       359
                                                                                             6 110              19           14
                                                                                                       2                                                47               5    1,188
                                                                                                                                          4
                                                                                                                             486      1




30
                                                                                                                         1                          2
                                     53                                                                                                       377                   59
                                                                                                                                                              9
                                                    2                                                                                                               3
                                                                                                                                                          7
                                                                                         2
                                                6                                                      4                          2
                                                                 14
                                                        2                                                  1                                              4
                                                                                                                                 10


                                                                          84


                                                            36                                                                                                               425

                                                                      1                                          33
                                                                 75


                                                                                                                                                                                      57




     Map based on Longitude (generated) and Latitude (generated). Color shows sum of count. The marks are labeled by sum of count. Details are shown for Country.
                                               Figure 6: Citation Stock by Percentiles and Field in 1995




                                   Figure 7: Number of US Citations: Immigrants relative to Domestics
  25
  20




                                                                                                  10 15 20 25
  15
  10
  5
  0




                                                                                                  5
                                                                                                  0
  -5




                                                                                                  -25 -20 -15 -10 -5
  -25 -20 -15 -10




                    -10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5                 6   7   8   9 10                        -10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5                 6   7   8   9 10
                                    Years before/after Scientist Moved to US                                                           Years before/after Scientist Moved to US



                                           (a) Full Sample                                                                                   (b) Star Sample
Notes: This figure plots point estimates for leading and lagging indicators for the migration of a scientist
                                                                                                         P to the US. Both
panels plot the point estimates of the following specification estimated using OLS: U SCitationsit = 10   τ =0 α−τ Arrivali,t−τ +
P10                         P10                                       P10
   τ =1 α+τ Arrivali,t+τ +    τ =0 β−τ Arrivali,t−τ × immigranti +      τ =1 β+τ Arrivali,t+τ × immigranti + θ(Ageit ) + δt + εit .
US Citationsit is the number of citations received by scientist i in year t from US-authored papers. The α parameters (21 in
all) controls for the US citation patterns of the matched domestic scientists for each year 10 years prior and post to the
matched immigrants arrival. The β parameters are our point estimates of interest and are the ones plotted in the above figure.
These reflect the differences in US citation patterns between immigrants and domestic scientists for each year around the
move year (+/- 10 years). θ flexible controls for scientist i’s age and δ is a full set of year dummies. There is no constant in
this specification. The vertical bars correspond to 95% confidence intervals with scientist-clustered standard errors.




                                                                                                    31
               Table 1: Estimated Prevalence of US Born Citizens and Immigrants Working in US Science Occupations
                                                          2003                                                  2013
                                    All          US                           %           All          US                             %
                                 Scientists     Born        Immigrants     Immigrant   Scientists     Born        Immigrants       Immigrant

     Computer and
     Mathematical Scientists     2,008,000    1,521,000          487,000        24%    2,647,000    1,879,000           769,000         29%
     Biological, Agr., and




32
     Env. Life Scientists         444,000      342,000           102,000        23%     638,000      459,000            179,000         28%
     Physical and
     Related Scientists           315,000      251,000            64,000        20%     319,000      238,000             81,000         25%
     Social and
     Related Scientists           495,000      440,000            54,000        11%     581,000      497,000             84,000         14%

     Total Scientists            3,262,000    2,054,000          707,000        22%    4,185,000    3,073,000          1,113,000        27%
     Source: Lan et al. (2015)
                                         Table 2: Descriptive Statistics
                                                                                             Citations/      Coauthors/
                                                                                             Scientist/       Scientist/
   Discipline      Journals       Papers       Scientists    Domestics      Immigrants          Year            Year
Economics                214      105,305         18,466          10,302              552           8.38             0.39
Evol. Biology             42       55,035          9,619           4,497              286          18.76             0.74
Immunology               175      586,424         84,649          35,281            3,311          16.17             2.59
Mathematics              190      126,535         22,156           7,644            1,065           3.67             0.42
Neuroscience             247      678,572         91,405          38,074            4,209          19.14             2.14
Psychology                71       49,316          9,805           5,495              218            6.9             0.67
Total                    939    1,601,187        236,100         101,293            9,641         12.17†            1.16†
Notes: Scientists refers to the total number of scientists active in the world. Domestics refers to the number of US-based
scientists who started their careers in the US. Immigrants refers to the number of US-based scientists who emigrated to the
US. Note that Domestics and Immigrants do not sum to Scientists because we do not report counts of scientists in the rest of
the world who do not emigrate to the US during our study period. The last two columns count the mean number of citations
received / unique coauthors per scientist per year.
† Means, instead of sums, are reported for these two columns.




                               Table 3: Descriptive Statistics (Star Sample)
                                                                                             Citations/      Coauthors/
                                                                                             Scientist/       Scientist/
   Discipline      Journals      Papers      Scientists     Domestics       Immigrants          Year            Year
Economics                214      29,727          1,324           1,058              101           34.45             0.72
Evol. Biology             42      14,866            755             458               49           59.72             1.21
Immunology               175     131,385          7,220           4,094              687           53.71             4.71
Mathematics              190      39,369          1,653             893              214           12.06             0.76
Neuroscience             247     144,420          7,129           3,902              799           61.72             3.83
Psychology                71      16,530            801             548               46           20.58             1.00
Total                    939     376,297         18,882          10,953            1,896          49.69†            3.34†
Notes: Scientists refers to the total number of scientists active in the world. Domestics refers to the number of US-based
scientists who started their careers in the US. Immigrants refers to the number of US-based scientists who emigrated to the
US. Note that Domestics and Immigrants do not sum to Scientists because we do not report counts of scientists in the rest of
the world who do not emigrate to the US during our study period. The last two columns count the mean number of citations
received / unique coauthors per scientist per year.
† Means, instead of sums, are reported for these two columns.




                                                            33
      Table 4: Descriptive Statistics of Matched Domestic and Immigrant Scientists
                          Domestic       Immigrant
                          Scientists      Scientists
Variable                      mean            mean    difference   p-value of difference
Panel A
Career Age                                 7.43                 7.48                -0.05                              0.73
Ever a Star                                0.14                 0.14                    0                                 1
Pt−1
      Cites                              154.11               153.92                 0.19                              0.97
Cites                                     34.36                35.19                -0.83                              0.37
Observations                              4,623                 4,623
Panel B: Star Sample
Career Age                                 9.99                 10.1                -0.11                              0.79
Ever a Star                                   1                    1                    0                                 1
Pt−1
      Cites                               449.9               442.67                 7.23                              0.78
Cites                                      78.7                80.83                -2.13                              0.54
Observations                                 640                  640


                                   Table 5: Mean Comparisons of Citations
                                           Immigrant                Domestic              Column       p-value
        Variable                        Mean Std. Dev.            Mean Std.Dev                Diff      of diff
                                          (1)        (2)           (3)       (4)              (5)          (6)
        Pre-Move Period                   N = 28,449                N = 28,449
 (1)    Citations                       17.68     54.25           17.92     49.64             -0.24        0.58
 (2)    US Citations                     6.55     24.58           10.13     28.30             -3.57        0.00
 (3)    Share of US Citation             0.33      0.22            0.57      0.23             -0.24        0.00
        Post-Move Period.                 N = 21,008                N = 21,008
 (4)    Citations                       20.45     74.40           18.08     52.19              2.36        0.00
 (5)    US Citations                    10.25     39.06            9.77     28.26              0.47        0.15
 (6)    Share of US Citations            0.49      0.25            0.54      0.24             -0.06        0.00
                                         Row         p-value
                                         Diff         of diff
 (7)    Citations                        2.77           0.00
 (8)    US Citations                     3.70           0.00
 (9)    Share of US Citations            0.15           0.00
Notes: Each observation is at the scientist-year level. Citations is the mean sum of the number of forward citations to papers
published by the scientist in the specific time period (pre or post move). US Citations is the mean annual count of the
number of forward citations to papers published by scientist i in the time period where the first author of the citing paper
resides in the US. Immigrant and domestic scientists are matched using coarsened exact matching along the following
dimensions: scientist age, total citations within the US, and discipline.



                                                             34
                        Table 6: Mean Comparisons of Citations (Star Sample)
                                           Immigrant                Domestic              Column       p-value
        Variable                        Mean Std. Dev.            Mean Std.Dev                Diff      of diff
                                          (1)        (2)           (3)       (4)              (5)          (6)
        Pre-Move Period                    N = 5,103                N = 5,103
 (1)    Citations                       52.28     108.92          53.08    96.50              -0.79        0.70
 (2)    US Citations                    19.95      50.90          30.17    55.18             -10.21        0.00
 (3)    Share of US Citations            0.35       0.18           0.58     0.18              -0.23        0.00
        Post-Move Period                   N = 4,611                N = 4,611
 (4)    Citations                       59.04     144.97          50.01    95.22               9.03        0.00
 (5)    US Citations                    29.79      76.53          27.22    51.49               2.58        0.06
 (6)    Share of US Citations            0.49       0.20           0.55     0.20              -0.06        0.00
                                         Row         p-value
                                         Diff         of diff
 (7)    Citations                        6.75           0.00
 (8)    US Citations                     9.84           0.00
 (9)    Share of US Citations            0.15           0.00
Notes: Each observation is at the scientist-year level. Citations is the mean sum of the number of forward citations to papers
published by the scientist in the specific time period (pre or post move). US Citations is the mean annual count of the
number of forward citations to papers published by scientist i in the time period where the first author of the citing paper
resides in the US. Immigrant and domestic scientists are matched using coarsened exact matching along the following
dimensions: scientist age, total citations within the US, and discipline.




                                                             35
                                                    Table 7: Difference-in-Differences, Diaspora Effect
                                                (1)           (2)                (3)              (4)                                    (5)                    (6)
     Sample                                                             Full                                                               Star

     Dependent Variable                        Cites             US Cites           US Cites Share                 Cites             US Cites           US Cites Share
     Immigrant with ≤ 1                         5.280∗               2.010+                −0.031∗∗                 27.430∗∗            12.056∗               −0.043∗∗
     diaspora colleagues†                      (2.169)              (1.199)                 (0.006)                 (9.406)             (5.313)                (0.014)




36
     Immigrant with ≥ 2                       −1.857               −1.752∗∗                −0.046∗∗                −0.132              −1.966                 −0.062∗∗
     diaspora colleagues‡                      (1.136)              (0.600)                 (0.005)                 (4.334)             (2.272)                (0.012)
     University Fixed Effects                    X                   X                       X                       X                    X                      X

     p-value of H0 : † = ‡                       0.001               0.002                   0.017                   0.001                0.004                  0.159
     Observations                             41970                41970                   41970                    9181                9181                   9181
     Notes: The unit of analysis is the scientist-year. The sample consists of domestic and immigrant scientists in the US. All specifications are estimated using OLS.
     Robust standard errors clustered at the scientist level are in parentheses.
     + p < 0.10, ∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗ p < 0.01
                                       Table 8: Difference-in-Differences, Countries where English is Common
                                                  (1)            (2)              (3)             (4)        (5)                                                    (6)
     Sample                                                                  Full                                                              Star

     Dependent Variable                              Cites            US Cites           US Cites Share                Cites             US Cites          US Cites Share
     Immigrant from country                            2.445+              0.531               −0.029∗∗                  4.820               0.564                −0.057∗∗
     where english is common†                         (1.415)             (0.730)               (0.006)                 (4.730)             (2.462)                (0.014)




37
     Immigrant from country                          −1.008              −1.320                −0.052∗∗                 14.162+              5.293                −0.054∗∗
     where english is uncommon‡                       (1.647)             (0.912)               (0.006)                 (8.189)             (4.632)                (0.013)
     University Fixed Effects                          X                   X                      X                       X                   X                     X

     p-value of H0 : † = ‡                             0.078               0.081                  0.001                  0.251               0.296                  0.838
     Observations                                    41970               41970                  41970                   9181                9181                   9181
     Notes: The unit of analysis is the scientist-year. The sample consists of domestic and immigrant scientists in the US. All specifications are estimated using OLS.
     Robust standard errors clustered at the scientist level are in parentheses.
     + p < 0.10, ∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗ p < 0.01
