                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       THE POLITICAL IMPACT OF IMMIGRATION:
                         EVIDENCE FROM THE UNITED STATES

                                      Anna Maria Mayda
                                        Giovanni Peri
                                       Walter Steingress

                                      Working Paper 24510
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24510


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2018




The authors would like to thank Michel Beine, George Borjas, Claudia Goldin, Daniel Hopkins
and Alexander Wagner for useful comments. Seminar participants at Vanderbilt University, Duke
University, Banque de France, Georgetown University, Universite Libre de Bruxelles (ECARES),
Lancaster University, Oxford University, the 14th IZA AM2 Meeting and the 2016 NBER
Summer Institute in Political Economy provided suggestions on earlier drafts of this paper. The
views expressed in this paper are those of the authors alone and do not reflect those of the Bank
of Canada or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Anna Maria Mayda, Giovanni Peri, and Walter Steingress. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Political Impact of Immigration: Evidence from the United States
Anna Maria Mayda, Giovanni Peri, and Walter Steingress
NBER Working Paper No. 24510
April 2018
JEL No. F22,J61

                                         ABSTRACT

In this paper we study the impact of immigration to the United States on the vote for the
Republican Party by analyzing county-level data on election outcomes between 1990 and 2010.
Our main contribution is to separate the effect of high-skilled and low-skilled immigrants, by
exploiting the different geography and timing of the inflows of these two groups of immigrants.
We find that an increase in the first type of immigrants decreases the share of the Republican
vote, while an inflow of the second type increases it. These effects are mainly due to the local
impact of immigrants on votes of U.S. citizens and they seem independent of the country of
origin of immigrants. We also find that the pro-Republican impact of low-skilled immigrants is
stronger in low-skilled and non-urban counties. This is consistent with citizens' political
preferences shifting towards the Republican Party in places where low-skilled immigrants are
more likely to be perceived as competition in the labor market and for public resources.

Anna Maria Mayda                               Walter Steingress
Dept. of Economics, ICC 552                    Bank of Canada
Georgetown University                          234 Wellington Street West
37th and O Streets, NW                         Ottawa, ON K1A 0G9
Washington, DC 20057                           Canada
amm223@georgetown.edu                          wsteingress@bank-banque-canada.ca

Giovanni Peri
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
gperi@ucdavis.edu
1       Introduction
Political leaders’ positions on the issue of immigration can be an important determinant
of their electoral success or failure. Immigration took center stage in the 2016 U.S.
presidential elections and its aftermath, as now-President Donald Trump took strong
stands on illegal immigration, the construction of a border wall, refugees from Syria,
and “sanctuary cities”. The “Brexit” vote in the United Kingdom and recent political
elections in Germany (2017) and Italy (2018) have highlighted the controversial political
role of immigration and the electoral success of strong anti-immigration stands. That
immigration has an effect on political outcomes has been pointed out in the academic
literature (see, for example, Ortega (2005) and other works discussed in Section 2).
Yet, to our knowledge, no empirical study has looked at the direct connection between
election outcomes and immigration in the United States.1 We tackle this question by
analyzing the link between immigration and the vote share received by the Republican
Party, across U.S. counties and over time, in the 20-year election cycle between 1990
and 2010.
    Three aspects of this paper are novel. First, we combine economic and demographic
data from the U.S. Census and American Community Survey with data on electoral
outcomes, for all types of elections, from the National Library of Congress at the U.S.
county level. We exploit the large variation in immigration across U.S. counties and
time to identify the correlation between immigration and votes to the Republican Party.
Second, we focus on the distinction between high-skilled (college-educated) and low-
skilled (non-college-educated) immigrants and exploit their differential variation, driven
by past networks and differences in skills across countries of origin to separately iden-
tify a causal effect of each group. These two types of immigrants affect the economy
and labor markets differently (see, for instance, Ottaviano and Peri (2012) and Card
(2009)) and, it turns out, they have a very different impact on the vote of U.S. citizens.
Third, we allow for heterogeneous effects of high- and low-skilled immigrants on voting
outcomes depending on the economic and demographic characteristics of the receiving
county. In analyzing these heterogeneous effects we shed light on the possible mecha-
nisms through which immigration may have impacted the vote share of the Republican
Party.
    The substantial inflow of immigrants to the United States during the last 30 years
has significantly shaped the U.S. economy and society. Immigrants affect native work-
ers’ opportunities in the labor market, their productivity, and their specialization (see,
for example, the book by Borjas (2014) and the recent review by Peri (2016)). Immi-
grants can also have an impact on other aspects of the host country’s economy (for
example through fiscal effects, innovation and consumption), as well as on its culture,
    1
    One partial exception (that we know of) is a recent paper by Baerg et al. (2014), which estimates a
negative impact of the share of unauthorized workers on the proportion of votes going to the Democrats,
focusing only on the U.S. state of Georgia. As we document below, there are several papers analyzing
the impact of immigrants on voting in European countries.




                                                  2
social norms, and sense of security.2 In addition, immigration can affect political out-
comes. In this paper we analyze the latter outcomes but, in doing so, we also need to
take into account the impact of immigration through the other channels. Indeed, we
assume that, through their votes, U.S. citizens respond to the perceived economic and
psychological costs and benefits – through the labor-market, fiscal and non-economic
mechanisms – of having more immigrants in their county. We posit that their proba-
bility of voting for the Republican Party goes up if the perceived cost of an increase
in immigrants (high-skilled or low-skilled) is larger than the perceived benefit. In this
simple framework we associate the Republican Party with more restrictive immigration
policies, which it usually championed in the 20 years we consider.3 Immigration may
also affect the outcome of elections by extending the pool of voters, i.e. directly, by
adding the new votes of newly naturalized immigrants. However, we find evidence sug-
gesting that the main effect of immigrants on Republican votes comes from the indirect
impact on preferences of existing voters.4
    Our strongest and most significant finding is that an increase in high-skilled im-
migrants as a share of the local population is associated with a strong and significant
decrease in the vote share for the Republican Party. To the contrary, an increase in the
low-skilled immigrant share of the population is associated with a strong and signifi-
cant increase in Republican votes. These effects are common to presidential, House and
Senate elections. Combining the two effects, the net impact of the increased immigrant
share on the average U.S. county was negative for the Republican Party between 1990
and 2010. This was because immigration in this period was on average college-biased.5
Our results are robust to instrumenting the two types of immigration with shift-share
instrumental variables (IV) based on the historical (1980) location of immigrants by
origin, across U.S. counties, augmented with the skill-specific inflows of immigrants in
the 1990-2010 period. Including a rich set of dummy variables and several controls at
the local level (county and commuting zone) to address lingering concerns about omit-
ted variables does not change the estimates. Moreover, testing whether past electoral
outcomes affected the inflow of high- or low-skilled workers shows no evidence of such
reverse causation.
    Those described above are average effects across U.S. counties. The perceived costs
and benefits of immigrants, however, should differ according to the local characteristics
of the county, and the heterogeneous effects across counties should depend on local
   2
     For example, Giuliano (2007) and Alesina and Giuliano (2011) show how immigrants affect the
transmission of social norms. Butcher and Piehl (1998), Chalfin (2015) and Spenkuch (2013) analyze
the effect of immigration on crime rates in U.S. cities.
   3
     Empirical evidence by Facchini and Steinhardt (2011) and Conconi et al. (2012) suggests that
Republican legislators are less likely to vote for pro-immigration policies compared with Democratic
ones.
   4
     Note that existing voters are those who are already citizens, i.e. natives (U.S.-born), who represent
the large majority of voters in most electoral districts, and naturalized immigrants who can vote as
well.
   5
     In addition, some specifications suggest that the negative Republican vote response to high-skilled
immigrants was stronger than the positive Republican vote response to low-skilled immigrants.


                                                    3
labor-market characteristics, on the extent of local fiscal redistribution and on non-
economic characteristics of citizens, consistent with these perceptions. This is indeed
what we find. The estimates show that the pro-Republican effect of low-skilled im-
migrants was particularly strong in counties where the share of unskilled natives was
higher, where economic activity was less dense, and where the county was prevalently
non-urban. These findings are consistent with the fact that low-skilled natives and those
living in less dynamic and more rural economies are more likely to feel in competition
with low-skilled immigrants. At the same time, we find evidence of a pro-Democrat
shift in response to high-skilled immigrants in counties where the share of low-skilled
natives was large, but the impact was still significant and pro-Democrat in counties
with a large share of high-skilled natives. These findings are consistent with an overall
perceived positive effect of high-skilled immigrants on citizens, which is stronger where
citizens are unskilled. Overall, these effects are likely to be driven by a combination
of labor-market effects based on relationships of complementarity and substitutability
and, in the case of high-skilled immigration, positive externalities (for example, through
innovation) and positive fiscal effects (through greater tax revenues). This is consistent
with empirical evidence that fiscal transfers from highly educated immigrants to natives
are positive (see Smith and Edmonston (1997)) and that high-skilled workers benefit
the local economy and wages (see Peri et al. (2015)).
    By providing systematic and robust evidence on the relationship between U.S. immi-
gration and voting outcomes, we are also able to shed light on “conventional wisdom” on
the topic and on puzzles in the literature. Anecdotal evidence suggests, and we confirm
in our data, that on average immigration in U.S. counties reduces the Republican vote
share. Political scientists and analysts seem to read this evidence as driven by a “pro-
Democratic Party” direct political effect – i.e. the idea that naturalized immigrants
vote predominantly for the Democratic party, which has a pro-immigrant platform –
and by the fact that this effect dominates whatever indirect effect immigration has on
the way existing voters vote.6 At first sight, this interpretation may seem consistent
with the empirical evidence: an increase in the share of citizen (voting) migrants re-
duces the Republican vote share, while an increase in the share of non-citizen migrants
has no effect on average (see Mayda et al. (2016)). However, a closer look suggests
that the main impact of immigration on voting outcomes comes from the skill level
of immigrants – which affects the voting behavior of existing voters – and not from
whether or how naturalized immigrants vote. We discuss this point further in the next
section.
    Not only is systematic evidence on the link between immigration and election out-
comes scarce in the case of the United States, but the little evidence that does exist is
puzzling in light of the results found for other countries. For example, several papers on
continental European countries find that immigrants increased the electoral vote share
of right-wing, anti-immigration parties (see Barone et al. (2016) and Halla et al. (2017)).
   6
    For example, in a 2014 background paper for the Center for Immigration Studies (CIS), Gimpel
(2014) states: “... the enormous flow of legal immigrants to the country has remade and continues to
remake the nation’s electorate in favor of the Democratic Party.”


                                                 4
What explains the opposite results across the two sides of the Atlantic? Why is the
average political impact of immigration (on conservative parties’ votes) positive in the
case of European countries and negative in the case of the United States? Our analysis
shows that the two sets of results are not inconsistent with each other. Immigrants
to Europe have been, on average, less skilled than immigrants to the United States,
and the local labor force in Europe is also less skilled (lower share of college-educated)
than in the United States. Our analysis shows that the local economic conditions of
a region, together with the skill level of immigrants, affect citizens’ perceived impact
of immigration and their vote response. Specifically, areas with low education levels
and low urbanization may be more ready to embrace nationalistic views in response
to low-skilled immigrants. This seems as true in the U.S. as in Europe. It is also in
line with the results of the 2016 “Brexit” referendum in which, following the message of
right-wing and anti-immigration parties, most non-urban areas outside of London voted
for the United Kingdom to leave the European Union, while the urban, high-skilled,
and densely populated region of London voted to stay within the European Union.
This suggests that the large recent inflow of immigrants in the United Kingdom had a
different impact in the rural low-skilled areas of England than in the urban high-skilled
metropolitan London region.
    After estimating the impact of increased immigration on the Republican share of
votes, we use these estimates and the recent growth in immigrant populations to see
how much of the recent shift of votes toward the Republican Party (in the 2012 and
2016 elections) can be predicted using our empirical model with heterogeneous effects.
We find that about 22% of the variation in the growth of votes for the Republican party
across U.S. counties can be explained by the estimated marginal effect of immigration
in the specification that allows for different skill groups and heterogeneous effects.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 frames our paper within
the existing literature. In Section 3 we lay out a simple empirical framework that
characterizes the effect of immigrants and motivates the estimating equation. We then
describe the data and how we construct the key variables in Section 4. In Section 5 we
discuss identification, followed by the main empirical results in Section 6. In Section
7, we consider potential channels and investigate heterogeneity of the effects across
counties. In Section 8 we perform exercises to predict changes in the Republican vote
share as a function of increases of immigration. Section 9 concludes.


2    Related Literature
Our paper is related to both theoretical and empirical contributions in the literature
that analyze the effect of immigration on voting behavior. A few papers examine the
voting behavior with respect to immigration policies and show that it is a function of
the skill composition of immigrants and natives. The seminal theoretical paper in this
literature is Benhabib (1996), which derives the skill composition requirements that
would be imposed on potential immigrants, under majority voting, assuming that the


                                            5
only effect of migration is realized through competition/complementarity in the labor
market. Ortega (2005) extends such a model and analyzes the trade-off arising in a
dynamic version in which immigrants (or their offspring) gain the right to vote and
thus affect the political balance of the destination country, with a lag. The arrival of
immigrants, whose skill composition depends on the existing immigration policy, alters
the skilled-to-unskilled labor ratio of the workforce in the destination country. This, in
turn, affects the current-period skill premium, as well as the skill composition of next
period’s electorate, hence the political balance and migration policies in the future. On
the one hand, skilled (unskilled) natives prefer an immigration policy that admits the
complementary unskilled (skilled) immigrants to their country because of their wage
effects. On the other hand, the arrival of unskilled (skilled) immigrants potentially shifts
the political equilibrium by increasing the number of unskilled (skilled) voters in the
next period. These two opposite effects could produce a cycle equilibrium in which the
political majority switches from one group to the other. Razin et al. (2011) focus instead
on the joint decision of voters on immigration and redistribution policies, respectively.
This paper shows that, in terms of immigration and redistribution, a democratic country
will produce policies that are consistent with each other so that, when immigration is
more open, natives restrict redistribution for fear of net transfers to immigrants, while
when immigration is more restricted, natives are willing to allow more redistribution.
The theoretical model derives predictions of how natives of different skills prefer more
or fewer immigrants as a function of the amount of redistribution provided by the
county. Finally, a related line of research investigates empirically how U.S. politicians
vote on topics related to immigration policies, as a function of the characteristics of
their districts. The main papers in this literature are Conconi et al. (2012) and Facchini
and Steinhardt (2011).
    While our paper is related to this literature in that it analyzes the connection be-
tween immigration and voting, we take a broader view as we analyze how immigration
affects the vote of citizens in elections, i.e. without focusing on a specific policy. Nev-
ertheless, our explicit consideration of the skill composition of immigrants and natives
is reminiscent of the central role that skill plays in Benhabib (1996), Ortega (2005),
Razin et al. (2011), Conconi et al. (2012) and Facchini and Steinhardt (2011).
    Another line of inquiry provides indirect evidence for the effect of immigrants on
citizens’ voting behavior by analyzing what determines the individual preferences of
natives about immigration. Scheve and Slaughter (2001) explore the drivers of attitudes
towards immigration in the United States using the 1992 NES survey. They find that
skilled respondents are significantly less likely to be anti-immigration compared with
unskilled ones. Hence, voters’ perceptions appear to be consistent with the predictions
of a standard labor-market model given that, in the period analyzed by this paper, U.S.
immigrants were on average less skilled than natives. Hanson et al. (2007) extend the
previous analysis by accounting for the impact of public finance considerations on U.S.
immigration attitudes. This paper shows that the negative impact of individual skill
on anti-immigration preferences is weaker in counties characterized by high exposure to
fiscal pressures commonly associated with certain types of immigration. Other papers

                                             6
in the literature, such as Mayda (2006), Facchini and Mayda (2009) and O’Rourke and
Sinnott (2006), analyze the labor market and welfare channels as determinants of public
opinion about immigration across countries. Finally, Card et al. (2012) show that, while
the perception of economic gains from immigrants varies by skill level across natives,
it is the perception of the impact of immigrants on local culture and amenities that
drives their policy preference. Our paper is clearly related to these studies, as voting
is an expression of the opinions expressed in these surveys. However, our focus is more
broadly on general elections outcomes. This is new and more relevant to assess the
impact of immigration on political equilibria.
     More directly related to our study are some recent papers that analyze how the inflow
of immigrants affects the electoral success of right-wing parties in Europe. In particular,
Barone et al. (2016) investigate the effect of immigration on political outcomes in Italy
for the 2001, 2006 and 2008 national elections. They find that inflows of immigrants
to a municipality increased the share of votes going to a center-right party that was
more conservative on immigration issues than the center-left one. Similarly, Halla et al.
(2017) estimate the impact of immigrant inflows in Austria on the share of votes for a
far-right-wing party (the Freedom Party of Austria). They find evidence of a positive
and significant effect at the neighborhood level. Both papers use shift-share instruments
à la Card (2001) to isolate supply-driven changes in immigrants and track their effects.
Finally, Otto and Steinhardt (2014) estimate the impact of the share of foreign citizens
on election outcomes using variation over time across districts in the city of Hamburg
between 1987 and 2000. The authors find evidence of a positive correlation between
the population share of immigrants in a district and the share of votes received by
extreme right-wing parties with a clearly anti-immigration stand, as well as evidence
of a negative correlation between the population share of immigrants in a district and
the share of votes received by the Green party, which held a pro-immigration position.
The authors give a causal interpretation of these results based on a fixed-effects OLS
empirical strategy and additional robustness checks, which account for the endogeneity
of the location decision of natives and immigrants. Relative to these papers, our paper
is the first to focus on U.S. elections, using variation across U.S. counties instrumented
with skill-specific shift-share instruments.
     Finally, in previous work by the authors on the same topic (Mayda et al. (2016)),
we distinguished between citizen and non-citizen immigrants but we did not account
for the skill level of immigrants themselves. We showed that an increase in citizen (vot-
ing) immigrants as a share of the U.S. population had a homogeneous, negative and
significant effect on the share of Republican votes across counties over time. Differently,
an increase in non-citizen immigrants had an insignificant average effect and significant
heterogeneous effects, shifting votes towards the Republicans in the most rural, low-skill
and high public-spending counties, but towards the Democrats in all the other counties.
In this paper we do not emphasize the distinction between citizen and non-citizen mi-
grants. The reason is that, once we account for the skill level of immigrants themselves
by differentiating between high-skilled and low-skilled, we find that increases in the
share of citizen vs. non-citizen migrants have similar effects. Specifically, whether we

                                            7
consider citizen or non-citizen migrants, an inflow of high-skilled immigrants decreases
the share of the Republican vote, while an inflow of low-skilled immigrants increases
it. Our current interpretation of the old results (Mayda et al. (2016)) is that the “pro-
Democratic Party” effect of an increase in the share of citizen migrants is driven by
the fact that these people are, on average, more skilled than the average U.S. citizen.
Non-citizen immigrants are instead more balanced between skilled and unskilled and
hence have no significant impact on the vote.


3    Empirical Model
In this section we present a simple empirical framework that allows us to organize and
discuss the impact of immigration on the Republican share of electoral votes. Our goal
is to focus on this impact by distinguishing between the share of more- and less-educated
immigrants. A change in the share of immigrants, high- or low-skilled, will affect the
electoral preferences of citizens and change the share of votes going to the Republican
Party. Although immigrants could also affect voting outcomes directly, i.e. through the
new votes of recently naturalized immigrants, it turns out that, empirically, the indirect
effect through the preference shift of existing voters is the largest. Hence, we focus on
this indirect effect. Consider rit as the probability of voting Republican for an average
U.S. citizen in county i and year t and expressed by the following general function:
                                              Lit    Hit
                               rit = f i (         ,       , Xit )                     (1)
                                             P opit P opit
    where Lit /P opit and Hit /P opit are the low-skilled and high-skilled immigrant shares
of the population in county i and year t and Xit are other socio-economic and demo-
graphic factors affecting the preference of the average citizen for the Republican Party.
By including the superscript i in the function f , we allow the relationship between
citizens’ votes and immigration to be county-specific. Later in the paper we will be
more explicit on how the effect depends on local socio-demographic characteristics. Ex-
pression (1) is a “behavioral” representation of the link between citizens’ votes and
the inflow of immigrants. The only structure that this representation imposes on the
relationship is that there may be an effect of high- and low-skilled immigrants on the
perception of citizens and it may affect their vote. One can think that a vote for the
Republican Party is a vote for less immigration and/or less redistribution. If low-skilled
immigrants are perceived to be “costly” by citizens – either because they change local
amenities or because they cause a labor market or fiscal drag on citizens – then such a
mechanism would imply a larger probability of voting for the Republican Party when
the number of low-skilled immigrants increases.
    Next we consider the total differential of expression (1) given a change in the size
of each group of immigrants (low-skilled and high-skilled), assuming that the native
population and the other variables do not change in county i. We obtain the following
expression:


                                                 8
                                             ∆Lit                ∆Hit
                         ∆rit = fNi AT,1 ∗          + fNi AT,2 ∗                        (2)
                                             P opit              P opit
    The term ∆ represents a change of the variable between time t and t + 1. In
expression (2) the term f1i is the partial derivative of the function f with respect to
the share of low-skilled immigrants in the local population and it captures the effect of
low-skilled immigrants on the Republican voting share. On the other hand, f2i is the
derivative with respect to the share of high-skilled immigrants in the local population
and it captures the effect of high-skilled immigrants on the Republican voting share.
Both are taken at the initial value t. The superscript i implies that this effect can be
heterogeneous across counties, depending on who the representative (median) voter is
in each county.
    If we ignore the superscript i, equation (2) can be the basis to estimate the average
(across counties) electoral effect of changes in the number of immigrants. We assume
that slowly changing factors affecting the share of Republican votes in a county can be
captured by a set of linear fixed effects (si ), and that national trends can be controlled
for with year- and election-type fixed effects (qt ). A set of economic and demographic
variables for the county, Xit , will absorb some of the remaining important correlates.
We obtain the following equation that captures the effect of a change in low- and high-
skilled immigrants assuming a homogeneous marginal effect across counties:
                                          Lit         Hit
                    rit = si + qt + βL          + βH        + βx Xit + εit              (3)
                                         P opit      P opit
    Expression (3) is the first specification we bring to the data. It provides a simplified
representation of the link between immigration and voting outcomes.
    Note that the perception of costs and benefits of low- and high-skilled immigrants
is likely to be quite different across counties, depending on the local socio-economic
composition of citizens. For instance, non-urban counties with less-educated citizens
may more strongly perceive competition from low-skilled immigrants, both in the labor
market and in terms of fiscal redistribution. In this case, an increase of these immigrants
will lead to a higher share of votes for the Republican Party, which is more likely to
advocate for restrictive immigration policies. On the other hand, densely populated,
high-skilled counties may perceive low-skilled immigrants as complements in the local
labor market. In this case, an increase of these immigrants may result in smaller pro-
Republican effects or even pro-Democrat shifts. We consider a specific way in which
the heterogeneous effects operate, by assuming that the impact of a change in high- or
low-skilled immigrants is a linear function of economic and demographic characteristics
of county i, which we call ki . For simplicity of interpretation, we standardize these
characteristics to vary between 0 and 1 and measure them at the beginning of the
period, in 1980. This way we can assess how the marginal effect on the vote of citizens
changes with the population characteristics in the county and allow the same inflow of
a given type of immigrants to have a different impact, depending on the county. We use
distinct characteristics of the local population that should be relevant for the operation

                                                9
of various channels of effect of immigrants on citizens’ labor market and fiscal interests.
This produces the following estimating equation:

                          Lit                Lit         Hit               Hit
    rit = si + qt + βL          + βL1 (ki )        + βH           1
                                                               + βH (ki )        + βx Xit + εit    (4)
                         P opit             P opit      P opit            P opit
    In this specification we model the impact of low- and high-skilled immigrants as,
respectively, the constant effects βL and βH in counties with the lowest average value of
the characteristic ki , plus an additional effect equal to, respectively, βL1 (ki ) and βH
                                                                                         1
                                                                                           (ki )
in counties with an increasing value of ki . For instance, if the variable considered is the
share of less-educated natives in the labor force (measured as those with a high-school
diploma or less), then the county with ki = 1 is that with the largest share of low-
educated natives in the population and βL + βL1 is the effect of increasing the share of
low-skilled immigrants by one percent of the population, on the Republican vote share
in that county. To the contrary, βL captures the effect of low-skilled immigrants in the
county with the lowest level of less-educated natives. A similar interpretation holds for
                            1
the coefficients βH and βH    in relation to an increase in high-skilled immigrants. The
term βx Xit controls for the effects of the county’s demographic characteristics on the
vote share of the county. εit captures the remaining idiosyncratic factors affecting the
Republican vote share and has an average of 0.


4       Data Description and Correlations
For each county i and year t we define the following population groups: the overall
population P opit , which is the number of adult (18+) residents of a county, both native
and foreign-born; the low-skilled immigrants Lit , which is the number of adult foreign-
born residents with no high-school degree; and the high-skilled immigrants Hit , which
is the number of adult foreign-born residents with a high-school degree or more.
    Data on natives and on low-skilled and high-skilled immigrants for the years 1980,
1990, 2000 and 2010 are obtained combining U.S. Census data from the Census web-
site and 5% U.S. Census data from the IPUMS (Integrated Public Use Micro Samples)
website (Ruggles et al. (2004)). Specifically, the share of low-skilled immigrants is calcu-
                    Lzt Mit
lated as PLopitit = Mzt P opit
                               , where (Lzt /Mzt ) is the share of low-skilled adult immigrants
in commuting zone z at time t and (Mit /P opit ) is the immigrant share in the total
adult population of county i at time t. Only the total immigrant population figures
are available at the county level from the Census. For this reason we calculate the
county-level low-skilled and high-skilled shares by applying the ratios constructed at
the commuting-zone level.7
    7
    To alleviate the concerns of measurement-error bias, we want to stress that, in the construction of
our instruments, we rely on county-level information and not on information at the commuting-zone
level.



                                                  10
   The election data are from the Congressional Quarterly data set and include presi-
dential and congressional (House and Senate) elections from 1990 to the present. Our
main outcome variable is the share of votes going to the candidate affiliated with the
Republican Party:
                                     Republican V otesit
                                  rit =                                            (5)
                                           V otesit
    Republican V otesit represents the number of people who voted for the Republican
Party, whereas V otesit is the number of actual votes in county i and year t. Since
elections do not necessarily coincide with the year the Census was taken, we average
the Republican vote share over the elections that coincide with the decennial Census
years and elections two years past the Census, i.e. the elections that took place in
1990/1992, 2000/2002 and 2010/2012 (with the exception of the House elections, for
which we have only data from 1992 onward). We consider 1990, 2000 and 2010 as the
years of analysis and we use the Census 1980 to construct our shift-share instruments,
as we will describe below.

4.1     Descriptive Statistics and Simple Correlations
After matching the election data with the Census data at the county-year-election
type level, the final sample contains 27,738 county-year-election observations across the
three types of elections (House, Senate and presidential), and each of which has 9,246
observations.8 Table 1 contains the summary statistics of the share of Republican
and Democratic votes across each type of election, in the upper part of the table.
Summary statistics for the key explanatory variables and for the other population data,
including the control variables that will be used in the empirical analysis, are reported
in the lower part of the table. The simple average – across all counties, elections and
years (1990, 2000 and 2010) – reported in Table 1 shows that the Republican Party
obtained 53.5% of the county vote and the Democratic party 42.5%. The lower average
percentage of the Democratic vote in Table 1 is an artifact of the simple average,
since Democrats and third-party candidates are over-represented in more urban and
densely populated areas.9 It is more relevant to consider the change in the share of the
vote to the Republican Party that occurred between 1990 and 2010, the period of our
analysis. Figure 1 shows the map of U.S. counties and the range of variation in the
change of intensity of the Republican vote between 1990 and 2010 (measured by the
change in Republican vote share). Darker shades of gray indicate an increase of the
Republican share, while lighter shades and white indicate a decrease in the Republican
share. Three interesting facts emerge from this map. First, non-urban counties in the
South and Mountain states have moved towards a larger share of the Republican vote.
  8
     Due to data limitations for some control variables (trade and employment), counties in Alaska
and Hawaii are not included. The results presented below are robust when we exclude these control
variables and at the same time include counties in Alaska and Hawaii.
   9
     The average weighted by voting population is much closer for the two parties.


                                               11
This is particularly apparent in Northern Texas, Oklahoma, Louisiana, Arkansas and
Kentucky. Second, urban counties in coastal locations of California, New England,
Florida and near the Great Lakes have moved towards a larger share of the Democratic
vote. Finally, some states have moved in one direction or another more than the rest of
the nation. For instance, New Mexico and Colorado have moved towards the Democrats
while Kansas and Oklahoma have moved towards the Republicans.
    The overall share of immigrants in the adult population has also changed signifi-
cantly in the considered period, with very large differences across counties. The map in
Figure 2 represents (darker color indicating greater intensity) changes in immigrants as
a share of the adult population, between 1990 and 2010 in all Continental U.S. coun-
ties. While some traditional immigrant locations such as California, Illinois (mainly
Chicago), Florida and New England continued to attract immigrants and increase their
share in the local population, new destinations emerged as magnets, especially in New
Mexico, Colorado, Kansas, Nevada and Washington State. Also interesting is to con-
sider the maps of the change in low-skilled and high-skilled immigrants, which are
reported in Figure 3, Panels (a) and (b). While the traditional states of immigration
(California, Florida, Texas, Illinois) still had growth of low-skilled immigrants (light
gray color in Panel (a)), they seem to have experienced an even larger inflow of high-
skilled immigrants in the two decades considered (dark gray in Panel (b)). Interestingly,
the border counties with Mexico seem to have experienced a decline in the share of low-
skilled immigrants, likely as a result of enforcement and return migration, especially in
the last 10 years of this period.
    Even a cursory glance at the maps in Figures 1 and 2 suggests a negative correla-
tion between the increase in total immigrants as a share of population and the share of
Republican vote. This is suggested by the fact that urban coastal areas, with larger pos-
itive changes in the share of immigrants, also experienced a decrease in the Republican
vote share. To visualize this correlation better, we show in Figure 4 the scatter plots
relating the changes in immigrant shares and changes in the Republican vote weighted
by the voting age population, between 1990 and 2010. The correlation is negative and
significant with a regression slope of -0.92 and a standard error of 0.03. Counties where
immigrants increased by one percent of the adult population experienced, on average,
a decrease of the Republican vote share by 0.92 percentage points.
    This aggregate correlation, however, hides two very different components, which are
separated in Panels (a) and (b) of Figure 5. Panel (a) shows the correlation between
changes in the low-skilled immigrant share and changes in the Republican vote share
and panel (b) shows the correlation between changes in the high-skilled immigrant
share and changes in the Republican vote share across countries. While the first is
positive and significant (with a coefficient of 0.29 and a standard error of 0.10), the
second is negative and significant (with a coefficient of -1.3 with standard error of
0.03). It appears that the inflows of more- or less-educated immigrants are correlated
with very different shifts. If most of the effects are driven by changes in citizens’
voting preferences, and part of the correlation is causal, these scatter plots suggest that
citizens may react to unskilled immigrants by moving to the party that promises less

                                            12
immigration (and less redistribution). At the same time, the vote response to highly
educated immigrant inflows more than offsets this response, pushing them toward voting
Democrat, the party that stands for more immigration and more redistribution. In net,
the correlation of immigration and the Republican vote in the average U.S. county is
negative, because in the 1990-2010 period the inflow of high-skilled immigrants has been
larger than the inflow of less-skilled immigrants (see averages in Table 1). Some of our
results below also suggest that the pro-Democrat response to high-skilled immigrants
is stronger than the pro-Republican response to low-skilled immigrants.
    Finally, Table 1 also shows the summary statistics of the control variables included
in the main empirical specifications. In choosing economic and demographic controls,
we follow the existing literature on the determinants of voting behavior in the United
States, in particular Della Vigna and Kaplan (2007), and include the share of low-
skilled natives in the adult population, the share of African-Americans and Hispanics,
the unemployment rate, the share of the population living in urban areas, as well as the
share of males and the average income per person (see lower panel of Table 1). As these
detailed demographic data are not available at the county level on the Census website,
we use the 5 per cent Census sample from the IPUMS website to compute these shares
at the commuting zone level and we apply those to all counties in the commuting zone.
    In addition to the variables described above, we also control for the possible trade
impact in the county – as trade may have an impact on votes (Che et al. (2016))
and may affect wages and employment (Autor et al. (2013)). More specifically, we
include the national industry-specific growth rate of manufacturing imports between
1990 and year t, weighted by the commuting zone’s employment composition across
sectors in manufacturing in the year 1990 (as in Autor et al. (2013)). We also control
for a “Bartik” indicator that proxies for sector-specific labor demand shocks in a given
commuting zone. We constructed it by taking a weighted average of the national
industry-specific growth rate of employment between 1990 and year t, using as weights
the employment shares across industries of the commuting zone in the year 1990.10 This
is an indicator of how technological forces have affected productivity and labor demand
in the long run.


5         Identification
The estimation of equation (3) with least squares (LS) risks producing biased estimates
if there are unobservable local characteristics affecting the vote of citizens (captured in
the term εit ) that are correlated with the change in high- and low-skilled immigrants as a
share of the population. If immigrants are attracted to locations where the attitudes of
citizens are becoming more favorable to immigration, and these attitudes are correlated
with the change in the local vote, then a spurious correlation between the inflow of
new immigrants and the change in Republican votes may ensue. Moreover, economic
and demographic changes that attract new immigrants and push local votes towards a
 10
      This follows Bartik (1992).


                                            13
specific party will also induce bias. In order to avoid or at least reduce these sources
of omitted variable bias, we use two instrumental variables to capture the variation in
more- and less-educated immigrants that should have little correlation with other local
economic or political determinants of the vote. They are an extension of the shift-share
instruments typically used in the migration literature.

5.1     Instrumental Variables
Our IV approach consists of identifying sources of variation for the change in more-
and less-educated immigrants, ∆Hit and ∆Lit , in county i between decade t − 10 and
t, which are uncorrelated with local political and economic factors that affect the local
vote. Since we are considering two distinct populations of immigrants, the IV variation
of the groups needs to be sufficiently differentiated to identify two separate effects.
To do so, we leverage the different timing and sizes of the inflow of high-skilled and
low-skilled immigrants across national groups, interacted with the 1980 distribution
of immigrants by country of origin across U.S. counties. Our two instruments build
on the shift-share methodology, widely used in this literature (since Altonji and Card
(1991) and Card (2001)), which we adjust in order to make it skill-specific. First, let us
define the terms shU S,i,1980 and shc,i,1980 as the U.S.-born adults and adult immigrants
from country c, respectively, living in county i in 1980, as a share of their total adult
population (age 18 and older) in the U.S. in 1980,11 namely:
                                                     Ni,1980
                                     shU S,i,1980 = P                                              (6)
                                                     i Ni,1980
and
                                                   Mc,i,1980
                                     shc,i,1980 = P                                                (7)
                                                    i Mc,i,1980
    The predicted size of the population of county i is given by the sum of the predicted
number of immigrants and the predicted number of natives in county i (P[       opit = Mdit +
Nit ). Each term in the latter sum uses imputed population changes, which are obtained
c
by multiplying aggregate changes of the population (of natives or of immigrants by
country of origin) by the 1980 shares of that population across counties. In particular,
the imputed native (N ) and immigrant (M ) population changes in county i are given
by the following two equations:
                X
       4Mcit =      shc,i,80 (Mct − Mct−10 ) and 4N     bit = shU S,i,80 (Nt − Nt−10 )
                   c

and these changes are then added to the initial distribution in 1980 to obtain the
  11
     We aggregate the countries of origin of immigrants into 14 origin-country groups, (Mexico, Canada,
Rest of Americas, Western Europe, Eastern Europe, China, Japan, Korea, Philippines, India, Rest of
Asia, Africa, Oceania, Others), thus the index c in shc,i,1980 varies across these groups.



                                                  14
imputed 1990 immigrant and native population in county i:
             ci1990 = Mi1980 + 4M
             M                  ci1990           and   bi1990 = Ni1980 + 4N
                                                       N                  bi1990

We iterate the process to obtain the imputed populations for the years after 1990:

                   M     cit−10 + 4M
                   cit = M         cit           and   N     bit−10 + 4N
                                                       bit = N         bit

The imputed total population is then simply the sum of the two (P[      opit = M
                                                                               d it + Nit ).
                                                                                      c
   Next, we calculate the imputed number of skilled and unskilled immigrants, using
the same 1980 share across counties by country of origin, shc,i,1980 , and distributing the
total number of high-skilled and low-skilled foreign-born immigrants from each country
of origin c at time t in the U.S. (Hct and Lct , respectively) proportionally to those
shares.12 Thus, the predicted number of skilled immigrants in county i is given by
                                          X
                                  Hb it =    shc,i,80 Hct
                                             c

and similarly, the imputed number of skilled immigrants is given by:
                                      X
                                L
                                bit =      shc,i,80 Lct
                                             c

The instrument for the share of skilled immigrants in county i is then simply   the pre- 
dicted number of high-skilled immigrants divided by the predicted population H          opit ,
                                                                                 b it /P[
                                                      
and for the low-skilled immigrants it is L   bit /P[
                                                   opit . We will use the instruments to
predict the share of skilled and unskilled immigrants in regression (3) and (4). We
note that the ability of the two instruments to proxy high- and low-skilled immigrants
depends only on the difference in skill intensity of immigrant groups, interacted with
their 1980 location by country of origin. Counties with similar shares of immigrants as
of 1980, but from different origins, generated very different imputed changes of high-
and low-skilled, due to the interaction of those shares with the educational composition
of immigrants by nationality.

5.2     Discussion
The shift-share instrument has been widely used in immigration economics and it is
convenient.13 It usually has reasonable power, because networks of existing immigrants
attract new immigrants from the same country, and its exclusion restriction is plausi-
ble. It is based on assuming that the distribution of immigrants by country of origin,
  12
     One advantage of this method is to avoid aggregation issues due to the use of commuting zone
level data for the skill level.
  13
     See a review of its use and refinements in Lewis and Peri (2015).



                                                 15
10 years before the period of analysis, in 1980, is not correlated with economic and
demographic changes for the native population, after 1990, other than via their impact
on current immigration. While persistent local conditions that attract immigrants and
affect political votes can threaten the identification, one can test the plausibility of the
assumptions and reduce the omitted variable concerns. We will discuss some of them
here.
    The first threat to identifying a causal connection from immigration to votes consists
of the possible reverse causation combined with persistence and correlation over time.
If places that are more likely to vote for the Republican Party also attract/push away
low-skilled (or high-skilled) immigrants and correlation over time is strong, this channel
can bias the estimates. One falsification exercise we perform to address this issue is to
regress the change in the subsequent share of low-skilled and high-skilled immigrants,
respectively, on past vote share, to show that there is no significant correlation.
    The second threat is that some counties have persistent economic, cultural and insti-
tutional features appealing to immigrants and also affecting their political preferences.
Location, geography and historical heritage of a county could be such factors. The
introduction of county fixed effects and of economic and demographic controls at the
commuting zone level contributes to reducing these concerns, but may not eliminate all
of them.
    Finally, as we estimate a reduced form and not a structural relation, it is impor-
tant to enrich our understanding of the average effect with the potential interaction
of immigrants with different local features. The fact that we allow the effects to be
heterogeneous across counties, depending on their initial characteristics, improves our
identification as well, in that it shows which local characteristics strengthen or weaken
a certain effect. This lends support to different hypotheses and channels, and may rule
out others. In addition, when the estimated effects are heterogeneous, it is much harder
to formulate an alternative interpretation of the results based on endogeneity. Hence,
we will implement the two-stage least squares (2SLS) estimates, and we will also try to
produce OLS estimates that reduce the worries of omitted variable bias. First we will
analyze some basic OLS regressions that allow us to choose a parsimonious specification
and focus on the most relevant partial correlations.


6     OLS and 2SLS Estimates
6.1    Basic OLS Estimates
Table 2, Panel (b) shows the estimates of coefficients βL and βH from equation 3 when
we use LS and include time effects, county effects and the commuting-zone specific
controls as described above (i.e. the share of low-skilled natives, the share of men,
the share of African-Americans, the share of Hispanics, the share of unemployed, the
average income per person in the adult population as well as the Bartik employment
shifter and the Import competition shock). These variables capture a wide range of


                                            16
economic and demographic characteristics of the commuting zone that may affect the
vote percentages, measured at the beginning of the decade. Specifically, the Bartik
shifter captures the sector-driven employment growth at the local level, and the Autor
et al. (2013) “trade shock” captures the impact of import competition from China and
other countries on the local manufacturing sectors. In Panel (a) of Table 2 we show,
for comparison, the coefficient estimates for the specifications that use the aggregate
share of immigrants as an explanatory variable.
    These specifications are reminiscent of the reduced-form regressions that are often
used to analyze the local impact of immigrants on labor market and other economic
outcomes (e.g. Card (2001), Basso and Peri (2016)). They provide prima facie evidence
of the correlation between the increase in foreign-born residents in a county, and then
separately of more- and less-educated foreign-born residents, and the change in the
share of Republican votes.
    In specification (1) we include all types of elections pooled, while in specifications
(2)-(4) we include separately presidential, Senate and House elections. The standard
errors are clustered at the commuting zone level to account for potential correlation of
errors within each commuting zone – given that a commuting zone encompasses a labor
market.
    Three clear facts emerge from Table 2. First, there is a significant and robust positive
correlation between the share of low-skilled immigrants and the Republican vote share
across counties, when pooling all elections as well as for each election type separately.
Second, there is a similarly robust and significant negative correlation between the share
of high-skilled immigrants and the vote share of the Republican Party in the pooled
election specification and in each election type. Third, although the coefficients are of
similar magnitude and opposite sign, when combining the two effects, in Panel (a), we
are left with a negative and significant coefficient. The reason is the larger increase
in high-skilled immigrants relative to low-skilled immigrants as a percentage of the
population in the 1990-2010 period. Counties in which less-skilled immigrants in the
adult population increased by 1 percentage point are also those where the share of the
Republican Party increased on average by 0.87 points. Conversely, a similar increase
in high-skilled immigrants reduced the Republican share by 0.75 percent.
    These correlations may be driven by many different factors and channels. First,
it may be that, rather than the level of skills of immigrants, which is certainly the
most relevant variable in determining their economic and labor market effect, it is the
origin of the immigrants that produces the voting response. Immigrants from poor
countries, no matter what their skill level is, may be perceived as being different and
imposing a cost, and hence the level of skill may just be proxying for immigrants coming
from rich and poor countries. In Table 3, column 2, we show the correlation after we
have split immigrants in four groups to estimate a separate coefficient on low-skilled
from poor countries, low-skilled from rich countries, high-skilled from poor countries
and high-skilled from rich countries. The set of rich countries are those in the OECD.
Interestingly, the coefficient on high-skilled immigrants is negative and significant (both
for rich and poor countries of origin) and the coefficient on low-skilled immigrants is

                                            17
positive and especially large for immigrants from OECD countries.
    It appears that low-skilled and high-skilled immigrants have a significantly different
association with the Republican vote, independent of whether they are from rich or poor
countries. The “pro-Democrat” impact of high-skilled immigrants, even for those from
poor countries, is consistent with a theory based on the economic and fiscal effect of
immigrants (and the positive contribution of high- relative to low-skilled immigrants),
rather than with a theory based on ethnicity or country of origin. To check if a specific
country of origin is associated with the pro-Republican vote share, in column 3 we isolate
the share of Mexican immigrants. They are the largest group of immigrants in the U.S.
and are often associated with undocumented immigration or low-skilled immigration.
Even in this case, there is a large positive association between the share of less-skilled
Mexicans with Republican votes, and there is a large and negative association between
the share of highly educated Mexicans with the Republican vote. Thus it appears that
the vote across counties is quite responsive to the skills of immigrants, rather than to
their nationality.
    Finally, in column 4 of Table 3 we analyze whether there is evidence that the share
of immigrants affects the share of Republican votes as a consequence of their direct
voting behavior when they naturalize and become citizens, rather than their impact
on natives. In this column we separate the share of immigrants between naturalized
(citizens) – hence able to vote – and non-naturalized (non-voting). The coefficient on
non-naturalized immigrants, no matter through what mechanism, can operate only via
their effect on citizens’ votes, as non-naturalized immigrants cannot vote. Hence, if non-
naturalized immigrants have a correlation with the vote share that is similar to that
of naturalized immigrants, this must imply that the indirect effect is the predominant
channel through which immigrants as a whole affect U.S. votes. The point estimates
of column 4 of Table 3 show that the correlation of low-skilled immigrants with the
Republican vote share is similar between citizens and non-citizens (not statistically
different) and positive, while in the case of high-skilled citizens, the coefficient is actually
larger in value (and negative) for non-citizen immigrants than for citizen immigrants.
These coefficients together suggest that the impact of immigrants is mainly through
their effect on existing voters’ preferences and votes (their indirect effect) and not
through their direct impact, i.e. through the new votes, participation and different
voting behavior of newly naturalized immigrants.
    An alternative way to check whether immigrants affected the participation at the
elections and hence may have had a role in modifying the composition of voters (rather
than their vote choice) is to see whether there is a significant correlation between
immigration and the electoral turnout across U.S. counties.14 These coefficients are
shown in Table 4, first for the total immigrant share and then for high- and less-skilled
immigrants separately. The estimated specification is just as (3), but the dependent
variable is now the total number of votes divided by the number of people who have
  14
     We define voter turnout as the total number of votes in the election data divided by the voting
population observed in the U.S. decennial Census. For the House elections, we observe only vote shares
for each party and hence are not able to compute the turnout.


                                                 18
the right to vote. The table shows a negative coefficient between immigrants and
vote turnout when controlling for local characteristics (column 2) but no significant
coefficient when separating more- and less-skilled immigrants (column 4). This suggests
that the participation channel is likely not too relevant and that the main effect of
immigration comes through the impact on existing voters’ votes, and it is different in
response to more- and less-skilled inflows.
   Let us emphasize that while all the estimated coefficients may suffer from omitted
variable bias, this preliminary analysis has provided us with some important correlations
that we will further analyze using the 2SLS estimation. As the partition between more-
and less-skilled has proved to be crucial, our 2SLS outcomes will focus on that. As
the correlation has proven to be the same for non-naturalized as well as for naturalized
immigrants, we consider the plausible channel for the correlation to be through the
votes of existing voters, i.e. an indirect effect.

6.2    Basic 2SLS Estimates
Table 5 shows the estimates using 2SLS, with imputed high- and low-skilled immigrants
as instruments. In columns 1, 2, 4 and 5 we include separately low- and high-skilled
immigrant changes as a share of the population. In specifications 3 and 6 we include
both changes simultaneously. In the lower part of the table we show the coefficients
for the first stage without commuting zone controls (specifications 1-3) and with those
controls (specifications 4-6). All specifications include all elections and control for
time, county and election fixed effects. The first thing to notice is that the F-statistics
of the first stage are reasonably large. The weaker instrument is the one predicting
the change in less-skilled immigrants, but its power and the joint power of the two
instruments are still strong, as the F-statistics are larger than 10 in the specification
with county fixed effects. Focusing on the most conservative specification 6, which
includes the commuting zone level controls and simultaneously estimates the effects of
the two groups, we see that the estimated coefficients are not too different from the OLS
coefficients in column 1 of Table 2, Panel (b). An increase in low-skilled immigrants
of one percent of the adult population produces an increase in the Republican vote of
1.3 percent. The same increase of high-skilled immigrants produces a decline in the
Republican share by 0.78 percent. The first effect is larger than the OLS estimate
(0.87), but the standard error is large so the two are not significantly different. The
second effect is very similar in the two estimates. These estimates are consistent with
a causal interpretation of the significant and opposite effects of high- and low-skilled
immigrants on the vote share. A large inflow of less-educated immigrants, possibly
increasing worries about labor market competition (for low-skilled citizens) and fiscal
transfers (for both high-skilled and low-skilled citizens) seems to push the electorate
towards a vote for the Republican Party. Recall that our set of controls – for sector-
driven employment growth and for trade shocks – is meant to separate out generic
economic shocks from the impact of the inflow of immigrants.
    To rule out that reverse causation plus persistence of political preferences could be

                                            19
a strong driver of the correlation, we test in Panel (a) of Table 6 whether the share of
Republican votes in an election is associated with the change in immigrants (high- and
low-skilled) during the following decade. In Panel (b) we perform the same test for the
predicted share of immigrants (high- and low-skilled) as defined by our instrumental
variable strategy. A correlation of the political environment with subsequent inflows
may reveal that locations with more Republican voters represent a worse environment
for low-skilled immigrants (or a better one for skilled immigrants) affecting subsequent
inflows and generating a correlation with subsequent vote change that may be due to
reverse causation. While some correlation exists when we do not include commuting
zone control variables or county fixed effects (see Table 6), there is no systematic cor-
relation between the past Republican vote share and the subsequent decade change in
the immigrant share or in the predicted share of high- or low-skill immigrants. While
immigrants certainly do not locate themselves randomly, the past vote share of the
Republican party does not seem to have predictive power in determining their location.
The similarity of OLS and 2SLS results, plus the test of reverse causality of Table 6,
help reassure us that our regressions do not show strong evidence of large omitted vari-
able bias or reverse causality bias, especially once we control for county fixed effects
and local economic factors. In the next section we will therefore rely on the OLS and
2SLS identification with many fixed effects to inquire after the heterogeneous response
of counties, depending on their economic and demographic make-up.


7     Heterogeneous Effects and Potential Explanations
Equation 4 shows that the electoral response of the median voter in county i may
depend on the average characteristics of that county, ki . This would be consistent with
the economic and political theories of voting. The perception of low-skilled immigrants
by less-educated natives may be negative, as those migrants may compete with them in
the labor market and may crowd out public resources that benefit them in particular.
Highly educated natives, instead, may value the variety of skills and services that they
bring – as low-skilled immigrants complement their skills – but still be concerned about
the fiscal impact of low-skilled immigrants. Hence, the effect of an inflow of low-skilled
immigrants on a vote against immigration (for the Republican Party) should be stronger
the larger the share of less-skilled citizens in the county (and hence the more unskilled
the median voter). In this section we analyze the operation of this and other channels
in determining heterogeneous voting responses across U.S. counties.

7.1    The Labor-market Channel
Economic theory of labor market competition suggests that immigrants would be bene-
ficial to the wage and employment of complementary types of workers and would reduce
the relative demand for similar types of workers (e.g. Ottaviano and Peri (2012)). Even
in the presence of positive overall effects from immigrants, workers with mostly com-


                                           20
plementary skills will perceive the strongest positive effect from a group of immigrants.
Hence, we consider the ratio of unskilled to skilled in the local population, before migra-
tion, as a key determinant of the attitude of citizens towards low-skilled and high-skilled
immigrants. The variable ki in this case will be the ratio of less-skilled to high-skilled
adult population in 1980, where we define as skilled people those with more than a
high-school degree and unskilled as those with at most a high-school degree. We in-
clude only people older than 18 and we standardize the value to be equal to 1 in the
county with the highest ratio, so that the county with smallest ratio has a value of
0.05. The theory of relative skill supply (as in Autor et al. (2006)) predicts that the
average worker in counties with large values of low-to-high skill ratio will be subject to
wage competition from low-skilled immigrants. Hence, in those counties, an increase
in the share of low-skilled immigrants should shift citizens’ votes towards Republicans
(βL1 > 0 in regression 4) because of the feared negative wage effects. To the contrary, the
average voter in counties with small values of the unskilled-to-skilled ratio is likely to
benefit from low-skilled immigration through skill complementarity. In those counties
the vote should move towards the (pro-immigration) Democratic Party as the inflow of
low-skilled immigrants produces benefits to the median voter. If based on labor market
competition, the vote impact on the Republican Party of high-skilled immigrants should
be the opposite. That is, counties with low values of the low-to-high skill ratio should
have a more pro-Republican response to high-skilled immigrants relative to counties
with high values of low-to-high skill ratio.
    Column 1 of Tables 7 and 8 shows the estimates of the key coefficients in specification
(4) when the interacted variable is the ratio of unskilled-to-skilled workers in 1980.15
The method of estimation is OLS for Table 7 and 2SLS for Table 8. The instruments
used for the share of low-skilled and high-skilled immigrants are the imputed shares
described above. We also instrument the interaction of the predetermined characteristic
with the share of immigrants with the interaction of the characteristics and the imputed
share of immigrants. The results are similar between the two methods qualitatively,
but the 2SLS interaction coefficients are much larger in absolute value and imprecisely
estimated, due to the low power of the instrument once we interact them with the
indicator of skills. Hence we focus on the OLS coefficient in our quantitative assessment.
    The estimates of column 1 of Table 7 imply that in the county with largest unskilled-
skilled ratio (standardized to be equal to 1), an increase of the low-skilled immigrant
group by one percent of the population increases the share of Republican votes by
3.22 percentage points (0.22 + 3.0). To the contrary, in the county with the smallest
share of unskilled-skilled ratio (equal to 0.02), the growth in the low-skilled immigrant
population produces a much smaller increase in the Republican vote equal to (0.22 +
0.02 ∗ 3.00 =) 0.28 percentage point. The first effect is significantly different from 0 at
the 5% confidence level, while the second is not statistically significant. This suggests a
  15
    While the share of immigrants is measured at the county level, the “interaction variables”, such
as the unskilled/skilled ratio and the share of the urban population, are measured for the commuting
zone. This is due to data availability for these variables at the commuting zone level and to the
commonality of economic conditions in the commuting zone.


                                                21
very heterogeneous response to the same phenomenon. Counties with a predominantly
low-skilled population respond to immigration with a much larger shift of votes towards
the Republican Party, relative to counties with a predominantly high-skilled population,
which do not have a significant response. This can be considered as one expression of
“polarization” of American politics. Interestingly, and consistently with an economic
explanation of the impact of immigrants, the response to an increase in high-skilled
immigration is symmetric, not just in the main effect but also in its interaction. In
the county with the largest ratio of unskilled-to-skilled people in 1980, an increase in
high-skilled immigrants of 1 percent of the population would produce a decrease in
the Republican vote by −2.75 percentage points (=−0.29 ∗ 2.46). However, the same
increase in the most skilled county would result in a shift by only −0.34 percentage
points (= 0.02∗2.4). In this case, the move away from the Republican vote is significant
also for the most skill-intensive county. If a county is more skilled, the pro-Republican
effect of less-skilled immigrants is reduced because that group does not harm labor
market perspectives, but the pro-Democrat effect of skilled immigrants is also reduced.
These effects are consistent with a world where there is an overall preference for high-
skilled immigrants, possibly because of their positive fiscal effect, and an aversion of
citizens for immigrants with skills similar to theirs (and preference for immigrants of
different skills). A model of skill complementarity plus some redistribution would imply
that such voting behavior is economically rational.
    To give a concrete example of how the heterogeneous responses affect the voting
outcomes, we compare two counties that had a rather large increase in their immigra-
tion shares over the last 20 years. The first is Gwinnet County in Georgia, which saw
its share of immigrants increase by 26 percentage points over 20 years. Immigration
was mainly high-skilled (two-thirds of immigrants were high-skilled). In addition, the
native population in 1980 was rather skilled. The county is part of a commuting zone
that ranks at the 26th percentile of the unskilled-to-skilled distribution of natives in
1980.16 According to the coefficients in Table 7, column 1, the implied decrease in
the Republican vote share is 10.2 percentage points. A county with a similarly large
increase in the share of immigrants was Concho County in Texas. The share of immi-
grants increased by 16 percentage points but was predominantly low-skilled (63 percent
of them were low-skilled). Furthermore, the county is part of a commuting zone with a
rather high share of unskilled natives. The commuting zone was at the 70th percentile
of the unskilled-to-skilled distribution of natives in 1980. The combination of having
a large inflow of unskilled immigrants and a native population characterized by a high
share of low-skilled natives implies, according to our model in Table 7, column 1, an
increase in the Republican vote share of 10.6 percentage points. Overall, this example
illustrates how a significant increase in the share of immigrants can lead to very differ-
ent election outcomes depending both on the composition of immigrants and on their
interaction with native characteristics. We can say that counties such as Gwinnet and
Concho diverged in their political preferences also as a consequence of their response
 16
      The first percentile being the commuting zone with the highest skilled-to-unskilled ratio.



                                                   22
to immigration.
    A second local characteristic that may affect the labor market impact of immigrants
on natives is the skill diversification and “thickness” of the local economy. Immigrants
may have differentiated skills relative to natives (see Ottaviano and Peri (2006)) and
they increase the variety of abilities available to firms. Their positive impact may
be larger where the number and variety of firms is larger and where the demand for
skills is more differentiated. Also, higher density of economic activity may imply a
better skill-to-task match for immigrants (see Peri and Sparber (2009)). This would
produce stronger and more positive productivity effects. We proxy the differentiation
and complexity of the local economy simply with the density of economic activity. We
consider the share of the county that is rural (i.e. non-urban) in 1980 as ki and we
summarize the economic theory of local agglomerations as implying lower benefits from
(low-skilled and high-skilled) immigration for larger values of ki . We also standardize
this variable to have a maximum value of 1 and a minimum of 0.
    Column 2 of Tables 7 and 8 shows the estimates of the relevant coefficients, inter-
acting county rural share in 1980 with the change of each type of immigrant. Using
the OLS estimates, which are smaller and more precise, we obtain that the county with
the most rural population (index equal to 1) experiences an increase of Republican
vote share of (0.47 + 1.41 =) 1.88 percent per increase of low-skilled immigrants of 1
percentage point of the population. A county with a fully urban population, instead,
experiences an increase of only 0.47 percent of the Republican vote as low-skilled immi-
grants increase by 1 percent of population. That same county also experiences a decline
of 0.68 percent in the Republican vote share for a similar increase in high-skilled immi-
grants. High-skilled immigrants may have had a stronger pro-Democrat effect in rural
counties but that gradient (estimated at −0.513) as the rural percentage increases is
not significant.
    Less-urbanized and low-skilled counties, therefore, are those where a larger increase
in low-skilled immigrants triggered a move towards the more “restrictive” Republican
Party. To the contrary, in urban highly skilled counties a larger inflow of immigrants,
especially if balanced or skill-intensive, triggered the opposite effect of an increase in the
share of votes for the Democratic Party. This result broadly aligns with the economic
interests of the median voter in each county. Skilled urban workers see the benefits of
opening their economy to immigrants, who increase the local supply of complementary
abilities, increase the variety of local skills, and bring them positive productivity effects.
Not only do urban highly skilled workers have different voting patterns than less-skilled
non-urban workers, but the same phenomenon – an increase in the share of non-citizen
immigrants – produces divergent political responses.

7.2    Fiscal Redistribution
Often immigrants, especially less-skilled ones, are perceived as a burden on the social
state. Several advocacy groups produce documents suggesting that, overall, immigrants
are a fiscal cost. Academic studies are much less clear that there is a negative fiscal

                                             23
effect of immigrants, as the fiscal accounting of immigrant effects is complex and de-
pends on a series of assumptions (see, for instance, the range of possible calculations
presented in Chapter 8 and 9 of NASEM (2016)). However, there is some consensus
among academics that less-educated immigrants may constitute a net fiscal cost for
natives, while more educated ones constitute a net positive transfer. Depending on
whether people think that the fiscal cost of less-educated immigrants will imply mainly
higher taxes (predominately paid by higher-skilled) or less welfare and transfer benefits
(predominately received by less-educated), this fiscal effect may produce larger opposi-
tion among more- or less-educated citizens. Highly educated immigrants instead should
be considered as bringing net benefits to both groups of citizens.
    To see if the local generosity of the welfare state affects the intensity of the anti-low-
skilled immigrant response, we analyze in column 3 of Tables 7 and 8 the interaction of
local public spending per dollar of income and immigration. As the generosity of public
spending increases, inflow of less-skilled immigrants may result in more opposition to
it and more votes for the Republican Party.17
    The estimates suggest that, even in this case, counties with larger public spending
per dollar of income respond with a stronger pro-Republican vote to less-skilled immi-
gration. The response to high-skilled immigrants, on the other hand, is opposite in sign
but not statistically significant. The generosity of local public spending seems to have
less of an interaction effect with immigration in determining the move towards a lower
share of Republican vote.
    Combining the evidence provided so far, we have a picture of the perceived economic
impact of immigration, and of the subsequent effect on citizens’ votes, that is also con-
sistent with the evidence from the literature on individual attitudes towards immigrants
(see Scheve and Slaughter (2001), Hanson et al. (2007), Mayda (2006), and Facchini
and Mayda (2009)). In particular, areas with more unskilled populations, lower urban
density and higher public expenditures per unit of GDP seem to respond to low-skilled
immigrants with a larger share of votes to the Republican Party. On the other hand,
high-skilled immigration consistently moves the local electorate towards votes for the
Democratic Party; this effect is particularly strong in areas with large concentrations
of low-skilled workers but it is present in all counties.

7.3     Linguistic Differences
A third channel that we test in our heterogeneous-effects specification entails the lin-
guistic difference between immigrants and natives. We take the linguistic distance of an
immigrant community’s language, defined as the official language spoken in the coun-
try of birth of that group, and we calculate the linguistic proximity index based on an
Ethnolinguistic Tree, as described in Adsera and Pytlikova (2015). We consider the
  17
    In our main specification we define public spending as the share of total public education ex-
penditure per GDP in the commuting zone. Alternative measures for public spending include total
expenditure for schools and hospitals per total GDP. In both cases, the results are similar to the one
presented in the main text.


                                                 24
linguistic proximity index ici1980 in commuting zone i that ranges from 0 to 1 depend-
ing on how many levels of the linguistic family tree the languages of the immigrant’s
country of origin c share with English. We weight the index by the share of immigrants
from country c in the immigrant population in the commuting zone wct1980 as of 1980
                                            Mi
                                            X
                                 Ii1980 =         wct1980 ict1980                       (8)
                                            c=1

    and use the linguistic proximity index Ii1980 that varies between 0 (all immigrants
in the commuting zone migrated from a country with English as an official language)
and 1 (no immigrant in the commuting zone migrated from a country with English as
an official language) in each commuting zone. We transform this index into a distance
measure (by taking one minus the proximity index), which also varies between 0 and
1. This distance, measured as of 1980, may be considered as an attribute of the local
immigrant group. It is interpreted as the average linguistic distance between the native
and the immigrant populations. As long as language commonality reflects similar val-
ues, a shared history or common cultural references, this index also proxies for average
cultural distance.
    The estimates of the coefficients on this interaction are shown in column 4 of Tables
7 and 8, using OLS or 2SLS. The linear coefficient of high-skilled immigrants and the
interaction term with linguistic distance is negative and significant in both the OLS and
the IV estimates. These results imply that the pro-Democrat effect of highly skilled
immigrants increases when the immigrants are from countries that are further linguis-
tically. For the low-skilled, the combined effect has the reverse implications. In the
2SLS specifications culturally homogeneous counties have no significant preference for
either party, but as immigrants are further away linguistically, low-skilled voters shift
their voting preference significantly to the Republican Party. When taken together,
these results can be considered as suggestive evidence that cultural distance between
the local immigrant community and natives tends to increase the anti-immigration sen-
timent that native people experience for less-educated immigrants. The pro-Democrat
reaction to high-skilled immigrants is not as clearly affected by linguistic distance, with
distance reinforcing the pro-Democrat effect, if anything.
    To illustrate the effects of cultural differences of immigrants on election outcomes, we
consider again the counties from before, Gwinnet County in Georgia and Concho County
in Texas. Gwinnet County is not only part of a commuting zone with a large share
of high-skilled natives but also part of a commuting zone where language differences
between immigrants and natives are smaller than for the median commuting zone.
On the other hand, immigrant-native language differences in Concho County are very
large. The county ranks at the 97th percentile of the distribution. Based on the
language differences and the differences in type of immigrants, the election outcomes
are as polarized as in the example of the labor market channel. The coefficients in
Table 7, column 4 imply a 16 percentage-point decrease in the Republican vote share
in Gwinnet County, while in Concho County the Republican vote share would increase


                                              25
by almost 8 percentage points.
    Finally, in the last column of Table 7 (column 5) we include all the channels, cap-
tured by the interaction effects, together. The collinearity among them and the large
number of endogenous variables implies that the estimates become significantly less
precise. More importantly, it is not possible to have a 2SLS estimate due to the joint
weakness of the instruments, hence there is no corresponding column in Table 8. The
sign and the point estimates for the OLS specification are similar to those estimated
one-by-one. The standard errors increase, however, so as to reduce the significance
of the estimates. Only the interactions with the share of skilled-to-unskilled ratio of
the native population, as well as the interaction with the cultural differences, remain
significant. The divergence in the effect of immigrants on votes between counties with
a large share of high-skilled natives and those with low share of high-skilled natives is
the strongest and most significant divide in political response to the vote. While not
too precise, the inclusion of different interactions can improve the aggregate explana-
tory power of the model. We will use this model to produce some predicted value of
changes in Republican share across U.S. counties between 1990 and 2010, simply based
on high-skilled and low-skilled immigrant changes. We will also compare them with
actual changes in the Republican Party share in the elections and see how much immi-
gration flows may have affected the recent increase in vote polarization and the move
towards the Republican Party in some counties.

7.4      Proximity
The last channel we consider is whether proximity to immigrants matters for the vote
response of natives. Recent research (such as Steinmayr (2016) for Austria and Mueller
et al. (2017) for Switzerland) has shown that proximity to immigrants can reduce anti-
immigrant sentiments among the native population. Our reduced-form regressions
at the county level cannot separate whether the positive/negative impact of immi-
grants on native opinion derives from direct contact with them or from news and local
information-mediated knowledge. We can, however, analyze whether the effect of im-
migrants in the same county is different from the effect of immigrants in the state. The
second group is as likely to affect the local/state news but less likely to come in direct
contact with natives. To do this, we include the share of immigrants in the state (ex-
cluding the own county) as an additional control variable. More precisely, we estimate
the following alternative specification of equation (4):

                            Lit          Ls−i,t         Hit      s Hs−i,t
      rit = si + qt + βL          + βLs           + βH        + βH          + βx Xit + εit   (9)
                           P opit       P ops−i,t      P opit      P ops−it
             L              H
    where P ops−i,t
               s−i,t
                     and P ops−i,t
                              s−i,t
                                    are the share of low- and high-skilled immigrants at the
state level, excluding those in the county. Table 9 shows the results. The share of both
low- and high-skilled immigrants at the state level significantly increases the Republican


                                                 26
vote share, while the county-share effect is still positive for low-skilled and negative for
high-skilled immigrants. The coefficient of low-skilled immigrants at the state level is
larger but not very different from that of high-skilled immigrants in the specification
with commuting zone controls. These results can be interpreted as consistent with the
idea that more immigrants in a state – likely to catalyze local media attention – produce
worries in voters. Personal contact with highly skilled immigrants reverses such worries
but personal contact with low-skilled immigrants increases them. Table 9, column 2
shows that, on average, in places where the share of immigrants at the county level is
higher than at the state level, natives are less likely to vote for the Republican Party.
On the contrary, in cases where the share at county level is lower than at the state
level, natives are more likely to vote Republican. The pro-Democrat effect arises from
county-level immigration of high-skilled immigrants, as shown in column 4 of Table 9.
While these results are mostly suggestive, they indicate that the type of immigrants
and their interactions and contact at the local level can be important to understand
their electoral impact.


8      Accounting for the 1990-2010 Change in Vote
      Shares
Figure 1 shows the 1990-2010 evolution of the Republican vote share in U.S. counties.
Many counties of the South, Central and Mountain regions of the U.S. display an
increase in the average vote share of the Republican Party over the period (dark colors),
when averaging elections. The map also shows the tendency of counties in urban New
England, several parts of the Midwest, California and few other mainly coastal locations
in the West to experience an increase in the share of Democratic Party vote (white
color). Is our model, which captures the impact of increased high- and low-skilled
immigration and their interactions with local characteristics, helpful to account for this
increase in vote polarization and political divide across U.S. counties? With a first
and simplistic look, one may observe the coastal and urban increase of the Democratic
Party share and be tempted to associate it with the growth of high-skilled immigrants,
which offsets a weaker effect of less-skilled immigrants, predominant in the non-coastal
regions. Our model, however, is more complex and suggests differentiated effects from
low-skilled immigrants across counties. We illustrate our model’s predictive power
in two steps. First, we calculate the predicted change in the Republican vote share
proceeding from the estimated effect of low-skilled immigrants, and then separately the
effect of high-skilled immigrants (including all interactions). We then combine the two
and test the correlation and explanatory power of these predictions relative to actual
changes in the share of Republican vote.
    The model estimated in the previous section establishes that the growth of skilled
and unskilled immigrants, interacted with local characteristics, was a significant deter-
minant of the change in U.S. voting patterns. In order to use the model for prediction,
we consider the OLS estimates in column 5 of Table 7, where we include all the county

                                            27
characteristics interacted with the change in high- and low-skilled immigrants as a share
of the population (unskilled-skilled index, urban share and local public spending index)
to predict the change in Republican vote share 1990-2010 in each county. We take
from the data the 1990-2010 county-specific changes in population shares of high- and
low-skilled immigrants.
    Figure 6(a) shows the map of the predicted impact of the growth in the popula-
tion share of low-skilled immigrants. As most counties experienced an increase in this
group’s share of the population, when taken by itself, this effect predicts an increase of
the Republican share (dark color). This predicted effect is particularly strong for the
counties with high shares of low-skilled workers, many of which are in the south. We
also differentiate between effects that are significantly positive (shown in the map with
a darker color) accounting for the standard error of the estimates. Only some counties
in the northern part of the U.S. experienced a decrease in Republican vote through this
channel.
    Figure 6(b) shows the heterogeneous predicted impact of high-skilled immigrants
on the Republican vote. In this case the effect is mainly negative, and particularly so
(light-colored counties on the map) for the coastal urbanized area that received large
inflows of highly skilled immigrants. The resulting map shows a very large number
of negative effects, all over the country, with positive effect on the Republican Party
from high-skilled immigrants in only a few counties in the south and central part of the
country.
    The most relevant Figure is 7. In it we combine the two effects of high-skilled and
low-skilled immigrants and we show the net effect on the Republican vote share. The
resulting picture reflects the overall impact as quite differentiated across the different
parts of the country. More immigrants increased the Democratic vote in the highly
dense urban areas of New England and California. Because these locations received
a large share of highly educated immigrants and because natives are highly skilled,
the vote impact of less-educated immigrants in these areas was attenuated. To the
contrary, the growth of immigrants increased the Republican vote share in large parts
of the non-urban less-skilled South and Midwest regions, where immigrants were less
skilled and the local characteristics made the counties respond more to the immigration
of less-skilled people. The electoral reward of winning many counties, rather than the
more populous ones (built into the electoral college for the presidential elections) turns
out to be an important feature of the effect of immigrants that rewarded the Republican
Party.
    In order to show how relevant immigration has been in predicting the changing
share of Republican votes across counties, we show in Figure 8 a scatter plot of the
model-predicted (from Figure 7) and the actual changes in the average vote share (from
Figure 1) over the period 1990-2010. We notice a very strong positive correlation: the
LS coefficient is 1.48 and the standard error is equal to 0.045. The model prediction
of the change in Republican vote explains 22% of the variance of the growth across
counties (R-square of the weighted LS regression is 0.22). We also perform a further
exercise and evaluate how many counties changed from a majority of Democratic votes

                                           28
in 1990 to become majority Republican, by adding the predicted change of Republican
vote from immigration.
    According to the coefficients in Table 7, column 5, in presidential elections only 7
out of 3,082 counties switched from a Democrat majority to a Republican majority.
The equivalent number for Senate elections is 2 counties and for House elections is 1
county. On the other hand, 60 counties switched from a Republican majority to a
Democrat majority in presidential elections (38 counties switched in Senate elections
and 35 in House elections). We can aggregate our results and calculate how many
congressional districts and states switched due to immigration. The results show that no
state and no congressional district switched from a Democrat majority to a Republican
majority as a consequence of immigration. At the same time, in House elections, 11
congressional districts and 5 states in presidential elections switched to a Democrat
majority. For Senate elections, our results imply no change in the majority due to
immigrants. These results show that immigration did fairly little to change majority
outcomes. Rather, it increased political polarization in the United States. Large urban
areas, already exhibiting a Democratic majority, are those where the pro-Democrat
effect of immigrants was stronger, but those counties were already leaning Democrat
before. Similarly, the effect of new immigrants increased the Republican vote share in
some less-urban and low-skilled counties that already exhibited a Republican majority
in 1990.


9    Conclusion
In this paper we have analyzed the connection between the change in the immigrant
population and the vote to the Republican Party, exploiting the variation across U.S.
counties between 1990 and 2010. We hypothesize that such a connection can be different
in response to high- or low-skilled immigrants.
    The first group certainly brings fiscal benefits to natives, possibly increases job
creation and growth, and is believed to be easily integrated. The second may have a
fiscal cost, may compete in the labor market with less-educated voters, and may have
a harder time to integrate. We take no stand on whether these assessments of facts are
correct, and in general economists agree that the labor market effects of less-educated
immigrants are small (e.g. Ottaviano and Peri (2012)), but we think that they may
correspond to the perceptions of U.S. voters.
    We also account for the fact that the perception and response of voters (and hence
of counties, in that their median voter differs) may be different depending on their char-
acteristics. Less-skilled citizens may perceive the labor market and fiscal competition
of less-skilled immigrants, while high-skilled citizens may value their skills and their
contributions to the local economy.
    We find that an increase in low-skilled immigrants affects the vote of U.S. counties
in different ways, but in general tends to push voters towards the Republican Party.
Non-urban, low-skill counties with high local public spending strongly increased their


                                           29
Republican vote share in response to low-skilled immigration. To the contrary, voting
patterns in urban, high-skilled counties with low local public spending did not respond
much to low-skilled immigration, but did respond to high-skilled immigration by moving
towards the Democratic Party.
    The differential response to the inflow of more- and less-educated immigrants is
consistent with an explanation in which natives prefer high-skilled immigrants, and
their response to less-educated immigrants is negative and stronger the less educated
the local population. Interestingly, this differential response to immigration is another
contributor to the polarization and political divide in the United States. While the most
highly educated immigrants (as well as less-educated, though not as many) moved into
urban, skill-intensive areas and contributed to moving those already left-leaning areas
further towards the Democratic Party, low-skilled immigration (and not much high-
skilled immigration) in non-urban and low-skilled areas has contributed to push those
areas towards the Republican Party. Our model can explain 22% of the growth in the
Republican Party vote share over the 1990-2010 period across U.S. counties, and it
shows how the opinion response to immigration is consistent with the local perception
of economic costs and benefits from it.




                                           30
References
Adsera, A. and M. Pytlikova (2015): “The role of language in shaping interna-
 tional migration,” The Economic Journal, 125.

Alesina, A. and P. Giuliano (2011): “Family ties and political participation,”
 Journal of the European Economic Association, 9, 817–839.

Altonji, J. G. and D. Card (1991): “The effects of immigration on the labor
 market outcomes of less-skilled natives,” in Immigration, trade, and the labor market,
 University of Chicago Press, 201–234.

Autor, D. H., D. Dorn, and G. H. Hanson (2013): “The China syndrome: Local
 labor market effects of import competition in the United States,” The American
 Economic Review, 103, 2121–2168.

Autor, D. H., L. F. Katz, and M. S. Kearney (2006): “The Polarization of the
 U.S. Labor Market,” American Economic Review, 96, 189–194.

Baerg, N., J. L. Hotchkiss, and M. Quispe-Agnoli (2014): “Unauthorized Im-
 migration and Electoral Outcomes,” Andrew Young School of Policy Studies Research
 Paper Series.

Barone, G., A. D’Ignazio, G. de Blasio, and P. Naticchioni (2016): “Mr.
 Rossi, Mr. Hu and politics. The role of immigration in shaping natives’ voting be-
 havior,” Journal of Public Economics, 136, 1–13.

Bartik, T. J. (1992): “Who benefits from state and local economic development
 policies,” Journal of the American Planning Association, 58, 258–259.

Basso, G. and G. Peri (2016): “Opportunity Lost: The Economic Benefit of Retain-
 ing Foreign-Born Students in Local Economies,” Chicago Council on Global Affairs.

Benhabib, J. (1996): “On the political economy of immigration,” European Economic
 Review, 40, 1737–1743.

Borjas, G. J. (2014): Immigration economics, Harvard University Press.

Butcher, K. F. and A. M. Piehl (1998): “Recent immigrants: Unexpected im-
 plications for crime and incarceration,” Industrial & Labor Relations Review Labor
 Relations Review, 51, 654–679.

Card, D. (2001): “Immigrant Inflows, Native Outflows, and the Local Labor Market
 Impacts of Higher Immigration,” Journal of Labor Economics, 19, 22–64.

——— (2009): “Immigration and Inequality,” American Economic Review, 99, 1–21.



                                          31
Card, D., C. Dustmann, and I. Preston (2012): “Immigration, wages, and com-
 positional amenities,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 10, 78–119.
Chalfin, A. (2015): “The Long-Run Effect of Mexican Immigration on Crime in U.S.
 Cities: Evidence from Variation in Mexican Fertility Rates,” American Economic
 Review, Papers & Proceedings.
Che, Y., Y. Lu, J. R. Pierce, P. K. Schott, and Z. Tao (2016): “Does Trade
 Liberalization with China Influence U.S. Elections?” Working Paper 22178, National
 Bureau of Economic Research.
Conconi, P., G. Facchini, M. Steinhardt, and M. Zanardi (2012): “The
 political economy of trade and migration: Evidence from the U.S. Congress,” CEPR
 Discussion Papers 9270, C.E.P.R. Discussion Papers.
Della Vigna, S. and E. Kaplan (2007): “The Fox News Effect: Media Bias and
 Voting,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122, 1187–1234.
Facchini, G. and A. M. Mayda (2009): “Does the welfare state affect individual
  attitudes toward immigrants? Evidence across countries,” The review of economics
  and statistics, 91, 295–314.
Facchini, G. and M. F. Steinhardt (2011): “What drives US immigration policy?
  Evidence from congressional roll call votes,” Journal of Public Economics, 95, 734–
  743.
Gimpel, J. G. (2014): “Immigration’s Impact on Republican Political Prospects, 1980
 to 2012,” .
Giuliano, P. (2007): “Living arrangements in western Europe: Does cultural origin
 matter?” Journal of the European Economic Association, 5, 927–952.
Halla, M., A. F. Wagner, and J. Zweimüller (2017): “Immigration and voting
 for the far right,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 15(6), 1341–1385.
Hanson, G. H., K. Scheve, and M. J. Slaughter (2007): “Public finance and
 individual preferences over globalization strategies,” Economics & Politics, 19, 1–33.
Lewis, E. and G. Peri (2015): “Immigration and the Economy of Cities and Re-
  gions,” Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, vol. 5, chap. 10, 625–685.
Mayda, A. M. (2006): “Who is against immigration? A cross-country investigation
 of individual attitudes toward immigrants,” The Review of Economics and Statistics,
 88, 510–530.
Mayda, A. M., G. Peri, and W. Steingress (2016): “Immigration to the U.S.:
 A problem for the Republicans or the Democrats?” NBER Working Papers 21941,
 National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

                                          32
Mueller, T., T. Nguyen, and V. P. . Preotu (2017): “Exposure to Immigrants
 and Voting on Immigration Policy: Evidence from Switzerland,” Tech. rep., mimeo.

NASEM (2016): The Economic and Fiscal Consequences of Immigration, National
 Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine (NASEM).

O’Rourke, K. H. and R. Sinnott (2006): “The determinants of individual attitudes
 towards immigration,” European Journal of Political Economy, 22, 838–861.

Ortega, F. (2005): “Immigration quotas and skill upgrading,” Journal of Public
 Economics, 89, 1841–1863.

Ottaviano, G. I. and G. Peri (2006): “The economic value of cultural diversity:
 evidence from US cities,” Journal of Economic Geography, 6, 9–44.

Ottaviano, G. I. P. and G. Peri (2012): “Rethinking the Effect of Immigration
 on Wages,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 10, 152–197.

Otto, A. H. and M. F. Steinhardt (2014): “Immigration and election outcomes:
 Evidence from city districts in Hamburg,” Regional Science and Urban Economics,
 45, 67–79.

Peri, G. (2016): “Immigrants, Productivity, and Labor Markets,” Journal of Eco-
 nomic Perspectives, 30, 3–30.

Peri, G., K. Shih, and C. Sparber (2015): “STEM Workers, H-1B Visas, and
 Productivity in US Cities,” Journal of Labor Economics, 33, S225 – S255.

Peri, G. and C. Sparber (2009): “Task Specialization, Immigration, and Wages,”
 American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 1, 135–169.

Razin, A., E. Sadka, and B. Suwankiri (2011): “Migration and the welfare state,”
 Political economy formation, MIT Press (Cambridge).

Ruggles, S., M. Sobek, T. Alexander, C. A. Fitch, R. Goeken, P. K. Hall,
 M. King, and C. Ronnander (2004): “Integrated Public Use Microdata Series
 (IPUMS): Version 3.0,” Minneapolis, MN: Minnesota Population Center. Available
 at: http://www. ipums. org. her, GA (1966).”.

Scheve, K. F. and M. J. Slaughter (2001): “Labor market competition and
  individual preferences over immigration policy,” Review of Economics and Statistics,
  83, 133–145.

Smith, J. and B. Edmonston (1997): The New Americans Economic, Demographic,
 and Fiscal Effects of Immigration, National Research Council, National Academy
 Press, Washington, D.C.



                                         33
Spenkuch, J. L. (2013): “Understanding the impact of immigration on crime,” Amer-
  ican law and economics review.

Steinmayr, A. (2016): “Exposure to Refugees and Voting for the Far-Right: (Unex-
  pected) Results from Austria,” IZA Discussion Papers 9790, Institute for the Study
  of Labor (IZA).




                                        34
Tables
                                      Table 1: Summary statistics


                                                             Obs.    Mean     Std. Dev.     Min       Max

Election data      Republican vote share                    27,738     53.5       16.1       0.0     100.0
                   Democrat vote share                      27,738     42.5       16.4       0.0     100.0

House election     Republican vote share                     9,246     54.3       20.3       0.0     100.0
                   Democrat vote share                       9,246     42.1       21.0       0.0     100.0

Senate election    Republican vote share                     9,246     51.8       14.2       5.1      93.3
                   Democrat vote share                       9,246     45.2       14.4       5.5      94.9

Presidential       Republican vote share                     9,246     54.3       12.8       7.9      94.1
election           Democrat vote share                       9,246     40.3       12.1       4.2      90.9




                                                             Obs.    Mean     Std. Dev.     Min       Max

Demographic data   Share of immigrants                      27,738      4.1        5.9        0.0     62.2
                   Share of low‐skilled immigrants          27,738      1.5        2.7        0.0     36.5
                   Share of high‐skilled immigrants         27,738      2.4        3.3        0.0     47.5
                   Share of low‐skilled natives             27,738     19.0        7.6        4.5     47.3
                   African‐American                         27,738      9.4       11.6        0.0     64.4
                   Share of urban population                27,738     28.8       31.1        0.0    100.0
                   Average income                           27,738   22,866      4,353    13,710    42,280
                   Share of males                           27,738     48.4        1.3      44.5      55.3
                   Unemployment rate                        27,738      4.1        1.4        1.5     10.9
                   Bartik instrument for employment         27,738     12.8       19.1    ‐106.8     118.3
                   Autor Dorn Hanson instrument for trade   27,738      2.6        0.8       ‐2.8      5.1




                                                      35
                                                             Table 2: Republican vote share and immigrant share
                                                           OLS estimates, U.S. Counties, all elections 1990, 2000 and 2010

                                                                                                     (1)             (2)           (3)           (4)
                                          Election type                                            Pooled            PE            SE            HE
                                                                                             Panel A

                                          Share of immigrants                                       ‐0.310***     ‐0.410***      ‐0.215*      ‐0.306**
                                                                                                     [0.0736]       [0.101]      [0.112]       [0.146]

                                          Election fixed effects                                       yes           no            no            no
                                          Commuting zone control variables                             yes           yes           yes           yes
                                          Time fixed effects                                           yes           yes           yes           yes
                                          County fixed effects                                         yes           yes           yes           yes

                                                                                             Panel B

                                          Share of low‐skilled immigrants                           0.872***       0.905***       0.468      1.219***
                                                                                                      [0.224]       [0.224]      [0.438]       [0.411]
                                          Share of high‐skilled immigrants                          ‐0.744***     ‐0.906***     ‐0.462**     ‐0.854***
                                                                                                      [0.115]       [0.149]      [0.228]       [0.189]

                                          Election fixed effects                                       yes           no            no            no
                                          Commuting zone control variables                             yes           yes           yes           yes
                                          Time fixed effects                                           yes           yes           yes           yes
                                          County fixed effects                                         yes           yes           yes           yes

                                          Observations                                               27,738         9,246         9,246         9,246
                                          Number of counties                                          3082          3082          3082          3082

Note: The dependent variable is the Republican vote share in a county and year. The explanatory variable is equal to immigrants as a share of the adult population. Method of estimation is least
squares. Specifications (1) and (5) include all elections pooled. Specifications (2) and (6) include only presidential election (PE), specifications (3) and (7) include Senate elections (SE) and
specifications (4) and (8) include only House elections (HE). Each regression is weighted by the population of the county. All regressions include county, election as well as year fixed effects.
Specifications (5)-(8) also include the following controls at the commuting zone level: share of low-skilled natives, share of men, share of black, share of hispanic, share of unemployed and
average income per person in the voting population as well as the Bartik employment shifter described in the text and the Import competition shock as defined in Autor, Dorn and Hanson
(2013). Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by commuting zone: ***, **, * indicate the statistically significant difference from zero at the 1, 5 and 10 percent levels respectively.


                                                                                               36
                  Table 3: Republican vote share and immigrant share
                  OLS estimates, U.S. Counties, all elections 1990, 2000 and 2010

                                                   (1)                 (2)                 (3)               (4)
Specification                                    Pooled,        Pooled, industrial     Pooled, only      Pooled, only
                                            all immigrants        countries only       from Mexico       non‐citizens

Share of low‐skilled immigrants               0.872***
                                                [0.224]
Share of high‐skilled immigrants              ‐0.744***
                                                [0.115]
Share of low‐skilled immigrants                                     1.326***
     from industrial countries                                        [0.299]
Share of high‐skilled immigrants                                    ‐1.001***
     from industrial countries                                        [0.363]
Share of low‐skilled immigrants                                      ‐0.0901
     from non‐industrial countries                                    [0.533]
Share of high‐skilled immigrants                                    ‐0.636***
     from non‐industrial countries                                    [0.119]
Share of low‐skilled immigrants                                                          0.949***
     from Mexico                                                                           [0.302]
Share of high‐skilled immigrants                                                          ‐0.780**
     from Mexico                                                                           [0.353]
Share of low‐skilled immigrants                                                             0.841
     from all other countries                                                              [0.585]
Share of high‐skilled immigrants                                                         ‐0.752***
     from all other countries                                                              [0.140]
Share of low‐skilled non‐citizen                                                                          0.919***
     immigrants                                                                                             [0.278]
Share of high‐skilled non‐citizen                                                                         ‐1.349***
     immigrants                                                                                             [0.250]
Share of low‐skilled citizen                                                                              1.552***
     immigrants                                                                                             [0.554]
Share of high‐skilled citizen                                                                              ‐0.380**
    immigrants                                                                                              [0.150]

Election fixed effects                            yes                  yes                  yes               yes
Commuting zone control variables                  yes                  yes                  yes               yes
Time fixed effects                                yes                  yes                  yes               yes
County fixed effects                              yes                  yes                  yes               yes

Observations                                    27,738                27,738              27,357            27,738

Note: The dependent variable is the Republican vote share in a county and year. The explanatory variable is equal to
immigrants as a share of the adult population. Method of estimation is least squares. All regressions include county,
election as well as year fixed effects. Specification (1) reproduces column 1 in panel b of the previous table.
Specification (2) distinguishes between the skill level of immigrants and whether immigrants are from an
industrialized (OECD) country. Specification (3) distinguishes between the skill level of immigrants and whether
immigrants are from Mexico. Specification (4) distinguishes between the skill level of immigrants and whether
immigrants are naturalized and allowed to vote in the U.S. All specifications also include the following controls at the
commuting zone level: share of low-skilled natives, share of men, share of black, share of hispanic, share of
unemployed and average income per person in the voting population as well as the Bartik employment shifter
described in the text and the Import competition shock as defined in Autor, Dorn and Hanson (2013). Standard errors
in parentheses are clustered by commuting zone: ***, **, * indicate the statistically significant difference from zero at
the 1, 5 and 10 percent levels respectively.

                                                        37
                             Table 4: Voter turnout
   OLS estimates, presidential and Senate elections pooled 1990, 2000 and 2010


                                                               (1)            (2)           (3)          (4)
 Election type                                               Pooled         Pooled        Pooled       Pooled

 Share of immigrants                                         0.0382        ‐0.116**
                                                            [0.0552]       [0.0570]
 Share of low‐skilled immigrants at county level                                          0.0167      ‐0.0103
                                                                                          [0.519]     [0.451]
 Share of high‐skilled immigrants at county level                                         0.0405       ‐0.154
                                                                                          [0.171]     [0.176]

 Election fixed effects                                        yes            yes           yes          yes
 Commuting zone control variables                              no             yes           no           yes
 Time fixed effects                                            yes            yes           yes          yes
 County fixed effects                                          yes            yes           yes          yes



 Observations                                                18,492         18,492        18,492       18,492
 R‐squared                                                    0.821          0.832        0.821        0.833

Note: The dependent variable is voter turnout, defined as the total number of votes divided by the sum of natives and
citizen immigrants. Each column is a different specification and includes county effects, time effects and county and
commuting zone controls. We pooled over presidential and Senate elections (data on the number of votes for House
elections are missing). The years considered are 1990, 2000 and 2010. Method of estimation is least squares. Each
regression is weighted by the population of the county. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by commuting zone:
***, **, * indicate the statistically significant difference from zero at the 1, 5 and 10 percent levels respectively.




                                                       38
                                     Table 5: Republican vote share, low‐skilled and high‐skilled immigrants
                                                 2SLS estimates, all elections 1990, 2000 and 2010

                                                              (1)                    (2)                  (3)                  (4)                    (5)                (6)
 Second stage
                                                            Pooled                 Pooled               Pooled               Pooled                 Pooled             Pooled

 Share of low‐skilled immigrants at county level           4.656**                                       1.278             2.394***                                    1.319**
                                                           [2.334]                                      [1.072]             [0.920]                                     [0.590]
 Share of high‐skilled immigrants at county level                                ‐1.674***            ‐1.521***                                   ‐1.018***           ‐0.782***
                                                                                   [0.158]              [0.186]                                     [0.150]             [0.179]

 Commuting zone control variables                             no                     no                  no                    yes                    yes                yes
 Time fixed effects                                           yes                    yes                 yes                   yes                    yes                yes
 County fixed effects                                         yes                    yes                 yes                   yes                    yes                yes

 Observations                                               27,738                 27,738               27,738               27,738                 27,738             27,738
 R‐squared                                                  0.633                  0.712                 0.717                0.710                 0.725               0.729
 IV F‐stat                                                  9.770                  38.68                 6.176                13.77                 59.69               14.71


                                                      Share of low‐skilled   Share of high‐skilled                     Share of low‐skilled   Share of high‐skilled
 First stage
                                                          immigrants             immigrants                                immigrants             immigrants


 Predicted share of low‐skilled immigrants                0.498***                 ‐0.289*                                  0.603***                ‐0.0383
        at county level                                    [0.114]                 [0.152]                                   [0.115]                [0.111]
 Predicted share of high‐skilled immigrants               ‐0.185**                0.870***                                 ‐0.233***               0.737***
        at county level                                   [0.0783]                 [0.112]                                  [0.0809]               [0.0929]

 Observations                                               27,738                 27,738                                    27,738                 27,738
 R‐squared                                                  0.972                  0.974                                      0.978                 0.980

Note: The top panel of the table shows the 2SLS estimates. The dependent variable is the Republican vote share in a county and year. Each column corresponds to a different
estimation. The relevant explanatory variables are two: low-skilled immigrants as the share of the adult population and high-skilled immigrants as the share of the adult population.
Specifications (4) - (6) include the following controls at the commuting zone level: share of low-skilled natives, share of men, share of black, share of hispanic, share of unemployed
and average income per person in the voting population as well as the Bartik employment shifter described in the text and the Import competition shock as defined in Autor, Dorn and
Hanson (2013). The bottom panel represents the first stage and shows how the imputed share of low-skilled and high-skilled immigrants predicts the actual shares. Standard errors in
parentheses are clustered by commuting zone: ***, **, * indicate the statistically significant difference from zero at the 1, 5 and 10 percent levels respectively.

                                                                                      39
                        Table 6: Lagged Republican share of votes and change in share of immigrants for each skill level
                                               OLS estimates, all elections 1990, 2000 and 2010

                                                  (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)               (5)           (6)            (7)             (8)

                                                                                                       Panel A
Dependent variable                                 Change in the share of low‐skilled immigrants                   Change in the share of high‐skilled immigrants

Mean Republican vote share 10 years ago       0.0242***      ‐0.0381**        0.0362          0.0252        0.0327***          0.0213        0.0221          0.0176
                                              [0.00741]       [0.0173]       [0.0286]        [0.0227]       [0.00875]         [0.0150]      [0.0222]        [0.0204]

Commuting zone control variables                  no             yes            no              yes               no            yes            no             yes
County fixed effects                              no             no             yes             yes               no            no             yes            yes
Time fixed effects                                yes            yes            yes             yes               yes           yes            yes            yes

Observations                                     6,164          6,164          6,164           6,164             6,164         6,164          6,164          6,164
R‐squared                                        0.079          0.028          0.714           0.932             0.202         0.379          0.747          0.938

                                                                                                    Panel B
Dependent variable                            Change in the predicted share of low‐skilled immigrants     Change in the predicted share of high‐skilled immigrants

Mean Republican vote share 10 years ago       0.00543***       ‐0.0344        0.0277          ‐0.00613        0.00273         ‐0.0279        0.0155        ‐0.00303
                                               [0.00190]      [0.0240]       [0.0294]        [0.00419]       [0.00185]        [0.0151]      [0.0187]       [0.00284]

Commuting zone control variables                  no             yes            no              yes               no            yes            no             yes
County fixed effects                              no             no             yes             yes               no            no             yes            yes
Time fixed effects                                yes            yes            yes             yes               yes           yes            yes            yes

Observations                                     6,164          6,164          6,164           6,164             6,164         6,164          6,164          6,164
R‐squared                                        0.086          0.157          0.498           0.996             0.354         0.648          0.602          0.997

Note: The sample period is 1990, 2000 and 2010. Specifications (2), (4), (6) and (8) in panel a and b include the following controls at the commuting zone level: the change in the
share of low-skilled natives, the change in the share of men, the change in the share of black, the change in the share of hispanic, the change in the share of unemployed and
average income per person in the voting population as well as the change in the Bartik employment shifter described in the text and the change in the Import competition shock as
defined in Autor, Dorn and Hanson (2013). Each regression is weighted by the population of the county. All regressions include year effects. Robust standard errors in parentheses
are clustered by commuting zone: ***, **, * indicate the statistically significant difference from zero at the 1, 5 and 10 percent levels respectively.


                                                                                        40
     Table 7: Heterogeneous effects: labour market, welfare and non‐economic
                                          channel
                OLS estimates, all elections pooled 1990, 2000 and 2010

                                                                                                                Cultural          All
                          Channel                                     Labor market              Welfare
                                                                                                              differences      together
                                                                     (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)            (5)
                       Election type                               Pooled         Pooled         Pooled         Pooled          Pooled

 Share of low‐skilled immigrants at county level (CL)              0.221          0.469*          0.448        0.954***          0.491
                                                                  [0.225]         [0.256]        [0.375]        [0.307]         [0.425]
 Share of high‐skilled immigrants at CL                          ‐0.296**       ‐0.680***      ‐0.646***       ‐0.338**         ‐0.0600
                                                                  [0.132]         [0.110]        [0.162]        [0.143]         [0.142]

 Share of low‐skilled immigrants at CL interacted                3.004***                                                      2.493***
    with unskilled to skilled ratio in 1980                       [0.774]                                                        [0.799]
 Share of high‐skilled immigrants at CL interacted              ‐2.464***                                                      ‐2.016***
    with unskilled to skilled ratio in 1980                       [0.576]                                                        [0.518]

 Share of low‐skilled immigrants at CL interacted                               1.419***                                         0.507
    with share of rural population in 1980                                       [0.442]                                        [0.592]
 Share of high‐skilled immigrants at CL interacted                               ‐0.513                                         ‐0.190
    with share of rural population in 1980                                       [0.323]                                        [0.328]

 Share of low‐skilled immigrants at CL interacted                                                1.071*                         ‐0.282
    with ratio of govt. exp. to GDP in 1980                                                      [0.648]                        [0.760]
 Share of high‐skilled immigrants at CL interacted                                               ‐0.260                          0.103
    with ratio of govt. exp. to GDP in 1980                                                      [0.263]                        [0.185]

 Share of low‐skilled immigrants at CL interacted                                                                 0.729           0.111
    with language differences in 1980                                                                            [0.850]         [0.839]
 Share of high‐skilled immigrants at CL interacted                                                             ‐2.129***       ‐1.731***
    with language differences in 1980                                                                            [0.488]         [0.434]

 Election fixed effects                                             yes             yes            yes             yes            yes
 Commuting zone control variables                                   yes             yes            yes             yes            yes
 Time fixed effects                                                 yes             yes            yes             yes            yes
 County fixed effects                                               yes             yes            yes             yes            yes

 Observations                                                      27.738         27.738         27.738          27,738         27,738
 R‐squared                                                         0.732           0.730          0.729          0.732           0.734

Note: The dependent variable is the Republican vote share. Each column is a different specification and includes county effects,
time effects and county and commuting zone (CZ) controls. We pooled over all three types of elections. The coefficients shown
are those for the share of low-skilled immigrants and the share of high-skilled immigrants together with the interaction between
each skill level of immigrants and one CZ characteristic in 1980, measured as an index between 0 and 1. The interacted
characteristics are included one at a time in specifications (1)-(4) and all together in specification (5). The years considered are
1990, 2000 and 2010. Method of estimation is least squares. Each regression is weighted by the population of the county.
Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by commuting zone: ***, **, * indicate the statistically significant difference from
zero at the 1, 5 and 10 percent levels respectively.




                                                              41
     Table 8: Heterogeneous effects: labour market, welfare and non‐economic
                                          channel
               2SLS estimates, all elections pooled 1990, 2000 and 2010

                                                                                                                        Cultural
 Channel                                                                   Labor market                Welfare
                                                                                                                      differences
                                                                       (1)              (2)               (3)              (4)
 Election type                                                       Pooled           Pooled            Pooled          Pooled

 Share of low‐skilled immigrants at county level (CL)                 ‐1.391           0.874             0.159           ‐0.726
                                                                     [1.211]          [0.698]           [0.814]          [1.006]
 Share of high‐skilled immigrants at CL                             ‐0.641**        ‐0.637***         ‐0.655***         ‐0.423**
                                                                     [0.295]          [0.172]           [0.211]          [0.215]

 Share of low‐skilled immigrants at CL interacted                    14.76**
    with unskilled‐to‐skilled ratio in 1980                          [7.197]
 Share of high‐skilled immigrants at CL interacted                    ‐0.414
    with unskilled‐to‐skilled ratio in 1980                          [1.149]

 Share of low‐skilled immigrants at CL interacted                                     3.851*
    with share of rural population in 1980                                            [2.292]
 Share of high‐skilled immigrants at CL interacted                                    ‐1.191*
    with share of rural population in 1980                                            [0.668]

 Share of low‐skilled immigrants at CL interacted                                                       3.255
    with share of govt. expenditure in 1980                                                            [2.510]
 Share of high‐skilled immigrants at CL interacted                                                     ‐0.231
    with share of govt. expenditure in 1980                                                            [0.265]

 Share of low‐skilled immigrants at CL interacted                                                                        6.798*
    with language differences in 1980                                                                                    [3.686]
 Share of high‐skilled immigrants at CL interacted                                                                     ‐3.547***
    with language differences in 1980                                                                                    [0.692]

 Election fixed effects                                                yes              yes               yes              yes
 Commuting zone control variables                                      yes              yes               yes              yes
 Time fixed effects                                                    yes              yes               yes              yes
 County fixed effects                                                  yes              yes               yes              yes

 Observations                                                        27,738           27,738            27,738           27,738
 R‐squared                                                           0.697             0.725            0.727             0.727
 IV F‐stat                                                           4.784             1.292            1.391             3.050

Note: The dependent variable is the Republican vote share. Each column is a different specification and includes county effects,
time effects and county and commuting zone (CZ) controls. We pooled over all three types of elections. The coefficients shown
are those for the share of low-skilled immigrants and the share of high-skilled immigrants together with the interaction between
each skill level of immigrants and one CZ characteristic in 1980, measured as an index between 0 and 1. The interacted
characteristics are included one at a time in specifications (1)-(4) and all together in specification (5). The years considered are
1990, 2000 and 2010. Method of estimation is instrumental varibale (IV), using the shift-share instruments described
in the text. Each regression is weighted by the population of the county. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by
commuting zone: ***, **, * indicate the statistically significant difference from zero at the 1, 5 and 10 percent levels respectively..




                                                              42
    Table 9: Republican vote share, low‐skilled and high‐skilled immigrants
                including immigration shares at the State level
                 OLS estimates, all elections 1990, 2000 and 2010

                                                         (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)
 Election type                                         Pooled        Pooled        Pooled         Pooled

 Share of immigrants at county level                 ‐0.837***     ‐0.401***
                                                      [0.0954]      [0.0776]
 Share of immigrants at state level                     0.164       0.483***
                                                       [0.276]       [0.164]
 Share of low‐skilled immigrants at county level                                   0.859**        0.818***
                                                                                    [0.340]        [0.236]
 Share of high‐skilled immigrants at county level                                 ‐1.405***      ‐0.891***
                                                                                    [0.203]        [0.135]
 Share of low‐skilled immigrants at state level                                    1.134**         0.716*
                                                                                    [0.532]        [0.411]
 Share of high‐skilled immigrants at state level                                     0.245        0.574***
                                                                                    [0.220]        [0.177]

 Election fixed effects                                  yes           yes           yes            yes
 Commuting zone control variables                        no            yes           no             yes
 Time fixed effects                                      yes           yes           yes            yes
 County fixed effects                                    yes           yes           yes            yes

 Observations                                          27,738        27,738        27,738         27,738
 R‐squared                                             0.707         0.726         0.719          0.731

Note: The sample period is 1990, 2000 and 2010. Specifications (2) and (4) include the following controls at
the commuting zone level: the change in the share of low-skilled natives, the change in the share of men, the
change in the share of black, the change in the share of hispanic, the change in the share of unemployed and
average income per person in the voting population as well as the change in the Bartik employment shifter
described in the text and the change in the Import competition shock as defined in Autor, Dorn and Hanson
(2013). Each regression is weighted by the population of the county. All regressions include year effects.
Robust standard errors in parentheses are clustered by commuting zone: ***, **, * indicate the statistically
significant difference from zero at the 1, 5 and 10 percent levels respectively.




                                                    43
                       Figure 1: Change in average Republican vote share between 1990 and 2010
                                                         Pooling across all elections




Note: The map represents the change of the average Republican vote share (pooled across all elections) from 1990 to 2010, using red color for larger change
and blue color for negative changes.




                                                                     44
                    Figure 2: Change in share of immigrants between 1990 and 2010 per U.S. county




Note: The map represents the change of the share of immigrants from 1990 to 2010, using darker color for positive changes and brighter color for negative
changes.




                                                                     45
 Figure 3: Change in share of low‐ and high‐skilled immigrants between 1990 and 2010 per
                                         U.S. county



            Panel (a): Change in share of low‐skilled immigrants in population (1990‐2010)




       Panel (b): Change in share of high‐skilled immigrants in voting population (1990‐2010)




Note: The maps represent the change of the share of low‐skilled immigrants in the population and the change in the
share of high‐skilled immigrants in the voting population between 1990 to 2010, using darker color for positive changes
and white for negative changes.




                                                         46
Figure 4: Correlation between the change in the Republican vote share and the change in the
                    immigrant population share between 1990 and 2010




 Note: Each point represents a U.S. county weighted by its voting age population. The vertical axis shows the average change in
 the share of Republican vote in all elections, and the horizontal axis shows the change in the share of immigrants in the adult
 population.




                                                              47
Figure 5: Correlation between the change in the Republican vote share and the change in the
     low‐skilled and high‐skilled immigrant population share between 1990 and 2010

           Panel (a): Change in share of low‐skilled immigrants in population (1990‐2010)




      Panel (b): Change in share of high‐skilled immigrants in voting population (1990‐2010)




 Note: Each point represents a U.S. county weighted by its voting age population. The vertical axis shows the average change in
 the share of Republican vote in all elections, and the horizontal axis shows the change in the share of low‐skilled immigrants in
 the adult population and the change in the share of high‐skilled immigrants in the voting population respectively.


                                                               48
Figure 6: Marginal effect of the change in the share of low‐skilled and high‐skilled
immigrants between 1990 and 2010 on the Republican vote share across counties

   Panel (a): Significant impact of the change in the share of low‐skilled immigrants between
                 1990 and 2010 on the Republican vote share with 95% confidence




  Note: The continuous impact is calculated using the coefficients in Table 7, i.e. (0.491 + 2.493 x cum. share of skilled vs.
  unskilled + 0.507 x cum. share of rural population ‐ 0.282 x cum. share of government expenditure in GDP + 0.111 x language
  difference) x change in share of low‐skilled immigrants between 1990 and 2010.


  Panel (b): Significant impact of the change in the share of high‐skilled immigrants between
                1990 and 2010 on the Republican vote share with 95% confidence




  Note: The continuous impact is calculated using the coefficients in Table 7, i.e. (‐ 0.06 ‐ 2.016 x cum. share of skilled vs.
  unskilled ‐ 0.190 x cum. share of rural population + 0.103 x cum. share of government expenditure in GDP ‐ 1.731 x language
  difference) x change in share of high‐skilled immigrants between 1990 and 2010.


                                                              49
 Figure 7: Marginal effect of the change in the share of immigrants between 1990 and 2010
(separated between low‐skilled and high‐skilled immigrants) on the Republican vote share
                         across counties with 95% confidence, 2010




 Note: The continuous impact is calculated using the coefficients in Table 7, i.e. (0.491 + 2.493 x cum. share of skilled vs.
 unskilled + 0.507 x cum. share of rural population ‐ 0.282 x cum. share of government expenditure in GDP + 0.111 x language
 difference) x change in share of low‐skilled immigrants between 1990 and 2010 + (‐ 0.06 ‐ 2.016 x cum. share of skilled vs.
 unskilled ‐ 0.190 x cum. share of rural population + 0.103 x cum. share of government expenditure in GDP ‐ 1.731 x language
 difference) x change in share of high‐skilled immigrants between 1990 and 2010.




                                                             50
Figure 8: Actual versus predicted change in the Republican vote share due to the change in
                 the immigrant population share between 1990 and 2010




 Note: Each point represents a U.S. county weighted by its voting age population. The vertical axis shows the actual change in
 the average share of Republican vote between 1990 and 2010 across all election types, and the horizontal axis shows the
 predicted change in the Republican vote share due to the change in the share of immigrants in the adult population between
 1990 and 2010.




                                                             51
Appendix
                                Table A1: Republican vote share, low‐skilled and high‐skilled non‐citizen immigrants
                                                  2SLS estimates, all elections 1990, 2000 and 2010

                                                                  (1)                     (2)                   (3)                   (4)                    (5)                 (6)
    Second stage
                                                                Pooled                  Pooled                Pooled                Pooled                 Pooled              Pooled

    Share of low‐skilled non‐citizen immigrants                 4.473*                                         2.139                1.875*                                     1.900**
          at county level                                       [2.690]                                       [1.450]               [0.966]                                     [0.816]
    Share of high‐skilled non‐citizen immigrants                                      ‐6.369***             ‐5.914***                                    ‐3.468***            ‐3.478***
          at county level                                                               [2.187]               [1.725]                                      [0.745]              [0.751]

    Commuting zone control variables                              no                      no                    no                    yes                   yes                  yes
    Time fixed effects                                            yes                     yes                   yes                   yes                   yes                  yes
    County fixed effects                                          yes                     yes                   yes                   yes                   yes                  yes


    Observations                                                27,738                  27,738                27,738                27,738                 27,738              27,738
    R‐squared                                                   0.663                   0.655                 0.689                 0.720                  0.716               0.725
    IV F‐stat                                                   11.02                   4.052                 5.892                 11.62                  16.75               21.82

                                                          Share of low‐skilled     Share of high‐skilled                      Share of low‐skilled   Share of high‐skilled
    First stage
                                                         non‐citizen immigrants   non‐citizen immigrants                     non‐citizen immigrants non‐citizen immigrants

    Predicted share of low‐skilled non‐citizen                 0.414***                 ‐0.0590                                   0.447***                ‐0.0194
           immigrants at county level                           [0.109]                [0.0749]                                    [0.109]               [0.0698]
    Predicted share of high‐skilled non‐citizen                 ‐0.187                 0.355***                                    ‐0.144                0.369***
           immigrants at county level                           [0.134]                 [0.130]                                   [0.0967]               [0.0965]

    Observations                                                27,738                  27,738                                      27,738                 27,738
    R‐squared                                                   0.958                   0.966                                       0.964                  0.973
   Note: The top panel of the table shows the 2SLS estimates. The dependent variable is the Republican vote share in a county and year. Each column corresponds to a different
   estimation. The relevant explanatory variables are two: low-skilled non-citizen immigrants as a share of the adult population and high-skilled non-citizen immigrants as a share of the
   adult population. Specifications (4) - (6) include the following controls at the commuting zone level: share of low-skilled natives, share of men, share of black, share of hispanic, share
   of unemployed and average income per person in the voting population as well as the Bartik employment shifter described in the text and the Import competition shock as defined in
   Autor, Dorn and Hanson (2013). The bottom panel represents the first stage and shows how the imputed share of low-skilled and high-skilled non-citizen immigrants predicts the
   actual shares. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by commuting zone: ***, **, * indicate the statistically significant difference from zero at the 1, 5 and 10 percent levels
   respectively.

                                                                                          52
       Table A2: Heterogeneous effects: labour market, welfare and non‐economic channel
                      OLS estimates, all elections pooled 1990, 2000 and 2010

                                                                                                             Cultural
 Channel                                                          Labor market               Welfare                        All together
                                                                                                           differences
                                                               (1)             (2)              (3)             (4)              (5)
 Election type                                               Pooled          Pooled           Pooled         Pooled            Pooled

 Share of low‐skilled non‐citizen immigrants                 0.587**        0.997***         0.975**         1.302***          0.736*
       at county level (CL)                                   [0.288]         [0.338]         [0.447]         [0.326]          [0.439]
 Share of high‐skilled non‐citizen immigrants               ‐0.959***       ‐1.726***       ‐1.581***       ‐1.081***           ‐0.440
       at CL                                                  [0.274]         [0.269]         [0.353]         [0.326]          [0.343]

 Share of low‐skilled non‐citizen immigrants at              3.509***                                                         3.572***
    CL interacted with unskilled‐to‐skilled ratio             [0.867]                                                          [1.103]
 Share of high‐skilled non‐citizen immigrants at            ‐3.652***                                                        ‐3.674***
    CL interacted with unskilled‐to‐skilled ratio             [0.925]                                                          [1.001]

 Share of low‐skilled non‐citizen immigrants at                              1.115**                                          0.00392
    CL interacted with rural population                                      [0.555]                                          [0.851]
 Share of high‐skilled non‐citizen immigrants at                             ‐0.0957                                           ‐0.408
    CL interacted with rural population                                      [0.532]                                          [0.878]

 Share of low‐skilled non‐citizen immigrants at                                                1.060                            1.021
    CL interacted with ratio of govt. exp. to GDP                                             [0.764]                          [0.661]
 Share of high‐skilled non‐citizen immigrants at                                               ‐0.621                           ‐0.265
    CL interacted with ratio of govt. exp. to GDP                                             [0.640]                          [0.609]

 Share of low‐skilled non‐citizen immigrants at                                                                1.258            0.284
    CL interacted with language differences                                                                   [0.983]          [0.991]
 Share of high‐skilled non‐citizen immigrants at                                                            ‐3.361***        ‐2.766***
    CL interacted with language differences                                                                   [1.053]          [0.960]

 Election fixed effects                                        yes              yes             yes             yes              yes
 Commuting zone control variables                              yes              yes             yes             yes              yes
 Time fixed effects                                            yes              yes             yes             yes              yes
 County fixed effects                                          yes              yes             yes             yes              yes

 Observations                                                27,738           27,738          27,738          27,738           27,738
 R‐squared                                                   0.730            0.729            0.729           0.731           0.732

Note: The dependent variable is the Republican vote share. Each column is a different specification and includes county effects, time effects
and county and commuting zone (CZ) controls. We pooled over all three types of elections. The coefficients shown are those for the share of
low-skilled non-citizen immigrants and the share of high-skilled non-citizen immigrants together with the interaction between each skill level
of immigrants and one CZ characteristic in 1980, measured as an index between 0 and 1. The interacted characteristics are included one at a
time in specifications (1)-(4) and all together in specification (5). The years considered are 1990, 2000 and 2010. Method of estimation is
least squares. Each regression is weighted by the population of the county. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by commuting zone:
***, **, * indicate the statistically significant difference from zero at the 1, 5 and 10 percent levels respectively.




                                                                     53
       Table A3: Heterogeneous effects: labour market, welfare and non‐economic channel
                      2SLS estimates, all elections pooled 1990, 2000 and 2010

                                                                                                                           Cultural
 Channel                                                                     Labor market               Welfare
                                                                                                                         differences
                                                                          (1)              (2)             (3)                (4)
 Election type                                                          Pooled           Pooled          Pooled            Pooled

 Share of low‐skilled non‐citizen immigrants                            ‐1.499            1.440           ‐1.472            ‐1.132
       at county level (CL)                                             [1.809]          [1.286]         [1.866]           [1.620]
 Share of high‐skilled non‐citizen immigrants                            ‐2.495        ‐2.474***       ‐2.196***           ‐1.628*
       at CL                                                            [1.591]          [0.919]         [0.711]           [0.846]

 Share of low‐skilled non‐citizen immigrants at                         24.82*
    CL interacted with unskilled‐to‐skilled ratio                       [14.83]
 Share of high‐skilled non‐citizen immigrants at                         ‐3.244
    CL interacted with unskilled‐to‐skilled ratio                       [5.041]

 Share of low‐skilled non‐citizen immigrants at                                          7.504
    CL interacted with rural population                                                 [4.858]
 Share of high‐skilled non‐citizen immigrants at                                        ‐3.988*
    CL interacted with rural population                                                 [2.406]

 Share of low‐skilled non‐citizen immigrants at                                                          10.24*
    CL interacted with ratio of govt. exp. to GDP                                                        [6.047]
 Share of high‐skilled non‐citizen immigrants at                                                          ‐2.341
    CL interacted with ratio of govt. exp. to GDP                                                        [2.011]

 Share of low‐skilled non‐citizen immigrants at                                                                            24.86*
    CL interacted with language differences                                                                                [13.40]
 Share of high‐skilled non‐citizen immigrants at                                                                         ‐17.72***
    CL interacted with language differences                                                                                [6.766]

 Election fixed effects                                                   yes              yes             yes               yes
 Commuting zone control variables                                         yes              yes             yes               yes
 Time fixed effects                                                       yes              yes             yes               yes
 County fixed effects                                                     yes              yes             yes               yes

 Observations                                                           27,738           27,738          27,738            27,711
 R‐squared                                                              0.659            0.715           0.715             0.683
 IV F‐stat                                                              1.738            0.495           1.070             2.956

Note: The dependent variable is the Republican vote share. Each column is a different specification and includes county effects, time effects
and county and commuting zone (CZ) controls. We pooled over all three types of elections. The coefficients shown are those for the share of
low-skilled non-citizen immigrants and the share of high-skilled non-citizen immigrants together with the interaction between each skill level
of immigrants and one CZ characteristic in 1980, measured as an index between 0 and 1. The interacted characteristics are included one at a
time in specifications (1)-(4). The years considered are 1990, 2000 and 2010. Method of estimation is instrumental variable (IV), using the
shift-share instruments described in the text. Each regression is weighted by the population of the county. Standard errors in parentheses are
clustered by commuting zone: ***, **, * indicate the statistically significant difference from zero at the 1, 5 and 10 percent levels
respectively.




                                                                     54
