                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




EFFECTS OF THE AFFORDABLE CARE ACT ON HEALTH BEHAVIORS AFTER THREE
                              YEARS

                                     Charles Courtemanche
                                        James Marton
                                       Benjamin Ukert
                                       Aaron Yelowitz
                                        Daniela Zapata

                                      Working Paper 24511
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24511


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2018




We would like to thank Pinka Chatterji and audiences at the University of Colorado Denver and
the Eastern Economics Association Annual Meeting for valuable comments. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Charles Courtemanche, James Marton, Benjamin Ukert, Aaron Yelowitz, and Daniela
Zapata. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Effects of the Affordable Care Act on Health Behaviors after Three Years
Charles Courtemanche, James Marton, Benjamin Ukert, Aaron Yelowitz, and Daniela Zapata
NBER Working Paper No. 24511
April 2018
JEL No. I12,I13,I18

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper examines the impacts of the Affordable Care Act (ACA) – which substantially
increased insurance coverage through regulations, mandates, subsidies, and Medicaid expansions
– on behaviors related to future health risks after three years. Using data from the Behavioral Risk
Factor Surveillance System and an identification strategy that leverages variation in pre-ACA
uninsured rates and state Medicaid expansion decisions, we show that the ACA increased
preventive care utilization along several dimensions, but also increased risky drinking. These
results are driven by the private portions of the law, as opposed to the Medicaid expansion. We
also conduct subsample analyses by income and age.

Charles Courtemanche                                   Aaron Yelowitz
Georgia State University                               University of Kentucky
Andrew Young School of Policy Studies                  Department of Economics
Department of Economics                                335 Business and Economics Building
P.O. Box 3992                                          Lexington, KY 40506-0034
Atlanta, GA 30302-3992                                 aaron@uky.edu
and NBER
ccourtemanche@gsu.edu                                  Daniela Zapata
                                                       Impaq International
James Marton                                           1101 Vermont Avenue
Georgia State University                               11th Floor
Andrew Young School of Policy Studies                  Washington, DC 20005
Department of Economics                                dzapata@impaqint.com
P.O. Box 3992
Atlanta, GA 30302-3992
marton@gsu.edu

Benjamin Ukert
Leonard Davis Institute of Health Economics
University of Pennsylvania
308 Colonial Penn Center
3641 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6218
bukert@wharton.upenn.edu
Introduction

       Emerging literatures in health economics and health policy seek to evaluate the impacts

of the primary components of the Affordable Care Act (ACA), including the individual mandate,

subsidized Marketplace coverage, and state Medicaid expansions, that were implemented in

2014 (Obama 2014). While the stated goals of the ACA include improving access to health care

in order to improve health outcomes, economists have long understood that expansions of

insurance coverage could plausibly influence investments in health capital in either direction

(e.g. Cawley and Ruhm 2011; Barbaresco et al. 2015). The purpose of this paper is to estimate

the impacts of the ACA on behaviors related to future health risks. These include both behaviors

that reduce future risks (such as utilization of preventive medical services) and those that

increase risks (such as smoking and drinking). Our primary innovation is to use data from the

2011-2016 Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS), which gives us a longer post-

treatment period than prior studies and therefore a greater ability to detect effects.

       The net effects of health insurance coverage on both preventive care utilization and risky

health behaviors depend on the relative roles of out-of-pocket prices, ex ante moral hazard, and

income effects. By lowering the portion of medical costs borne by the patient, health insurance

reduces the price of preventive care as well as medications and counseling services related to

risky behaviors. The direct price effect should therefore work in the direction of healthier

lifestyles along both dimensions. However, expansions in insurance coverage could also lead to

less healthy lifestyles through ex ante moral hazard, the phenomenon in which the reduction in

financial risk associated with unhealthy behavior incentivizes such behavior. While ex ante

moral hazard has most often been examined in the context of risky health behaviors, the same

logic could also apply to a failure to adhere to screening and vaccination guidelines (Barbaresco



                                                  2
et al. 2015; Simon et al. 2017). In addition, income effects from gaining free or subsidized

coverage could influence behaviors in potentially conflicting ways. Consumers may choose to

spend money they had budgeted for the direct purchase of medical care on alcohol, cigarettes,

and junk food or, conversely, on healthy food and gym memberships (Simon et al. 2017).

        Following Courtemanche et al. (2017, 2018a), we estimate difference-in-difference-in-

differences (DDD) models to evaluate the impact of the ACA, where the differences come from

time, state Medicaid expansion status, and local area pretreatment uninsured rate. Most of the

previous ACA literature tends to focus on the effects of the ACA Medicaid expansions using a

simpler difference-in-differences (DD) model that compares changes over time in Medicaid

expansion states to changes in non-expansion states. We seek to identify the impact of the other

components of the ACA as well, such as the individual mandate and subsidized Marketplace

coverage.1 This is inherently more challenging because these components were implemented in

every state simultaneously. Our third difference addresses this issue by exploiting an additional

layer of plausibly exogenous variation arising from the fact that the national components of the

ACA should provide the most intense “treatment” in local areas with the highest pre-reform

uninsured rates.

        The BRFSS is well-suited for our study because it includes a number of questions related

to health behaviors and other outcomes of interest. In addition, it is large enough to precisely

estimate the effects of state policies, with over 300,000 observations per year. Our sample

consists of nonelderly adults included in the 2011–2016 waves of the BRFSS.

        Our results provide some evidence of both improved access to preventive services and

the presence of ex ante moral hazard. For the full sample of non-elderly adults, the ACA


1
  Our results could also partially reflect the ACA’s employer mandate, which took effect in 2015 and became
stronger in 2016. See https://obamacarefacts.com/obamacare-employer-mandate/.

                                                        3
increased several aspects of preventive care utilization (well-patient checkups, pap and HIV

tests, and mammograms) but also risky drinking in non-Medicaid-expansion states, with the

effects being statistically indistinguishable in Medicaid expansion states. No statistically

significant results emerge for flu shots, body mass index (BMI), drinks per month, smoking, or

exercising. Event study regressions provide support for our econometric approach while also

revealing some evidence of additional ex ante moral hazard – greater smoking and less exercise

– in the ACA’s third year. Finally, we conduct subsample analyses by income and age. The gains

in preventive care are largely concentrated among the lower half of the income distribution,

while the results suggesting ex ante moral hazard are clearer among the upper half. The increases

in pap and HIV tests are concentrated among those below the sample median age, while the rise

in mammograms is driven by those above the median age.

       These findings with three years of post-reform data build on analyses by Courtemanche

et al. (2018a) and Simon et al. (2017) that also used the BRFSS but only through 2015.

Moreover, Courtemanche et al. (2018a) only examine a single preventive care outcome (well-

patient checkups), while Simon et al. (2017) only estimate causal effects of the ACA’s Medicaid

expansion.


Literature Review

       The RAND Health Insurance Experiment of the 1970s–1980s provides some of the first

causally interpretable evidence on the impacts of health insurance coverage on health behaviors.

Randomized variation in the generosity of insurance coverage through the experiment did not

lead to statistically significant changes in smoking behavior or weight (Brook et al. 1983). There

is also a large literature focusing on Medicaid expansions prior to the ACA. In terms of risky

health behaviors, Medicaid expansions for children and pregnant women in the 1980s and 1990s

                                                  4
reduced low birthweight (Currie and Gruber 1996a), but increased smoking among pregnant

women (Dave, Kaestner, and Wehby 2015).

       Studies of the more recent randomized 2008 Oregon Medicaid lottery found that

Medicaid coverage increased use of preventive services but did not have statistically significant

effects on smoking or obesity (Finkelstein et al. 2012; Baicker et al. 2013). Kolstad and

Kowalski (2012) found that the expansion of coverage resulting from the 2006 Massachusetts

insurance reform increased utilization of some types of preventive care, while Courtemanche and

Zapata (2014) found that it reduced BMI but did not significantly influence smoking. Among

seniors, Dave and Kaestner (2009) documented slightly worsening smoking and drinking habits

as a result of gaining Medicare coverage, while Card et al. (2008) found mixed results for

preventive care.

       In terms of the ACA, one strand of the literature examines the 2010 mandate for insurers

to cover dependents up to 26 years old. Evidence suggests that this dependent coverage

expansion did not impact the utilization of preventive services, but did reduce BMI (Barbaresco

et al. 2015). Another strand of literature examines the major components of the ACA that were

implemented in 2014. Simon et al. (2017) used the BRFSS and found that the ACA Medicaid

expansion increased some aspects of preventive care use among low income childless adults.

However, they did not find any evidence of effects on risky health behaviors. Similarly,

Courtemanche et al. (2018a) showed that the full ACA increased well-patient checkups, but

found no evidence of effects on risky health behaviors. Cotti et al. (2017) use scanner, rather

than survey, data and find little evidence that the ACA’s Medicaid expansion influenced

purchases of snack foods, soda, cigarettes, or alcohol.




                                                 5
       Relative to the previous literature, we make two main contributions. First, to our

knowledge, we provide the first causally interpretable evidence on the effects of the ACA on

health behaviors after three years. Simon, Soni, and Cawley (2017), Courtemanche et al.

(2018a), and Cotti et al. (2017) only used two years of post-treatment data. Since none of these

studies found effects on risky behaviors, the addition of the third post-treatment year will

ultimately prove essential for documenting any ex ante moral hazard. The importance of the third

year is not surprising. Enrollment in the Marketplaces has continued to rise each year since the

ACA took effect, and the estimated gain in insurance coverage from the fully implemented ACA

rose from 6.5 percentage points in 2014 to 9.7 percentage points in 2015 to 11.8 percentage

points in 2016 (Courtemanche et al., 2018b). Moreover, a long literature on economic models of

addiction suggests that health habits – particularly those related to addictive substances – can

take time to adjust in response to changing incentives (Cawley and Ruhm, 2011).

       Second, we also conduct, to our knowledge, the first investigation of the effects of the

fully implemented ACA (including the provisions related to private coverage) on a broad

spectrum of preventive care measures. Simon, Soni, and Cawley (2017) examined several

preventive care outcomes but only offered causally interpretable results for the ACA’s Medicaid

expansion. Courtemanche et al. (2018a) estimated the impacts of both the private and Medicaid

expansion components of the ACA, but only considered one preventive care measure (well-

patient checkups).


Data

       We use data from the BRFSS, an annual telephone survey conducted by the US Centers

for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) in conjunction with state health departments. The

BRFSS collects information on various types of health behaviors for all 50 states and the District

                                                 6
of Columbia. Having a large sample size (more than 300,000 adults per year) is critical because

the ACA affected insurance coverage for only a fraction of the population, thus limiting

plausible effect sizes.

         Our sample consists of BRFSS respondents 19-64 years old who were interviewed

between 2011 and 2016. Older individuals were excluded because the ACA was not intended to

affect their health care coverage. We start our sample with calendar year 2011 because this is the

first year in which the BRFSS included cell phones in its sampling frame. Thus our 2011-2016

sample period gives us a total of three years of pre-reform data and three years of post-reform

data.

         We examine ten dependent variables related to preventive care or risky behaviors. Our

preventive care outcomes are indicators for a recent well-patient checkup (e.g. physical), flu

shot, pap test, and mammogram in the past year, and whether the person was ever tested for

HIV.2 Our risky health behavior outcomes are a binary indicator for whether one smokes, a count

of alcoholic drinks consumed in the past month, an indicator for whether one was a risky drinker

in the last month,3 a continuous variable measuring the respondents’ body weight in the form of

BMI,4 and a binary variable for any exercise in the last month.5 Smoking, drinking, and obesity-


2
  The BRFSS survey questions we use to build the preventive care outcomes are: “About how long has it been since
you last visited a doctor for a routine checkup?” A routine checkup is a general physical exam, not an exam for a
specific injury, illness, or condition; during the past 12 months, “have you had either a flu shot or a flu vaccine that
was sprayed in your nose?”; “how long has it been since you had your last Pap test?”; “how long has it been since
you had your last mammogram?”; and “not counting tests you may have had as part of blood donation, have you
ever been tested for HIV? Include testing fluid from your mouth”.
3
  According to the CDC (https://www.cdc.gov/alcohol/fact-sheets/alcohol-use.htm), risky drinking is defined as
consuming 60 or more (32 or more) drinks in the last month for men (women), or having any episodes of binge
drinking in the last month. Binge drinking is defined as having five or more drinks in one occasion for men and four
or more drinks in one occasion for women. We also considered using binge drinking as an outcome; the results were
very similar to those for risky drinking.
4
  BMI is defined as weight in kilograms divided by height in squared meters. We also considered a binary outcome
for obesity (BMI ≥ 30) and the results were qualitatively similar to those for BMI. The BRFSS computes BMI based
on respondents’ reported height and weight. Self-reported height and weight are widely known to suffer from
measurement error, but attempting to correct for this error rarely has a meaningful effect on regression estimates
(Courtemanche et al., 2015).

                                                           7
related behaviors were selected because they represent three of the leading causes of preventable

death in the United States, costing 467,000, 64,000, and 216,000 lives respectively per year as of

2005 (Danaei et al. 2009; Cawley and Ruhm 2012).

         Our analysis includes controls for demographic characteristics, household characteristics,

economic characteristics, and measures that capture state differences in the implementation of

the ACA. Specifically, we use BRFSS information to construct dummy variables for age groups,

gender, race/ethnicity, marital status, education, household income, number of children in the

household, whether the respondent reports their primary occupation to be a student, and whether

the respondent is unemployed. Additionally, we use data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics to

control for seasonally adjusted monthly state unemployment rate. Finally, following

Courtemanche et al. (2017, 2018a), we include dummy variables for whether states set up their

own insurance exchanges and whether these exchanges experienced glitches (KFF 2014;

Kowalski 2014).

         One of our treatment variables, measuring the “dose” of the ACA’s impact, is the

uninsured rate in the respondent’s “local area” in the pre-reform year of 2013, computed within

our BRFSS sample. Defining local areas is not straightforward since the BRFSS does not contain

narrow geographic identifiers such as county. Beyond state of residence, the only geographic

information available in the BRFSS is an “area type” variable indicating whether the respondent

resides in the center city of an MSA, outside the center city of an MSA but inside the county


5
 For the risky health behaviors we used the following questions and pre-calculated variables in the BFRSS; “do you
now smoke cigarettes every day, some days, or not at all?”; the calculated total number of alcoholic beverages
consumed per month, the calculated BMI based on questions regarding height and weight, “During the past month,
other than your regular job, did you participate in any physical activities or exercises such as running, calisthenics,
golf, gardening, or walking for exercise?”. We created the risky drinker variable ourselves based on the government
definition in footnote 2, the calculated alcohol consumption variable mentioned above, and a binge drinking
question that states, “Considering all types of alcoholic beverages, how many times during the past 30 days did you
have X [X = 5 for men, X = 4 for women] or more drinks on an occasion?”


                                                           8
containing the center city, inside a suburban county of the MSA, or not in an MSA. Moreover,

the “area type” variable is missing for cell-phone respondents. Following Courtemanche et al.

(2018a), we define four “local areas” within each state – those living within a central city,

suburbs, non-MSA, and location unavailable (i.e., cell phone sample) – and calculate the

pretreatment average uninsured rates accordingly. This approach produces a total of 194 “areas”

(some states do not have all four area types) with 2013 uninsured rates that are computed from

between 219 to 5,804 respondents each, with the average being 1,475 respondents and the

median being 1,205 respondents.6

        Our Medicaid expansion variable is constructed based on information collected by the

Kaiser Family Foundation (KFF). According to the KFF, 32 states expanded Medicaid by 2016.

Most states expanded Medicaid in January 2014, with a handful of exceptions. Michigan’s

expansion (April) and New Hampshire’s expansion (August) both took place during 2014. In

addition, Pennsylvania, Indiana and Alaska expanded Medicaid in January, February, and

September of 2015, respectively. Finally, Montana and Louisiana expanded Medicaid in January

and July of 2016, respectively. We classify states as part of the Medicaid expansion treatment

group beginning the month of their expansions.

        Table 1 provides pretreatment means and standard deviations for our preventive care and

risky health behavior dependent variables, stratified into four groups based on whether the

respondent’s state expanded Medicaid and whether her local area’s pretreatment uninsured rate

was above or below the median within the sample.7 Table A1 in the Online Appendix does the


6
  The lack of county identifiers precludes other possible measures of the “dose” of the ACA’s impact, such as
county-level variation in physician density, that would have to be computed outside the BRFSS.
7
  We were able to compare the mean baseline BRFSS values of the majority of our health behavior measures of
interest with publically reported values from the CDC (NCHS, 2017) as a check on their validity. Our measures
were generally consistent with those compiled by the CDC which gives us confident that our results are not being
driven by data collection idiosyncrasies associated with the BRFSS.


                                                        9
same for our control variables. According to Table 1, 63 percent of respondents had a well

patient checkup in the past year, 32 percent had a flu shot, 56 percent had a pap test, 36 percent

had a mammogram, and 44 percent have ever had an HIV test. All preventive care outcomes,

with the exception of having a HIV test, had higher pretreatment rates in Medicaid expansions

states, especially in states with below the median baseline uninsured rate. Our econometric

strategy will account for these baseline differences.

       In terms of risky health behaviors, the average BMI of the sample in the pretreatment

period was 27.9, 22 percent were smokers, the sample average was almost 15 alcoholic drinks

per month, and about 21 percent of the sample was engaged in risky drinking. Pretreatment

smoking and binge drinking rates and the number of drinks per month were higher in states with

baseline uninsured rates above the median, while BMI was higher among non-expansion states.

       Figure 1 shows how the average values of the preventive care outcome variables change

across the sample period for four groups stratified by state Medicaid expansion status and local

area pretreatment uninsured rate (above or below the median). Well-patient doctor visits and flu

shots were trending upward before the ACA’s 2014 implementation, while Pap tests were

declining and mammograms and HIV tests were relatively flat. Importantly, for all these

outcomes the pretreatment trends appear relatively similar across the four groups, providing

preliminary support for an identification strategy based on pretreatment uninsured rates and

Medicaid expansion decisions. After the ACA took effect, we see some evidence of increases in

some of these measures – most notably pap and HIV tests in 2015 – but an econometric

evaluation is necessary to determine whether these are causal effects of the law.

       Figure 2 presents similar graphs for the risky behavior outcomes. Prior to the ACA’s

implementation, BMI was trending upward while smoking and drinking were trending



                                                 10
downward and exercise did not exhibit a clear pattern. Again, pretreatment trends are broadly

similar across the four groups. After the ACA, BMI and smoking appear to largely continue their

pre-existing trends, while the downward trend in drinking disappears and actually turns positive

for some groups.


Methods

        We seek to estimate the effects of both the fully implemented ACA (including the

Medicaid expansion) and the ACA without the Medicaid expansion for each outcome. The major

challenge associated with this objective is in disentangling the impacts of the nationwide

components of the ACA from underlying annual fluctuations in our outcomes of interest that

would have occurred even in the absence of the ACA. In this paper we adopt the DDD strategy

Courtemanche et al. (2017) use to identify the impact of the ACA on health insurance coverage

after one year and that Courtemanche et al. (2018a) use to estimate the effect on access, risky

health behaviors, and self-assessed health after two years. Such an approach exploits sub-state

geographic variation in the intensity of treatment arising from differential pre-reform uninsured

rates. Adding this layer of sub-state variation allows us to include time period fixed effects while

still identifying the effects of the national components of the ACA.

        Assuming that a geographic area’s treatment intensity is proportional to its baseline

(2013) uninsured rate, our DDD model is given by equation (1):

                                              ∗                               ∗

                                 ∗                ∗                                               (1)

where        is a generic health behavior outcome described in table 1 for individual i in area type

a in state s in time period t,       is an indicator for whether period t is in the post-reform

period of January 2014 or later,       is a vector of control variables previously described in

                                                      11
table 2,                  is an indicator for whether state s participated in the ACA’s Medicaid

expansion as of time (month/year) t, and                       is the 2013 (pre-reform) uninsured rate

in area type (central city, rest of MSA, non-MSA, cell phone) a within state s. Further,

denotes time fixed effects for each month or year * area type combination; these control for time

as flexibly as possible and also allow time trends to evolve differentially across individuals living

in the four different constructed area types. Finally,       denotes fixed effects for each geographic

area (e.g., central city in Georgia), and        is a standard error term. Note that       is not

separately included in equation (1) since it is absorbed by the time fixed effects (     ), while the

terms                     ∗               are not separately included in equation (1) since they are

absorbed by the area fixed effects          ).

           The effect of the ACA on health behaviors without the Medicaid expansion is given by

   *                    , which means it is assumed to be zero in a (hypothetical) area with a 0

percent uninsured rate at baseline and increases linearly as the pre-reform uninsured rate rises.

The identifying assumption is that, in the absence of the ACA, any changes in health behaviors

that would have occurred in 2014–2016 would not have varied differentially by area uninsured

rates, conditional on the controls. We do not need to assume that there would have been no

changes at all in health behaviors in the absence of the ACA (conditional on the controls), as

would be the case in a pre-post comparison that did not employ variation in pre-reform (2013)

uninsured rates.

           The effect of the Medicaid expansion alone on health behaviors is given by      ∗

                    ∗              . As with the other pieces of the ACA, this approach assumes that

the impact of the Medicaid expansion varies linearly with the state’s pre-reform (2013)

uninsured rate. Following Miller (2012a) and Courtemanche et al. (2017, 2018a), we consider


                                                    12
to represent unobserved confounders rather than capturing part of the expansion’s causal effect,

since the Medicaid expansion should not causally affect coverage in an area with a 0 percent

baseline uninsured rate. The identifying assumption for the impact of the Medicaid expansion is

therefore that, in the absence of the ACA, differential changes in health behaviors in 2014–2016

between Medicaid expansion and nonexpansion states would not have been correlated with pre-

reform uninsured rates. This is of course a weaker assumption than would be required by a DD

model examining the impact of the Medicaid expansion on health behaviors.

       We also estimate several variants of equation (1) as robustness checks. First, since some

control variables (e.g. income, education, marital status) could be endogenous to the ACA, we

re-estimate our main regression including only the demographic controls age, gender, and

race/ethnicity. The second and third checks involve two alternate ways to compute pretreatment

uninsured rates: 1) pooling all three pretreatment years rather than just using 2013, and 2) simply

using state-level estimates rather than defining sub-state areas based on the “area type” variable.

For the fourth check, we drop respondents interviewed on cell phones since we do not know

whether they live in a central city, suburban area, or rural area. Recall that we originally included

them as a distinct sub-state group. Next, we drop 19-25 year olds since they were already

partially treated by the ACA dependent coverage expansion that took effect in 2010. In another

check, we drop the five “early expansion” states that Kaestner et al. (2017) classify as having

comprehensive Medicaid expansions under the ACA before 2014. Lastly, we drop the seven

states who took up the Medicaid expansion after January 2014 (Courtemanche et al., 2017).


Results

       Tables 2 and 3 report the results from the baseline DDD regression for the preventive

care and risky behavior outcomes, respectively. The results from the robustness checks are

                                                 13
generally quite similar; they are available in Tables A2-A11 of the Online Appendix. The top

panel of each table presents the coefficient estimates and standard errors for the variables of

interest, while the bottom panel gives the implied effects of the ACA with and without the

Medicaid expansion at the average pretreatment uninsured rate of 0.206. Indicators of statistical

significance are given at the 0.1 percent, 1 percent, and 5 percent level. Table A12 of the Online

Appendix reports all of the regression coefficients from our baseline regressions for each

outcome.

       The results from Table 2 show that the fully implemented ACA increased utilization of

all the preventive care outcomes in non-Medicaid-expansion states, with the effects on checkups,

pap tests, and HIV tests being statistically significant at the 5 percent level or better. The

magnitudes of the increases are 3.8, 1.9, 4.3, 1.5, and 2.1 percentage points for checkups, flu

shots, pap tests, mammograms, and HIV tests, respectively. To provide a benchmark,

Courtemanche et al. (2018b) estimated that the full ACA increased health insurance coverage by

9.5 percentage points using the same BRFSS data and econometric model. If we assume that the

ACA only affected preventive care via the extensive margin of health insurance coverage, the

results therefore imply that between 17 and 50 percent of newly insured individuals increased

their preventive care usage, depending on the outcome. Moreover, the estimated effects represent

between 5 and 11 percent of the outcomes’ sample means. For these reasons, we consider the

magnitude of the increase in preventive care utilization to be economically meaningful.

Interestingly, all the gains appear to be attributable to the private expansion component of the

ACA (the package of reforms that took effect nationally), as opposed to the Medicaid expansion.

The effects of the Medicaid expansion are statistically insignificant and relatively small for all




                                                  14
outcomes. Moreover, the increase in mammograms actually becomes significant without the

Medicaid expansion.

       Turning to the risky health behavior outcomes in Table 3, we observe only one

statistically significant effect of the full ACA: a 1.6 percentage point increase in the probability

of being a risky drinker. This represents a sizeable 7.4 percent increase relative to the sample

mean. Again, the effect is nearly completely driven by the private portion of the ACA rather than

the Medicaid expansion. The point estimates for drinks per month, smoking, and exercise also

point in the direction of worse health behaviors, while the reverse is true for BMI. However, the

effects for these outcomes are all insignificant and much smaller in magnitude relative to the

sample mean.


Event Study Model

       We next estimate an event study model to trace out the ACA’s impact by year. This

serves two purposes. First, such an approach provides indirect tests of the identifying

assumptions of our DDD model, as any “effects” of the ACA that emerge during the

pretreatment period likely reflect placebo test failures. Second, the event study model also allows

us to distinguish between the ACA’s effects in each of the three post-treatment years, thereby

specifically illustrating the importance of our addition of 2016 to the sample period. The event

study model is given by the following equation, with 2013 being the base year:

                                            ∗ 2011                             ∗ 2012
                             ∗ 2014                              ∗ 2015                                ∗
      2016                        ∗ 2011                           ∗ 2012                              ∗
  2014                        ∗ 2015                            ∗ 2016                                 ∗
                                 ∗ 2011                              ∗                  ∗ 2012
                               ∗          ∗ 2014                                    ∗            ∗
                                     2015                                 ∗               ∗ 2016
                                                                                               (2)


                                                 15
where Y2011t, Y2012t, Y2014t, Y2015t, and Y2016t are indicators for each year and the other

variables are defined as in equation (1). The tests for differential pretreatment trends (i.e.,

falsification tests) are provided by evaluating whether the coefficients on the “treatment”

variables in the pretreatment years (θ1, θ2, θ11, θ12) are equal to 0.8

         Table 4 presents the event study results for the preventive care outcomes and Table 5

does the same for the risky health behavior outcomes. Note that the pap test and mammogram

variables are not available in 2013 and 2015, so 2012 is the base year for those outcomes while

no effect is reported in 2015. There are a total of 36 falsification tests (four pretreatment

interaction terms for each of the eight outcomes with no missing years plus two for each of the

two remaining outcomes). We obtain four falsification test failures, or eleven percent, which is

reasonably close to the five percent that would expected due to chance, albeit somewhat larger.

Two of the four failures are for the checkup variable, meaning that for the other outcomes the

falsification tests only fail six percent of the time. One way to interpret these results is therefore

that the estimated increase in well-patient checkups should be treated with caution, but that the

DDD model performs quite well for the other outcomes.

         The coefficient estimates on the treatment variables in the post-reform years provide a

few new insights. First, new evidence of ex ante moral hazard emerges in the third post-

treatment year: a statistically significant increase in smoking (1.8 percentage points) among

those in non-expansion states in 2016 and a statistically significant decrease in exercise (2.7

percentage points) in Medicaid expansion states. These findings were masked in the aggregate

post-reform results reported in Table 3, and were also not found by either of the prior studies that


8
  Recall that the coefficient on the              ∗         variable in our main regression was assumed to capture
unobserved confounders rather than part of the causal effect of the Medicaid expansion. We therefore do not
consider θ6 and θ7 to provide additional falsification tests and do not show the estimates for these coefficients in the
tables.

                                                           16
used only two post-treatment years. Second, we observe some evidence that the gains in

preventive care diminish over time. The full ACA increased flu shots, pap tests, and

mammograms by 3.8, 6.2, and 2.5 percentage points, respectively, in the first year after the ACA

took effect, and all of these effects are statistically significant. In contrast, by 2016 these

magnitudes had fallen to 2.8, 3.1, and 1.8 percentage points, none of which are statistically

significant. If taken at face value, these results are consistent with pent-up demand driving some

of the increase in 2014. However, the estimates from 2014 and 2016 are not statistically

different, so we are reluctant to emphasize such an interpretation. Moreover, the results for HIV

tests do not fit this pattern, as the effects (at least in non-expansion states) are stronger in 2016

and 2015 than in 2014.


Subsample Analyses

        We next conduct subsample analyses that stratify the sample by income and age. We

expect the ACA’s impacts to be most pronounced among young adults and individuals of low

socio-economic-status, as these groups experienced the largest insurance coverage gains from the

ACA (Courtemanche et al., 2018c). Specifically, we re-estimate equation (1) for four

subsamples: those with household incomes above and below the sample median, and those with

age above and below the sample median. For each subsample, we re-compute the relevant

pretreatment uninsured rate based on only the respondents in that particular subsample. The need

to retain a sufficient number of individuals in each local area in each subsample to compute

reliable pretreatment uninsured rates is why we only stratify into two broad categories along each

dimension.

        Table 6 reports the results for the low income subsample while Table 7 does the same for

the high income subsample. For the preventive care outcomes, the effects appear largely

                                                   17
concentrated among those with incomes below the median. The impacts of the private portion of

the ACA on checkups, mammograms, and HIV tests are statistically significant for the low

income subsample, and the magnitudes are larger than those from the full sample reported in

Table 2. In contrast, we observe statistically insignificant and relatively small effects on these

outcomes among those above the median income, and the signs are mixed. The only exception to

this pattern is that the magnitude of the effect of the full ACA on pap tests is almost identical in

the two subsamples, and is only significant among those with higher incomes since the standard

error is much smaller for that group. Turning to the risky behavior outcomes, ex ante moral

hazard appears more prevalent among the high income subsample. As shown in the bottom panel

of Table 7, for this subsample the estimated effects of the full ACA are in the direction of less

healthy behaviors for all outcomes. The only result that is statistically significant at the 5 percent

level or better is the estimated increase in smoking, while the rise in risky drinking is significant

at the 10 percent level. Though statistically insignificant, the estimated increase in drinks per

month is economically meaningful at 3.3 percent of the sample mean. Among the low income

subsample, the pattern of signs is more mixed, with the full ACA leading to healthier behaviors

for three outcomes and less healthy behaviors for two, and none of these estimates are

statistically significant or especially large.9

        Tables 8 and 9 report the results for the age subsamples. For preventive care, we see that

the estimated effects of the full ACA are consistently positive across all outcomes in both

subsamples. While the impact on checkups is an identical 4.1 percentage points for both groups,


9
  The BRFSS only reports income in ranges (e.g. $15,000 to $19,999), so we assign each respondent a value of
income equal to the midpoint of the associated category when doing the stratification. Since this leads to
measurement error, we also tried assessing heterogeneity in impacts by socioeconomic status by stratifying by
education level. These results are available upon request. Because the differences across subsamples were less clear
stratifying by education than income, we decided to report the income subsamples only in the body of this paper. In
other words, our results suggest that BRFSS income, despite its measurement error, is a better proxy for actual
income that education.

                                                        18
the increases in pap and HIV tests are only statistically significant in the younger subsample, and

they are much larger than the corresponding increases in the older subsample (4.9 and 3.8

percentage points compared to 2.0 and 0.1 percentage points). In contrast, the gain in

mammograms is concentrated among the older subsample, consistent with them being more

commonly recommended for that age group. For risky behaviors, the patterns are mixed, and the

only estimates significant at the 5 percent level are an increase in drinks per month from the fully

implemented ACA for the older subsample and an increase in risky drinking from the private

portion of the ACA for the younger subsample.

       In an additional set of regressions, we also examined the impacts of the ACA on those

aged 65 and above as a falsification test. This is because those aged 65 and above should not

have been directly impacted by the ACA, as they were already covered by Medicare. The results,

reported in Table 10, were generally both statistically and economically insignificant, as

expected.


Difference-in-Difference Analysis for Medicaid Expansion

       In the above DDD analyses, we repeatedly find little to no evidence of effects of the

Medicaid expansion on the various outcomes. While this could indicate genuine null effects, it is

also possible that the DDD model is poorly suited to identify plausibly sized effects of the

Medicaid expansion. The DDD estimator for the triple interaction term is inherently less efficient

than the simpler DD estimator used by most evaluations of the ACA’s Medicaid expansion.

Additionally, as discussed in the previous section, it is impractical to estimate our DDD model

with narrowly defined subsamples because of the need to retain a sufficient number of

individuals to compute pretreatment uninsured rates in each local area for each subsample. As




                                                19
such, it may be difficult to identify the effects of a narrowly targeted intervention such as the

Medicaid expansion, which primarily focused on low-income childless adults.

       For these reasons, we close our empirical analysis by estimating a DD model with the

sample restricted to adults with household income below 100 percent of the Federal Poverty

Level (FPL) and no children in the home. The first restriction prevents confounding from the

ACA’s expansion of private coverage, since those with incomes below 100 percent of the FPL

were prohibited from purchasing subsidized insurance on the Marketplace. The second

restriction minimizes the share of the sample that was eligible for Medicaid prior to the ACA,

since eligibility criteria were more generous for adults with children in most states. By

estimating a DD model with BRFSS data and a low-income subsample, our approach mirrors

that of Simon et al. (2017), with the key difference being our inclusion of the third posttreatment

year. Specifically, the DD model is identical to equation (1) but drops the                   ∗

              ∗        term. Results from regressions that further drop the                    ∗

       term are virtually identical and are available upon request.

       Table 11 reports the results. Even in the less rigorous DD model with a sample narrowly

restricted to the individuals most likely to benefit from the Medicaid expansion, we find no

statistically significant effects on any of the ten outcomes in either direction. The magnitudes are

all relatively small, at least compared to the 9.8 percentage point increase in insurance coverage

estimated using the same sample and DD method. Additionally, the signs are mixed, with six

pointing in a favorable direction (greater preventive care use, healthier lifestyle habits) and four

in an unfavorable direction. Therefore, the null results for the Medicaid expansion observed

throughout the paper do not appear to simply be due to limitations of the DDD design.




                                                 20
Discussion

       This paper estimates the effects of the ACA on the health behaviors of non-elderly adults

after three years. We consider two distinct types of outcomes: positive health investments in the

form of preventive services and disinvestments in the form of risky behaviors. Both types of

behaviors could theoretically be influenced by both the reduction in effective prices of medical

services after obtaining insurance coverage and ex ante moral hazard from the expectation of

lower out-of-pocket costs in the future if a preventable illness occurs. Using data from the

BRFSS and an identification strategy that leverages variation in pre-ACA uninsured rates and

state Medicaid expansion decisions, we find some evidence to support both of these hypotheses.

The ACA increased preventive care along several dimensions, including well-patient checkups,

pap tests, mammograms, and HIV tests. This is consistent with the direct price effect dominating

ex ante moral hazard for preventive services, which makes sense since these services are

purchased directly in the medical sector. In contrast, while certain medical treatments can help

individuals make healthier lifestyle choices, the prices of food, gym memberships, alcohol, and

cigarettes are not directly influenced by health insurance. Perhaps for this reason, we find that ex

ante moral hazard dominates for at least some risky behaviors, while other behaviors do not

seem to be influenced by insurance in either direction.

       An interesting aspect of our results is that we consistently find that any observed effects

are attributable to the “private portion” of the ACA – the package of national reforms including

regulations in the non-group insurance market, mandates, and subsidized health insurance

exchanges – as opposed to the Medicaid expansion. This echoes the findings of Courtemanche et

al. (2018a, 2018b) that improvements in access to care and self-assessed health from the ACA

are driven mostly by the private expansion. One possible explanation is that Medicaid



                                                 21
historically pays providers much less than private insurers, which can lead to difficulty finding a

primary care doctor or specialist.10 Since the medical services under consideration in this paper –

screenings, vaccines, counseling services, and prescriptions for weight loss or smoking cessation

drugs – are generally administered in office-based settings, this could potentially help explain

Medicaid’s null effects.

        However, other factors argue against this explanation. Medicaid increased its payment

rates to match those of Medicare in 2013 and 2014, with only a few states maintaining the full

fee bump thereafter.11 Polsky et al. (2015) show that the Medicaid fee bump improved

availability of primary care appointments for enrollees. This implies that, if provider payment

rates are the issue, we should have found a positive of effect of Medicaid expansion on

preventive care in 2014 followed by a reduction in 2015, rather than null effects across all years.

Moreover, results from the randomized Oregon Medicaid experiment indicate that Medicaid

increased use of preventive services, even without the fee bump (Finkelstein et al., 2012; Baicker

et al., 2013). In sum, it is difficult to say more at this stage beyond simply that Medicaid’s effects

may vary by context, which could include both demand-side factors such as the demographic

characteristics of newly covered individuals or supply-side factors such as supply of health care

providers. Additionally, a Medicaid expansion could conceivably be less effective when it occurs

alongside an expansion of private coverage (i.e. Marketplace coverage), as the expansion of

private coverage places additional strain on provider capacity.

        Another noteworthy result is that, while the majority of our results for risky behaviors are

statistically insignificant, we find relatively robust evidence that the ACA increased risky

drinking. It is possible that a single result could emerge by chance given the large number of

10
   See, for instance, https://health.usnews.com/health-news/health-insurance/articles/2015/05/26/youve-got-
medicaid-why-cant-you-see-the-doctor.
11
   See https://www.advisory.com/daily-briefing/2015/04/23/states-to-continue-medicaid-pay-bump.

                                                        22
hypotheses tested in our paper,12 but it is also possible that ex ante moral hazard could be

especially pronounced in the case of risky drinking. One argument for why ex ante moral hazard

has not been found more frequently in the literature is that diseases from many risky behaviors,

such as cancer or heart disease from smoking or obesity, often occur far into the future.

Individuals may assume that even if they are currently uninsured, they will be insured (perhaps

by Medicare or a future job) by time those illnesses occur (Barbaresco et al., 2015). In contrast,

excessive drinking can lead to the need for expensive medical care immediately, such as an

ambulance ride and hospitalization due to acute alcohol poisoning.

         Our work is subject to several limitations, including general concerns about the extent to

which the self-reported outcomes we examine accurately measure the behavior of BRFSS

respondents. That being said, subjective self-reported health variables have been shown to be

correlated with objective measures of health, such as mortality (Idler and Benyamini 1997;

DeSalvo et al. 2006; Phillips, Der, and Carroll 2010). In our particular context, one may be

additionally concerned that gains in coverage led to gains in knowledge about health status and

behaviors through increased interaction with health care providers and that this led to changes in

reporting rather than actual changes in behavior.

         In closing, while our research offers important new information about the effects of the

ACA over a longer time frame than most prior studies, our results nonetheless provide only one

piece of a much larger puzzle. Any comprehensive evaluation of the ACA would have to take

into account effects on a wide range of other outcomes, including overall health, financial


12
  Following arguments made in other studies that looked at a similar number of outcomes, such as Barbaresco et al.
(2015), we do not implement formal methods for multiple hypothesis testing because, while these control the Type I
error rate, they do so at the expense of a large increase in the Type II error rate. While we cannot rule out the
possibility of an occasional spurious result given the number of hypotheses tested, it is worth noting that we obtain
many more statistically significant results than would be expected due to chance. For instance, in Tables 2 and 3,
which contain our baseline results, we report twenty coefficient estimates. Five are significant at the 5 percent level,
whereas only one would be expected to be significant by chance.

                                                          23
protection, health care expenditures, fiscal costs, employment, and wages. We contribute to this

broader debate by providing new evidence that the ACA increased utilization of preventive

services but led to less healthy lifestyles along at least some dimensions.


References

Baicker, Katherine, Sarah Taubman, Heidi Allen, Mira Bernstein, Jonathan Gruber, Joseph P.
Newhouse, Eric C. Schneider, Bill J. Wright, Alan M. Zaslavsky, and Amy N. Finkelstein, and
the Oregon Health Study Group. 2013. The Oregon experiment: Effects of Medicaid on clinical
outcomes. New England Journal of Medicine 368(18): 1713–22.

Barbaresco, Silvia, Charles Courtemanche, and Yanling Qi. 2015. Impacts of the Affordable
Care Act dependent coverage provision on health-related outcomes of young adults. Journal of
Health Economics 40: 54–68.

Brook, Robert H., John E. Ware Jr., Wiliam H. Rogers, Emmet B. Keeler, Allyson R. Davies,
Cathy A. Donald, George A. Goldberg, Kathleen N. Lohr, Patricia C. Masthay, and Joseph P.
Newhouse. 1983. Does free care improve adults’ health? Results from a randomized controlled
trial. New England Journal of Medicine 309(23): 1426–34.

Cawley, John, and Christopher Ruhm. 2011. The economics of risky health behaviors. In
Handbook of Health Economics 2, edited by Thomas G. McGuire, Mark V. Pauly, and Pedro P.
Barros. New York: Elsevier, pp. 95–199.

Card, David, Carlos Dobkin, and Nicole Maestas. 2008. The Impact of Nearly Universal
Insurance Coverage on Health Care Utilization: Evidence from Medicare. American Economic
Review, 98(5), 2242-2258.

Courtemanche, Charles, and Daniela Zapata. 2014. Does universal coverage improve health?
The Massachusetts experience. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 33(1): 36–69.

Courtemanche, Charles, James Marton, and Aaron Yelowitz. 2016. Who gained insurance
coverage in 2014, the first year of full ACA implementation? Health Economics 25: 778–84.

Courtemanche, Charles, James Marton, Benjamin Ukert, Aaron Yelowitz, and Daniela Zapata.
2017. Early impacts of the Affordable Care Act on health insurance coverage in Medicaid
expansion and non-expansion states. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 36(1): 178–
210.

Courtemanche, Charles, James Marton, Benjamin Ukert, Aaron Yelowitz, and Daniela Zapata.
2018a. Early effects of the Affordable Care Act on health care access, risky health behaviors,
and self-assessed health. forthcoming at Southern Economic Journal 84(3): 660–691.


                                                 24
Courtemanche, Charles, James Marton, Benjamin Ukert, Aaron Yelowitz, and Daniela Zapata.
2018b. Effects of the Affordable Care Act on health care access and self-assessed health after
three years. Working paper, Georgia State University.

Courtemanche, Charles, James Marton, Benjamin Ukert, Aaron Yelowitz, and Daniela Zapata.
2018c. The three-year impact of the ACA on disparities in insurance coverage. Working paper,
Georgia State University.

Courtemanche, Charles, Joshua Pinkston, and Jay Stewart. 2015. Adjusting body mass for
measurement error with invalid validation data. Economics and Human Biology, 19, 275-293.

Currie, Janet and Jonathan Gruber. 1996a. Health insurance eligibility, utilization of medical
care, and child health. Quarterly Journal of Economics 111: 431–66.

Danaei, Goodarz, Eric L. Ding, Dariush Mozaffarian, Ben Taylor, Jürgen Rehm, Christopher J.
L. Murray, and Majid Ezzati. 2009. The preventable causes of death in the United States:
Comparative risk assessment of dietary, lifestyle, and metabolic risk factors. PLoS Med 6(4):
e1000058.

Dave, Dhaval, and Robert Kaestner. 2009. Health insurance and ex ante moral hazard: Evidence
from Medicare. International Journal of Health Care Finance and Economics 9(4): 367–90.

Dave, Dhaval M., Robert Kaestner, and George L. Wehby. 2015. Does Medicaid coverage for
pregnant women affect prenatal health behaviors? NBER Working Paper 21049.

DeSalvo, Karen B., Nicole Bloser, Kristi Reynolds, Jiang He, and Paul Muntner. 2006. Mortality
prediction with a single general self-rated health question. Journal of General Internal Medicine
21(3): 267–75.

Finkelstein, Amy, Sarah Taubman, Bill Wright, Mira Bernstein, Jonathan Gruber, Joseph P.
Newhouse, Katherine Baicker, and the Oregon Health Study Group. 2012. The Oregon health
insurance experiment: Evidence from the first year. Quarterly Journal of Economics 127: 1057–
1106.

Hinde, Jesse M. 2017. Incentive(less)? The effectiveness of tax credits and cost-sharing
subsidies in the Affordable Care Act. American Journal of Health Economics 3(3): 346–369.

Idler, Ellen L., and Yael Benyamini. 1997. Self-rated health and mortality: A review of twenty-
seven community studies. Journal of Health and Social Behavior 38(1): 21–37.

Kaestner, Robert, Bowen Garrett, Jiajia Chen, Anuj Gangopadhyaya, and Caitlyn Fleming. 2017.
Effects of ACA Medicaid expansions on health insurance coverage and labor supply. Journal of
Policy Analysis and Management 36(3): 608-642.

Kaiser Family Foundation (KFF). 2014. State decisions on health insurance marketplaces and the
Medicaid expansion. Available at http://kff.org/health-reform/state-indicator/state-decisions-for-

                                                25
creating-health-insurance-exchanges-and-expanding-medicaid/.

Kolstad, Jonathan and Amanda Kowalski (2012). “The Impact of Health Care Reform on
Hospital and Preventive Care: Evidence from Massachusetts.” Journal of Public Economics,
96(11), 909-929.

Kowalski, Amanda 2014. The early impact of the Affordable Care Act state-by-state. NBER
Working Paper 20597.

Miller, Sarah 2012a. The effect of insurance on emergency room visits: An analysis of the 2006
Massachusetts health reform. Journal of Public Economics 96: 893–908.

National Center for Health Statistics [NCHS]. 2017. Health, United States, 2016: With
Chartbook on Long-term Trends in Health. Hyattsville, MD.

Obama, Barack 2016. United States health reform: Progress to date and next steps. Journal of the
American Medical Association 316(5): 525–32.

Phillips, Anna C., Geoff Der, and Douglas Carroll. 2010. Self-reported health, self-reported
fitness, and all-cause mortality: Prospective cohort study. British Journal of Health Psychology
15(2): 337–46.

Simon, Kosali, Aparna Soni, and John Cawley. 2017. The impact of health insurance on
preventive care and health behaviors: Evidence from the first two years of the ACA Medicaid
expansions. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 36: 390–417.

Sommers, Benjamin, Genevieve Kenney, and Arnold Epstein. 2014. New evidence on the
Affordable Care Act: Coverage impacts of early Medicaid expansions. Health Affairs 33(1): 78-
87.




                                               26
Figure 1 – Changes in Preventive Care Variables over Time by State Medicaid Expansion
                 Status and Local Area Pretreatment Uninsured Rate

                                         Well Patient Doctor Visit                                                              Flu Shot




                                                                                    .4
  .7
  .65




                                                                                    .35
  .6




                                                                                    .3
  .55




                                                                                    .25
                           2011   2012       2013              2014   2015   2016                          2011   2012   2013              2014   2015   2016
                                                      Year                                                                        Year


                                                    Pap Test                                                              Mammogram




                                                                                    .25 .3 .35 .4 .45 .5
  .46 .48 .5 .52 .54 .56




                           2011   2012       2013              2014   2015   2016                          2011   2012   2013              2014   2015   2016
                                                      Year                                                                        Year


                                                    HIV Test
  .4 .42 .44 .46 .48 .5




                           2011   2012       2013              2014   2015   2016
                                                      Year




                                                    Above Median Local Area Uninsured Rate and Expanded Medicaid
                                                    Below Median Local Area Uninsured Rate and Expanded Medicaid
                                                    Above Median Local Area Uninsured Rate and No Expansion
                                                    Below Median Local Area Uninsured Rate and No Expansion




                                                                             27
Figure 2 – Changes in Risky Health Behavior Variables over Time by State Medicaid
           Expansion Status and Local Area Pretreatment Uninsured Rate

                                          BMI                                                                  Smoking Rate




                                                                       .18 .2 .22 .24 .26 .28
28.5
28
27.5




                     2011   2012   2013           2014   2015   2016                            2011   2012   2013          2014   2015   2016
                                           Year                                                                      Year


                                   Drinks per Month                                                            Risky Drinking
18




                                                                       .3
                                                                       .25
16
14




                                                                       .2
12




                                                                       .15
                     2011   2012   2013           2014   2015   2016                            2011   2012   2013          2014   2015   2016
                                           Year                                                                      Year


                                    Any Excercise
.72 .74 .76 .78 .8




                     2011   2012   2013           2014   2015   2016
                                           Year




                                          Above Median Local Area Uninsured Rate and Expanded Medicaid
                                          Below Median Local Area Uninsured Rate and Expanded Medicaid
                                          Above Median Local Area Uninsured Rate and No Expansion
                                          Below Median Local Area Uninsured Rate and No Expansion




                                                                  28
   Table 1 – Means and Standard Deviations of Dependent Variables by State Medicaid
                  Expansion Status and Pretreatment Uninsured Rate
                               Full     Medicaid    Medicaid       Non-        Non-
                             Sample Expansion; Expansion; Expansion; Expansion;
                                        ≥ Median    < Median    ≥ Median     < Median
                                        Baseline    Baseline     Baseline    Baseline
                                       Uninsured Uninsured Uninsured Uninsured
Checkup                       0.626       0.600       0.689       0.593        0.679
                             (0.483)     (0.490)     (0.462)     (0.491)      (0.467)
Flu Shot                                0.324         0.324           0.402     0.292      0.358
                                       (0.467)       (0.469)         (0.490)   (0.455)    (0.479)
Pap Test                                0.559         0.522           0.562     0.556      0.564
                                       (0.496)       (0.500)         (0.496)   (0.497)    (0.496)
Mammogram                               0.363         0.332           0.484     0.285      0.447
                                       (0.481)       (0.471)         (0.500)   (0.451)    (0.497)
HIV                                     0.443         0.439           0.395     0.490      0.419
                                       (0.497)       (0.496)         (0.489)   (0.500)    (0.493)
BMI                                    27.864        27.944          27.906    28.059     28.252
                                       (6.282)       (6.386)         (6.225)   (6.446)    (6.379)
Smoker                                  0.216         0.246           0.185     0.241      0.202
                                       (0.412)       (0.430)         (0.388)   (0.428)    (0.401)
Alcoholic Drinks per Month             14.292        13.833          13.526     14.783     12.692
                                      (36.019)      (35.114)        (31.460)   (39.790)   (31.912)
Risky Drinking                          0.217         0.212           0.190     0.217      0.179
                                       (0.412)       (0.409)         (0.392)   (0.413)    (0.383)
Any Exercise                            0.768         0.760           0.787     0.739      0.762
                                       (0.422)       (0.427)         (0.410)   (0.439)    (0.426)
Notes: Standard deviations in parentheses. BRFSS sampling weights are used.




                                                      29
                                              Table 2 – Effects of ACA on Preventive Care Outcomes
                                                       (Pretreatment Uninsured Rate = 0.206)
                                                             Checkup         Flu Shot        Pap Test                          Mammogram               HIV Test
Coefficient Estimates of Interest
Post * Pretreatment Uninsured                                    0.136***                0.083               0.288*               0.095**              0.113***
                                                                  (0.039)               (0.079)              (0.118)              (0.030)               (0.034)
Medicaid Expansion * Post * Pretreatment                            0.051                0.008               -0.080                -0.022               -0.011
Uninsured                                                          (0.053)              (0.068)              (0.106)               (0.056)              (0.035)
Implied Effects of ACA at Mean Pre-Treatment Uninsured Rate
ACA without Medicaid Expansion                  0.028***                                 0.017               0.059*               0.020**               0.023**
                                                 (0.008)                                (0.016)              (0.024)              (0.006)               (0.007)
Medicaid Expansion                                                  0.011                0.002               -0.017                -0.005               -0.002
                                                                   (0.108)              (0.014)              (0.022)               (0.011)              (0.007)
Full ACA (with Medicaid Expansion)                               0.038***                0.019               0.043*                 0.015               0.021*
                                                                  (0.011)               (0.013)              (0.019)               (0.011)              (0.008)

Pretreatment Mean and Standard Deviation of                         0.639                0.335                0.515                0.350                 0.447
Outcome                                                            (0.483)              (0.472)              (0.499)              (0.477)               (0.497)
Sample Size                                                      1,577,507            1,497,214              441.224              443,970              1,446,305
Notes: Standard errors, heteroscedasticity-robust and clustered by state, are in parentheses. *** indicates statistically significant at 0.1% level; ** 1% level; * 5%
level. BRFSS sampling weights are used. All regressions include state*location type and year*location type fixed effects as well as the controls.




                                                                                 30
                                     Table 3 – Effects of ACA on Risky Health Behaviors
                                             (Pretreatment Uninsured Rate = 0.206)
                                                     BMI          Drinks per        Risky      Smoker     Any Exercise
                                                                    Month          Drinking
Coefficient Estimates of Interest
Post * Pretreatment Uninsured                     -0.236             1.766          0.076      -0.007       -0.003
                                                  (0.393)           (2.378)        (0.028)     (0.042)      (0.050)
Medicaid Expansion * Post * Pretreatment           0.011             1.463          0.006       0.033        0.038
Uninsured                                         (0.494)           (2.153)        (0.003)     (0.032)      (0.051)
Implied Effects of ACA at Mean Pretreatment
Uninsured Rate
ACA without Medicaid Expansion                    -0.049             0.363         0.016*       0.002       -0.001
                                                  (0.081)           (0.489)        (0.006)     (0.009)      (0.010)
Medicaid Expansion                                 0.002             0.301          0.001       0.007        0.008
                                                  (0.101)           (0.442)        (0.007)     (0.007)      (0.011)
Full ACA (with Medicaid Expansion)                -0.046             0.664         0.017*       0.008        0.007
                                                  (0.086)           (0.496)        (0.007)     (0.007)      (0.006)

Pretreatment Mean and Standard Deviation of       27.977             14.203         0.215       0.205        0.772
Outcome                                           (6.384)           (36.379)       (0.410)     (0.404)      (0.419)
Sample Size                                      1,503,710         1,510,877      1,502,567   1,547,824    1,532,577
See notes from Table 2.




                                                              31
             Table 4 – Event Study Regressions for Preventive Care Outcomes
                                  Checkup  Flu Shot    Pap Test    Mammo-     HIV Test
                                                                     gram
Coefficient Estimates of Interest
2011 * Pretreatment               -0.297**  0.128       -0.063       0.103    -0.055
Uninsured                          (0.089) (0.066)      (0.076)     (0.059)   (0.050)
2012 * Pretreatment           -0.178**      0.055         --         --        0.050
Uninsured                      (0.065)     (0.046)                            (0.039)
2014 * Pretreatment           -0.029        0..029      0.192*     0.067       0.056
Uninsured                     (0.050)      (0.094)      (0.087)   (0.040)     (0.077)
2015 * Pretreatment           -0.041        0.209         --         --       0.176*
Uninsured                     (0.092)      (0.163)                            (0.069)
2016 * Pretreatment            0.092        0.177        0.237     0.055       0.154
Uninsured                     (0.083)      (0.089)      (0.181)   (0.053)     (0.075)
Medicaid Expansion * 2011      0.105       -0.039        0.011     0.037      -0.110
* Pretreatment Uninsured      (0.080)      (0.052)      (0.117)   (0.077)     (0.056)
Medicaid Expansion * 2012      0.036        0.076         --         --       -0.159*
* Pretreatment Uninsured      (0.052)      (0.063)                            (0.058)
Medicaid Expansion * 2014      0.061       0.156         0.111     0.053      -0.084
* Pretreatment Uninsured       (0.58)      (0.63)       (0.116)   (0.068)     (0.077)
Medicaid Expansion * 2015      0.091       -0.037         --         --        -0.117
* Pretreatment Uninsured      (0.080)      (0126)                             (0.084)
Medicaid Expansion * 2016      0.033       -0.042       -0.084     0.029      -0.156**
* Pretreatment Uninsured      (0.086)      (0.090)      (0.154)   (0.063)      (0.053)
Implied Effects of ACA at Mean Pretreatment Uninsured Rate
ACA without Medicaid           -0.006        0.006      0.040*     0.014       0.012
Expansion in 2014              (0.010)      (0.019)     (0.018)   (0.008)     (0.016)
ACA without Medicaid           0.008        0.043         --         --       0.036*
Expansion in 2015             (0.019)      (0.034)                            (0.014)
ACA without Medicaid           0.019        0.036        0.049     0.011      0.032*
Expansion in 2016             (0.017)      (0.018)      (0.037)   (0.011)     (0.015)
Full ACA (with Medicaid        0.007       0.038*      0.062***   0.025*      -0.006
Expansion) in 2014            (0.011)      (0.016)      (0.017)   (0.012)     (0.014)
Full ACA (with Medicaid        0.010        0.036        N/A       N/A         0.012
Expansion) in 2015            (0.012)      (0.022)                            (0.012)
Full ACA (with Medicaid        0.026        0.028        0.031     0.018      -0.001
Expansion) in 2016            (0.016)      (0.023)      (0.025)   (0.010)     (0.011)
See notes from Table 2.




                                            32
                 Table 5 – Event Study Regressions for Risky Health Behaviors
                                  BMI      Drinks per      Risky      Smoker     Any
                                             Month        Drinking              Exercise
Coefficient Estimates of Interest
2011 * Pretreatment                0.933     -6.064      -0.045        0.074     0.091
Uninsured                         (0.704)    (3.222)     (0.042)      (0.037)   (0.053)
2012 * Pretreatment              -0.869      -0.220     -0.121**       0.044    -0.034
Uninsured                        (0.651)     (4.892)     (0.038)      (0.047)   (0.101)
2014 * Pretreatment              -0.703       7.779       0.017        0.013     0.001
Uninsured                        (0.714)     (3.921)     (0.034)      (0.052)   (0.051)
2015 * Pretreatment              -0.556      -3.183       0.060        0.064     0.064
Uninsured                        (0.637)     (2.885)     (0.050)      (0.034)   (0.045)
2016 * Pretreatment              -0.358      -6.438      -0.031       0.087*    -0.032
Uninsured                        (0.569)     (3.748)     (0.037)      (0.039)   (0.107)
Medicaid Expansion * 2011        -0.049       2.131      -0.005       -0.083    -0.084
* Pretreatment Uninsured         (0.814)     (5.242)     (0.057)      (0.042)   (0.065)
Medicaid Expansion * 2012        1.880*      -6.846       0.015       -0.097    -0.093
* Pretreatment Uninsured         (0.793)     (6.174)     (0.046)      (0.054)   (0.109)
Medicaid Expansion * 2014         0.856      -7.236       0.016        0.019     0.012
* Pretreatment Uninsured         (0.887)     (4.284)     (0.039)      (0.049)   (0.049)
Medicaid Expansion * 2015         1.252       3.307      -0.040       -0.052    -0.003
* Pretreatment Uninsured         (0.730)     (4.064)     (0.050)      (0.037)   (0.057)
Medicaid Expansion * 2016         1.234       5.796        0.056      -0.071    -0.098
* Pretreatment Uninsured         (0.906)     (3.968)      (0.052      (0.044)   (0.082)
Implied Effects of ACA at Mean Pretreatment Uninsured Rate
ACA without Medicaid           -0.145        1.600       0.003         0.003     0.001
Expansion in 2014              (0.015)      (0.806)     (0.007)       (0.010)   (0.012)
ACA without Medicaid             -0.114      -0.655       0.013        0.013     0.013
Expansion in 2015                (0.131)     (0.594)     (0.010)      (0.007)   (0.009)
ACA without Medicaid             -0.074      -1.324      -0.006       0.018*    -0.006
Expansion in 2016                (0.117)     (0.771)     (0.008)      (0.008)   (0.022)
Full ACA (with Medicaid           0.032      -0.112       0.007        0.007     0.003
Expansion) in 2014               (0.123)     (0.809)     (0.010)      (0.010)   (0.010)
Full ACA (with Medicaid           0.143       0.026       0.005        0.003     0.013
Expansion) in 2015               (0.173)     (1.026)     (0.010)      (0.007)   (0.010)
Full ACA (with Medicaid           0.180      -0.132       0.005        0.003    -0.027*
Expansion) in 2016               (0.137)     (0.661)     (0.013)      (0.009)   (0.011)
See notes from Table 2.



                                             33
                       Table 6 – Income Below Median Subsample
                          (Pretreatment Uninsured Rate = 0.320)
Preventive Care Outcomes: Checkup        Flu Shot    Pap Test Mammogram    HIV Test
ACA w/o Medicaid            0.045**       0.021        0.073    0.043***   0.038***
                            (0.017)      (0.019)      (0.050)    (0.011)    (0.011)
Medicaid Expansion           -0.001       9.006       -0.036     -0.001     -0.022
                            (0.018)      (0.020)      (0.039)    (0.018)    (0.015)
Full ACA (w/ Medicaid)      0.045**       0.027        0.037     0.042*      0.016
                            (0.016)      (0.017)      (0.035)    (0.017)    (0.015)

Pretreatment Mean and      0.581       0.282       0.523       0.290        0.475
Standard Deviation        (0.493)     (0.450)     (0.499)     (0.454)      (0.499)
Sample Size               796,268     748,471     230,937     232,567      722,738

Risky Health Behavior       BMI      Drinks per    Risky      Smoker          Any
Outcomes:                             Month       Drinking                 Exercise
ACA w/o Medicaid           -0.080      0.894       0.021       -0.007       -0.003
                           (0.118)    (0.795)     (0.011)      (0.014)     (0.014)
Medicaid Expansion          0.006     -0.900       -0.012       0.012        0.020
                           (0.175)    (0.682)     (0.012)      (0.012)     (0.017)
Full ACA (w/ Medicaid)      -0.074    -0.007       0.008        0.005        0.017
                           (0.138)    (0.760)     (0.011)      (0.008)     (0.012)

Pretreatment Mean and      28.344      12.507      0.196       0.276        0.709
Standard Deviation        (6.766)     (37.676)    (0.397)     (0.447)      (0.454)
Sample Size               752,253     756,077     750,961     779,208      769,377
See notes from Table 2.




                                        34
                          Table 7 – Income Above Median Subsample
                             (Pretreatment Uninsured Rate = 0.064)
Preventive Care                Checkup      Flu Shot    Pap Test Mammogram   HIV Test
Outcomes:
ACA w/o Medicaid                0.007      0.015       0.020*    -0.001       0.010
                               (0.007)    (0.012)     (0.008)    (0.012)     (0.009)
Medicaid Expansion              0.010      0.001       0.019     -0.014      -0.010
                               (0.012)    (0.011)     (0.012)    (0.012)     (0.007)
Full ACA (w/ Medicaid)          0.016      0.017      0.038**    -0.014      -0.001
                               (0.010)    (0.009)     (0.013)    (0.010)     (0.009)

Pretreatment Mean and          0.684       0.378       0.610      0.464        0.41
Standard Deviation            (0.465)     (0.484)     (0.487)    (0.499)     (0.491)
Sample Size                   781,239     748,743     210,287    211,403     723,567

Risky Health Behavior           BMI      Drinks per    Risky     Smoker         Any
Outcomes:                                 Month       Drinking               Exercise
ACA w/o Medicaid               -0.026     -0.275       0.006      0.007        0.001
                               (0.070)    (0.447)     (0.006)    (0.004)     (0.011)
Medicaid Expansion              0.066      0.822       0.010     0.010*       -0.001
                               (0.096)    (0.412)     (0.007)    (0.005)     (0.010)
Full ACA (w/ Medicaid)          0.040      0.547       0.016     0.017**      -0.001
                               (0.099)    (0.470)     (0.008)    (0.006)     (0.005)

Pretreatment Mean and          27.289     16,474       0.244      0.141       0.842
Standard Deviation            (5.580)    (33.297)     (0.423)    (0.348)     (0.365 )
Sample Size                   751,457    754,800      751,606    768,616     763,200
See notes from Table 2.




                                            35
                          Table 8 – Age Below Median (19-48) Subsample
                               (Pretreatment Uninsured Rate = 0.236)
Preventive Care                  Checkup      Flu Shot    Pap Test Mammogram   HIV Test
Outcomes:
ACA w/o Medicaid                 0.020*      0.006      0.064**     0.011       0.021**
                                 (0.010)    (0.018)     (0.023)    (0.012)      (0.006)
Medicaid Expansion                0.021      0.011       -0.015     0.004        0.018
                                 (0.012)    (0.020)     (0.029)    (0.016)      (0.009)
Full ACA (w/ Medicaid)          0.041***     0.017       0.049*     0.015      0.038***
                                 (0.011)    (0.014)     (0.024)    (0.013)      (0.009)

Pretreatment Mean and            0.577       0.281       0.596      0.221       0.515
Standard Deviation              (0.494)     (0.449)     (0.491)    (0.415)     (0.500)
Sample Size                     779,427     732,916     212,543    213,531     710,785

Risky Health Behavior             BMI      Drinks per    Risky     Smoker        Any
Outcomes:                                   Month       Drinking               Exercise
ACA w/o Medicaid                -0.070       0.599       0.017*     0.002       0.008
                                (0.108)     (0.734)     (0.008)    (0.011)     (0.012)
Medicaid Expansion              -0.013      -0.218        0.002     0.012       0.001
                                (0.152)     (0.696)     (0.009)    (0.011)     (0.014)
Full ACA (w/ Medicaid)           -0.083      0.381       0.018      0.015       0.008
                                (0.127)     (0.747)     (0.009)    (0.008)     (0.008)

Pretreatment Mean and            27.489     15.194       0.256      0.225       0.787
Standard Deviation              (6.273)    (37.965)     (0.436)    (0.417)     (0.409)
Sample Size                     736,688    742,330      737,948    763,051     753,292
See notes from Table 2.




                                              36
                          Table 9 – Age Above Median (49-64) Subsample
                               (Pretreatment Uninsured Rate = 0.155)
Preventive Care                  Checkup      Flu Shot    Pap Test Mammogram   HIV Test
Outcomes:
ACA w/o Medicaid                0.042***    0.037*       0.045     0.038*       0.026*
                                 (0.012)    (0.015)     (0.026)    (0.015)     (0.010)
Medicaid Expansion               -0.001     -0.020      -0.025      -0.001     -0.026*
                                 (0.016)    (0.013)     (0.026)    (0.017)     (0.011)
Full ACA (w/ Medicaid)          0.041***     0.017       0.020     0.037**       0.001
                                 (0.010)    (0.012)     (0.023)    (0.012)     (0.011)

Pretreatment Mean and            0.717       0.406       0.497      0.612       0.315
Standard Deviation              (0.451)     (0.491)     (0.500)    (0.487)     (0.464)
Sample Size                     798,080     764,298     228,681    230,439     735,520

Risky Health Behavior             BMI      Drinks per    Risky     Smoker         Any
Outcomes:                                   Month       Drinking               Exercise
ACA w/o Medicaid                 -0.118      0.267       0.007     -0.005       -0.015
                                 (0.109)    (0.582)     (0.004)    (0.005)     (0.009)
Medicaid Expansion                0.166      1.144       0.007     -0.005        0.011
                                 (0.151)    (0.711)     (0.007)    (0.006)     (0.012)
Full ACA (w/ Medicaid)            0.048     1.412*       0.014     -0.010       -0.004
                                 (0.117)    (0.586)     (0.008)    (0.006)     (0.009)

Pretreatment Mean and            28.635     12.640       0.149      0.201       0.733
Standard Deviation              (6.235)    (31.553)     (0.356)    (0.400)      (442)
Sample Size                     767,022    768,547      764,619    784,773     779,285
See notes from Table 2.




                                              37
                                       Table 10 – Age 65 and Older
Preventive Care                      Checkup     Flu Shot    Pap Test               Mammogram            HIV Test
Outcomes:
ACA w/o Medicaid                       0.003           0.004           0.006             0.003            0.008*
                                      (0.004)         (0.010)         (0.012)           (0.009)           (0.004)
Medicaid Expansion                     0.004           0.001          -0.002             0.004           -0.020**
                                      (0.004)         (0.010)         (0.010)           (0.013)           (0.007)
Full ACA (w/ Medicaid)                0.007*           0.005           0.004             0.007            -0.012*
                                      (0.003)         (0.007)         (0.007)           (0.013)           (0.006)

Pretreatment Mean and                 0.858            0.605           0.270             0.626             0.123
Standard Deviation                   (0.349)          (0.489)         (0.444)           (0.484)           (0.329)
Sample Size                          731,224         700,828          219,203          255,172           655,332

Risky Health Behavior                  BMI          Drinks per        Risky             Smoker             Any
Outcomes:                                            Month           Drinking                            Exercise
ACA w/o Medicaid                       0.096         -0.345           -0.004            -0.005            0.009
                                      (0.083)        (0.322)         (0.004)            (0.003)          (0.006)
Medicaid Expansion                    -0.038          -0.103          -0.001             0.005            -0.006
                                      (0.074)         (0.281)         (0.004)           (0.004)           (0.007)
Full ACA (w/ Medicaid)                 0.058          -0.448          -0.004            -0.001             0.003
                                      (0.031)         (0.395)         (0.002)           (0.003)           (0.004)

Pretreatment Mean and                 27.546           9.647           0.069             0.091             0.685
Standard Deviation                   (5.394)         (27.100)         (0.253)           (0.288)           (0.465)
Sample Size                          711,120         704,029          701,088          718,118           714,310
See notes from Table 2. Also, since the pretreatment uninsured rate for those 65 and older is very small because of
Medicare, we evaluate the effects at the nonelderly pretreatment uninsured rate of 0.206.




                                                         38
    Table 11 – Difference-in-Difference Results for Childless Adults Below Poverty Line
Preventive Care              Checkup     Flu Shot     Pap Test Mammogram HIV Test
Outcomes:
Medicaid Expansion             0.035       -0.006       -0.012         0.013       -0.011
                              (0.026)     (0.018)      (0.030)        (0.018)     (0.016)
Pre-Treatment Mean and         0.625        0.323        0.347         0.357        0.387
Standard Deviation            (0.484)     (0.467)      (0.479)        (0.479)     (0.487)
Sample Size                  110,021      103,093       32,765        33,432       98,196

Risky Health Behavior         BMI       Drinks per    Risky        Smoker         Any
Outcomes:                                 Month      Drinking                   Exercise
Medicaid Expansion           0.213        -1.980      -0.008        -0.008       0.024
                            (0.182)       (1.754)    (0.015)       (0.013)      (0.019)
Pre-Treatment Mean and       28.163       11.445       0.160        0.304        0.641
Standard Deviation          (7.303)      (41.510)    (0.367)       (0.460)      (0.480)
Sample Size                 104,908      103,886     103,097       107,512      106,199
See notes for Table 2.




                                           39
     Appendix Table A1 – Summary Statistics for Control Variables by State Medicaid
                   Expansion Status and Pre-Treatment Uninsured Rate
                           Full Sample    Medicaid   Medicaid       Non-        Non-
                                         Expansion; Expansion; Expansion; Expansion;
                                          ≥ Median   < Median     ≥ Median    < Median
                                          Baseline    Baseline     Baseline   Baseline
                                          Uninsured Uninsured Uninsured Uninsured
Age 25-29                     0.105         0.164      0.072        0.140       0.060
                             (0.306)       (0.370)    (0.258)      (0.347)     (0.237)
Age 30-34                     0.118         0.152      0.099        0.137       0.094
                             (0.323)       (0.359)    (0.298)      (0.344)     (0.292)
Age 35-39                     0.107         0.110      0.098        0.105       0.096
                             (0.302)       (0.313)    (0.297)      (0.307)     (0.294)
Age 40-44                     0.119         0.103      0.125        0.113       0.134
                             (0.323)       (0.304)    (0.331)      (0.316)     (0.340)
Age 45-49                     0.108         0.084      0.121        0.093       0.127
                             (0.309)       (0.277)    (0.326)      (0.289)     (0.333)
Age 50-54                     0.130         0.093      0.151        0.106       0.161
                             (0.336)       (0.289)    (0.358)      (0.308)     (0.367)
Age 55-59                     0.104         0.066      0.127        0.077       0.130
                             (0.304)       (0.249)    (0.332)      (0.267)     (0.337)
Age 60-64                     0.096         0.054      0.119        0.070       0.131
                             (0.294)       (0.227)    (0.324)      (0.255)     (0.337)
Female                        0.497         0.450      0.522        0.470       0.537
                             (0.499)       (0.497)    (0.499)      (0.499)     (0.499)
Black                         0.122         0.107      0.096        0.176       0.142
                             (0.327)       (0.309)    (0.194)      (0.381)     (0.349)
Hispanic                      0.166         0.215      0.141        0.220       0.089
                             (0.372)       (0.411)    (0.347)      (0.414)     (0.285)
White                         0.633         0.578      0.674        0.548       0.718
                             (0.482)       (0.493)    (0.469)      (0.497)     (0.450)
Married                       0.524         0.398      0.584        0.461       0.639
                             (0.499)       (0.489)    (0.492)      (0.497)     (0.482)
High school degree            0.267         0.261      0.264        0.281       0.269
                             (0.443)       (0.439)    (0.440)      (0.449)     (0.443)
Some College                  0.320         0.338      0.305        0.322       0.328
                             (0.466)       (0.473)    (0.461)      (0.467)     (0.470)
College graduate              0.281         0.238      0.321        0.231       0.306
                             (0.449)       (0.426)    (0.467)      (0.421)     (0.461)
                                    -- CONTINUED --



                                         40
                                       Full       Medicaid     Medicaid       Non-         Non-
                                      Sample     Expansion;   Expansion;   Expansion;   Expansion;
                                                  ≥ Median     < Median     ≥ Median     < Median
                                                  Baseline     Baseline     Baseline     Baseline
                                                 Uninsured    Uninsured    Uninsured    Uninsured
One child                               0.181       0.182        0.181        0.184        0.179
                                       (0.385)     (0.387)      (0.385)      (0.387)      (0.383)
Two children                            0.166       0.152        0.175        0.164        0.166
                                       (0.372)     (0.359)      (0.380)      (0.370)      (0.372)
Three children                          0.072       0.069        0.072        0.074        0.071
                                       (0.257)     (0.253)      (0.259)      (0.262)      (0.258)
Four children                           0.025       0.026        0.011        0.029        0.024
                                       (0.156)     (0.158)      (0.105)      (0.168)      (0.154)
Unemployed                              0.091       0.105        0.086        0.093        0.012
                                       (0.280)     (0.307)      (0.280)      (0.291)      (0.107)
Unemployment rate                       8.053      8.508        8.307        7.388        7.585
                                       (1.628)    (1.278)      (1.721)      (1.468)      (1.635)
Student                                 0.051      0.075        0.043        0.058        0.032
                                       (0.221)    (0.264)      (0.202)      (0.233)      (0.176)
Income 10k to less than 15k             0.058      0.077        0.046        0.073        0.046
                                       (0.235)    (0.266)      (0.209)      (0.260)      (0.208)
Income 15k to less than 20k             0.080      0.099        0.062        0.108        0.068
                                       (0.271)    (0.298)      (0.240)      (0.311)      (0.251)
Income 20k to less than 25k             0.089      0.103        0.073        0.115        0.083
                                       (0.286)    (0.304)      (0.259)      (0.319)      (0.276)
Income 25k to less than 35k             0.103      0.113        0.090        0.123        0.095
                                       (0.304)    (0.317)      (0.286)      (0.329)      (0.293)
Income 35k to less than 50k             0.134      0.133        0.128        0.142        0.140
                                       (0.340)    (0.340)      (0.334)      (0.349)      (0.347)
Income 50k to less than 75k             0.154      0.141        0.164        0.133        0.171
                                       (0.360)    (0.347)      (0.370)      (0.340)      (0.376)
Income more than 75k                    0.309      0.230        0.382        0.217        0.351
                                       (0.460)    (0.421)      (0.486)      (0.411)      (0.478)
Note: Standard deviations in parentheses.




                                                   41
 Appendix Table A2 – Implied Effect of ACA on Probability of Having a Well Doctor Visit at Mean Pre-Treatment Uninsured
                                                Rate: Robustness Checks
                           Demogra-      Uninsured        State       Drop Cell   Drop 19-25 Drop States      Drop Late
                               phic      Rate from      Baseline        Phone      Year Olds      with Full   2014-2016
                            Controls     2011-2013        2013         Sample                       Early     Expanders
                               Only                    Uninsured                                 Expansion
                                                           Rate
ACA without Medicaid         0.026**      0.030***       0.030**      0.034**      0.029***       0.026**      0.031***
Expansion                    (0.009)       (0.008)       (0.009)       (0.011)      (0.007)        (0.009)      (0.009)
Medicaid Expansion            0.011         0.013         0.019        -0.006        0.009          0.007        0.015
                             (0.010)       (0.012)       (0.015)       (0.018)      (0.012)        (0.012)      (0.012)
Full ACA (with Medicaid     0.037***      0.043***      0.049***        0.027      0.038***       0.034**      0.046***
Expansion)                   (0.009)       (0.011)       (0.012)       (0.015)      (0.011)        (0.012)      (0.012)
Sample Size                1,592,995     1,577,507     1,577,507      955,099      1,483,247     1,431,550    1,381,042
Notes: Standard errors, heteroscedasticity-robust and clustered by state, are in parentheses. *** indicates statistically significant at 0.1% level; ** 1% level; * 5%
level. BRFSS sampling weights are used. All regressions include state*location type and year*location type fixed effects as well as the controls.

  Appendix Table A3 – Implied Effect of ACA on Probability of Having a Flu Shot at Mean Pre-Treatment Uninsured Rate:
                                                   Robustness Checks
                           Demogra-      Uninsured       State       Drop Cell     Drop 19-25 Drop States    Drop Late
                              phic       Rate from     Baseline        Phone       Year Olds     with Full  2014-2016
                            Controls     2011-2013       2013         Sample                       Early    Expanders
                              Only                    Uninsured                                 Expansion
                                                         Rate
ACA without Medicaid         0.015         0.023        0.036*       0.029***        0.019         0.017        0.022
Expansion                   (0.016)       (0.017)       (0.016)       (0.008)       (0.014)       (0.017)     (0.019)
Medicaid Expansion           0.004         0.002        -0.024         -0.051        0.001        -0.003        0.010
                            (0.014)       (0.014)       (0.021)       (0.019)       (0.012)       (0.014)     (0.013)
Full ACA (with Medicaid      0.020         0.026         0.012         -0.023        0.019         0.014       0.032*
Expansion)                  (0.012)       (0.014)       (0.017)       (0.021)       (0.013)       (0.013)     (0.014)
Sample Size                1,504,439     1,497,214    1,497,214       914,444      1,409,996    1,359,777    1,311,153
See notes from Appendix Table A2.

                                                                                 42
  Appendix Table A4 – Implied Effect of ACA on Probability of Having a Pap Test at Mean Pre-Treatment Uninsured Rate:
                                                    Robustness Checks
                           Demogra-      Uninsured        State      Drop Cell     Drop 19-25 Drop States   Drop Late
                              phic        Rate from     Baseline        Phone      Year Olds    with Full   2014-2016
                            Controls     2011-2013        2013        Sample                       Early    Expanders
                              Only                     Uninsured                                Expansion
                                                          Rate
ACA without Medicaid         0.055*         0.056*      0.070***        0.019        0.055        0.060*       0.066*
Expansion                   (0.025)        (0.024)       (0.020)       (0.023)      (0.029)      (0.025)      (0.025)
Medicaid Expansion           -0.016         -0.017       -0.023         0.011        -0.018       -0.029   -0.021
                            (0.022)        (0.025)       (0.026)       (0.031)      (0.026)      (0.021)   (0.019)
Full ACA (with Medicaid      0.039*          0.039       0.047*         0.030        0.036         0.031        0.045
Expansion)                  (0.017)        (0.023)       (0.021)       (0.022)      (0.019)      (0.020)      (0.023)
Sample Size                 442,967        441,224      441,224       270,841       418,028      400,913      387,583
See notes from Appendix Table A2.

  Appendix Table A5 – Implied Effect of ACA on Probability of Having a Mammogram at Mean Pre-Treatment Uninsured
                                                Rate: Robustness Checks
                          Demogra-       Uninsured       State       Drop Cell  Drop 19-25 Drop States  Drop Late
                               phic      Rate from     Baseline        Phone    Year Olds   with Full   2014-2016
                           Controls      2011-2013       2013         Sample                   Early    Expanders
                              Only                     Uninsured                            Expansion
                                                         Rate
ACA without Medicaid         0.017*        0.019*      0.024***       0.028**    0.025***    0.018**      0.018*
Expansion                   (0.007)       (0.007)       (0.006)       (0.009)     (0.007)    (0.006)      (0.007)
Medicaid Expansion           -0.006        -0.003        0.002         -0.009  -0.006         -0.011      -0.003
                            (0.011)       (0.013)       (0.016)       (0.015)  (0.013)       (0.012)      (0.011)
Full ACA (with Medicaid       0.011         0.016        0.026         0.019       0.019      0.008        0.015
Expansion)                  (0.009)       (0.012)       (0.014)       (0.013)     (0.012)    (0.012)      (0.012)
Sample Size                 445,744       443,970       443,970       272,488     420,648    403,349     389,924
See notes from Appendix Table A2.



                                                         43
 Appendix Table A6 – Implied Effect of ACA on Probability of Having a HIV Test at Mean Pre-Treatment Uninsured Rate:
                                                   Robustness Checks
                          Demogra-       Uninsured       State      Drop Cell     Drop 19-25 Drop States   Drop Late
                               phic      Rate from     Baseline        Phone      Year Olds    with Full   2014-2016
                            Controls    2011-2013        2013         Sample                      Early    Expanders
                              Only                    Uninsured                               Expansion
                                                         Rate
ACA without Medicaid        0.020**      0.027***       0.023*        -0.010       0.023**      0.023**     0.028***
Expansion                   (0.008)       (0.007)       (0.010)       (0.010)      (0.009)      (0.007)      (0.007)
Medicaid Expansion           -0.004        -0.003       -0.002       0.038**        -0.004       -0.001       -0.001
                            (0.008)       (0.008)       (0.013)       (0.014)      (0.009)      (0.008)      (0.008)
Full ACA (with Medicaid       0.017       0.023**       0.021*       0.028**        0.019*       0.022*      0.028**
Expansion)                  (0.010)       (0.008)       (0.008)       (0.010)      (0.009)      (0.009)      (0.009)
Sample Size                1,453,114     1,446,305    1,446,305      883,864      1,361,038    1,313,615   1,266,655
See notes from Appendix Table A2.

 Appendix Table A7 – Implied Effect of ACA on Probability of Smoking at Mean Pre-Treatment Uninsured Rate: Robustness
                                                        Checks
                           Demogra-      Uninsured        State      Drop Cell   Drop 19-25 Drop States     Drop Late
                               phic      Rate from      Baseline       Phone      Year Olds    with Full    2014-2016
                            Controls     2011-2013        2013        Sample                     Early      Expanders
                              Only                     Uninsured                              Expansion
                                                          Rate
ACA without Medicaid          0.004        0.002          0.002       -0.017*       0.001        0.003        0.004
Expansion                    (0.010)      (0.009)       (0.010)       (0.006)      (0.009)      (0.009)      (0.010)
Medicaid Expansion            0.005        0.009          0.014        0.023*       0.003        0.004        0.002
                             (0.009)      (0.007)       (0.012)       (0.009)      (0.007)      (0.006)      (0.006)
Full ACA (with Medicaid       0.009        0.011         0.016*         0.006       0.004        0.006        0.006
Expansion)                   (0.008)      (0.008)       (0.007)       (0.007)      (0.007)      (0.008)      (0.010)
Sample Size                1,555,778     1,547,824     1,547,824      941,023     1,455,902   1,405,248     1,355,368
See notes from Appendix Table A2.



                                                         44
 Appendix Table A8 – Implied Effect of ACA on the Number of Drinks per Month at Mean Pre-Treatment Uninsured Rate:
                                                   Robustness Checks
                          Demogra-       Uninsured       State      Drop Cell   Drop 19-25 Drop States   Drop Late
                              phic       Rate from     Baseline       Phone     Year Olds    with Full   2014-2016
                           Controls     2011-2013        2013        Sample                     Early    Expanders
                             Only                     Uninsured                             Expansion
                                                         Rate
ACA without Medicaid         0.427         0.130        -0.028        -0.220      0.237         0.374       0.340
Expansion                   (0.054)       (0.560)       (0.619)      (0.756)     (0.592)      (0.504)      (0.577)
Medicaid Expansion           0.448         0.232         0.752        1.723       0.349         0.671       0.538
                            (0.536)       (0.496)       (0.672)      (1.110)     (0.595)      (0.430)      (0.501)
Full ACA (with Medicaid      0.876         0.362         0.724        1.504       0.586        1.045*       0.878
Expansion)                  (0.459)       (0.595)       (0.545)      (0.836)     (0.471)      (0.491)      (0.637)
Sample Size               1,518,096      1,510,877    1,510,877      918,902    1,4221,48    1,371,966   1,323,365
See notes from Appendix Table A2.

      Appendix Table A9 – Implied Effect of ACA on BMI at Mean Pre-Treatment Uninsured Rate: Robustness Checks
                           Demogra-       Uninsured     State      Drop Cell  Drop 19-25 Drop States      Drop Late
                              phic        Rate from   Baseline       Phone     Year Olds     with Full   2014-2016
                            Controls     2011-2013      2013        Sample                      Early     Expanders
                              Only                   Uninsured                               Expansion
                                                        Rate
ACA without Medicaid         -0.009         -0.089     -0.073        0.086       -0.120        -0.074       -0.080
Expansion                   (0.082)        (0.085)     (0.080)      (0.079)      (0.099)      (0.079)      (0.098)
Medicaid Expansion           -0.036         -0.015      0.196        -0.089       0.030        0.008        0.016
                            (0.110)        (0.107)     (0.126)      (0.139)      (0.127)      (0.103)      (0.109)
Full ACA (with Medicaid      -0.044         -0.104      0.123        -0.003      -0.089        -0.066       -0.065
Expansion)                  (0.102)        (0.087)     (0.093)      (0.125)      (0.094)      (0.093)      (0.102)
Sample Size                1,510,854      1,503,710  1,503,710      911,795    1,414,679     1,365,135    1,316,701
See notes from Appendix Table A2.




                                                        45
Appendix Table A10 – Implied Effect of ACA on Probability of Having Exercised in the Last 30 Days at Mean Pre-Treatment
                                          Uninsured Rate: Robustness Checks
                          Demogra-       Uninsured       State      Drop Cell     Drop 19-25 Drop States      Drop Late
                               phic      Rate from     Baseline       Phone        Year Olds     with Full    2014-2016
                            Controls    2011-2013        2013        Sample                         Early     Expanders
                              Only                   Uninsured                                  Expansion
                                                         Rate
ACA without Medicaid         -0.005        0.001         0.002        -0.002         -0.005        -0.002       -0.001
Expansion                   (0.013)       (0.012)       (0.010)      (0.006)        (0.010)       (0.010)      (0.012)
Medicaid Expansion            0.004        0.008         0.005        0.005          0.010         0.008        0.011
                            (0.012)       (0.011)       (0.011)      (0.014)        (0.012)       (0.011)      (0.010)
Full ACA (with Medicaid      -0.001        0.009         0.007        0.003          0.005         0.006        0.010
Expansion)                  (0.006)       (0.006)       (0.008)      (0.013)        (0.006)       (0.006)      (0.007)
Sample Size                1,544,933     1,532,577    1,532,577      931,656       1,442,214     1,391,155    1,341,734
See notes from Appendix Table A2.

 Appendix Table A11 – Implied Effect of ACA on Probability of At Risk Drinking in the last 30 Days at Mean Pre-Treatment
                                          Uninsured Rate: Robustness Checks
                           Demogra-      Uninsured       State       Drop Cell     Drop 19-25 Drop States       Drop Late
                              phic       Rate from     Baseline         Phone       Year Olds      with Full   2014-2016
                            Controls     2011-2013       2013         Sample                          Early    Expanders
                              Only                   Uninsured                                    Expansion
                                                         Rate
ACA without Medicaid        0.016**        0.014*       0.015*         -0.006         0.008          0.016*       0.018*
Expansion                   (0.005)       (0.006)       (0.007)        (0.005)       (0.005)        (0.006)      (0.007)
Medicaid Expansion           -0.001        -0.003        0.002          0.014         0.001           0.003        0.001
                            (0.007)       (0.009)       (0.010)        (0.010)       (0.007)        (0.007)      (0.008)
Full ACA (with Medicaid      0.015*         0.010       0.017*          0.008         0.009          0.019*        0.018
Expansion)                  (0.007)       (0.009)       (0.008)        (0.009)       (0.007)        (0.008)      (0.010)
Sample Size                1,509,556     1,502,567    1,502,567       914,505       1,414,505      1,364,519    1,316,228
See notes from Appendix Table A2.



                                                           46
        Appendix Table A12 – Effects of ACA on Preventive Care and Risky Health Behavior Outcomes – All Regression Coefficients
                           (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)         (6)           (7)         (8)          (9)         (10)
                                                                                                      Drinks per                  Any         Risky
Variables               Checkup       Flu Shot     Pap Test    Mammogram     HIV Test     Smoker       Month          BMI       Exercise     Drinking
Medicaid Expansion       0.00274      0.00360       0.0249       0.00473      0.00618    -0.0153**      -0.239     -0.0265     -0.00837     0.000977
                        (0.0128)      (0.0146)     (0.0222)      (0.0127)    (0.00915)   (0.00697)     (0.508)     (0.0913)    (0.00979)    (0.00663)
Post * Pre-Treatment    0.136***       0.0829      0.288**      0.0954***    0.113***     0.00722        1.766       -0.236    -0.00344     0.0757***
Uninsured               (0.0394)      (0.0794)      (0.118)      (0.0296)     (0.0343)    (0.0420)     (2.378)      (0.393)     (0.0503)     (0.0279)
Medicaid Expansion *      0.0511      0.00821       -0.0803      -0.0222      -0.0112      0.0334       1.463       0.0112       0.0377      0.00573
Post * Pre-Treatment    (0.0529)      (0.0684)      (0.106)      (0.0556)     (0.0353)    (0.0326)     (2.153)      (0.494)     (0.0514)     (0.0328)
Uninsured
Female                  0.0998***     0.0653***       --           --        0.0522***   -0.0397***   -11.07***    -0.553***   -0.0204***   -0.0976***
                         (0.00316)    (0.00380)                              (0.00323)    (0.00477)     (0.256)     (0.0515)    (0.00221)    (0.00311)
Age 25-29               -0.0207***     -0.00319    0.116***    -0.0210***     0.169***    0.0660***      0.255      1.604***   -0.0319***     0.00464
                         (0.00455)    (0.00456)     (0.0103)    (0.00348)    (0.00626)    (0.00490)     (0.400)     (0.0417)    (0.00257)    (0.00457)
Age 30-34               -0.00760**    0.00733*     0.0936***   -0.0314***     0.230***    0.0909***    -0.825**    2.515***    -0.0621***   -0.0339***
                         (0.00358)    (0.00411)     (0.0136)    (0.00469)    (0.00769)    (0.00632)     (0.374)     (0.0470)    (0.00254)    (0.00404)
Age 35-39               0.0140***     0.00907**    0.0535***    0.0182***     0.231***    0.0813***   -1.231***    2.963***    -0.0784***   -0.0594***
                         (0.00356)    (0.00348)     (0.0144)    (0.00549)    (0.00996)    (0.00499)     (0.388)     (0.0493)    (0.00500)    (0.00486)
Age 40-44               0.0503***    0.00883***     0.0354*     0.333***      0.197***    0.0667***   -1.624***    3.253***    -0.0952***   -0.0808***
                         (0.00524)    (0.00295)     (0.0179)     (0.0107)    (0.00994)    (0.00561)     (0.265)     (0.0510)    (0.00472)    (0.00406)
Age 45-49               0.0707***     0.0299***      0.0137     0.429***      0.147***    0.0681***   -2.344***    3.319***     -0.108***    -0.105***
                         (0.00477)    (0.00408)     (0.0182)     (0.0109)     (0.0120)    (0.00435)     (0.325)     (0.0387)    (0.00502)    (0.00574)
Age 50-54                0.109***     0.0722***     -0.0204     0.474***     0.0779***   0.0663***    -2.816***    3.293***     -0.118***    -0.132***
                         (0.00385)    (0.00569)     (0.0165)     (0.0112)     (0.0116)    (0.00432)     (0.345)     (0.0463)    (0.00575)    (0.00521)
Age 55-59                0.148***     0.126***    -0.0467***    0.489***       0.0142    0.0464***    -4.267***    3.330***     -0.131***    -0.164***
                         (0.00610)    (0.00532)     (0.0157)    (0.00964)     (0.0101)    (0.00336)     (0.334)     (0.0605)    (0.00496)    (0.00570)
Age 60-64                0.193***     0.184***    -0.0810***    0.511***    -0.0360***   0.00835**    -4.896***    3.233***     -0.137***    -0.188***
                         (0.00660)    (0.00541)     (0.0155)     (0.0108)     (0.0121)    (0.00368)     (0.327)     (0.0556)    (0.00478)    (0.00631)
Black                    0.144***    -0.0273***   0.0995***    0.0874***      0.222***   -0.0751***   -5.240***    1.669***    -0.0309***   -0.0737***
                         (0.00270)    (0.00436)    (0.00618)    (0.00479)    (0.00790)    (0.00919)     (0.369)     (0.0650)    (0.00313)    (0.00414)
Hispanic                0.0339***       0.00321    0.0562***    0.0422***      0.0157     -0.159***   -4.442***    0.736***    -0.0252***   -0.0320***
                         (0.00448)    (0.00612)    (0.00371)    (0.00514)     (0.0168)    (0.00625)     (0.327)      (0.105)    (0.00374)    (0.00418)
                                                                   -- CONTINUED --



                                                                        47
                        (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)          (5)           (6)            (7)        (8)           (9)         (10)
                                                                                                     Drinks per                    Any         Risky
Variables              Checkup      Flu Shot     Pap Test   Mammogram       HIV Test       Smoker      Month          BMI       Exercise     Drinking
Other                 0.0293***    0.0252***   -0.0606***     -0.000470    -0.0417**    -0.0284***   -5.892***    -1.061***   -0.0447***   -0.0905***
                      (0.00353)    (0.00509)    (0.00964)     (0.00456)     (0.0172)     (0.00522)     (0.576)      (0.145)    (0.00406)    (0.00560)
Married               0.0272***    0.0312***   0.0206***      0.0206***   -0.0978***    -0.0889***   -4.645***     0.0795*     -0.000268   -0.0651***
                      (0.00214)    (0.00224)    (0.00315)     (0.00284)    (0.00354)     (0.00309)     (0.244)     (0.0445)    (0.00169)    (0.00190)
High School Grad      0.0448***    0.00949**      0.0189       0.0161**     0.0179**    -0.0701***   -1.699***     0.00593     0.0678***     -0.00454
                      (0.00349)    (0.00375)     (0.0136)     (0.00660)    (0.00759)      (0.0139)     (0.275)     (0.0415)    (0.00404)    (0.00314)
Some College          0.0530***    0.0441***    0.0303**       0.0143**    0.0725***     -0.123***   -2.745***       0.0587     0.126***    -0.00803*
                      (0.00362)    (0.00604)     (0.0135)     (0.00626)    (0.00796)      (0.0159)     (0.304)     (0.0478)    (0.00423)    (0.00404)
College Grad          0.0541***     0.110***   0.0723***      0.0299***    0.0673***     -0.224***   -3.971***    -1.177***    0.183***    -0.0219***
                      (0.00487)    (0.00707)     (0.0152)     (0.00795)    (0.00761)      (0.0179)     (0.312)     (0.0830)    (0.00705)    (0.00458)
No Children          0.00426***    0.0178***   0.0250***       -0.00576    0.0556***     0.00620*    -2.974***     0.168***   -0.00508**   -0.0413***
                      (0.00158)    (0.00325)    (0.00511)     (0.00349)    (0.00295)     (0.00316)     (0.151)     (0.0289)    (0.00196)    (0.00199)
One Child              -0.00195    0.0222***   0.0160***    -0.00983*** 0.0619***      -0.00924***   -2.966***      -0.0655     -0.00256   -0.0446***
                      (0.00230)    (0.00393)    (0.00375)     (0.00363)    (0.00360)     (0.00246)     (0.189)     (0.0400)    (0.00296)    (0.00162)
Two Children         -0.0179***     0.00845      0.00456     -0.0142***    0.0642***    -0.0148***   -3.401***      0.0661    -0.00563**   -0.0565***
                      (0.00479)    (0.00512)    (0.00884)     (0.00332)    (0.00489)     (0.00364)     (0.315)     (0.0642)    (0.00257)    (0.00253)
Three Children       -0.0281***    0.00923*     0.000783      -0.0184**    0.0618***    -0.0233***   -3.385***     0.254**     -0.0134**   -0.0716***
                      (0.00429)    (0.00507)    (0.00703)     (0.00696)    (0.00610)     (0.00404)     (0.619)      (0.100)    (0.00523)    (0.00652)
Four Children        -0.0548***    -0.0205**     -0.0154       -0.0205*    0.0541***    -0.0226***    -1.818**     0.289**    -0.0265***   -0.0829***
                       (0.0124)    (0.00772)     (0.0196)      (0.0104)    (0.00782)     (0.00606)     (0.839)      (0.108)    (0.00525)    (0.00749)
Income 10k to less   -0.0120***   -0.0109***     0.00533       -0.00612    0.00949*       -0.00614      -0.194    0.264***    0.00931***     0.00470
than 15k              (0.00417)    (0.00398)    (0.00771)     (0.00546)    (0.00555)     (0.00377)     (0.315)     (0.0742)    (0.00303)    (0.00365)
Income 15k to less   -0.0365***   -0.0152***      0.0116       -0.00431     -0.00970     -0.0121**    1.100**       -0.0797   0.0254***    0.0248***
than 20k              (0.00621)    (0.00481)    (0.00808)     (0.00891)    (0.00775)     (0.00455)     (0.506)     (0.0952)    (0.00450)    (0.00410)
Income 20k to less   -0.0255***   -0.0191***    0.0225**       -0.00154      -0.0131    -0.0275***   2.404***     -0.221***    0.0470***    0.0349***
than 25k              (0.00323)    (0.00326)    (0.00895)     (0.00574)     (0.0108)     (0.00562)     (0.520)     (0.0764)    (0.00344)    (0.00417)
Income 25k to less   -0.00907**   -0.0193***   0.0324***      0.00910*    -0.0356***    -0.0525***   2.902***     -0.422***    0.0651***    0.0446***
than 35k              (0.00361)    (0.00475)    (0.00734)     (0.00478)     (0.0114)     (0.00820)     (0.336)     (0.0689)    (0.00379)    (0.00444)
Income 35k to less    0.0188***    -0.0130**   0.0579***      0.0227**    -0.0441***    -0.0751***   4.070***     -0.494***    0.0929***   0.0643***
than 50k              (0.00554)    (0.00610)     (0.0117)     (0.00875)     (0.0125)     (0.00829)     (0.295)     (0.0707)    (0.00611)    (0.00313)
                                                                 -- CONTINUED --



                                                                      48
                             (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)             (5)          (6)           (7)         (8)           (9)         (10)
                                                                                                          Drinks per                   Any         Risky
Variables                  Checkup      Flu Shot     Pap Test   Mammogram         HIV Test      Smoker      Month         BMI        Exercise    Drinking
Income 50k to less       0.0430***      -0.00151    0.0812***    0.0438***      -0.0534***   -0.0998***    4.971***    -0.600***    0.120***    0.0795***
than 75k                  (0.00540)    (0.00588)     (0.0147)    (0.00937)        (0.0126)     (0.0101)     (0.386)     (0.0702)    (0.00745)   (0.00297)
Income more               0.0689***    0.0320***     0.113***    0.0783***      -0.0426***    -0.129***    7.718***    -1.152***    0.165***     0.115***
than 75k                  (0.00672)    (0.00548)     (0.0151)    (0.00936)        (0.0132)     (0.0102)     (0.377)     (0.0873)    (0.00674)   (0.00310)
Student                  0.0323***     0.0240***   -0.0996***   -0.0296***      -0.0826***   -0.0880***   -2.350***    -0.739***   0.0486***    -0.0167**
                          (0.00599)    (0.00397)    (0.00854)    (0.00398)       (0.00357)    (0.00427)     (0.531)     (0.0889)    (0.00480)   (0.00683)
Unemployed               -0.0487***   -0.0483***   -0.0349***   -0.0375***      0.0340***     0.0672***    1.135***     -0.00218   0.0233***     0.00564*
                          (0.00387)    (0.00237)    (0.00645)    (0.00550)       (0.00229)    (0.00354)     (0.267)     (0.0445)    (0.00258)   (0.00283)
Unemployment Rate         -0.000848     -0.00135     -0.00224    -0.000225        9.48e-06    -0.00204*   -0.366***      0.0193    0.00495***   -0.000330
                          (0.00226)    (0.00190)    (0.00358)    (0.00285)       (0.00163)    (0.00116)     (0.120)     (0.0156)    (0.00175)   (0.00146)
Exchange                  -0.000773      0.00240     -0.00400     0.00301        0.0141***    0.0128***      0.127      -0.0764*    -0.000343    -0.00785
                          (0.00469)    (0.00559)     (0.0105)    (0.00598)       (0.00389)    (0.00431)     (0.285)     (0.0417)    (0.00505)   (0.00498)
Exchange Glitches          -0.00666     -0.00363      0.0130      0.00145        -0.000506     -0.00589     0.0867      -0.00151     0.00607    0.0129***
                          (0.00633)    (0.00585)     (0.0108)    (0.00724)       (0.00610)    (0.00492)     (0.238)     (0.0646)    (0.00522)   (0.00483)
Constant                   0.443***    0.228***      0.524***    0.0705***        0.283***    0.478***     28.55***    26.35***     0.501***    0.358***
                           (0.0311)     (0.0248)     (0.0318)     (0.0242)        (0.0266)     (0.0187)     (1.733)      (0.249)     (0.0218)    (0.0183)

Observations              1,577,507   1,497,214     441,224      443,970        1,446,305    1,547,824    1,510,877    1,503,710   1,532,577    1,502,567
R-squared                    0.068      0.055        0.054        0.274           0.117        0.111        0.046        0.072       0.082        0.072
See notes from Appendix Table A2.




                                                                           49
