                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      AMATEURS CROWDS & PROFESSIONAL ENTREPRENEURS AS PLATFORM
                          COMPLEMENTORS

                                      Kevin J. Boudreau

                                      Working Paper 24512
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24512


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    April 2018




I would like to acknowledge helpful comments from seminar participants at Copenhagen
Business School, Harvard University, London School of Economics, IESE, the NBER Summer
Institute, New York University, University College London, University of Southern California,
University of Michigan, Warwick University, the International Industrial Organization
Conference. The paper was also influenced by helpful comments from Carliss Baldwin, Dan
Elfenbein, Shane Greenstein, Brent Hickman, Nicola Lacetera, Karim Lakhani, Gwen Lee, Hong
Luo, Jenny Kuan, Justin Johnson, Alan MacCormack, Dylan Minor, Ramana Nanda, Imke
Reimers, Chris Stanton, Steve Tadelis, Thales Teixeira, Neil Thompson, Eric von Hippel, and
Joel Waldfogel. This work also benefitted from collaboration in related topics with Lars Bo
Jeppesen (CBS) and Milan Miric (USC). Excellent research assistance was provided by Richard
Paulsen and Gourishankar Seal. Executives at Priori Data contributed proprietary data to this
study. I acknowledge research funding from Harvard Business School Northeastern University
for this study. All errors are my own. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Kevin J. Boudreau. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Amateurs Crowds & Professional Entrepreneurs as Platform Complementors
Kevin J. Boudreau
NBER Working Paper No. 24512
April 2018
JEL No. D04,E26,J4,L1,L8,O3

                                         ABSTRACT

Platforms often have “crowds” of amateurs working on them as complementors, in other cases
professional entrepreneurs—or both. What can a platform owner do to implement these
outcomes? I document evidence on mobile app developers showing that just small, incremental
changes in platform design—related to the bare minimum costs required to build an app and
factors affecting non-pecuniary payoffs—can lead the “bottom-to-fall-out” of the market to
amateurs. Where the bottom-falls-out, there is a flood of lowest-quality developers who
nonetheless are long-lived on the platform and engage in relatively high development activity. I
find no evidence that amateurs crowd-out development activity of top developers in this context.
Moreover, the bottom-falling-out is associated with the generation of significantly greater
numbers of highest-quality products. I discuss several interpretations.


Kevin J. Boudreau
D'Amore-McKim School of Business
Northeastern University
360 Huntington Avenue
Boston, MA 02115
and NBER
k.boudreau@northeastern.edu
1       Introduction
Rather than always using internal R&D or outsourcing to innovation partners, firms are increas-
ingly platforming to external large crowds—organizing them using a variety of approaches in a
wide range of fields from data science, to media and graphical design, natural sciences, fashion and
finance and beyond. Important scholarly advances in understanding this growing use of crowds
now come from multiple research traditions.1
    It is now increasingly common to see large crowds of amateurs developing and innovating
alongside professional complementors in instances of platform-based marketplaces (Bakos, 2001;
Krishnan and Gupta, 2001; Gawer and Cusumano, 2002; Rochet and Tirole, 2003; Varian, 2010;
Ghazawneh and Henfridsson, 2013; Parker et al., 2016). For example, shortly after the launch of
the Apple AppStore, Der Spiegel observed that “a small industry has developed around Apple’s app
business, that includes a lot of amateur developers but also incorporates software companies like
Zynga and Pangea” (Muller, 2009). Fast Company magazine heralded “...a revival of the hobbyist
programmer. Not since the days of the Commodore 64 and Atari 2600 has indie software been sold
by such tiny teams of programmers to such massive numbers of consumers” (Stevens, 2011). Now,
a “blurry line between professionals and amateurs” (Chip, 2012) exists, with hundreds of thousands
of developers ranging from indy developers, entrepreneurial firms, professional enterprises and large
corporations to individual hobbyists, learners, hackers, tinkerers, and user-innovators (Chip, 2012;
Desai, 2015). Despite a recurring $100 annual platform access fee and on-going capital expenses
and other opportunity costs, a large bulk of developers persist in on-going development and oﬀering
products on the AppStore without any reasonable expectation of earning revenues—much less an
expectation of a positive income, even one below regular competitive returns. (Modal product
revenues across products on the AppStore are zero.) A similar mix of professionals and amateurs
can be seen on many other well-known platforms such Youtube, Shutterstock, Podcasts, Etsy, and
Kindle Self-Publishing. In other cases, such as merchants on Amazon.com, we observe mostly
professional enterprises. In still other cases, complementors are dominated by crowds of amateurs,
as in the makers of “add-ons” for Mozilla’s Firefox web browser. Under what conditions do crowds
of amateurs and professional complementors join on a platform? Can this be influenced by platform
design? How are amateurs and professionals really fundamentally diﬀerent?
    Past research stresses the importance of having large numbers of complementors on a platform-
based marketplace (e.g., Church and Gandal, 1992; Katz and Shapiro, 1994; Gawer and Cusumano,
2002; Schilling, 2002; Shankar and Bayus, 2003; Suarez, 2004; Parker and Van Alstyne, 2005, 2017;
Brynjolfsson, et al., 2003, 2011; Cennamo and Santalo, 2013; Bresnahan and Greenstein, 2014).
    1
     See, for example, von Hippel, 2005; Benkler, 2006; Terwiesch and Xu, 2009; Baldwin and von Hippel, 2011;
Kohler et al., 2011; Zhang and Zhu, 2011; Afuah and Tucci, 2012; Murray et al. 2012; Majchrzak and Malhotra,
2013; Muchnik et al., 2013; Chesbrough and Brunswicker, 2014; Felin and Zenger, 2014; Kittur et al., 2014; Mollick
and Nanda, 2015; Piezunka and Dahlander, 2015; Sauermann and Franzoni, 2015; Chen and Horton, 2016; Glaeser,
et al. 2016; Su, et al., 2016; Sundararajan, 2016; Felin, et al. 2017; Lakhani, 2017; McAfee and Brynjolfsson, 2017;
Nagaraj, 2017; Powell, 2017; Lifshitz-Assaf 2018.


                                                         2
Less research has investigated the heterogeneity of complementors2 —and particularly to determi-
nants and implications of amateurs and professionals. Making progress on amateurs, in particular,
might be a useful building block in better understanding platform positioning, performance, in-
novativeness and eﬃciency3 (a question I return to after presenting main results). It also appears
that this mix of amateurs and professionals might be influenced, inasmuch as we see diﬀerent mixes
of amateurs and professionals on platforms in the same industry, such as the corporate and user-
generated video-sharing platforms (e.g., Ching, 2016). (Addressing this questions, as will be seen,
is also an opportunity to draw together several important strands of previously separate research
streams.)
    The consensus dictionary definition of amateurs—those engaging in a pursuit on an unpaid
basis—provides a useful start. I proceed with a yet weaker working definition: those who do not
require payment to engage in a pursuit. This definition is attractive in neither presupposing skills
nor eventual outcomes of amateurs.4 Further, this definition helpfully distinguishes hobbyists,
learners, and fanatics (willing to participate and incur personal expenses without any reasonable
prospect or expectation of positive income) from cases in which workers and entrepreneurs are
willing to accept lower-than-regular income, but nonetheless expect some form of payment (e.g.,
Hamilton, 2000; Scott Morton and Podolny, 2002; Stern, 2004; Åstebro et al., 2014; Sauermann
and Cohen, 2010).
    I develop empirical hypotheses by integrating existing standard theories of market entry and
entrepreneurial selection (e.g., Bresnahan and Reiss, 1991; Hamilton, 2000; Manso, 2016) into a
single compact framework. Rather than presume the existence of distinct groups of amateurs and
professionals (cf. Gambardella et al. 2016), instead I summarize the range of hackers, students,
hobbyists, funded start-ups, tinkers, learners, user innovators and other possible complementors
as coming from some continuous distribution in “quality” (ex-ante expected ability to generate
income) and non-pecuniary motivations. In this latter regard, the framework builds on research
demonstrating multiple sources of motivations among online and platform-based developers apart
from just income, including an interest in creative or challenging problem-solving, learning, building
reputation, social interaction, expanding one’s network, and user innovation motives. (See, for
example, important contributions across a range of institutional approaches: Lakhani and Von
Hippel, 2003; Lakhani and Wolf, 2005; Jeppesen and Frederiksen, 2006; Lerner, et al. 2006 ;
Roberts, et al. 2006; Wu et al., 2007; Howison and Herbsleb, 2011; Zhang and Zhu, 2011; Von
    2
      See Rietveld and Eggers (2018) for an exception, examining how changes early adopters to late adopter users
over time aﬀects success of diﬀerent complementors.
    3
      To the extent a platform can support large numbers of amateur complementors without creating undue crowding
or congestion (e.g., Bresnahan et al. 2014), findings across several literatures hint at possible benefits of amateurs
on platform outcomes (e.g., von Hippel 1998, Jeppesen and Frederiksen, 2006; Jeppesen and Lakhani, 2010; Kittur
et al. 2013; West and Bogers, 2014; Waldfogel and Reimers, 2015; Aguiar and Waldfogel, 2016, 2018; Lyytinen, et
al. 2016; Sauermann and Franzoni 2015).
    4
      Consider, for example, unpaid amateur Olympic competitors, open source software contributors, and student
competitors in case competitions each might vary widely in skill and eventual outcomes.



                                                          3
Krogh et al., 2012; Agrawal, 2014; Lei, et al., 2016; Xu, 2016; von Hippel 2017.) Apart from
diﬀerent types, the framework allows for diﬀerences in choices in product development expenditures
and long-livedness on the platform.
    Crucially, the the framework leads to two distinct solutions or sets of conditions under which
complementors join a platform. A first (standard) solution shows that professionals’ join according
to a minimum quality threshold. Further, the minimum threshold incrementally shifts (“raising-
or lowering-the-bar”)—aﬀecting marginal or “fringe” professionals—by altering platform design
to change complementors’ cost structure (e.g., provision of development tools, documentation,
high powered APIs, platform access fees), levels of non-pecuniary payoﬀs (e.g., public profiles
of complementor accomplishments, social interaction forums), or complementors’ income potential
(e.g., contractual proscription from charging platform users, platform marketing). See, for example,
Ceccagnoli et al. (2012), Claussen et al. (2013), and Ghose et al. (2014).
    A second solution or set of conditions for joining relates to amateurs. This second solution exists
only where a specific component of complementors’ cost structure—the cost necessary to develop
a bare minimum viable product for complementors—falls below levels of non-pecuniary payoﬀs for
some part of the distribution of complementors. Unlike the earlier condition for professionals, this
second solution implies no minimum quality threshold. It is in this sense that the “bottom-falls-out”
of the market to amateurs.
    Complementors meeting this second set of conditions are predicted to be relatively long-lived
on the platform and thus able to accumulate in large numbers, despite tending to be of lower
quality. They should also should be expected to diﬀer in product development choices inasmuch as
they are not bound by usual market discipline, and payoﬀs are weighted towards a non-pecuniary
ones. It turns out to be an outcome of the analysis (rather than a pre-baked assumption) that this
second solution implies a distinct set of complementors from professionals who not require income
to be willing to participate.
With abundant prior research on entry and market participation by professionals entrepreneurs
and firms, the empirical analysis focuses greatest attention on conditions under which the bottom-
falls-out to amateurs. The ideal empirical test involves comparing multiple identical platforms un-
der same conditions, while independently varying minimum development costs and non-pecuniary
payoﬀs. Such an ideal experimental is impracticable if only because platform industries tend
to consolidate around few diﬀerentiated platforms and lack of controlled conditions. To make
relevant controlled comparisons, I instead exploit within-platform variation across 503 narrow
subcategories—platform submarkets—on the Apple AppStore. Each submarket is a microcosm
platform-based market to which the earlier predictions equally apply. Within each submarket,
there are hundreds or thousands of developers and apps. For example, the data studied here in-
clude 3,759 weather apps, 528 hockey games, 273 heart monitors, 543 hypnosis apps, 1,643 games
on fishing, and 1,543 Sudoku games. These 503 subcategories are associated with 43 categories,
thus making it possible to compare say “arcade ball games” to “classic arcade” and other subcat-

                                                  4
egories, while controlling for the wider category of “arcade games.” Similarly, “call managers and
tools,” “download managers,” and other such subcategories can be compared, while controlling
for the broader category of “device and developer tools.” Importantly, the details of the institu-
tional context of the AppStore provides a rare opportunity to operationalize and measurement key
concepts. As platform design is fixed, research design exploits diﬀerences across subcategories to
capture variation in minimum costs and non-pecuniary payoﬀs.
I find empirical patterns to each be consistent with the precise theoretical predictions. Small incre-
mental shifts in minimum development costs, once low enough, produce abrupt non-linear changes
in link between numbers of developers and minimum development costs. The implications of these
incremental cost changes are anything but incremental: developer numbers more than double in
submarkets where the bottom has fallen out. The accompanying flood of products is dominated not
just by low quality, but by very lowest-quality, by all available measures. Nonetheless, developers
in these submarkets live for longer spells and make relatively high numbers of products.
     In a secondary exploration of implications for the basket of complementary goods, I find no evi-
dence that added amateurs result in any congestion or crowding (beyond what might have already
been the case with hundreds of professional developers), in terms of revenues, price, or invest-
ments in new versions (cf. Boudreau, 2012; Waldfogel, 2014; Bresnahan et al. 2014). Instead, the
bottom-falling-out is associated with significantly greater numbers of high-quality complementary
goods. I discuss a number of possible explanations.
     The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 develops main empirical hypotheses related how
platform design influences participation on a platform. Section 3 develops describes the data
used for the empirical analysis. Section 4 presents main results related to platform participation.
Section 5 considers implications of findings for platform performance and the basket of products
that becomes available in cases where the bottom-falls-out to amateurs. Section 6 concludes.


2    Hypothesis Development
This section develops empirical hypotheses on the basis of a simple organizing framework. Time
proceeds in discrete periods. In each period, a new unit mass of potential complementors arrives
(e.g., completing academic training, leaving other employment or leisure, etc.). Each complementor
lives two periods or phases, t✏ {1, 2}. Therefore, platform participation at any time is the sum of
phase 1 and phase 2 complementors.
    In the first “selection” phase, complementors choose whether to join the platform. Product de-
velopment is uncertain and fraction p✏ [0, 1) are revealed to be successful in the sense of earning non-
zero revenues (net of any variable costs), Ri,1 and Ri,2 . Complementors also enjoy non-pecuniary
payoﬀs, i ✏R+ , when participating on the platform. Subscripts i and t index complementors and
phase. Those joining in the first phase will continue in the second “retention” phase, if successful.



                                                   5
       Therefore, the selection condition in the first phase is as follows:5

                         p (Ri,1 + Ri,2 + 2 i ) + (1        p) (    i   + Wi,2 )   Wi,1 + Wi,2 .              (1)

   Note, the terms R, W, and p should each now be interpreted as values determined in com-
petitive equilibrium. Further, the expression presumes that exit costs are suﬃciently low that
complementors return to outside options if they are unsuccessful (e.g., Manso, 2016).
   The retention condition in the second phase is as follows:

                                               Ri,2 +       i      Wi,2 .                                     (2)

    Complementors diﬀer in quality, ⇢i ✏R+ , and non-pecuniary motivations, i ✏R+ . Quality ⇢i
together with the choice of level of opportunity costs devoted to product development Wi,t ✏R+
determine revenues, R(Wi,t , ⇢i )   0.6 Development costs are partially endogenous, the sum of
minimum costs required create a bare minimum viable product, wmin , and any additional discre-
tionary quality-improving expenditures, wi,t , i.e., Wi,t = wmin + wi,t . (It follows that first-phase
developers with probability of 1 p of failing invest less than do successful second-phase devel-
opers who who invest without this uncertainty and therefore have incentives to “scale-up” as they
operate.)
    Within this general set-up, there are a number of dimensions of platform design that might be
altered, as below.

                                                 <TABLE 1>

Lowering-the-Bar to “Fringe” Professionals. The selection condition defines the part of the
⇢ and     distribution of developers who are willing to join. A first (standard) solution to the
selection condition (1) is derived by substituting the partially endogenous cost structure,

                            p (Ri,1 + Ri,2 )   wi,1       pwi,2         (1 + p) (wmin       i) ,              (3)

    and rearranging to show that selection in the first phase requires meeting a minimum quality
threshold :

                                   ⇢i    ⇢min = ⇡     1
                                                          ((1 + p) (wmin           i )) ,                     (4)

where ⇡(⇢) ⌘ p Ri,1 ⇤      ⇤
                      + Ri,2        ⇤
                                   wi,1    ⇤
                                         pwi,2 , is roughly equivalent to expected income—and is
thus increasing in quality, ⇡ (⇢i ) > 0. Complementors meeting this minimum quality condition
                             0


   5
     NB. The expression simplifies to pRi > (1+p)
                                              2 W , equivalent to expression 2 of Manso’s (2016) analysis, where
R’s and W ’s are constant across phases and non-pecuniary payoﬀs are zero.
   6
     Revenues might also be determined by the numbers and types of other complementor choosing to participate
and perhaps their investments in product development Wi,t , if there are congestion or network eﬀects acting among
complementors.


                                                            6
are “professional” in the sense that their willingness to join depends on having some non-zero
expectation of revenues. “Marginal” or “fringe” professional complementors are those for whom
condition 4 is binding.
    The retention condition (2) is re-written, below, in a similar order to expression (3), above, to
clarify this condition holds so long as the complementor chose to join in the first phase and was
successful:

                                           Ri,2    wi,2        wmin   i.                         (5)

    It follows that just fraction p of complementors from t = 1 are retained at t = 2. The total
total number of professionals is just 1 + p times those selecting in the first phase.
    Following usual intuitions and standard results across a range of literatures, participation by
professional entrepreneurs and enterprises is a matter of meeting a minimum quality threshold
expression 4. Changes to each dimension of platform design listed in Table 1 will incrementally
move this threshold up or down.7 For example, reducing any part of cost structure (lower wmin ,
greater Rw0 ,) or taking action to boost non-pecuniary payoﬀs ( ) or boosting the income opportu-
nity (R, p) will generally “lower the bar”—adding to greater numbers of lower-quality marginal or
“fringe” professionals. Panels I and II of Figure 1 illustrate the minimum quality threshold and an
example of lowering the minimum quality threshold.

The Bottom-Falling-Out to Amateurs. Selection condition (1) does not just have just one
solution. This condition is also necessarily satisfied if the following is true:

                                                   wmin         i.                              (6)

    Consider that wmin  i implies that the left hand side of condition 1 will—at minimum—go
to zero. This occurs if quality is suﬃciently low that discretionary investments are unproductive
and set to zero. But, the right hand side is at most zero, where wmin  i .
    This solution follows the simple intuition that amateurs will be willing to join without any
necessary expectation of revenues, so long as their non-pecuniary motivations on their own exceed
opportunity costs, 2 i Wi,1 + Wi,2 (cf. expression 3). For the “marginal amateur,” without even
any incentives to make discretionary investments, Wi,1 = Wi,2 = wmin , or wmin  i .
    This solution diﬀers more radically still for retention even than for selection. Whereas only
fraction p of professionals are retained; in this solution, all amateurs persist, so long as wmin  i
remains true. Therefore, total amateurs at any point in time is 2⇥ the number joining in the first
phase (not just 1 + p this number).
  7
      Particulars depend on functional form assumptions.




                                                           7
Distinguishing Amateurs from Professionals. That there are two solutions does not, on its
own, immediately imply two distinct subsets of complementors. Here, however, the two solutions
are non-overlapping and immediately adjacent, in terms of the parts of the ⇢ and distribution.
And, although this means that professionals and amateurs are part of a continuum in their “types,”
the discussion here will clarify why they are discretely diﬀerent in their behavior and choices.
    Consider first that the ⇡ 1 ( ) term in the minimum quality threshold for professionals (4) is
mathematically undefined for negative arguments, i.e., wmin  i .8 But, this is indeed precisely
the threshold at which the marginal entrepreneur joins. That professionals and amateurs are
non-overlapping and immediately adjacent follows the observation that professionals appear to, at
once, be distinct from hobbyists, learners, hackers and tinkerers—but at the same time part of a
“blurry” continuum with them (see Introduction).
    Consider a thought experiment. A platform does not initially create conditions for amateurs to
join (e.g., Panels I and II of Figure 1). Only professionals join and do so in relation to a minimum
quality threshold. Now imagine the platform owner drops fixed access fees for complementors and
the bottom-falls-out, wmin  i , for complementors with high ’s, as in Panel III of Figure 1.
    Now, those for whom wmin  i includes both professionals (who would have joined) even
without a fee change, and now a potentially much larger group of complementors who who have
earlier been below the minimum threshold (Panel II versus III of Figure 1). Therefore, there will
be both amateurs and professionals where wmin  i . To distinguish the one from the other, we
can delineate those whose endogenously chosen levels of product development expenditures do not
exceed their non-pecuniary payoﬀs, wmin + wi,t < i . Thus, while amateurs do not have a quality
floor, they have a ceiling:,

                                             ⇢max < w     1
                                                              (   i   wmin ) .                    (7)

                                                   <FIGURE 1>


2.1       Main Predictions
Conditions Leading the Bottom-to-Fall-Out to Amateurs. Whereas professionals’ mini-
mum quality threshold shifts incrementally in relation to many platforms design choices; amateurs
are aﬀected only by the interplay of bare minimum development costs, wmin , and non-pecuniary
payoﬀs, , with the eﬀect of leading the bottom to fall out.
    As illustrated in Figure 2, general changes in minimum cost structure should initially lead to the
incremental addition of additional, progressively lower-quality fringe professional complementors,
until finally condition 6 is met and the bottom falls out. At this point, we will see a nonlinear
increase in numbers of complementors. Platform design changes that boost non-pecuniary payoﬀs
  8
      I.e. professionals simply do not join for negative income.



                                                              8
will lead the point at which the bottom falls out to shift to the right. Thus, a boost in non-
pecuniary motivations will make it easier for the bottom-to-fall-out.

                                          <FIGURE 2>

Diﬀerences between Amateurs and Professionals. The analysis also implies several diﬀer-
ences—some continuous, some discrete—distinguishing amateurs from professionals:

    • Diﬀerences in Quality. Quality of amateurs and professionals will be on a continuum.
      Highest-quality amateurs will be of comparable quality to lowest-quality “fringe” profession-
      als; lowest-quality amateurs are unbounded from below. (Quality here is ex-ante expected
      revenues.)

    • Diﬀerences in Long-livedness and Tendency to Accumulate on the Platform. Despite their
      lower-quality, developers are long-lived. They are retained inasmuch as condition (6) remains
      true.

    • Diﬀerences in Complementary Goods Development. Amateurs may (somehow) make diﬀerent
      sort of product development choices inasmuch as they are not bound by market discipline
      and a necessity of seeking (some non-zero level of) income. They will also disproportionately
      receive and be motivated by non-pecuniary payoﬀs. Precisely how is an empirical question.


3     Data Set
A first data source used here is a machine-collected cross-section of the 192,372 app developers
supplying 693,541 apps in mid-2013. This is a period of stable growth, five years after the launch
of the AppStore. This data source includes app titles and developer names, price, sales rank,
version number, file size, and user ratings. Focusing on data from 2013 reflect the data collection
period, but also has the advantage of allowing app-level revenues to be estimated using a procedure
described by Garg and Telang (2012). The app rankings, originally based on sales and download
ranks and essential to this methodology, have since been altered.
    These data were matched to a machine learning-based breakdown of apps into precise sub-
categories, generated by Priori Data. For example, within the 693,541 apps, there are 155 aliens
and space invader games, 2,246 arcade ball games, 2,517 board games, 1,830 brain teasers, 1,002
advanced calculators, 1,287 alarm clocks, 921 astrology-related apps, and 600 apps related to baby
names. These 503 subcategories subdivide 43 larger categories. Main variables are defined in Table
2.

                                           <TABLE 2>



                                                 9
   A third data source, described further below, is a unique survey data set, which confirms the
prevalence of a range of non-pecuniary motivations and allows diﬀerences diﬀerent app categories
to be detected.


3.1     Measuring Diﬀerences in Minimum Development Costs, wmin
Generally speaking, we should not consider the size of a piece of software (lines of code, memory
size, etc.) to be a clear or meaningful indication of its cost or complexity. Software size varies, for
example, by architectural approach, elegance and parsimony, use of external libraries, compatibility
choices and other factors (e.g., Pendharkar, 2004; Verner and Tate, 1992). However, (i) the specific
features of the institutional context, (ii) the focus here on bare minimum development costs, and
(iii) the focus on diﬀerences across subcategories allow minimum file sizes to serve as a meaningful
proxy for variation in minimum development costs, wmin . As shown in Figure 3, these diﬀerences
across subcategories are tiny, many orders of magnitude smaller than diﬀerences in average file
sizes across subcategories. (The analysis will later show these diﬀerences to reflect exogenous
diﬀerences inherent to the app type.)

                                                  <FIGURE 3>

    First, minimum sized apps are meaningful measures of apps of each type. For an app to be
admitted to the platform, it must pass a rigorous certification program. This assures proper func-
tioning of the app and that the app does what is claimed. This includes the app not jeopardizing
the security and proper operation of the system. This includes such things as long load times, im-
proper use of file systems and storage, or system crashing. More specific checks include violations
in content and use of apps such as misuse of trademarks and logos. Any app-specific applications
programming interfaces that are undocumented will lead an app to be rejected. For example,
where applications use a user’s GPS location, this must be for purposes of providing a location-
based service–rather than just naked extraction of location data for purposes of advertising alone.
Apps are also evaluated to ensure they do not contain unsuitable content, possible legal issues
and obligations. Thus, Apple forbids use of open source code and external code libraries. More
arbitrary aesthetic requirements exist, too, that lead to standardized presentation. This includes
stipulations that the use of date and time “scrollers” be of identical width, and that a standard
button system be used to encourage uniform appearances.9
   9
     These points accompany a more general set of Apple’s “Human Interface Guidelines.” The requirements for
approval have been changed and refined over time and have become more stringent over time. A recent summary
is provided at this link http://blog.safedk.com/technology/ios-ats-apple-store-policy-rejected/. Especially notable
were changes in 2017 intended to reduce undiﬀerentiated apps by announcing “apps created from a commercialized
template or app generation service will be rejected” while also imposing a series of principles for evaluating minimum
quality and functions (http://sdtimes.com/app-store-review-guidelines-smbs/).
   Beyond just this structured and rule-bound certification process, some features of the AppStore lead to further
control and standardization of minimum constraints and functional requirements. For example, all apps transactions



                                                         10
    Second, the smallest app need not indeed be the lowest cost app. Rather, variation in size
of very smallest apps, particularly given the highly controlled and regulated code-use, should
capture inherent diﬀerences in complexity and diﬃculty of the development task (Albrecht and
Gaﬀney, 1983; Boehm et al. 2000). Even with the above described high degrees of control and
standardization of code use, there will nonetheless be considerable variation in elegance in writing
in code—and the minimum file size might reflect the most eﬃcient approach, well-designed. This
might in fact be a most meaningful measure of all in capturing diﬀerences in “hard” technical
constraints to generating a certain kind of app with minimal code. (See empirical analysis for tests
of this interpretation.) Many of these arguments will not apply to other parts of the distribution
of file sizes, outside of the minimum file size and particularly for larger code bases, where there
is much scope for any number of factors other than just complexity and challenge influencing the
code base.


3.2     Measuring Diﬀerences in Non-Pecuniary Payoﬀs,
Data collected by Miric, et al. (2018) on 809 app developers’ representing 7,973 apps on the basis of
a large-scale survey are useful to drawing out a set of useful distinctions to test earlier predictions
related to non-pecuniary motivations. It is useful to first review the broad patterns in the data.
Table 3 compares motivations self-reported by part-time and full-time developers, ordered by the
diﬀerences in between part-time versus full-time developers. Ordering the data in this manner is
useful to the extent we can interpret part-time developers to weight more towards amateurs than
do full-time developers. Consistent with this interpretation part-time developers are more likely to
report (in order) “it’s a hobby,” “to learn new skills,” “for fun,” “to increase my job prospects,” “to
use the app myself,” and “to be part of the app developer community.” For full-time developers,
they are more likely to indicate “to make an income” or “to be an entrepreneur
    As large as this survey sample may be, it remains too small to meaningfully match to the large
population data here. However, we can nonetheless exploit these survey data to draw inferences
across subcategories. In particular, survey respondents in the 58 games subcategories were 13%
(s.e. = 0.05) more likely to report engaging in development “for fun” than those developing for
non-games related subcategories. The analysis will therefore simply exploit this knowledge that
games elicit greater degrees of non-pecuniary motivations among their developers. (The empirical
challenge will then be whether any observed diﬀerences in outcomes can be attributed to these
diﬀerences in motivations rather than other plausible diﬀerences between games and non-games.)

                                                 <TABLE 3>
are managed centrally on the one Apple-sponsored AppStore (rather than having iOS-compatible apps traded
through alternative channels). Also, unlike other leading mobile platforms, the Apple iOS operating system has not
been allowed to fork to allow for multiple variants, supporting diﬀerent hardware designs. Apple hardware is made
only by one company–itself–and variations in iPhone hardware at any one time do not require multiple versions of
software to run on each.


                                                       11
4          Main Results
Sections 4.1 and 4.2 test main predictions regarding conditions under which the bottom-falls-out
to amateurs. Section 4.3 tests corollary predictions about the diﬀerences between amateurs and
professionals.


4.1          Numbers of Developers & Minimum Development Costs
As summarized in Figure 2, earlier arguments predict that the developer of numbers, N umDevelopers,
should initially incremental increase as minimum development costs, proxied by M inF ileSize, are
lowered (lowering-the-bar). However, at some point, we should see a nonlinear change in the rela-
tionship between numbers of developers and minimum costs, if the bottom-falls-out to amateurs.
    The relationship is first estimated using a fully-flexible nonparametric estimator with locally-
weighted least-squares calculated along the curve. Weights are provided by a second-order Epanech-
nikov kernel with bandwidth chosen according to "direct rule-of-thumb" local-linear method of
Ruppert, Sheather and Wand (1995). As shown in Figure 4, moving from right to left along
the x-axis, the results are consistent with cost reductions first leading to incremental increases in
N umDevelopers. However, at still lower costs, there is a nonlinear and even “kinked” increase,
consistent with the “bottom falling out” to amateurs. The shape is similar to that presented in
predictions in Figure 2.

                                                          <FIGURE 6>

    To estimate the location of the “kink” I re-estimate the relationship as an unconstrained piece-
wise linear model, where model coeﬃcients are estimated on two independent curves. The model
also parametrically estimates the breakpoint between the two curves. The specification is as
follows:

                               8
                               <      low
                                            +   low
                                                       · M inF ileSizes + Jlow + "low if M inF ileSizes 
                                      0         1                          s      s
 N umDeveloperss =                                                                                                    ,
                               :     high
                                            +   high
                                                       · M inF ileSizes + Jhigh + "high if M inF ileSizes >
                                     0          1                          s       s
                                                                                               (8)
    where s indexes product subcategories, J summarizes all subcategory-specific variation, and
  is the parameterized breakpoint. Parameters are estimated via maximum likelihood. Fig-
ure 4 graphically presents estimates of 0 ’s, 1 ’s, and . The break point is estimated to be
M inF ileSize = 0.063 megabytes (s.e. = 0.023). (In subsequent analysis, I will use this break
point to distinguish the bottom-fall-out or not.10 ) Although the two segments of the linear model
are estimated separately, the two linear pieces touch at the breakpoint.
    10
         Strictly speaking, this is a statistical statement. We might expect exceptions on either side of the breakpoint.



                                                                12
    Model estimates from the piece-wise model are reported in model (2) of Table 4. Consistent
with predictions and earlier non-parametric results, the slope of the relationship is shallow and
negative to the right of this breakpoint, at 159 developers per megabyte reduced to the minimum
cost. To the left of the breakpoint, this slope is many more times larger in magnitude or 21,073
(159 plus 20,914) added developers per megabyte increase in minimum cost. Actual changes are
considerably smaller than these coeﬃcients might initially suggest, given that M inF ileSize and
its variation are not just incremental, but tiny (Figure 3).
    Model (1) provides a more direct interpretation of magnitude, estimating mean diﬀerences on
either side of the breakpoint with a dummy capturing where the bottom-falls-out with lower min-
imum development cost, M inF ileSize < 0.063. Where minimum development costs are relatively
high, the mean number of developers is 362 (s.e. = 27), from the estimated constant term. The es-
timated coeﬃcient on the low-cost dummy is, 494 (s.e. = 49), indicating the number of developers
more than doubles to 856 (494 + 362), as the bottom falls out.

                                                  <TABLE 4>

4.1.1      Robustness

The above results closely conform to predictions summarized in Figure 2. However, before pro-
ceeding further, I investigate robustness of results in Table 5.

Omitted Variable Bias? One concern in interpreting results is that M inF ileSize could be
correlated with unobserved factors that themselves shape NumDevelopers, biasing earlier estimates.
To assess this possibility, I introduce the 43 product category dummies. These are stringent controls
that surely capture a large portion of any possible supply-side and demand-side determinants of
NumDevelopers. As reported in model (1) of Table 5 adding these stringent controls leads estimated
coeﬃcients on LowM inCost and MinFileSize⇥LowMinCost to be almost precisely the same as in
earlier estimates of model (2) of Table 4. The point estimate of the coeﬃcient on M inF ileSize
changes more appreciably, but not statistically so.
    An additional test to attempt to more directly detecting spurious correlation with market
potential is to add lagged subcategory revenues, as in model (2).11 This again, has no statistical
eﬀect on model estimates. (The coeﬃcient on revenues is itself zero. In simpler uncontrolled
regressions, the relationship between numbers of developers and revenues is positive.) These results
are consistent again with the tiny variation in MinFileSize and its relationship with NumDevelopers
being orthogonal to other determinants of NumDevelopers.

                                                  <TABLE 5>
 11
      Revenues are endogenous and therefore results should be interpreted with caution.




                                                        13
Reverse Causation? Another possible source of bias in earlier estimates relates to possible
reverse causation, where say high levels of competition could itself cause lower investment and
smaller file size. If this were the case, we might expect similar patterns for say the the first
percentile in file size. To make starkest comparisons, I report simple linear relationships between
NumDevelopers and both with MinFileSize and with 1stPctlFileSize, in models (3) and (4). The
relationship with the minimum file size is starkly diﬀerent from that with the percentile. The
relationship with MinFileSize is again consistent our interpretation as a shift in the hard technical
constraint, and—importantly, here—inconsistent with the relationship with the endogenous first
percentile (i.e., not bound by a hard constraint, being well above the minimum).
    I repeat this comparison too with the mean level of file size, in model (5). The relationship with
mean file size is simply zero. This null result is especially notable when considering the massive
variation of the mean, and tiny variation of the minimum (Figure 3). Apart from mean file sizes
possibly reflecting endogenous responses of some sort, the larger code base is more likely to reflect
many more factors than just technical diﬃculty or levels of eﬀort (see earlier discussion in Section
3.1).

                                            <TABLE 3>

Endogeneity Bias via “Over-Sampling” of Minimum File Size? Another concern and
source of bias would exist if MinFileSize were not to reflect hard technical constraints, but instead
was just a decline of minimum file sizes with greater numbers of “draws” (an order statistic ar-
gument). To attempt to detect any such eﬀect, model (6) replaces M inF ileSize with the mean
value of Monte Carlo re-sampling of the minimum file size with replacement, over 50 trials. The
Monte Carlo simulated values for MinFileSize lead to similar coeﬃcient estimates, as in model
(6). Alternatively defining simulated measures in relation to the median (rather than mean) of
simulations, or simply mechanically dropping minimum file sizes and using second-lowest file size,
fails to perturb the results.


4.2    Numbers of Developers, Minimum Costs & Non-Pecuniary Motiva-
       tions
As summarized in Figure 2, earlier arguments predict that a boost in non-pecuniary payoﬀs should
shift the cost at which the bottom-falls-out “to the right,” i.e., to higher levels of minimum devel-
opment costs. Here, we exploit the earlier finding (Section 3.2) that those building games were
13% (s.e. = 0.05) more likely to report engaging in development “for fun” than those developing
for non-games related subcategories. This conforms to the intuition that there are higher intrinsic
motivations to develop games than for other software. This might relate to the creative process,
or simply the prospect of playing the games.


                                                 14
    The analysis here therefore compares the 58 observations related to games subcategories to
those of other subcategories. As shown graphically in Figure 7, the non-linear relationship of the
58 games subcategories is indeed shifted to the right of the relationship for the wider population.
(The 58 observations do not allow a break point in a piecewise model to be estimated with precision,
as earlier.)
    Of course, the challenge in interpreting this result is that games and non-games should surely
diﬀer in ways other than just motivations. This problem of interpretation cannot be unequivocally
addressed by further measurement or testing. However, several sources of (some) assurance should
be noted. First, the relevant question is not whether games and non-games are diﬀerent, or even
diﬀerent in their numbers of developers. The narrower and more relevant question is whether they
diﬀer in their link between N umDevelopers-M inF ileSize. Despite the earlier analysis finding
that other determinants of NumDevelopers (other than MinFileSize) were statistically orthogonal
to the relationship; it is only when we focus on this particular cut of the data do we see diﬀerences.
Moreover, these are not simply diﬀerences, but rather patterns than precisely conform to quite
specific predictions. (Finally, the results here might too be considered in light of the wider array of
patterns predictions that will be presented in this section that precisely conform to predictions.)

                                           <FIGURE 5>


4.3    Diﬀerences between Amateurs & Professionals
This section contrasts products and developers in subcategories where the bottom fell out (i.e.,
M inF ileSize < 0.063) in relation to those in other cases.

Lowest-Quality Products. Earlier arguments predict that as the bottom falls out, added de-
velopers should not only be of lower quality, but will include those of lowest quality. Of course,
it is not possible to observe ex-ante quality of developers; however, here it is possible to observe
ex-post (realized) measures of product quality do exist. A most important measure of quality here
are user provided ratings on a 5-point quality scale. Consistent with predictions, the vast bulk of
the average 846 products added to a submarket as the bottom falls out are not just low-quality,
but by very lowest quality products in terms of either having a mean rating of less than one or
no rating at all, as in Panel I of Figure 8. Other possible rough correlates of quality—the number
of user ratings, file size, and numbers of versions—are each consistent with the the bulk of added
developers being of very lowest quality where the bottom-falls-out.

                                           <FIGURE 6>

Long-Livedness on the Platform. Earlier arguments also predict that that where the bottom-
falls-out, developers will tend to persist in oﬀering their products on the platform, even despite


                                                  15
low quality. To compare long-livedness on the platform, Panel 1 of Figure 7 presents the lifespan
of product on the platform, in days, from top to bottom-ranked apps—shown separately for cases
where the bottom-fell-out (i.e., M inF ileSize < 0.063) versus not. To exploit just diﬀerences across
similar subcategories, the number of days is corrected (de-meaned) by product categories.costs.
Rank order of an app within a subcategory is approximated by the numbers of user ratings.12
    As might be expected, highest-ranked apps—to the left of the figure—have longest lifespan
since they were first introduced. This is consistent with the very top, most successful apps being
less subject to selection, and their developers having incentives for on-going development and
versioning (see Panel III of Figure 7). Consistent with the main question here, the patterns are
also consistent with products being longer-lived in subcategories where the bottom falls out, as
the estimate curve for subcategories where the bottom-fell-out (i.e., M inF ileSize < 0.063) is
statistically higher.

Diﬀerences in Product Development.                 Earlier arguments predict that amateurs should
somehow diﬀer in their product development choices, inasmuch as they are not bound to regular
market discipline and payoﬀs skew to non-pecuniary motivations. Here, I test for material diﬀer-
ences in key product development outputs: numbers of products generated by a given developer
and versioning of products, in Panels II and III of Figure 7. The most relevant question here
is whether somehow the “long tail” in cases where the bottom falls out is somehow engaging in
product development diﬀerently from what would be expected of the rightward tail of just fringe
professionals.
    As seen in Panel III of Figure 7, the numbers of versions released (corrected by category)
in relation to rank order is similar for overlapping ranks in subcategories where the bottom-fell-
out or not, with highest numbers of products released by highest-ranked products, and declining
numbers for ever lower ranks. There is then perhaps some suggestion of a slightly higher mean
number of versions created, as one proceed to the very rightward “long tail” in app types where
the bottom-fell-out.
    As seen in the case of Panel II of Figure 7, among very top-ranked developers, there is a similar
pattern of highest-ranked developers producing greatest numbers of products, with a quite rapid
decline outside of very top ranks. In the lower tail, however, the mean number of products where
the bottom-fell-out is generally higher than for fringe professionals in categories where the bottom
has not fallen out.

                                                   <FIGURE 7>
 12
      For observations where sales data are available, sales are highly correlated with user ratings.




                                                           16
5     Exploration of Implications of the Bottom-Falling-Out
Following the earlier main analysis, this section provides a preliminary exploration of how the
bottom-falling-out aﬀects the basket of complementary goods. The number of apps within each
subcategory increases to 1404 products, on average, where the bottom falls out. This is an increase
of 846 (s.e. = 104.2) above the 558 (s.e. = 63.1) products, on average, within narrowly-defined
subcategories. On the face of it and following conventional intuitions on eﬀects of entry and
increases in variety, in terms of numbers of products, we might expect large eﬀects. However, it
is important to keep in mind that this is entry by mostly lowest-quality developers into narrowly-
defined, already-served product types with established market niche-leaders. (We might expect
too that added developers could potentially have an eﬀect on the creation of new niches, but the
research design and structure of data examined here does not allow for such an analysis and this
remains a question deserving future research.)
    If following existing insights on professional complementors working on platforms we might
expect the entry of large numbers of complementors might have any number of possible positive
or negative eﬀects (externalities), as has been theorized (Economides, 1996; Eisenmann, et al.
2006) and found (Augereau, 2006; Boudreau, 2012) in past research. This question remains to be
systematically studied in the case of the bottom-falling-out to amateurs, and is crucial to evaluating
any eﬀect on the basket of complementary goods. I divide the following exploration into questions
of pricing and possible substitution between amateurs and higher-quality professionals, possible
externalities and eﬀects on investment incentives, and observed eﬀects on resulting quality.


5.1    Weak Evidence of Substitution and Competitive Pressure on Top
       Developers
Panel IV of Figure 7 first seeks to detect whether there is evidence of substitution in pricing
patterns. If large numbers of amateurs created crowding and congestion, we might expect this
would create downward pressure on the price of higher quality professional developers. As might
be expected, Panel IV of Figure 7 shows that top apps tend to be priced highest, with price
becoming lower with rank. Broadly speaking, pricing is about the same whether the bottom-falls-
out or not for top apps, as the estimated confidence intervals for price versus rank are overlapping.
The exception might be among very top apps, where the estimated mean price curve appears to
be a tiny bit lower.
    To more precisely verify whether there are indeed slightly lower prices, I separately estimate
the eﬀect on just a subsample of top-ranked apps across each of the 503 subcategories, controlling
for 43 categories. If I compare just the 503 top-ranked apps in each subcategory, the estimated
eﬀect is not statistically significant at 0.09 (s.e. = 0.19)—or about a dime less, but too noisy
to be significant. The eﬀect is weakly statistically significant in estimates on just the top-3 apps


                                                 17
or 0.258 (s.e. = 0.141). The eﬀect becomes statistically insignificant again among top-10 apps,
but the point estimate remains negative at 0.088 (s.e. = 0.12)—again, about a dime less, but
too noisy to be significant. Therefore, all results point to a weak negative eﬀect on price of the
bottom-falling-out to amateurs on highest-ranked developers (cf. Miric, 2017).


5.2    No Evidence of Crowding or Congestion
To assess whether there might exist some form of negative externality, congestion or crowding-
out, I seek evidence of any diﬀerences in investment incentives, as reflected in versioning. The
interpretation here is that—all else being equal—that developers with higher investment incentives
will engage in more versioning of their products. Again, as might be expected, levels of versioning
are greatest for top-ranked apps and are lower for lower-ranked apps. The patterns are again very
similar for cases where the bottom has fallen out or where it has not, only that the long right tail
is much longer where the bottom has fallen out. The estimated relationship between versioning
and rank order is statistically identical for the most part, with largely overlapping 95% confidence
intervals, as in Panel III of Figure 7. Where there is any possible diﬀerence, among very top-
ranked apps to the far left of the curve, versioning is in fact slightly higher in the case where the
bottom has fallen out to amateurs. (Regression analysis focused on just top apps confirms this
point.) Therefore, there is no evidence here that going from hundreds of professional developers
to hundreds more amateurs within this context results in any net diminution of investment, as
indicated by number of versions of any title. Similar conclusions are drawn if interpreting number
of product releases as an indication of willingness to invest or experiment, as in Panel II of Figure
7.

                                          <FIGURE 12>

                                          <FIGURE 10>


5.3    Increase in Higher-Quality Complementary Goods
It remains a question of how adding amateurs impacts the quality of products added to the
platform. Patterns studied in Figure 7 would themselves suggest even a possible increase in quality
given no diminution in the release of new versions or new products—and even perhaps a slight
increase among top developers. Indeed, the earlier Figure 6 provides some suggestion that, while
the bulk of developers added were of very lowest quality, there would also appear to be greater
numbers of high-quality products. For example, although it is perhaps diﬃcult to immediately
discern in Figure 8, the number of products with at least 4.5 out of 5 ratings increases from 111
(s.e. = 17.2) by 158 (s.e. = 22.1) to 269, as the bottom falls out. Of course, it is possible that
lowest-quality and least-reviewed apps have highest variance, leading to many “false positive” when
counting seemingly high-quality apps. Table 6 therefore re-estimates the increasing numbers of

                                                 18
apps with at least 4.5 out of 5, but sampling only those with some minimum number of user ratings.
As reported in the table, whether sampling on >10, >100, >500, or >5000 ratings, I find that
the number of highest-quality products roughly doubles the number of highest-quality products
across a wide range of estimates. Even estimating the eﬀect of the bottom falling on numbers of
top apps with at least 150,000 user ratings (the 99th percentile), I find much more than double
(437% times) the greater of high-quality products.

                                           <TABLE 6>


5.4    Possible Interpretations and Areas for Future Research
There are a many plausible mechanisms why the bottom-falling-out could lead to more high-quality,
either from products generated by developers who initially entered as amateurs but went on to
become professionals, or those originally joining as professionals. Indeed, it is possible that each
mechanism operates at the same time. As elaborated below, most deserve closer scrutiny in future
research.

  1. “Many Shots-on-Goal & Extreme Value Outcomes.” Large numbers of amateurs with virtually
     zero chance of a positive income and expected losses might at least in rare instances hit upon
     a good idea and become successful. The earlier theoretical analysis would then predict
     such a developer would then have incentives to invest to a point where it would become a
     professional, and simply appear in the data here as just another high quality supplier. (A
     number of studies make analogous arguments in relation to income-seeking professionals,
     e.g., Terwiesch and Xu, 2009; Boudreau, et al. 2011; Waldfogel 2012, 2014; Waldfogel and
     Reimers, 2015; Aguiar and Waldfogel, 2016, 2018.) Strictly speaking, a longer panel-based
     research design allowing some form of “genealogy” of developers is required to investigate this
     mechanism. Nonetheless, even the analysis provided here at least suggests this explanation
     is plausible on its face. Consider for example, that as the bottom-falls-out, there are only 2.4
     added products with 4.5 ratings with at least 500 reviews (Table 6). On its face, generating
     fewer than 3 more products by this standard—while adding hundreds upon hundreds of
     developers as the bottom-falls-out—would still mean a tiny probability of this “extreme
     value” quality outcome. It should be highlighted however, that perhaps making this seem
     more plausible still is that even attaining this threshold of quality likely does not on its own
     imply achieving a commercially successful app. The bulk of share in any given subcategory
     goes to the top one or two developers. An app with 500 high-quality ratings or more is by
     no means necessarily commercially success.

  2. “Amateur Learning & Evolution.” Closely-related to arguments above is the possibility that
     the long-lived amateurs on the platform could at least over time engage in gradual experi-
     mentation and learning to eventually achieve higher outcomes than they would upon initial

                                                19
     entry. Perhaps a high motivation to learn and insulation from market forces could even
     create advantages for amateurs to grow and evolve, to deliver these added 2.4 highly-rated
     products. Again, a longer panel-based research design allowing some form of “genealogy” of
     developers is warranted and encouraged to investigate this possibility in future study.

  3. “Sticky Information & Heterogeneity.” Reducing the bare minimum costs and “entry barriers”
     to historically low levels to let the bottom-fall-out creates the opportunity for non-specialists
     to participate (Jeppesen and Lakhani, 2011; Murray et al, 2016) and perhaps allow a wider
     range of diversity, and perhaps also even “sticky” knowledge regarding the needs of particular
     customer groups or novel approaches to addressing problems (e.g., von Hippel, 1998; Jeppesen
     and Lakhani, 2010; Jeppesen and Frederiksen, 2006). These arguments do not likely explain
     the particular patterns documented here given that the research design here focuses on
     narrow precise-designed, establish product categories at a snapshot in time. That is not to
     say, however, that these arguments were not at work on the AppStore over time.

To the extent a platform can support large numbers of amateur complementors without creating
undue crowding or congestion (e.g., Bresnahan et al. 2014), findings across several literatures
hint at possible benefits of amateurs on platform outcomes (e.g., von Hippel 1998, Jeppesen
and Frederiksen, 2006; Jeppesen and Lakhani, 2010; Kittur et al. 2013; West and Bogers, 2014;
Waldfogel and Reimers, 2015; Aguiar and Waldfogel, 2016, 2018; Lyytinen, et al. 2016; Sauermann
and Franzoni 2015).

  1. “Knowledge Spillovers and Vicarious Learning.” The ideas, examples, failed and successful
     experiments that are carried out by amateurs might also, in the end, be observed by oth-
     ers—even higher-quality professional entrepreneurs—who then successfully implement these
     ideas in highest-quality products. This could be true even if amateurs’ own ideas never
     attain commercial success or even technical success, as ideas may be discerned one feature
     at a time and adopted. If this were the operating mechanism, then the 2.4 added high
     quality products could come from the ranks of already relatively high-quality professionals,
     rather than from the seemingly “utterly long-shot” amateur. In this case, the higher-ranked
     developers would simply have to observe and learn from other developers. This activity is
     increasingly becoming easier on online platforms. If this were the case, we might expect an
     overall improvement and learning in areas where the bottom has fallen out, given there is
     more productive knowledge to build on for all. Indeed in Figure 6, there is some suggestion
     of greater numbers of higher quality across the entire distribution of quality, although the
     diﬀerences seem more acute in most extreme high-quality outcomes. The diﬀerences there-
     fore appear to manifest most in the extreme upper tail. It is a priori unclear why greatest
     learning and impact should take place in very best products.

  2. “Lower Experimentation Costs–for all.” At least some of the approaches to platform design

                                                 20
       that serve to reduce minimum development costs, wmin , Table 1 might also plausibly serve
       to reduce the costs of making higher-cost discretionary investments at the same time, Rw0
       (e.g., powerful tools). If this were the case, then professionals might simultaneously benefit
       from lower cost of experimentation and themselves release more products, do more learning
       and ultimately generate better products—whether amateurs do so or not. This would be
       additionally plausible if the platform did not incur undue coordination costs, congestion and
       crowding from amateurs—as appears to be the case, here. The preceding analysis did not
       test or allow for this possibility. Recall, rather than exploit changes in platform design (here
       constant within a given platform), the analysis exploited inherent diﬀerences across given app
       types. The econometric analysis found that the proxy for minimum costs, MinFileSize, were
       rather unrelated to higher statistics of file size. (models 3, 4 and 5 of Table 5). Further, the
       greatest impact on quality appears to concentrate greatest on very top apps and developers
       – precisely where cost structure of very minimum viable products might be least relevant.

    3. “Strategic Incentives to Invest in Product Development.” In considering the eﬀects of added
       suppliers—potential competitors—the bulk of existing research, particularly that rooted in
       industrial economics, tends to consider eﬀects of added entry and competition on strategic
       incentives (e.g., Aghion, et al., 2005; Anderson and Cabral. 2007). Here, the relevant question
       is whether the bottom-falling-out to added amateurs could have stimulated incentives to
       engage in more active development by high-quality developers. This could happen if, on the
       one hand, there are two-sided network eﬀects that were to create a demand-pull for more
       innovation an development. On this account, work by Bresnahan, et al. (2015) suggests that
       the strength of two-sided network eﬀects–at the margin—were quite limited on the Apple
       AppStore, once the platform grew to a critical scale. On the other hand, it is also possible
       for the threat of competition, particularly close neck-and-neck competition, to stimulate
       innovation incentives and racing. Here we see some (weak) evidence of substitution and
       competitive pressure, in the form of slightly lower prices among top-developers, where the
       bottom falls out (Section 5.1). For this to serve as an explanation, it would have to be
       true that these top developers were attempting to “escape competition” from the flood of
       low quality amateur developers, which would seem perhaps less likely on its face than other
       plausible explanations listed earlier.


6     Summary & Conclusion
Crowds of amateurs are often willing to participate in markets, particularly online digital platform-
based marketplaces, developing products without any expectation of earning income or revenues.
This paper sought to provide a clearer understanding of how platform design influences participa-
tion of amateurs and professionals on platforms.


                                                  21
     The empirical analysis of mobile apps found, as predicted, that tiny incremental shifts in
a proxy measure of minimum costs led the bottom-to-fall-out to amateurs—at least once costs
became suﬃciently low. Also consistent with predictions, the minimum cost at which the bottom-
fell-out was higher (more easily attained) in cases of games, with statistically higher non-pecuniary
motivations. Where the bottom fell out, amateurs were not just lower quality, but largely of very
lowest observable quality. Nonetheless, they were relatively long-lived on the platform. In these
cases, developers tended to generate relatively high numbers of versions and products, relative to
their rank-order within their submarkets might otherwise suggest.
     The evidence further suggests that the bottom falling out to hundreds of added amateurs creates
some weak degree of downward price pressure on top professional developers, but no evidence of
net crowding or congestion, in terms of willingness of top developers to generate more products
and new versions or higher quality products. In fact, the bottom falling out—despite leading to a
flood of lowest-quality products, also increases the number of highest-quality products. I discussed
a handful of alternative plausible explanations, most of which cannot be ruled out with the data
and research design available here—and which deserve further research.
     So, to answer the main question posed by this study, the participation by is determined by a
range of dimensions of platform design, which each incrementally move a minimum quality thresh-
old for professionals: minimum development costs (e.g, access fees, etc.), rate at which development
costs translate to higher revenues (e.g., tools, etc.), factors influencing non-pecuniary payoﬀs (e.g.,
public profiles, etc.), and expected revenues (e.g., contractual restrictions from charging users,
etc.). By contrast, amateurs are aﬀected instead only by the interplay of minimum development
costs and non-pecuniary motivations, and will join professionals if minimum costs fall lower than
non-pecuniary payoﬀs. To have amateurs on their own, those conditions must hold, while either
outright barring professionals access, or otherwise restricting revenues.
     The results also clarify that our existing theories and frameworks are useful in studying this
new generation of markets and market actors. At the same time, these markets diﬀer from usual
textbook descriptions. For example, the “Long-Tail” of suppliers and products on platform-based
marketplaces (Brynjolfsson et al., 2003, 2011), will where the bottom falls out be a great deal
“longer” than standard theory and intuitions predict—and amateurs are not subject to market
discipline in any neoclassical sense. Integration of existing research insights across the largely
disparate literatures now studying crowds and platforms—e.g., Computer Science, Economics, In-
formation Systems, Innovation Science, Human-Computer Interface, Law, Management, Network
Science, Sociology—is likely to bear considerable fruit.




                                                  22
                                                REFERENCES

Afuah, Allan, and Christopher L. Tucci. "Crowdsourcing as a solution to distant search." Academy of Management
Review 37.3 (2012): 355-375.
Aghion, Philippe, Nick Bloom, Richard Blundell, Rachel Griffith, and Peter Howitt. "Competition and innovation:
An inverted-U relationship." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 120, no. 2 (2005): 701-728.
Agrawal, Ajay, Christian Catalini, and Avi Goldfarb. 2014. "Some simple economics of crowdfunding." Innovation
Policy and the Economy 14.1 (2014): 63-97.
Aguiar, Luis, and Joel Waldfogel. 2016. "Even the losers get lucky sometimes: New products and the evolution of
music quality since Napster." Information Economics and Policy 34: 1-15.
Aguiar, Luis, and Joel Waldfogel. "Quality Predictability and the Welfare Benefits from New Products: Evidence
from the Digitization of Recorded Music." Journal of Political Economy 126.2 (2018).
Albrecht, Allan J., and John E. Gaffney. 1983. "Software function, source lines of codes, and development effort
prediction: a software science validation." IEEE Trans Software Eng. SE-9, pp. 639-648.
Anderson, Axel, and Luis Cabral. 2007. "Go for broke or play it safe? Dynamic competition with choice of
variance." RAND Journal of Economics 38.3: 593-609.
Åstebro, Thomas, Holger Herz, Ramana Nanda, and Roberto A. Weber. 2014. "Seeking the roots of
entrepreneurship: insights from behavioral economics." Journal of Economic Perspectives 28, no. 3: 49-69.
Augereau, Angelique, Shane Greenstein, and Marc Rysman. "Coordination versus differentiation in a standards war:
56k modems." The RAND Journal of Economics 37.4 (2006): 887-909.
Bakos, Yannis. "The emerging landscape for retail e-commerce." Journal of economic perspectives 15, no. 1 (2001):
69-80.
Baldwin, Carliss, and Eric Von Hippel. "Modeling a paradigm shift: From producer innovation to user and open
collaborative innovation." Organization Science 22, no. 6 (2011): 1399-1417.
Benkler, Yochai. The wealth of networks: How social production transforms markets and freedom. Yale University
Press, 2006.
Boudreau, Kevin J. "Let a thousand flowers bloom? An early look at large numbers of software app developers and
patterns of innovation." Organization Science 23.5 (2012): 1409-1427.
Boudreau, Kevin J., Nicola Lacetera, and Karim R. Lakhani. "Incentives and problem uncertainty in innovation
contests: An empirical analysis." Management Science 57.5 (2011): 843-863.
Boudreau, Kevin, and Lars Jeppesen. "Unpaid crowd complementors: The platform network effect mirage."
Strategic Management Journal 36.12 (2015): 1761-1777.
Bresnahan, Timothy, and Shane Greenstein. 2014. "Mobile computing: The next platform rivalry." American
Economic Review 104.5: 475-480.
Bresnahan, Timothy F., Jason P. Davis, and Pai-Ling Yin. "Economic value creation in mobile applications." The
changing frontier: Rethinking science and innovation policy. University of Chicago Press, 2014. 233-286.
Bresnahan, Timothy, Joe Orsini, and Pai-Ling Yin. Demand heterogeneity, inframarginal multihoming, and
platform market stability: Mobile apps. Mobile Innovation Group Working Paper, 2015.
Bresnahan, Timothy and Peter Reiss. 1991. “Entry and Competition in Concentrated Markets,” Journal of Political
Economy, pp. 977- 1009.
Brynjolfsson, Erik, Yu Hu, and Duncan Simester. 2011."Goodbye pareto principle, hello long tail: The effect of
search costs on the concentration of product sales." Management Science 57.8: 1373-1386.
Brynjolfsson, Erik, Yu Hu, and Michael D. Smith. 2003. "Consumer surplus in the digital economy: Estimating the
value of increased product variety at online booksellers." Management Science 49.11: 1580-1596.
Boehm, Barry, Chris Abts, and Sunita Chulani. 2000. "Software development cost estimation approaches—A
survey." Annals of software engineering 10.1-4: 177-205.
Ceccagnoli, M., Forman, C., Huang, P. and Wu, D.J., 2012. Cocreation of Value in a Platform Ecosystem! The Case
of Enterprise Software. MIS Quarterly, pp.263-290.
Vancouver
Cennamo, Carmelo, and Juan Santalo. "Platform competition: Strategic trade offs in platform markets." Strategic
Management Journal 34.11 (2013): 1331-1350.
Chen, Daniel L., and John J. Horton. "Research note—Are online labor markets spot markets for tasks? A field
experiment on the behavioral response to wage cuts." Information Systems Research 27.2 (2016): 403-423.
Chesbrough, Henry, and Sabine Brunswicker. "A fad or a phenomenon?: The adoption of open innovation practices
in large firms." Research Technology Management 57, no. 2 (2014): 16-25.
Ching, Kenny. "Exaptation dynamics and entrepreneurial performance: evidence from the Internet video industry."
Industrial and Corporate Change 25.1 (2016): 181-198.
Church, Jeffrey, and Neil Gandal. "Network effects, software provision, and standardization." The Journal of
Industrial Economics (1992): 85-103.
Claussen, Jörg, Tobias Kretschmer, and Philip Mayrhofer. "The effects of rewarding user engagement: the case of
facebook apps." Information Systems Research 24.1 (2013): 186-200.
Economides, Nicholas. "Network externalities, complementarities, and invitations to enter." European Journal of
Political Economy 12.2 (1996): 211-233.
Felin, Teppo, Karim R. Lakhani, and Michael L. Tushman. "Firms, crowds, and innovation." Strategic organization
15, no. 2 (2017): 119-140.
Felin, Teppo, and Todd R. Zenger. "Closed or open innovation? Problem solving and the governance choice."
Research Policy 43.5 (2014): 914-925.
Gambardella, Alfonso, Christina Raasch, and Eric von Hippel. 2016. "The user innovation paradigm: impacts on
markets and welfare." Management Science 63.5 (2016): 1450-1468.
Garg, Rajiv, and Rahul Telang. 2012. "Inferring app demand from publicly available data." MIS Quarterly.
Gawer, Annabelle, and Michael A. Cusumano. Platform leadership: How Intel, Microsoft, and Cisco drive industry
innovation. Vol. 5. Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 2002.
Ghazawneh, Ahmad, and Ola Henfridsson. "Balancing platform control and external contribution in third party
development: the boundary resources model." Information Systems Journal 23.2 (2013): 173-192.
Ghose, Anindya, Panagiotis G. Ipeirotis, and Beibei Li. "Examining the impact of ranking on consumer behavior
and search engine revenue." Management Science 60.7 (2014): 1632-1654.
Glaeser, Edward L., Andrew Hillis, Scott Duke Kominers, and Michael Luca. "Crowdsourcing city government:
Using tournaments to improve inspection accuracy." American Economic Review 106, no. 5 (2016): 114-18.
Hamilton, Barton H. 2000. "Does entrepreneurship pay? An empirical analysis of the returns to self-employment."
Journal of Political Economy 108.3: 604-631.
Howison, James, and James D. Herbsleb. "Scientific software production: incentives and collaboration."
Proceedings of the ACM 2011 conference on Computer supported cooperative work. ACM, 2011.
Jeppesen, Lars Bo, and Lars Frederiksen. "Why do users contribute to firm-hosted user communities? The case of
computer-controlled music instruments." Organization science 17.1 (2006): 45-63.
Kittur, Aniket, Jeffrey V. Nickerson, Michael Bernstein, Elizabeth Gerber, Aaron Shaw, John Zimmerman, Matt
Lease, and John Horton. "The future of crowd work." In Proceedings of the 2013 conference on Computer
supported cooperative work, pp. 1301-1318. ACM, 2013.
Kohler, T., Fueller, J., Matzler, K., Stieger, D., & Füller, J. (2011). Co-creation in virtual worlds: The design of the
user experience. MIS quarterly, 773-788.
Krishnan, Vish, and Saurabh Gupta. "Appropriateness and impact of platform-based product development."
Management Science 47.1 (2001): 52-68.
Lakhani, Karim R. "Managing communities and contests to innovate with crowds." Revolutionizing Innovation:
Users, Communities and Open Innovation (2017): 109-134.
Lakhani, Karim, and Robert Wolf. 2005. Why hackers do what they do: Understanding motivation and effort in
free/open source software projects.” J. Feller, ed. Perspect. Free Open Source Software. Cambridge, MA.
Lakhani, Karim R., and Eric Von Hippel. "How open source software works: “free” user-to-user assistance."
Research Policy 32.6 (2003): 923-943
Lerner, Josh, Parag A. Pathak, and Jean Tirole. 2006. "The dynamics of open-source contributors." American
Economic Review: 114-118.
Lifshitz-Assaf, Hila. (2018) "Dismantling knowledge boundaries at NASA: from problem solvers to solution
seekers." Administrative Science Quarterly.
Lyytinen, Kalle, Youngjin Yoo, and Richard J. Boland Jr. "Digital product innovation within four classes of
innovation networks." Information Systems Journal 26.1 (2016): 47-75.
Majchrzak, Ann, and Arvind Malhotra. "Towards an information systems perspective and research agenda on
crowdsourcing for innovation." The Journal of Strategic Information Systems 22.4 (2013): 257
Manso, Gustavo. 2016. “Experimentation and the Returns to Entrepreneurship.” The Review of Financial Studies,
29(9), 2319-2340.
McAfee, Andrew. and Erik Brynjolfsson, 2017. Machine, Platform, Crowd: Harnessing our Digital Future. W.W.
Norton & Co..
Miric, Milan, How Does Signaling Influence the Rate and Direction of Innovative Activity in a Platform Based
Marketplace? (September 5, 2017). Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3032733 or
http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3032733
Miric, Milan, Kevin Boudreau, Lars Jeppesen. 2018. “Protecting their Digital Assets” Unpublished Manuscript
Mollick, Ethan, and Ramana Nanda. "Wisdom or madness? Comparing crowds with expert evaluation in funding
the arts." Management Science 62.6 (2015): 1533-1553.
Muller. 2009. “Gold Rush in the Smartphone Software Market.” Der Spiegel Online, downloaded from
http://www.spiegel.de/international/zeitgeist/the-apps-boom-gold-rush-in-the-smartphone-software-market-a-
659563-2.html
Muchnik, L., Aral, S. and Taylor, S.J., 2013. Social influence bias: A randomized experiment. Science, 341(6146),
pp.647-651.
Murray, Fiona, Philippe Aghion, Mathias Dewatripont, Julian Kolev, and Scott Stern. "Of mice and academics:
Examining the effect of openness on innovation." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 8, no. 1 (2016):
212-52.
Murray, Fiona, Scott Stern, Georgina Campbell, and Alan MacCormack. "Grand Innovation Prizes: A theoretical,
normative, and empirical evaluation." Research Policy 41, no. 10 (2012): 1779-1792.
Nagaraj, Abhishek. "Does copyright affect reuse? Evidence from google books and wikipedia." Management
Science (2017).
Parker, Geoffrey G., and Marshall W. Van Alstyne. "Two-sided network effects: A theory of information product
design." Management Science 51.10 (2005): 1494-1504.
Parker, Geoffrey, and Marshall Van Alstyne. "Innovation, openness, and platform control." Management Science
(2017).
Parker, Geoffrey G., Marshall W. Van Alstyne, and Sangeet Paul Choudary. Platform Revolution: How Networked
Markets Are Transforming the Economy and How to Make Them Work for You. WW Norton & Company, 2016.
Pendharkar, Parag C. 2004. "An exploratory study of object-oriented software component size determinants and the
application of regression tree forecasting models." Information & Management 42.1: 61-73.
Piezunka, Henning, and Linus Dahlander. "Distant search, narrow attention: How crowding alters organizations’
filtering of suggestions in crowdsourcing." Academy of Management Journal 58.3 (2015): 856-880.
Powell, Walter W. "A sociologist looks at crowds: Innovation or invention?." Strategic Organization 15.2 (2017):
289-297.
Rietveld, Joost, and J. P. Eggers. "Demand Heterogeneity in Platform Markets: Implications for Complementors."
Organization Science (2018).
Rochet, Jean-Charles, and Jean Tirole. 2003. "Platform competition in two-sided markets." Journal of the European
Economic Association: 990-1029.
Roberts, Jeffrey A., Il-Horn Hann, and Sandra A. Slaughter. 2006. "Understanding the motivations, participation,
and performance of open source software developers: A longitudinal study of the Apache projects." Management
Science 52.7: 984-999.
Ruppert, David, Simon J. Sheather, and Matthew P. Wand. 1995. "An effective bandwidth selector for local least
squares regression." Journal of the American Statistical Association 90.432: 1257-1270.
Sauermann, Henry, and Wesley M. Cohen. 2010. "What makes them tick? Employee motives and firm innovation."
Management Science 56.12: 2134-2153.
Sauermann, Henry, and Chiara Franzoni. "Crowd science user contribution patterns and their implications."
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 112.3 (2015): 679-684.
Schilling, Melissa A. "Technology success and failure in winner-take-all markets: The impact of learning
orientation, timing, and network externalities." Academy of Management Journal 45.2 (2002): 387-398.
Seamans, Robert, and Feng Zhu. "Responses to entry in multi-sided markets: The impact of Craigslist on local
newspapers." Management Science 60, no. 2 (2013): 476-493.
Scott Morton, Fiona M., and Joel M. Podolny. 2002. "Love or money? The effects of owner motivation in the
California wine industry." Journal of Industrial Economics 50.4: 431-456.
Shankar, Venkatesh, and Barry L. Bayus. "Network effects and competition: An empirical analysis of the home
video game industry." Strategic Management Journal 24, no. 4 (2003): 375-384.
Stern, Scott. 2004. "Do scientists pay to be scientists?." Management Science 50.6: 835-853.
Su, N., Levina, N. and Ross, J.W., 2016. The long-tail strategy of IT outsourcing. MIT Sloan Management Review,
57(2), p.81.
Suarez, F.F., 2004. Battles for technological dominance: an integrative framework. Research Policy, 33(2), pp.271-
286.
Sundararajan, Arun, 2016. The sharing economy: The end of employment and the rise of crowd-based capitalism.
Mit Press.
Terwiesch, Christian, and Yi Xu. "Innovation contests, open innovation, and multiagent problem solving."
Management Science 54.9 (2008): 1529-1543.
Varian, Hal. 2010. “Computer mediated transactions.” American Economic Review, 100(2), 1-10.
Verner, June, and Graham Tate. 1992. "A software size model." IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 18.4:
265-278.
von Hippel, Eric. Democratizing Innovation. MIT press, 2005.
von Hippel, Eric. "Economics of product development by users: The impact of “sticky” local information."
Management Science 44.5 (1998): 629-644.
von Hippel, Eric 2017. Free Innovation. Cambridge MA: MIT Press.
Von Krogh, G., Haefliger, S., Spaeth, S., & Wallin, M. W. (2012). Carrots and rainbows: Motivation and social
practice in open source software development. MIS quarterly, 649-676. von Hippel, Eric. 2017. Free innovation.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Waldfogel, Joel. "Copyright research in the digital age: Moving from piracy to the supply of new products."
American Economic Review 102.3 (2012): 337-42.
Waldfogel, Joel. 2014. "Digitization and the quality of new media products: the case of music." Economic Analysis
of the Digital Economy. Eds Avi Goldfarb, Shane Greenstein, and Catherine Tucker. University of Chicago Press.
407-442.
Waldfogel, Joel, and Imke Reimers. 2015. "Storming the gatekeepers: Digital disintermediation in the market for
books." Information Economics and Policy 3: 47-58.
West, Joel, and Marcel Bogers. "Leveraging external sources of innovation: a review of research on open
innovation." Journal of Product Innovation Management 31.4 (2014): 814-831.
Wu, Chorng-Guang, James H. Gerlach, and Clifford E. Young. "An empirical analysis of open source software
developers’ motivations and continuance intentions." Information & Management 44.3 (2007): 253-262.
Xu, Lei, Tingting Nian, and Luis Cabral. 2016. What makes geeks tick? A study of stack overflow careers. Working
paper.
Zhang, Xiaoquan, and Feng Zhu. 2011. "Group size and incentives to contribute: A natural experiment at Chinese
Wikipedia." American Economic Review 101.41601-1615.
TABLE 1 Platform Design Choices


Notation   Dimension of Change                           Examples
Δwmin      Cost structure: Minimum development           Reduced platform access charges for
           costs                                         complementors; altered development environment
                                                         (provision of development tools and frameworks,
                                                         documentation, modifiable examples)

ΔR'w       Cost structure: Rate that development costs   Altered development environment and tools
           translate to higher revenues

Δβ         Non-pecuniary payoffs                         Platform public profiles featuring accomplishments
                                                         or skills; learning and interaction forums; leader
                                                         boards

ΔR, Δp     Expected revenues                             Complementor licensing programs that proscribe
                                                         charging users; platform marketing
TABLE 2 Main Variable Definitions

                                                  Unit of
        Variable       Unit of Observation                                                                 Definition
                                                Measurement

Endogenous Variables
NumDevelopers          503 Subcategories     [Developer Count]   The count of unique developers operating and offering products within a given product
                                                                 subcategory
Price                  693,541 products      [$]
Revenues               503 Subcategories     [$000's]            Summation of all estimated annual revenues of all apps appearing in a given subcategory,
                                                                 based on both download charges and in-app purchases
UserRatings            693,541 products      [5-Point Scale]     Mean of all ratings received from users of the app
UserRatingsCount       693,541 products      [Count]             Total number of ratings received from users of the app
NumVersions            693,541 products      [Count]             Number of revisions or new versions of a particular app title that have been released to the
                                                                 sample period
FileSize               693,541 products      [MB]                Amount of memory required to save software app
MeanFileSize           503 Subcategories     [MB]                The mean file size, in megabytes, of all apps appearing within a given product subcategory

Exogenous Variables
MinFileSize            503 Subcategories     [MB]                The smallest software app, in megabytes, of all apps appearing within a given product
                                                                 subcategory
Games                  503 Subcategories     [Indicator]         Indicator switched to 1 for each of the 58 (out of 503) subcategories featuring games
Product Category FE    43 Categories         [Indicator]         Set of fixed effects corresponding to the set of 43 parent categories of the 503 subcategories
                                                                 (e.g., sports games, trivia games, home household and garden, calendars and clocks)
LowMinCost             503 Subcategories     [Indicator]         Indicator switched on for subcategories for which MinFileSize<.063 (where it is estimated
                                                                 the bottom begins to fall out of the market to amateurs)
TABLE 3 Motivations of Part-Time and Full-Time Developers (Sorted by Difference)

 Sources of motivation:                                                                        Part-Time       Full-Time        Difference       s.e.

 it's a hobby or personal interest outside my main job                                             .54             .18              .36         (.05)   ***
 to learn new skills                                                                               .75             .51              .24         (.04)   ***
 for fun                                                                                           .66             .49              .17         (.05)   ***
 to increase my job/career prospects                                                               .38             .24              .14         (.05)   ***
 to use the app myself                                                                             .54             .40              .14         (.05)   ***
 to be part of the app developer community                                                         .28             .21              .07         (.04)   **
 to see other people using my app creations                                                        .60             .57              .03         (.05)
 to be creative, to create new things                                                              .73             .73              .01         (.04)
 maybe I'll get rich                                                                               .39             .40              -.02        (.05)
 to build my reputation as a developer                                                             .30             .34              -.05        (.04)
 to tackle especially interesting technical / development problems                                 .29             .34              -.05        (.04)
 to do especially challenging things                                                               .39             .46              -.07        (.05)
 to be part of an exciting industry                                                                .41             .53              -.13        (.05)   **
 to meet interesting people                                                                        .10             .23              -.13        (.03)   ***
 to be an entrepreneur                                                                             .46             .61              -.15        (.05)   ***
 to make an income                                                                                 .49             .73              -.24        (.05)   ***

Notes. *, ** and *** indicate statistical significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively. N = 809 developers, in total; 135 part-time developers; values indicate
fractions of respondents replying in the affirmative that this motivation is an important.
TABLE 4 Nonlinear Response to Incremental Reductions in Minimum Development Cost

            Dep. Var.:              NumDevelopers
                                               Piece-Wise Linear
                                Simple
                                                     Model

                Model:           (1)                 (2)

 MinFileSize                                       -159
                                                   (358)
    MinFileSize ⨉                               -20,914***
    LowMinCost
                                                  (2,963)

 LowMinCost                    494***             1,252***
 (I{MinFileSize<.063})
                                (49)                (145)
 Constant                      362***              381***
                                (27)                 (60)

 Adj-R^2                         .09                 .16


Notes. Standard errors clustered by app categories are reported
in parentheses. *, ** and *** indicate statistical significance at
10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively. Number of observations =
503 app subcategories.
TABLE 5 Robustness Tests

                Dep. Var.:                                           NumDevelopers
                                                                                                                   Monte Carlo
                                                                    Compare Minimum with Other Distributional
                                  Added Control Variables                                                          Re-Sampled
                                                                                  Statistics
                                                                                                                   MinFileSize

                    Model:        (1)               (2)               (3)             (4)              (5)             (6)

 MinFileSize                     -706*             -738           -4,291***                                        -4,421***
                                 (425)             (985)             (614)                                            (621)
 1stPctlFileSize                                                                    736**
                                                                                    (289)
 MeanFileSize                                                                                        -960
                                                                                                     (940)
   MinFileSize ⨉             -21,099***        -21,686***
   LowMinCost                  (3,005)           (8,148)
 LowMinCost                   1,256***          1,316***
 (I{MinFileSize<.063})
                                (147)             (499)
 Revenues                                          -.1
                                                   (.1)

 Product Category FE               Y                 Y                Y                Y               Y               Y

 Adj-R^2                          .21               .21               .12             .07              .05             .13


Notes. Standard errors clustered by app categories are reported in parentheses. *, ** and *** indicate statistical significance
at 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively. Number of observations = 503 app subcategories.
TABLE 6 Regression Results for Numbers of High Quality Products

             Depvar:                    Number of Highest Rated Apps, >4.5 out of 5 Rating
                         All counted,                                                   > 5000       95th pctl,
                                         > 10 ratings   > 50 ratings   > 500 ratings
                         > 0 ratings                                                    ratings      > 150,644
                            (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)           (5)           (6)
 LowMinCost              157.8***         30.6***        10.7**           2.4*          0.3*          0.03*
 (I{MinFileSize<.063})
                          (22.1)           (7.9)          (4.3)           (1.6)          (.2)         (.02)
 Constant                111.1***        31.89***       15.85***         4.9***        0.6***          .01
                           (17.2)           (7.5)          (4.7)          (1.7)          (.2)          (.01)

 ((LowMinCosts +           242%            196%           167%           149%           140%          437%
 Const)/Const}

 Adj-R^2                     .14             .31            .37            .37           .30            .05

Notes. Standard errors clustered by app categories are reported in parentheses. *, ** and *** indicate statistical
significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively. Number of observations = 503 app subcategories.
                                                  Unit Mass (“Square”) of Potential Platform Joiners at t = 1


                       I. Standard Selection                                             II. “Lowering-the-Bar”                                   III. “Bottom-Falling-Out”

  100th                                                              100th                                                      100th
                                                                                   Professional Entrepreneurs Joining                         Professional Entrepreneurs Joining

                                    ρmin                                                                                                                                      ρmax




                                                                                                                                                                                          “Crowd” of Amateurs Joining
                                (Professionals)                                                                                                                             (Amateurs)
                                                                                    Ex: Effect of continued lowering of wmin
                                                                                                                                                          Ex: Effect of continued




                                                                    [percentile]




                                                                                                                               [percentile]
Quality, ρi




                                                                     Quality, ρi
[ percentile]




                                                                                                                                Quality, ρi
                                                                                                                                                          lowering of wmin
                  White area = not joining platform




                Developers
                without non-
                pecuniary       Increasing levels of non-
                motivations     pecuniary motivations
        1st         β =0                β >0                100th          1st       βi = 0        βi > 0         100th               1st        βi = 0               βi > 0             βi > wmin
                  Non-Pecuniary Motivations, βi                                     Non-Pecuniary Motivations, βi                               Non-Pecuniary Motivations, βi
                               [percentile]                                                     [percentile]                                                 [percentile]

                Professionals select onto the                                      The min quality threshold,                                 A distinct, second selection
                platform at t=1 according to a                                     ρmin, incrementally shifts with                            condition becomes relevant
                minimum quality threshold,                                         platform changes in cost                                   where a specific part of cost
                ρmin.                                                              structure, non-pecuniary                                   structure—wmin—falls below
                                                                                   payoffs, and expected                                      non-pecuniary payoffs
                                                                                   revenues




                               Figure 1 Professionals and Amateurs Join a Platform in Response to Different Thresholds
                                Participation by Amateurs & Professionals
           100%


   Sum Total Number of
     Complementors




                                                   Increasing →
                              “Crowd”
                            of                 Non-Pecuniary Payoffs,
                         Amateurs                        βi

                          Professional Entrepreneurs
                 0%
                         0+
                                              ⟵ Decreasing
                                        Minimum Development Costs,
                                                  wmin

                                   Figure 2 Summary of Main Predictions
Notes. The graph shows the total mass of complementors joining the platform. This is
the sum of all professionals and amateurs joining at t=1 and the overlapping
generation that continues at t=2. Therefore, the 100% on the vertical axis corresponds
with a mass of two.
              100
File Size [MB]
 1      10
        .1




                     0           100           200          300          400          500
                                          Ordered by Minimum File Size

                                                        p99
                                                        p50
                                                        p1
                                                        Minimum


                    Figure 3 File Size Distribution of Apps Across Subcategories (Ordered by Minima)
                    4000 3000
           NumDevelopers
              2000  1000
                    0




                                0      .1             .2                 .3                           .4
                                      Minimum Development Cost [MinFileSize]

  Figure 4 Incremental Changes in Minimum Development Costs and the “Bottom Falling Out”
Note: The flexible nonlinear relationship is estimated with locally-weighted least-squares, weighted by second-order
Epanechnikov kernel, with bandwidth chosen according to "direct rule-of-thumb" local-linear method of Ruppert,
Sheather and Wand (1995). The piece-wise linar relationship estimates slopes, constants and break-point with
maximum likelihood, with 95% confidence intervals shown. Number of observations = 503 app subcategories (i.e.,
precisely-defined types).
            4000 3000
   NumDevelopers
      2000  1000
            0




                        0     .1             .2                 .3                           .4
                             Minimum Development Cost [MinFileSize]


        Figure 5 The Bottom Falls Out at Higher Minimum Development Costs for Games (Blue)

Note: The flexible nonlinear relationship is estimated with locally-weighted least-squares, weighted by second-order
Epanechnikov kernel, with bandwidth chosen according to "direct rule-of-thumb" local-linear method of Ruppert,
Sheather and Wand (1995), with 95% confidence intervals shown. The piece-wise linear relationship estimates
slopes, constants and break-point with maximum likelihood. Number of observations = 503 app subcategories (i.e.,
precisely-defined types), 58 for games.
                                             I. User Rating                                          II. Number of User Ratings




                                                                                    800
                           600




                                                                          200 400 600
            Number of Apps




                                                                          Number of Apps
             200    400
                      0




                                                                                    0
                             0 (unrated) 1       2     3       4    5                            0       10       20       30       40       ≥50


                                         III. File Size [MB]                                             IV. Version Number
            200 400 600 800 1000




                                                                          200 400 600 800 1000
             Number of Apps




                                                                           Number of Apps
                      0




                                                                                    0
                                   0   10       20    30       40   ≥50                          1   2   3    4    5   6        7   8    9   ≥10




          Figure 6 Bulk of Products Added are of Lowest-Quality, as the Bottom Falls Out

Note. Flexible nonlinear relationship is estimated with locally-weighted least-squares. The analysis essentially
compares the 503 subcategories at each rank, controlling for 43 categories and contrasting levels across similar
subcategories that differ in their MinFileSize. The relationships are estimated using the data on all XXXX apps in
the population, stratified by subcategories wherein the bottom-has-fallen-out in blue (i.e., MinFileSize < 0.063),
following the earlier analysis, versus where it has not in grey. The exception are estimates related to numbers of
products, which instead of using product-level data use developer-level data (accounting for the different x-axis).
Rank order of app demand is approximated using the rank order of number of user ratings. Therefore, for each the
top ranks, there are 503 observations for each subcategory. At lower ranks, there are fewer observations as different
subcategories have different numbers of developers and products (i.e., the estimates are based on an unbalanced
panel, towards the right side).
                               I. Product Age [Days]                                      II. Products per Developer




                                                                1 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2
    300 400 500 600 700




                          0       5000          10000   15000                         0      1000     2000        3000   4000
                                   Rank Order of App                                          Rank Order of Developer


                              III. Versions Released                                                IV. Price
    1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4




                                                                2
                                                                1.5
                                                                1
                                                                .5
    1




                          0       5000          10000   15000                         0         5000          10000      15000
                                   Rank Order of App                                             Rank Order of App

  Controlling for mean category fixed effects.




                              Figure 7 Outcomes across Different Ranks, as the Bottom-Falls-Out (Blue)

Note. Flexible nonlinear relationship is estimated with locally-weighted least-squares. The analysis essentially
compares the 503 subcategories at each rank, controlling for 43 categories and contrasting levels across similar
subcategories that differ in their MinFileSize. The relationships are estimated using the data on all apps in the
population, stratified by subcategories wherein the bottom-has-fallen-out in blue (i.e., MinFileSize < 0.063),
following the earlier analysis, versus where it has not in grey. The exception are estimates related to numbers of
products, which instead of using product-level data use developer-level data (accounting for the different x-axis).
Rank order of app demand is approximated using the rank order of number of user ratings. Therefore, for each the
top ranks, there are 503 observations for each subcategory. At lower ranks, there are fewer observations as different
subcategories have different numbers of developers and products (i.e., the estimates are based on an unbalanced
panel, towards the right side). The levels presented are the results, controlling for subcategory means, and then
adding back the overall mean levels of each variable to provide a direct estimate of overall mean levels.
