                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        FIRM-LEVEL FINANCIAL RESOURCES AND ENVIRONMENTAL SPILLS

                                         Jonathan Cohn
                                       Tatyana Deryugina

                                      Working Paper 24516
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24516


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2018




We would like to thank Andres Almazan, Aydogan Alti, Cesare Fracassi, Sam Krueger, Tim
Landvoigt, Inessa Liskovich, Daniel Neuhann, Laura Starks, Sheridan Titman, Mindy Zhang, and
seminar participants at the University of Texas-Austin, EnergyFest, and the University of Illinois
for helpful comments. Muye Chen provided superb research assistance. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research. Tatyana Deryugina holds slightly over $6,200 in BP stock, which she has
owned since 2010.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Jonathan Cohn and Tatyana Deryugina. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Firm-Level Financial Resources and Environmental Spills
Jonathan Cohn and Tatyana Deryugina
NBER Working Paper No. 24516
April 2018
JEL No. G32,Q52,Q53

                                         ABSTRACT

Using novel US environmental spill data, we document a robust negative relationship between
the number of spills a firm experiences in a given year and its contemporaneous and lagged (but
not future) cash flow. In addition, studying two natural experiments, we find an increase
(decrease) in spills following negative (positive) shocks to a firm's financial resources, both in
absolute terms and relative to control firms. Overall, our results suggest that firms' financial
resources play an important role in their ability to mitigate environmental risk.


Jonathan Cohn
University of Texas at Austin
McCombs School of Business
Austin, TX 78712
jonathan.cohn@mccombs.utexas.edu

Tatyana Deryugina
Department of Finance
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
515 East Gregory Drive, MC-520
Champaign, IL 61820
and NBER
deryugin@illinois.edu
   There are approximately 30,000 reported environmental spills in the US and its coastal
waters each year. These range from small leaks to catastrophic discharges of hazardous ma-
terials such as oil that cost billions of dollars to clean up, inflict billions more in economic
damage on affected areas, and sometimes cause injury or death (Cohen, 2010). Companies
handling oil, gas, and other hazardous materials in the course of their operations spend
billions of dollars per year in an effort to minimize the risk of such spills (Lux Research,
2013). However, in capital-constrained companies, these activities compete with investment
in marketing, expanding capacity, and developing new products. In order to preserve fi-
nancing capacity for mission-critical investments, constrained companies may cut corners on
activities that mitigate spill risk, creating a potential dependence of the incidence of spills on
a company’s available financial resources. This paper explores that dependence empirically
by combining corporate financial information with novel incident-level environmental spill
data from the US.
   Our empirical analysis takes two forms. First, we use multivariate regression analysis to
examine the empirical determinants of environmental spill incidence. Controlling for a host
of firm characteristics as well as firm and industry-year fixed effects, we find a consistent
negative relationship between a firm’s current and lagged cash flow and the occurrence of
spills for which that firm is responsible. Our estimates imply that a one-standard deviation
increase in cash flow is associated with a 2.8% decrease in the number of contemporaneous
spills and a 2.3% decrease in the number of spills the following year, relative to the sample
mean. We also find some evidence that this relationship is stronger for firms for which cash
constraints are likely tighter - firms with high levels of debt and, especially, smaller firms.
   We further explore the relationship between environmental spill risk and cash flow by
exploiting detailed information about each spill in our sample. We find that the relationship
between spill risk and prior-year cash flow holds not only for spills in general, but also for
spills resulting in evacuations or injuries specifically - i.e., for high-impact spills. In addition,


                                                 1
we find that spills attributed to operator error are more closely related to contemporaneous
cash flow, while those attributed to equipment failure are more closely related to lagged cash
flow. While speculative, it seems plausible that reduced investment in activities that directly
affect operator error risk such as training, supervision, and proper staffing would manifest
itself in higher spill risk quickly, while reduced investment in equipment maintenance would
take more time to do so.
    Although we focus primarily on the impact of financial resource availability on spill risk,
we also find a positive relationship between spill rates and both contemporaneous and lagged
sales growth. This finding coheres with the idea that investments in activities that mitigate
spill risk compete for scarce resources with other productive activities, as competition for
resources is likely to be most intense in fast-growing firms. In addition, we find a positive
relationship between spill risk and financial leverage (net debt-to-assets ratio), a factor that
previous papers have linked to difficulties in financing investment (Denis and Denis, 1993;
Lang et al., 1996). However, this relationship is not statistically significant at conventional
levels.
    While these results are consistent with greater financial resources enabling firms to spend
more to prevent spills, they are also open to alternative interpretations. For example, poor
operational management may result in both low levels of cash flow and high levels of spill
risk. There may also be quasi-mechanical relationships between spills and cash flow, as
the incidence of spills and spending to mitigate spill risk can both reduce cash flow in the
short run. Our second approach addresses the identification challenge by isolating variation
in cash flow that should be related to the incidence of spills only through its impact on
the resources available to spend on spill prevention. Specifically, we examine (1) negative
cash flow shocks due to the difficulty firms faced in rolling over maturing debt during the
financial crisis starting in late 2007 and (2) positive cash flow shocks to the US operations
of multinational firms due to a one-time tax holiday allowing accumulated overseas profits


                                               2
to be repatriated at an exceptionally low tax rate.1
    We exploit firms’ differential exposure to these shocks and conduct a difference-in-differences
analysis, comparing the change in spill incidence around the time of these shocks for firms
more exposed to them to that of observationally-similar control firms that were either less
exposed or completely unexposed. The results provide further support for a causal link be-
tween financial resources and spill occurrence: Firms exposed to a negative (positive) cash
flow shock experience an increase (decrease) in spill incidence in the second and third years
after the shock. The short lag in response seems reasonable if investments in averting spills
take time to affect spill risk. The difference-in-differences estimates imply a considerably
larger response of spills to financial shocks than our baseline multivariate regression analysis
does, though the estimates are also less precise. While each piece of evidence we present
could have alternative interpretations, the evidence taken together points to a dependence
of a firm’s environmental spill risk on its internal financial resources.
    Our results contribute to our understanding of how firms manage risks associated with
handling hazardous materials. They suggest that firms devote fewer resources to managing
these risks when they have less capacity to finance investment in these resources, potentially
imposing externalities on the communities in which they operate. This implication in turn
suggests that minimizing capital-raising frictions that create a dependence on internally-
generated cash flow to finance investment can generate previously-unrecognized social ben-
efits. Our results also have implications for regulators, as they suggest a factor that can be
used to identify firms more likely to experience spills in the near future.
    Ours is not the first paper to examine the impact of changes in a firm’s ability to finance
investment on the well-being of stakeholders beyond its investors. Rose (1990) and Dionne
et al. (1997) find that airlines are more likely to experience accidents when their operating
   1
     Almeida et al. (2012) study the effect of the onset of the financial crisis on capital investment of firms
with high levels of debt maturing, while Dharmapala et al. (2011) and Faulkender and Petersen (2011)
examine the effect of the repatriation tax holiday on capital investment.



                                                      3
margins are lower, while Phillips and Sertsios (2013) find that airlines’ mishandled baggage
and late arrival rates are higher when they are financially distressed. Cohn and Wardlaw
(2016) present evidence that workplace injury rates are higher in firms with more debt and
increase (decrease) in response to negative (positive) cash flow shocks. Relatedly, Nie and
Zhao (2015) find that Chinese coal mining companies have higher workplace fatality rates
when they have more debt. Finally, Kini et al. (2017) find that firms with higher debt loads
are more likely to issue product recalls.
   These studies all focus on how financing impacts important but narrowly-defined sets
of stakeholders - employees and customers. To our knowledge, ours is the first study to
explicitly consider the impact of a firm’s financial resources on the broader community in
which it operates. While employees and customers can mitigate costs they face due to a firm’s
lack of financing by severing their relationship with the firm, communities cannot generally
sever these ties, making it difficult for them to mitigate the threat of environmental damage.
   To our knowledge, ours is also the first paper to examine firm-level determinants of
environmental risk. By contrast, other papers considering the relationship between environ-
mental performance and firm financial health focus exclusively on trying to identify the effect
of environmental performance on firm profitability (see Horváthová (2010) for a review). An-
other related body of literature considers firm-level determinants of participation in voluntary
environmental programs and of corporate social responsibility initiatives (see Reinhardt and
Stavins (2010) for a review). Other work studies the effects of regulation and market struc-
ture on environmental safety, abstracting from firm-level attributes. For example, Galiani
et al. (2005) find that water privatization in Argentina decreased child mortality, Hausman
(2014) finds improvements in nuclear plants’ safety following electricity market restructur-
ing and divestiture, and Boomhower (2016) finds that insurance requirements reduced oil
and gas firms’ production but also improved their environmental performance. Our paper
is distinct in that we focus on market frictions rather than government regulation. Finally,


                                               4
our finding that firms pursuing aggressive growth experience higher spill rates lines up with
evidence of a more general trade-off between economic activity and safety at the country
level (Jones, 2016) and with concerns about the harmful environmental impacts of the recent
boom in hydraulic fracturing (Hill, 2013; Adgate et al., 2014; Jackson et al., 2014).
     The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section I discusses several US laws
relevant to environmental spills and outlines a conceptual framework for understanding how
financing frictions can affect spill risk. We present our empirical methodology in Section
II. In Section III, we describe the data and sample. Sections IV and V present the paper’s
empirical results. Finally, Section VI concludes.



      I.    Environmental Spills, Risk Management, and

                                             Financing

A.     Laws governing hazardous material discharge in the United States

     Numerous US laws and regulations govern how firms must handle hazardous materials.
Some of these regulations specify the precautions firms must take to prevent accidental
discharge of such materials as well as the consequences for failing to do so. Here, we briefly
discuss major federal legislation relevant to the spills in our sample: Section 311 of the
Clean Water Act (CWA), which covers discharge of hazardous substances into water, the
Oil Pollution Act of 1990 (OPA), which cover oil spills, and the Resource Conservation and
Recovery Act (RCRA), which covers a broad range of hazardous materials as well as solid
waste.2 Individual states can and do implement laws that are at least as strict as federal
ones, but a review of state legislation is beyond the scope of this paper.
    2
      A related regulation, the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act
(CERCLA), also known as “Superfund”, covers abandoned hazardous waste sites and is less likely to be
relevant to our setting.



                                                 5
   Section 311 of the CWA, titled “Oil and hazardous substance liability,” states that the
owner or operator of a facility or vessel from which a hazardous substance was unlawfully
discharged is liable for the full amount of cleanup costs, including the cost of restoring
natural resources and mitigating damages. In cases where the responsible partly is found
to be negligent, other penalties may be levied. The responsible party is also required to
notify the US government whenever it becomes aware of a prohibited discharge. With the
exception of oil, the CWA leaves it up to the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to
determine which substances are hazardous when discharged into water.
   The OPA, passed in 1990, amended the CWA in several important ways. First, it intro-
duced new requirements focused on oil spill prevention, including for vessel construction and
crew qualifications. It also broadened the definition of damages and increased the liability
limits and civil penalties for violating Section 311 of the CWA. Finally, the OPA established
a fund to finance quick oil removal and to pay compensation for damages in cases where the
responsible party was not found to be negligent.
   The RCRA, which was enacted in 1976, covers all hazardous materials not regulated by
other acts and a wide range of non-hazardous solid waste. Importantly, the RCRA is not
limited to water discharges and gives the EPA broad powers to regulate hazardous waste,
including its generation, transportation, storage, and disposal. In cases where hazardous
substances are released, the EPA or a state authority must compel the responsible party to
take corrective action.
   A key theme across these and other regulations is that those responsible for discharging
hazardous materials are fully liable for cleanup costs and, in some cases, for any other
damages caused by the spill. Fines may also be levied on a firm acting negligently. It is thus
important to recognize that spills are not costless to firms, which we proceed to do in the
conceptual framework below.




                                              6
B.     Conceptual Framework

     Corporations invest billions of dollars per year to reduce the risk of environmental spills.
As an example of the consequences of failing to make such investments, a methyl isocyanate
(MIC) gas leak at Union Carbide’s pesticide plant outside Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh, India,
killed an estimated 2,259 people immediately and is blamed for thousands more deaths over
time. Many experts attribute the “Bhopal disaster” directly to budget cuts that limited
investment in activities that might have prevented a major spill. For example, a history
of the disaster concludes that “cuts ... meant less stringent quality control and thus looser
safety rules. A pipe leaked? Don’t replace it, employees said they were told ... MIC workers
needed more training? They could do with less. Promotions were halted, seriously affecting
employee morale and driving some of the most skilled ... elsewhere” (Kurzman, 1987).
     As with all forms of investment, a firm must finance any investment in reducing spill
risk either out of internal cash flow or by raising external capital. We now develop a simple
conceptual framework for illustrating how shocks to financial resources affect the risk of
environmental spills in financially-constrained firms. Consider a firm choosing how much to
invest in two technologies - a production technology that generates cash flow and a technology
that mitigates the risk of environmental spills, which reduce cash flow when they occur.
An investment of K in the production technology yields a cash flow of F (K, z), where
z is a productivity parameter reflecting the marginal return to investment in production.
Production has declining returns to scale - that is, F1 > 0 and F11 < 0. A higher value of z
implies higher productivity - that is, F12 > 0. An investment of M in the spill-risk mitigation
technology results in a spill probability equal to P (M ), with 0 ≤ P (M ) < 1, P1 < 0, and
P11 > 0. The firm’s total investment is denoted by I = K + M .
     The firm must finance its total investment of I out of internal and external funds. The
firm has internal funds of W , which carry a unit opportunity cost of 1. The firm bears a
deadweight capital-raising cost of C(E) when it raises external funds of E, with C1 (0) = 0,

                                                7
C1 > 0 for E > 0, and C11 > 0. To make the solution non-trivial, we assume that the firm
lacks the internal resources to finance all of its preferred level of investment - i.e., the level
at which it would invest if it had unlimited financial resources.3 This assumption, combined
with the assumption that C1 (0) = 0, ensures that the firm will raise a positive of amount of
external capital - that is, E ∗ > 0.
    If a spill occurs, the firm bears a cost of S, reflecting, among other consequences, the
lost value of spilled material, cleanup costs, litigation, any damages paid to spill victims,
and lost production due to disruptions in operations. A spill may also result in costs that
are external to the firm. For example, the community in which a spill occurs may suffer
economic damage that is difficult to verify and that it therefore may not be able to recover
from the firm. Similarly, people exposed to hazardous materials may suffer health problems
that are difficult to link to the spill and may therefore not receive full compensation for their
losses. These externalized costs do not factor into the firm’s payoff, and we do not take a
stand on what fraction of the total costs of a spill is borne by the firm versus the rest of
society.
    Given this setup, the firm chooses its investments in production and spill risk mitigation
technologies to maximize its value. Formally, it solves the problem:


                                  max F (K, z) − P (M )S − C(E) − I,                                         (1)
                                K≥0,M ≥0



subject to I = W + E. The first order conditions to this problem are:


                                        F1 (K, z) = 1 + C1 (I − W )                                          (2)
    3
      In a more general setting, even a firm possessing sufficient financial resources to finance its equilibrium
level of investment in the current period may act as though it is constrained in its ability to do so if there
is a risk that it will lack the resources to finance investment at some point in the future.




                                                       8
and
                                          − P1 (M )S = 1 + C1 (I − W ).                                       (3)

         Intuitively, the firm sets the marginal return to investment in its production technology
(F1 (K, z) in Equation 2) and the marginal return to investment in spill prevention (−P1 (M )S
in Equation 3) equal to the marginal cost of an additional dollar of external funds, 1+C1 (I −
W ).4
         We now illustrate how changes in a firm’s internal resources W affect its investment
decisions. Implicitly differentiating the first order conditions with respect to W and solving
the resulting system of equations yields the following comparative statics:

                    dK                      C11 (I − W )P11 (M )S
                       =
                    dW   C11 (I − W )P11 (M )S − (C11 (I − W ) + P11 (M )S)F11 (K, z)

and
                   dM                     −C11 (I − W )F11 (K, z)
                      =                                                               .
                   dW   (C11 (I − W ) − F11 (K, z))P11 (M )S − C11 (I − W )F11 (K, z)

         Since C11 > 0, P11 > 0, F11 < 0, and W < I, both of these expressions are unambiguously
positive. Not surprisingly (given continuous marginal returns), a financially-constrained
firm invests more in all available technologies when it has more internal financial resources
available to invest. By contrast, if a firm is not financially constrained, both C1 and C11
                                               dK       dM                                     dM
are equal to zero, implying that               dW
                                                    =   dW
                                                             = 0. The chief implication of     dW
                                                                                                    > 0 for our
                                    dP (M )             dM
empirical analysis is that           dW
                                              = P1 (M ) dW < 0. That is, the likelihood of spills declines
with a firm’s internal financial resources.
         While we focus on the effects of financial resources on spills in our empirical analysis, the
model also generates clear predictions about the effect of z on spills. Implicitly differentiating
     4
         The second order conditions for maximization are trivially satisfied given the assumptions on F , P , and
C.




                                                             9
Equations 2 and 3 with respect to z and solving the resulting system of equations yields:

              dK                (C11 (I − W ) + P11 (M )S)F12 (K, z)
                 =−                                                              ,
              dz    C11 (I − W )P11 (M )S − (C11 (I − W ) + P11 (M )z)F11 (K, z)

which is unambiguously positive, and

             dM                        C11 (I − W )F12 (K, z)
                 =−                                                              ,
              dz    C11 (I − W )P11 (M )S − (C11 (I − W ) + P11 (M )z)F11 (K, z)

                                                    dP (M )
which is unambiguously negative. Noting that          dz
                                                              = P1 (M ) dM
                                                                         dz
                                                                            > 0, the likelihood of
spills increases with the quality of the firm’s productive investment opportunities, which
substitute for investment in mitigating spill risk when capital is scarce. In our empirical
analysis, we also consider how spills vary with a firm’s sales growth - an indirect test of this
secondary implication.



                        II.     Empirical Methodology

     This section describes the methodology we use to test the response of environmental
spills to a firm’s financial resources. We use two approaches. First, we conduct multivariate
regression analysis, focusing on the relationship between the number of spills a firm experi-
ences in a given year and its cash flow. We then use a difference-in-differences approach to
analyze two natural experiments involving shocks to financial resources that affected some
firms much more than others.


A.     Multivariate Regression Analysis

     If external financing is costly, a firm’s investment may depend on its internally generated
cash flow. Following this argument, the financing constraints literature examines the sensi-
tivity of various forms of investment to cash flow. Adhering to the spirit of that literature, we

                                               10
estimate the empirical relationship between environmental spills and cash flow, controlling
for potentially confounding factors. Our regression specification is:


            Spillsit = β1 CashF lowit + β2 CashF lowi,t−1 + Xit 0 θ + αi + αst + it ,       (4)


where Spillsit is the total number of spills attributable to firm i in year t, and αi and αst
represent firm and 2-digit-SIC-code-by-year fixed effects, respectively. We cluster all stan-
dard errors in our regressions at the firm level to account for possible time-series correlation
in the error term within firm. The two variables labeled CashF low correspond to the firm’s
contemporaneous and lagged cash flow as a fraction of assets.
   The financing constraints literature focuses primarily on the sensitivity of investment to
contemporaneous cash flow. We consider the sensitivity of spills to both contemporaneous
and lagged cash flow for two reasons. First, the dependent variable in our regressions, spills,
is not actually a measure of investment. Rather, it is an outcome of investment in activities
that mitigate spill risk. Some activities, such as the supervision of employees and monitoring
of production variances, may reduce spill risk quickly. However, other activities, including
the maintenance of production equipment and storage facilities, are likely to reduce spill risk
over time rather than immediately and may thus be detectable only with a lag.
   Second, there are strong a priori reasons to anticipate a negative relationship between
spills and contemporaneous cash flow due to reverse causality. As already noted, firms are
generally responsible for the costs of spill remediation. Thus, a spill in a given year is likely
to entail a set of costs that reduce cash flow in the year of the spill and possibly in future
years as well. This effect of spills on cash flow may induce a negative relationship between
spill incidence and contemporaneous cash flow, muddying interpretation of the coefficient on
contemporaneous cash flow. However, the cost of remediating spills in one year should not
affect cash flows in the prior year. Therefore, any relationship between spill incidence and


                                               11
lagged cash flow is unlikely to be contaminated by the effects of reverse causality.
   Another factor worth considering in interpreting estimates of Equation 4 is that any
expenditures that a firm makes to mitigate the risk of environmental spills will tend to
directly reduce cash flow. This factor could attenuate negative estimates of the sensitivity
of spills to both current and past cash flows, since firms spending more to mitigate spill risk
should have both less cash flow in the current period and fewer spills in both the current and
future periods. If this effect is important, then one might reasonably interpret any negative
relationship between spills and lagged cash flow as a lower bound on the estimated effect of
financial resources on next-year spill risk.
   We also include a vector of other time-varying firm characteristics, Xit , in estimating
Equation 4. The variables in this vector includes the log of total assets, PP&E as a percentage
of assets, debt (net of cash) to assets, sales growth and, in some specifications, capital
expenditures and sales per dollar of assets. We discuss the construction of these variables
in detail in Section III. While the primary purpose of including these variables is to control
for potentially confounding factors, some of these variables have a natural interpretation in
the context of financing constraints. For example, sales growth plausibly proxies for the
presence of investment opportunities that compete with investment in mitigating spill risk
for scarce corporate resources. The theoretical framework presented in the previous section
suggests that this competition for resources can increase spill risk. Theory also suggests that
firms with higher debt loads may have more difficulty raising additional capital to finance
investment, creating a potential dependence of spill risk on financial leverage. We explore
these possibilities in our regression analysis as well.
   The coefficients β1 and β2 capture the causal effect of changes in firm cash flows on envi-
ronmental spills under the condition that there are no omitted determinants of spills that are
correlated with cash flow, i.e. Cov(CashF lowit , it ) = Cov(CashF lowi,t−1 , it ) = 0. There
are several possible reasons why this condition might not hold. For example, unobservable


                                               12
work intensity might increase both cash flows and spill probability. Poor managerial quality
could decrease cash flows and increase spill risk. Similarly, better production technology
could lead to both higher cash flows and fewer spills. Finally, as mentioned above, spills
themselves could affect a firm’s cash flow by increasing its costs, inducing reverse causality.
       While such identification assumptions are fundamentally untestable, we try to assess
the probability that they are violated through several indirect means. First, we examine
how sensitive our estimates are to varying the included controls Xit . Second, we examine
whether the timing of the sensitivities to cash flows of spills with different underlying causes
lines up with the time horizons over which a lack of financial resources should impact them.
Third, we assess whether spill risk is more sensitive to cash flows in firms more likely to
be constrained a priori as a further test of the theoretical mechanism. Finally, to identify
the effects of financial resource availability on environmental outcomes more cleanly, we also
study two quasi-natural experiments involving shocks to financial resources. We discuss
these experiments next.


B.       Natural Experiment 1: American Jobs Creation Act

       Our first natural experiment exploits a provision in the American Jobs Creation Act
(AJCA) of 2004. US multinationals were historically required to pay US corporate taxes on
foreign-sourced income upon repatration of that income, with a credit for foreign corporate
taxes paid. This encouraged companies to defer repatriation of income earned in low-tax
jurisdictions. The AJCA allowed US multinationals to repatriate foreign income on a one-
time basis at a low 5.25% tax rate. This shock represented a significant windfall for the
domestic coffers of firms with profitable foreign subsidiaries. According to IRS estimates,
US firms collectively repatriated $312 billion in response to the AJCA.5 However, the AJCA
   5
   Dharmapala et al. (2011) and Faulkender and Petersen (2011) study the effects of this shock on invest-
ment levels in general.



                                                   13
represented a cash flow shock only for firms with previously unrepatriated foreign profits.
    We exploit differential exposure to this shock based on the presence of foreign profits
to conduct difference-in-differences analysis around the AJCA. Specifically, we compare the
change in spill rate from before to after the AJCA For firms likely to have unrepatriated
foreign profits prior to the AJCA to those without. In doing so, we implicitly treat whether or
not a firm has unrepatriated foreign profits at the time that AJCA was passed as exogenous
with respect to future changes in its spill risk.
    To implement this difference-in-differences analysis, we define P osF rgnP rof as a firm-
specific indicator variable equal to one if the sum of an establishment’s parent-firm for-
eign profits (Compustat variable pifo) from 2001 through 2003 is positive and zero other-
wise.6 Firms for which P osF rgnP rof = 1 represent the treatment group in the experi-
ment. To form a control group, we match each firm in the treatment group to one firm
for which P osF rgnP rof = 0, using propensity score matching without replacement. The
dependent variable is P osF rgnP rof , and the explanatory variables are CashF low/Assets,
Log(Assets), SalesGrowth, P P E/Assets, and Debt/Assets, all measured in the year prior
to the shock, i.e., as of fiscal year-end 2003. We provide the exact definitions of these
variables in Section III.
    Our final sample consists of all treated and control firm-year observations in the periods
2001-2003 and 2005-2007. We define an indicator variable P ost2004 to be equal to one
for observations in years 2005-2007 and zero for observations in years 2001-2003. We then
estimate the following regression equation:


                Spillsit = β ajca P ost2004t ∗ P osF rgnP rofi + αiajca + δtajca + it ,                 (5)
   6
     Establishments for which P osF rgnP rof = 0 include establishments of firms with foreign losses over the
2001 to 2003 period and those with no foreign subsidiaries, with approximately 95% being comprised of the
latter.




                                                     14
where αiajca represents a vector of firm fixed effects and δtajca represents a vector of year fixed
effects. The difference-in-differences coefficient β ajca represents the change from before to
after the AJCA in the expected annual number of spills for firms with accumulated foreign
profits at the time of the Act relative to control firms.


C.       Natural Experiment 2: Financial Crisis of 2007

       Our second natural experiment exploits variation in the maturity structure of firms’
debt at the onset of the financial crisis in late 2007. US credit markets seized up starting
in August 2007 and remained tight through 2008, making it difficult for firms to roll over
maturing debt.7 While this tightening may have affected access to capital more generally,
it was an especially large negative shock to financial resources for firms with a lot of debt
maturing during this period. These firms would have needed to either repay their maturing
debt or, if possible, roll it over at high interest rates. The maturity structure of a firm’s debt
at the beginning of the crisis is plausibly exogenous with respect to factors that might affect
spill risk, as it is unlikely that firms anticipated the crisis when setting maturity schedules
in the preceding years.
       We exploit differential exposure to the shock based on debt maturity to conduct a
difference-in-differences analysis. Specifically, we compare the change in spill rate from
before to after the onset of the crisis For firms with high levels of debt maturing shortly
after the onset of the crisis to those without. In doing so, we implicitly treat a firm’s debt
maturity structure at the time of the onset of the financial crisis as exogenous with respect
to future changes in its spill risk.
       To implement this difference-in-differences analysis, we define DebtDueIn1Y ear/Assets
as debt maturing within one year (Compustat dd1) as of fiscal year-end 2007 divided by
   7
    Almeida et al. (2012) study the effect of this shock on capital expenditure levels in 2008, and other
papers have studied its effect on other forms of investments and in other contexts (e.g., Benmelech et al.,
2017).


                                                    15
total assets for each firm the sample.8 We then define HighM at as a firm-specific indicator
variable equal to one if DebtDueIn1Y ear/Assets ≥ HighM aturityT hreshold for a given
level of HighM aturityT hreshold and zero otherwise. As we do not have strong priors on
what the “right” threshold HighM aturityT hreshold is, we use three different threshold
values in our analysis: 0.07, 0.05, and 0.03.
    Firms for which HighM at = 1 represent the treatment group in the experiment. To form
a control group, we again use propensity score matching without replacement to match each
firm in the treatment group to one firm for which HighM at = 0. For each treated firm, we
choose the untreated firm with the closest propensity score as its match. We calculate the
propensity to be treated as the fitted value from a probit regression, where the dependent
variable is HighM at, and the explanatory variables are CashF low/Assets, Log(Assets),
SalesGrowth, P P E/Assets, and Debt/Assets, all measured as of fiscal year-end 2006, the
year prior to the shock.
    Our final sample consists of all firm-year observations in 2005-2010 belonging to treated
and control firms. We define a variable P ost2007, which equals one for observations in years
2008-2010 and zero for observations in years 2005-2007. We then estimate the following
equation:
                  Spillsit = β crisis P ost2007t ∗ HighM ati + αicrisis + δtcrisis + it ,               (6)

where αicrisis represents a vector of firm fixed effects and δtcrisis represents a vector of year
fixed effects. The difference-in-differences coefficient β crisis represents the change from before
to after the onset of the financial crisis in the expected annual number of spills for firms with
a high level of debt maturing within one year as of the onset of the crisis, relative to control
firms.
   8
     Following the approach of Almeida et al. (2012), we constrain our sample to firms with 2007 fiscal year-
ends between September 2007 and January 2008, as firms with earlier 2007 fiscal year-ends could have altered
their maturity structures before the crisis began. Approximately 80% of firms have 2007 fiscal year-ends
between September 2007 and January 2008.



                                                     16
                              III.       Data and Sample

       Our data on spills come from the U.S. Coast Guard’s National Response Center (NRC).9
This database includes all air, water, and land releases of various substances, as well as
maritime security incidents, reported by either the responsible party or a third party, which
includes individuals calling the NRC hotline.10 The unit of observation in the data is a
reported incident; thus, some ex post innocuous spills may be included, although this is less
likely in the case of larger events. Our data, which span 1990-2012, include over 710,000
such spills and incidents.
       Whenever such information is available, each entry in the NRC database reports what
was spilled and how much. Importantly, the name and address of the party responsible for
the spill are also reported, as well as whether the responsible party is a private enterprise, a
governmental entity, a private citizen, a public utility, or other. In some cases, the substance,
the amount, and/or the responsible party are not known: we conjecture that these are likely
to be fairly minor incidents.
       Table I summarizes several aspects of the spill data. About 37% of the incidents occur
in a “fixed facility.” Slightly under 14% occur on a vessel, followed in frequency by mobile
sources (9.5%), railroads (8.2%), platforms (5.4%), and storage tanks (4.8%). 0.66% of
incidents involve aircraft, and slightly under 15% do not have a known source. In the vast
majority of cases where the responsible party is known, it is a private enterprise, and slightly
more than half of the reports are made by the responsible party as opposed to a third party.
       Most of the spills involve releases into water (55.9%), followed by land (22.0%) and air
(18.7%). About 3.2% of the incidents result in injuries, 2.8% result in fatalities, and 1.6%
result in evacuations. Finally, the database contains such detailed information as reported
   9
    Available from http://nrc.uscg.mil/.
  10
    According to the data, about half of the incidents are reported by phone. In 44 percent of cases the
communication mode is unavailable. The rest of the reports arrive through the web, the fax, the news, and
“other” sources.



                                                   17
“sheen color,” underscoring its comprehensiveness.


                                           — Table I here —


      Our data on firm financials for 1990-2012 come from Compustat’s North American
Annual Fundamentals database, which is populated from annual 10-K filings. We define
CashF low/Assets as the sum of income before extraordinary items (Compustat item ib)
and depreciation and amortization (dp), divided by lagged total assets (at); Log(Assets)
as the natural log of total assets; SalesGrowth as the percent change in sales (sale) from
the prior year; P P E/Assets as net property, plant and equipment (ppent) divided by total
book assets; Debt/Assets as book debt (the sum of Compustat items dlc and dltt) minus
cash (ceq), divided by total assets; Capex/Assets as capital expenditures (capx) divided by
lagged total assets; and Sales/Assets as sales divided by lagged total assets. We winsorize
all variables at the 1st and 99th percentiles to address concerns about possible outliers.
      To match responsible parties in the NRC database to firms in the Compustat database in
each year, we primarily use firms’ names and addresses.11 Because of some clear mis-spellings
in the NRC database (e.g., “ExonMobil”) as well as variations in how responsible party
names are reported (e.g., “Exxon”, “ExxonMobil”, “Exxon Mobil”), we do not always require
a perfect match between firm names to attribute a spill to a particular Compustat firm.
Instead, we set match thresholds based on the normalized number of differences between the
two company names. Specifically, for every pair of names in NRC/Compustat, we calculate
a “similarity ratio” equal to 2 M
                                T
                                  , where M is the number of matching elements, and T is
the total number of elements in the two names. Note that M cannot be larger than the
length of the shorter name. When matches are not perfect (i.e., 2 M
                                                                  T
                                                                    is less than 1), we also
compare the responsible party location reported in the NRC database to the Compustat
firm’s headquarters location; if these match, we allow for a lower level of similarity between
 11
      For more details on the matching procedure, see the Data Appendix.


                                                    18
company names to label them a match. In addition, we account for the presence of 200
common words in company names. If both companies’ names contain a common word and
the common words do not match, we label that pair a non-match. If the common words match
perfectly or if one or both of the companies do not have a common word in their name, we
compare the non-common components of the firms’ names. For the most ambiguous matches
near the cutoffs, we use Mechanical Turk workers, who are asked to judge the likelihood that
the responsible party is a particular Compustat company based on the companies’ names
and the Compustat industry sector and business description. In Appendix Table B1, we
demonstrate that our results are robust to using only perfect matches.
       Figure 1 shows the geographic distribution of spills in our final sample. Panel (a) shows
the number of spills, and panel (b) shows amounts spilled for cases in which we are able
to calculate them.12 During our sample period, each state experiences at least 20 spills at-
tributable to publicly traded companies. Many states experience several hundred spills. The
largest number of spills in our final sample occur in Texas, Louisiana, and California. When
considering quantity spilled, these three states remain near or at the top of the distribution.
The states of Wyoming, Nevada, Oklahoma, Indiana, Ohio, and Florida are also near the
top, each with over 4,800 pounds of materials spilled by publicly traded companies during
our sample period.


                                           — Figure 1 here —


       Finally, Table II provides summary statistics for firm-year observations in our sample,
which includes all firm-years in Compustat between 1990 and 2012. The mean number
  12
     Spill amounts are reported either in units of weight (e.g., pound, gram) or units of volume (e.g., gallon,
teaspoon). Because weight units are more common, we convert as many quantities as possible to pounds. Oil
and oil-related products are the most commonly reported substances in volume-based quantities. Thus, for
quantities reported in volume units, we assume that the material spilled is petroleum oil, which has a weight
of 7.35 pounds per gallon unless the material name contains the term “natural gas,” another commonly
spilled substance with volume-based reporting. In that case, we assume the material is compressed natural
gas and assign it a weight of 5.66 pounds per gallon.


                                                      19
of annual spills per firm is 0.11, and about 5% of firms have a spill in any given year.
Evacuations, injuries, and fatalities are much rarer: evacuations or injuries occur in only
0.30-0.32% of observations, and fatalities are limited to 0.06% of observations.


                                     — Table II here —


   Panel B of Table II reports summary statistics for firm financial variables. The average
cash flow is -12% of assets, but the median is a positive 6%. Both the average and median
sales growth are positive, and average sales are about 125% of a firm’s assets. The standard
deviation of cash flow divided by assets, which we later use to assess the economic magnitude
of our estimates, is 0.62.



            IV.       Results: Empirical Determinants of

                              Environmental Spill Risk

   We first present results from analysis of the firm-level determinants of environmental spill
risk, starting with variants of Equation 4. Table III presents the baseline results. Recall that
the dependent variable in these regressions is the number of spills, and the main explanatory
variables are contemporaneous and lagged CashF low/Assets. The regressions include firm
and industry-year fixed effects. Standard errors, clustered at the firm level, are reported in
parentheses below each point estimate.


                                     — Table III here —


   We control for prior-year ending Log(Assets) in each specification to account for dif-
ferences in firm size. All else equal, a firm with larger operations should have a greater
exposure to the risk of hazardous spills. Column (1) presents estimates from a regression
where we do not include any additional control variables. Unsurprisingly, the coefficient

                                              20
on Log(Assets) is positive and highly significant. The coefficients on contemporaneous and
lagged CashF low/Assets are both negative and statistically significant at the one-percent
level.
    As discussed in Section II, the relationship between spills and contemporaneous cash
flow is difficult to interpret. While greater cash flow may reduce spill risk by allowing
additional investment in mitigating this risk, spills are also likely to affect cash flows as
firms must expend resources on remediating the effects of spills. However, the negative
relationship also holds for lagged cash flows and is consistent with greater cash resources
prompting a firm to invest more in mitigating spill risk, though we discuss caveats regarding
this interpretation shortly. The point estimates imply that a one-standard deviation increase
in CashF low/Assets is associated with a 2.0% decrease in spills in the same year relative
to the sample mean and a 3.3% decrease in the following year.
    In column (2), we add SalesGrowth to the regression. The relationships between spills
and both lagged and contemporaneous cash flows remain essentially unchanged. Spills are
positively associated with sales growth (statistically significant at the one percent level).
The coefficient implies that a one-standard deviation increase in sales growth is associated
with a 1.6% increase in the expected number of spills relative to the sample mean. As
the conceptual framework we present in Section I demonstrates, in cash-constrained firms,
investment in growth competes with investment in factors that mitigate environmental spill
risk. To the extent that annual sales growth reflects investment in growth, the positive
coefficient on SalesGrowth is consistent with investment in growth crowding out investment
in mitigating spill risk.
    In column (3), we add two additional control variables: P P E/Assets and Debt/Assets.
In principle, firms with more physical assets may face a greater risk of an environmental spill
because of the nature of their production technology. However, the inclusion of firm fixed
effects in the regressions requires that any such effect be driven by time-series variation in the


                                               21
nature of that technology, which is unlikely to vary much over time. Financial leverage may
also be related to spill risk because more indebted firms have incentives to take on risk and
may find it difficult to raise capital. The coefficient on Debt/Assets is positive. However,
the coefficients on the two additional variables are both statistically insignificant at the ten
percent level.
      In column (4), we add Capex/Assets as an additional control variable. Capital ex-
penditures could be either negatively related to spills if expenditures reflect technological
upgrades that reduce spill risk or positively related if expenditures reflect the addition of
assets that require integration into the company’s overall production process. The coefficient
on Capex/Assets is statistically insignificant at the ten percent level.
      Finally, column (5) adds Sales/Assets as an additional control variable. Sales per dollar
of assets could be positively related to spills if additional sales put a strain on a company’s
production process. The coefficient on Sales/Assets is statistically insignificant at the ten
percent level. The coefficients on the cash flow variables remain unchanged in columns (2)-(5)
as these additional control variables are added, demonstrating the stability of our estimates.
      Exposure to spill risk varies substantially across different industries. This risk is likely
to be negligible in some industries, especially those in the service sector. We refrain from
removing firms in industries where spill risk is likely to be low in constructing our sample for
two reasons. First, any criteria for removing such firms is necessarily arbitrary. Second, firms
may operate across multiple industries, and exclusion based on a firm-level industry code will
remove some firms that do, in fact, face non-trivial spill risk. However, in Appendix Table
B2, we demonstrate that our results are, if anything, slightly stronger if we exclude firms in
3-digit SIC industries that average fewer than 0.01 spills per firm-year in our sample.13
      We next estimate a series of regressions where we include both the cash flow and control
variables at different time horizons. We include the one-year lagged as well as contem-
 13
      This filter removes approximately 25% of the observations in the sample.



                                                     22
poraneous CashF low/Assets in regression Equation 4 to account for the possibility that
investments in mitigating spill risk may pay off in fewer spills with some delay. However,
our specification of the exact timing of the relationship between cash flow and spill risk is
arbitrary, and it is possible that investments affect spill risk over an even longer time horizon.
To that end, we include additional lags in our estimation, both to explore the dynamics of
the relationships between spills and these variables and to ensure that our results are not
sensitive to including controls measured over different horizons. Table IV presents the results
from these regressions.


                                      — Table IV here —


   In column (1), we add the two-year lagged value of CashF low/Assets as an additional
explanatory variable. The coefficients on contemporaneous and lagged CashF low/Assets
remain negative and statistically significant at the one-percent level when we add two-year
lagged CashF low/Assets. However, two-year lagged CashF low/Assets itself enters with a
positive sign, is small in magnitude, and is statistically insignificant.
   In column (2), we add next year’s cash flow to the estimating equation. While the focus
of our analysis is on how cash flow affects spills, remediating spills can be costly, so spills are
likely to affect cash flow as well. The exact timing of this effect is unclear. Some of the costs
of remediating a spill may occur after the year of the spill, though our cash flow measures are
based on accrual accounting variables, and companies may take accounting charges in the
year of a spill to account for future costs. The coefficients on contemporaneous and lagged
CashF low/Assets remain negative and statistically significant at the one-percent level when
we add next year’s cash flow. The coefficient on future cash flows is negative, consistent
with spills reducing cash flow in future periods. However, the coefficient is statistically
insignificant at the ten percent level. This accounting approach would shift the measured
costs of a spill from future years to the year in which the spill occurs.


                                                23
   In column (3), we include CashF low/Assets in each year from two years prior to the
year of the observation to the year after. The coefficients on the contemporaneous and
lagged cash flow variables remain negative and statistically significant at the one-percent
level. In addition, the coefficient on next year’s CashF low/Assets, which remains negative,
now becomes statistically significant at the ten percent level, consistent with some of the
costs of spills accruing in the year after they occur.
   Finally, in columns (4) and (5), we demonstrate the robustness of our estimates to addi-
tional lagged control variables. The coefficients on both contemporaneous and lagged cash
flows remain negative and highly statistically significant. Cash flows two years ago con-
tinue to lack explanatory power over this year’s spills. Next year’s cash flow continues to be
negatively related to spills this year at a ten-percent level of statistical significance.
   We seek to further assess the economic importance of the association between spills and
cash flows by narrowing our focus to a set of relatively costly spills - those involving injuries,
fatalities, or evacuations. Specifically, we estimate variations of regression Equation 4 where
we replace total spills as the dependent variable with indicators for spills of each of these
three types. We use indicators for the occurrence of these types of spills rather than counts
because there are very few cases where a firm has multiple spills of one of these types in a
given year. Table V presents the results. All of the coefficients and standard errors in Table
V are multiplied by 100 to make the table easier to read.


                                       — Table V here —


   The probabilities of having spills involving injuries and evacuations (but not fatalities)
in a given year are negatively associated with prior-year cash flows. These associations are
statistically significant at the ten percent level, with p-values of 0.052 and 0.099 respectively.
Given the 0.62 standard deviation of CashF low/Assets, and noting that the coefficients
are multiplied by 100 in the table, the coefficients imply 0.032 and 0.021 percentage point


                                                24
decreases in the probability of spills resulting in evacuations and injuries, respectively, in
response to a one-standard deviation increase in prior-year cash flow. These decreases are a
substantial 10.7% and 6.6% of the 0.30% and 0.032% unconditional probabilities of having
at least one of these types of spills in a given year, respectively. However, we recommend
caution in interpreting the magnitudes implied by these estimates, as the relative infrequency
of the outcomes involved means that the estimates are relatively imprecise.
   We next exploit information about the underlying cause of each spill in our data to gain
further insights into the mechanisms by which financial resources might affect spill risk. As
we describe in Section I, investments in activities that mitigate spill risk can take a variety
of forms. Some forms involve investments in hard assets, including expenditures to maintain
and upgrade equipment. Others involve investments in employees who handle dangerous
materials. These investments include expenditures on training, supervision, and retention of
more-skilled employees.
   These different forms of investment plausibly affect environmental spill risk over different
time horizons. For example, cuts to employee training or the loss of more-skilled employees
are likely to increase spill risk quickly. Deferred equipment maintenance, on the other hand,
may take time to manifest itself in higher spill risk.
   Motivated by these differences, we examine the sensitivity of spills caused by operator
error and equipment failure separately to cash flows at different horizons. Specifically, we
estimate variants of regression Equation 4, substituting measures of spills caused by equip-
ment failure and operator error separately for total spills as the dependent variable. Given
the modest numbers of spills attributed to each of these two underlying causes (especially
those attributed to operator error), we use spill indicators as the dependent variables in these
regressions rather than counts. Table VI presents the estimates.


                                     — Table VI here —



                                              25
       Columns (1) and (2) demonstrate that spills due to equipment failure are sensitive pri-
marily to lagged rather than contemporaneous cash flow. In contrast, columns (3) and (4)
demonstrate that spills due to operator error are more sensitive to contemporaneous rather
than lagged cash flow. While not conclusive, the differences between the time horizons over
which spills caused by equipment failure and operator error are sensitive to cash flow are
consistent with how different types of investment are likely to affect spill risk.
       We next examine how the relationship between spill incidence and cash flow varies with
firm characteristics likely to reflect how cash-constrained a firm is.                    However, we note
that there is some debate about whether more-constrained firms should actually exhibit
a higher sensitivity of investment to internal resources (Kaplan and Zingales, 1997).14 We
measure the likelihood that a firm is cash-constrained using three characteristics that are
theoretically-motivated and that the literature has used to measure cash constraints previ-
ously: Log(Assets), Debt/Assets, and Dividends/Assets. Firms are generally thought to
be more cash constrained if they are smaller or have higher debt loads, which make raising
additional external capital difficult. A firm paying few or no dividends has one fewer margin
on which to adjust its uses of cash in order to free up cash flow for investment. We esti-
mate regressions where we interact each of these three characteristics with current-year and
prior-year CashF low/Assets, measuring each characteristic in the year prior to the cash
flow variable with which it is interacted. Table VII presents the results.


                                            — Table VII here —


       Spill incidence is more sensitive to both contemporaneous and lagged cash flow for firms
with higher debt-to-asset ratios, though only the differential sensitivity to contemporaneous
  14
     Investment in general may appear to be more sensitive to cash flow for firms seen as likely to be cash-
constrained even absent such constraints because cash flow may proxy for unobserved investment opportu-
nities for these types of firms (Altı, 2003). This concern is unlikely to be relevant in our setting. If anything,
the conceptual framework we present in Section I suggests that firms with better investment opportunities
may invest less in mitigating spill risk because of crowding out from other forms of investment.


                                                       26
cash flow is statistically significant (column (1)). The p-value of the coefficient on the
interaction of lagged cash flow and debt-to-assets is 0.12. In addition, spill incidence is more
sensitive to lagged cash flows for smaller firms (column (2)). These results are consistent
with an increase in financial resources allowing more investment in mitigating spill risk in
firms more likely to be constrained in their ability to invest a priori. However, we find no
statistical relationship between a firm’s dividend policy and the sensitivity of its spill risk to
cash flow (column (3)).
   Overall, the results in this section consistently and robustly suggest a dependence of spill
risk on a firm’s ability to finance investment out of internal cash flow. However, none of the
evidence presented here is based on truly exogenous variation in internal financial resources.
As noted in the discussion of our empirical methodology in Section I, interpreting the rela-
tionship between spill incidence and contemporaneous cash flows is especially challenging.
To more closely approximate the ideal experiment, which would entail randomly shocking
firms’ financial resources and measuring subsequent changes in spills, we next analyze the
response of spill incidence to two quasi-natural experiments that produced such shocks.



       V.      Results: Spill Risk and Cash Flow Shocks

   This section presents results from analyzing the two quasi-natural experiments described
in Sections II.B and II.C. We first present comparisons of treatment and control samples
from each experiment. As described in Section II.B, the treatment sample in the AJCA
experiment consists of firms with foreign profits over the three years prior to the AJCA,
while firms in the control sample lack such profits over that period. As described in Section
II.C, the treatment sample in the financial crisis experiment consists of firms with high levels
of debt maturing within one year as of the onset of the crisis, while firms in the control sample
have low levels of debt maturing within one year. We use three separate cutoff values of


                                               27
DebtDueIn1Y ear/Assets to assign firms to high-debt maturity (treatment) and low-debt
maturity (control) groups: 0.07, 0.05, and 0.03.
   Table VIII compares the mean values of several variables in the matched treatment and
control sample pairs for each of the two experiments. Panel A presents comparisons for the
AJCA experiment, while Panel B presents comparisons for the financial crisis experiment.
For the comparison in the AJCA experiment, we measure variables in fiscal year 2003, except
for Spills/Y ear, which is the mean number of spills per year over the period 2001-2003. For
the comparison in the financial crisis experiment, we measure variables in fiscal year 2007,
expect for Spills/Y ear, which is the mean number of spills per year over the period 2005-
2007.


                                   — Table VIII here —


   For the AJCA experiment, differences in the means of all of the variables presented except
for Spills/Y ear are small and statistically insignificant. Despite the fact that we include
pre-treatment spills per year in the set of match variables in propensity score matching when
we construct the control sample, firms with foreign profits pre-AJCA have much higher pre-
AJCA spill rates than control firms do. As a robustness check, in the Appendix, we repeat
the analysis in this section for the AJCA experiment matching only on Spills/Y ear instead
of on multiple predictive variables. This approach does not homogenize the treatment and
control samples on other dimensions, but it does ensure that treatment and control samples
are similar in terms of pre-treatment spill rates. The results are slightly weaker than those
presented in this section, in large part because the standard errors of the estimates are
slightly higher.
   For the financial crisis experiment, differences in the means of all of the variables pre-
sented are small and statistically insignificant, with the exception of SalesGrowth when the
DebtDueIn1Y ear threshold is 0.03. Of particular importance is the fact that Spills/Y ear


                                             28
differs little between treatment and control establishments for all three thresholds.
   Next, we plot the mean number of spills for the treatment and control groups around
the two events. Figure 2 presents these plots. Figure 2 (a) presents a plot for the AJCA
experiment, while Figures 2 (b), (c), and (d) presents plots for each of the three variants of
the financial crisis experiment.


                                     — Figure 2 here —


   For the financial crisis experiment, the patterns are roughly consistent with mean spills
increasing for the treatment groups relative to the control groups in 2009 - the second year
after the onset of the crisis - and remaining elevated in 2010. While there is noise in spills
from year to year in both the treatment and control groups (but especially in the treatment
groups), we see no obvious patterns in the time series prior to 2009 that would indicate
a violation of the parallel trends assumption required for a valid difference-in-difference
estimation. The timing of the response is consistent with investments in mitigating spill risk
taking time to implement and/or manifest themselves in reduced risk.
   As already noted, the pattern is more difficult to interpret in the AJCA case. Firms in
the treatment group have considerably higher spill rates pre-treatment than control firms
do in this experiment. However, treatment- and control-firm spill rates appear to begin
converging only after the AJCA and nearly reach parity in 2007.
   Next, we implement formal difference-in-differences estimation based on regression Equa-
tions (5) and (6). Table IX presents estimates based on the AJCA experiment, first without
controlling for additional time-varying firm characteristics (columns (1)-(3)) and then with
CashF low/Assets, Log(Assets), SalesGrowth, P P E/Assets, and Debt/Assets added to
the regressions as controls (columns (4)-(6)).


                                    — Table IX here —


                                             29
   The negative coefficient on P ost2004 ∗ P osF rgnP rof in columns (1) and (4) indicates
a decrease in spills for firms with accumulated foreign profits, relative to control firms, after
the AJCA allowed the repatriation of foreign profits at a low tax cost. In columns (2) and
(5), we present separate estimates of the differential change in spills from before the AJCA to
each post-AJCA year. We do so by including interactions of indicators for each post-AJCA
year (Y ear2005, Y ear2006, and Y ear2007) with the P osF rgnP rof indicator rather than
lumping post-AJCA years together into a single P ost2004 indicator. The estimates show
that declines in all three post-AJCA years relative to the pre-AJCA period. However, the
drop is clearly largest and is only statistically significant in 2007.
   For consistency with the financial crisis difference-in-differences results that we describe
next, we also define an indicator variable Y ears2006 − 07, which takes a value of one in
either of those two years and zero otherwise. We then estimate a regression where we
interact this variable with P osF rgnP rof and also include the interaction of Y ear2005 and
P osF rgnP rof . Columns (3) and (6) present these estimates. The coefficient on Y ear2006−
07 ∗ P osF rgnP rof is negative and statistically significant at the ten and five percent levels,
respectively.
   Table X presents results for the crisis experiment. Panels A, B, and C present results for
matched treatment-control samples where the high-maturity cutoff is set at 0.07, 0.05, and
0.03, respectively. The regression results follow the same pattern as those in Table IX.


                                      — Table X here —


   Column (1) in each panel presents the base difference-in-differences estimate of the change
in annual number of spills from before to after the onset of the crisis for firms with a high
level of maturing debt relative to controls. The coefficient on P ost2007 ∗ HighM at, which
represents the difference-in-differences estimate, is positive in all three panels, though it is
only statistically significant (at the ten percent level) when the DebtDuein1Y ear/Assets


                                               30
threshold for high debt maturity is 0.05. However, as Figure 2 suggests, pooling together all
post-crisis onset years potentially masks important patterns in the differential evolution of
spill incidence after the crisis. As already noted, a decrease in investment in mitigating spill
risk due to the constraining effects of debt maturing during the crisis is likely to take time
to manifest itself in higher spill rates.
   In column (2) of each of the three panels, we present separate estimates of the differential
change in spills from before to each year after the onset of the crisis. We do so by including
interactions of indicators for each post-crisis year (Y ear2008, Y ear2009, and Y ear2010) with
the HighM at indicator rather than lumping post-onset years together in a single P ost2007
indicator. The estimates in this column show no response of spill incidence in 2008, the first
year after the onset of the crisis, except in the case where the high-debt maturity threshold is
0.03, where the estimate is negative. However, the estimates do show a considerable relative
increase in spills in both 2009 and 2010 compared to the pre-treatment period. These
relative increases are of similar magnitudes in all three samples. The relative increase for
2009 compared to pre-treatment years is statistically significant when the high-debt maturity
threshold is 0.03 and for 2010 compared to pre-treatment years when the threshold is 0.07
or 0.05.
   To more formally test the significance of the relative increase in spills in 2009 and 2010, we
define an indicator variable Y ears2009 − 10, which takes a value of one in either of those two
years and zero otherwise. We then estimate a regression where we interact this variable with
HighM at and also include the interaction of Y ear2008 and HighM at. Column (3) presents
these estimates. The coefficient on Y ear2009 − 10 ∗ HighM at is positive and statistically
significant at the five, ten, and ten percent levels in the three samples, respectively.
   We do not include any firm-level control variables in the first three columns because of
concerns about including endogenous controls in difference-in-differences estimation. How-
ever, for completeness, columns (4)-(6) in each panel repeat the regressions from columns


                                               31
(1)-(3) with the five additional control variables mentioned above. The addition of the con-
trol variables generally increases the estimates of relative change in spills compared to the
pre-treatment period, resulting in higher levels of statistical significance in some cases. For
example, column (6) in each of the three panels shows that the coefficients on the interac-
tions of Y ears2009 − 10 and HighM at are all statistically significant at the five percent level
when we include control variables.
   Given the relatively small number of potential control firms, we do not require each
control firm to fall within the same industry as the treated firm with which it is matched.
As a robustness check, we impose the requirement that matches fall within the same 2-digit
SIC industry and re-estimate the regressions in Tables IX and X. Tables B5 and B6 in the
Online Appendix present these results. Generally, the results for the crisis experiment are
similar to those presented in Table X. The signs of the coefficients of interest in the AJCA
experiment are the same as those in Table IX, though the magnitudes are smaller, and none
of the coefficients of interest are statistically significant at the ten percent level. However,
if we adopt a specification that is less taxing on statistical power by replacing firm and
year fixed effects with 2-digit-SIC-industry-by-year and 3-digit SIC industry fixed effects,
both the crisis and AJCA experiment results hold even when we match within 2-digit SIC
industry. Tables B7 and B8 present these final results.
   The relative changes in spills following financial resource shocks that Tables IX and X
depict are considerable in magnitude. For example, the estimates in columns (3) and (6)
of the three panels in Table X indicate an increase in annual spills of 0.025 to 0.036 for
high-debt maturity firms in the second and third years after the onset of the crisis. The
magnitudes of the estimated response are similar in the AJCA experiment. Relative to the
mean firm in our sample, which experiences 0.11 spills per year, these estimates imply a
23%-33% change in the number of environmental spills following these considerable shocks
to financial resources.


                                               32
                                  VI.       Conclusion

   In summary, this paper presents evidence that the number of hazardous environmental
spills for which a firm is responsible decreases with the firm’s capacity to finance investment.
This evidence takes two forms. In fixed effects regressions, spill incidence decreases with
both contemporaneous and prior-year cash flow. It also increases with sales growth. The
relationship with prior-year cash flow holds for spills in general as well as specifically for
those relatively high-impact spills that result in evacuations or injuries. The relationship
is stronger for smaller and more highly-indebted firms that likely have limited access to
external financing. Second, difference-in-differences analysis indicates that firms subject to
positive (negative) cash flow shocks in two quasi-natural experiments display a subsequent
decrease (increase) in spills relative to control firms.
   Overall, our results suggest that firms cut spending on activities that reduce spill risk
when they lack the financial resources to fund them. Our findings add to the growing
literature examining the impact of a firm’s ability to finance on the firm’s non-financial
stakeholders. One novel feature of our evidence is that it supports an impact on the commu-
nity at large in which a firm operates rather than a well-defined set of stakeholders such as
employees or customers. Our findings also have implications for environmental regulators, as
they point to observable factors that can be used to identify firms more likely to experience
spills, including high-impact spills, in the near future.




                                               33
                                REFERENCES
Adgate, J. L., B. D. Goldstein, and L. M. McKenzie (2014). Potential public health hazards,
  exposures and health effects from unconventional natural gas development. Environmental
  Science & Technology 48 (15), 8307–8320.

Almeida, H., M. Campello, B. Laranjeira, and S. Weisbenner (2012). Corporate debt matu-
  rity and the real effects of the 2007 credit crisis. Critical Finance Review 1, 3–58.

Altı, A. (2003). How sensitive is investment to cash flow when financing is frictionless?
  Journal of Finance 58 (2), 707–722.

Benmelech, E., C. Frydman, and D. Papanikolaou (2017). Financial frictions and employ-
  ment during the great depression. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Re-
  search.

Boomhower, J. (2016). Drilling like there’s no tomorrow: Bankruptcy, insurance, and envi-
  ronmental risk.

Cohen, M. A. (2010). A taxonomy of oil spill costs-what are the likely costs of the
  Deepwater Horizon spill?

Cohn, J. B. and M. I. Wardlaw (2016). Financing constraints and workplace safety. Journal
  of Finance 71 (5), 2017–2058.

Denis, D. and D. Denis (1993). Managerial discretion, organizational structure, and cor-
  porate performance: A study of leveraged recapitalizations. Journal of Accounting and
  Economics 16, 209–236.

Dharmapala, D., C. F. Foley, and K. J. Forbes (2011). Watch what I do, not what I say: The
 unintended consequences of the Homeland Investment Act. The Journal of Finance 46 (3),
 753–787.

Dionne, G., R. Gagné, F. Gagnon, and C. Vanasse (1997). Debt, moral hazard and airline
  safety: An empirical evidence. Journal of Econometrics 79 (2), 379–402.

Faulkender, M. and M. Petersen (2011). Investment and capital constraints: Repatriations
  under the American Jobs Creation Act. Review of Financial Studies 25, 3351–3388.

Galiani, S., P. Gertler, and E. Schargrodsky (2005). Water for life: The impact of the
 privatization of water services on child mortality. Journal of Political Economy 113 (1),
 83–120.

Hausman, C. (2014). Corporate incentives and nuclear safety. American Economic Journal:
  Economic Policy 6 (3), 178–206.



                                            34
Hill, E. L. (2013). Shale gas development and infant health: evidence from Pennsylvania.
  working paper.

Horváthová, E. (2010). Does environmental performance affect financial performance? a
  meta-analysis. Ecological Economics 70 (1), 52–59.

Jackson, R. B., A. Vengosh, J. W. Carey, R. J. Davies, T. H. Darrah, F. O’sullivan, and
  G. Pétron (2014). The environmental costs and benefits of fracking. Annual Review of
  Environment and Resources 39, 327–362.

Jones, C. I. (2016). Life and growth. Journal of Political Economy 124 (2), 539–578.

Kaplan, S. N. and L. Zingales (1997). Do investment-cash flow sensitivities provide useful
 measures of financing constraints? The Quarterly Journal of Economics 112 (1), 169–215.

Kini, O., J. Shenoy, and V. Subramaniam (2017). Impact of financial leverage on the in-
  cidence and severity of product failures: Evidence from product recalls. The Review of
  Financial Studies 30 (5), 1790–1829.

Kurzman, D. (1987). A killing wind: Inside union carbide and the Bhopal catastrophe.
 McGraw-Hill Companies.

Lang, L., E. Ofek, and R. Stulz (1996). Leverage, investment, and firm growth. Journal of
  Financial Economics 40, 3–29.

Lux Research (2013). Oil industry spend on health, safety and environment jumps 60% to
  $56 billion in 2030. Technical report.

Nie, H. and H. Zhao (2015). Financial leverage and employee death: Evidence from China’s
  coalmining industry. Working paper.

Phillips, G. and G. Sertsios (2013). How do firm financial conditions affect product quality
  and pricing? Management Science 59 (8), 1764–1782.

Reinhardt, F. L. and R. N. Stavins (2010). Corporate social responsibility, business strategy,
  and the environment. Oxford Review of Economic Policy 26 (2), 164–181.

Rose, N. L. (1990). Profitability and product quality: Economic determinants of airline
  safety performance. Journal of Political Economy 98 (5), 944–964.




                                             35
                                                                Figures

                         Figure 1: Spatial distribution of in-sample spills


                                                      (a) Number of spills


                            6

                                      42


                                                 89


                                                            57


                                                                       23


                                                                                   10


                                                                                              03


                                                                                                            0


                                                                                                                      1


                                                                                                                                   9
                           -7




                                                                                                         09


                                                                                                                   47


                                                                                                                               40
                                     -1


                                               -1


                                                          -2


                                                                     -3


                                                                                 -4


                                                                                             -7

                                                                                                       -1


                                                                                                                 -1


                                                                                                                              -3
                       20

                                 77


                                             3


                                                       0


                                                                   8


                                                                               4


                                                                                          1
                                                                                        41
                                          14


                                                    19


                                                                25


                                                                            32




                                                                                                   4

                                                                                                              91


                                                                                                                          72
                                                                                                  70

                                                                                                            10


                                                                                                                      14
                                                      (b) Quantity spilled
                                      73


                                                 64


                                                              2
                            53




                                                                        4


                                                                                    5


                                                                                               7


                                                                                                            2


                                                                                                                      6

                                                                                                                                50
                                                           40


                                                                       90


                                                                                   41


                                                                                              84


                                                                                                        80


                                                                                                                      9
                                     -6


                                               -9




                                                                                                                   11


                                                                                                                               10
                        -2




                                                         -1


                                                                   -1


                                                                              -2


                                                                                         -2


                                                                                                       -4


                                                                                                                 -1


                                                                                                                           -3
                                 3


                                           3
                       4

                                25


                                          67


                                                      4

                                                                02


                                                                            04


                                                                                        15


                                                                                                   47


                                                                                                            02
                                                    96




                                                                                                                          6
                                                              14


                                                                        19


                                                                                    24


                                                                                               28




                                                                                                                     19
                                                                                                         48

                                                                                                                   11




Quantities are in thousand of pounds. Not all spills have quantifiable amounts reported.


                                                                            36
Figure 2: Mean Spills by Year for Treatment and Control Firms


                                    (a) AJCA

.29
.25
.21
.17
.13
.09
.05




      2000             2002              2004             2006               2008
                                         Year

                  PosFrgnProf=1 (treatment)            PosFrgnProf=0 (control)



             (b) Financial crisis - high maturity threshold: 0.07
.29
.25
.21
.17
.13
.09
.05




      2005          2006          2007          2008          2009           2010
                                         Year

                      HighMat=1 (treatment)            HighMat=0 (control)




                                         37
Figure 2: Mean Spills by Year for Treatment and Control Firms (continued)


                  (c) Financial crisis - high maturity threshold: 0.05

     .29
     .25
     .21
     .17
     .13
     .09
     .05




           2005          2006          2007          2008          2009           2010
                                              Year

                           HighMat=1 (treatment)            HighMat=0 (control)



                  (d) Financial crisis - high maturity threshold: 0.03
     .29
     .25
     .21
     .17
     .13
     .09
     .05




           2005          2006          2007          2008          2009           2010
                                              Year

                           HighMat=1 (treatment)            HighMat=0 (control)




                                              38
                                         Tables

                         Table I: Summary of environmental spill data
This table reports the percentage of spills in the U.S. Coast Guard’s National Response Center
(NRC) database with various characteristics.

                  Incident type                              Responsible party
 Fixed Facility                      37.38%     Private enterprise                 60.02%
 Vessel                              13.65%     Governmental entity                 4.45%
 Mobile                               9.46%     Private citizen                     4.14%
 Railroad                             8.20%     Public utility                      3.07%
 Pipeline                             5.55%     Unknown/other                      28.32%
 Platform                             5.43%
 Storage Tank                         4.79%
                                                              Reporting party
 Aircraft                             0.66%
 Unknown/other                       14.90%     Responsible party                  51.68%
                                                Third party                        48.32%
                      Medium
                                                                  Sheen color
 Water                               55.93%
 Land                                21.98%     Rainbow                            45.68%
 Air                                 18.69%     Silvery                            11.67%
 Soil                                 1.58%     Dark Black                          5.03%
 Ballast                              1.31%     Redish                              3.19%
 Subsurface                           0.51%     Blueish                             2.27%
                                                Brown                               2.22%
                                                Whitish                             1.84%
                  Consequence
                                                Grayish                             1.74%
 Fatalities                           2.80%     Dark Brown                          1.52%
 Injuries                             3.24%     Yellowish Brown                     0.71%
 Evacuation                           1.64%     Light Brown                         0.65%
 Road closure                         1.87%     Light Black                         0.24%
 Rail track closure                   1.97%     Unknown/other                      23.24%




                                              39
                                   Table II: Summary statistics
This table presents summary statistics for firm-year observations in our sample. Total spills
(spill indicator) are the number of spills (indicator for the number of spills) reported in the U.S.
Coast Guard’s National Response Center (NRC) database for which a firm is responsible. Cash-
Flow/Assets is the sum of income before extraordinary items and depreciation, divided by lagged
assets. Assets are total reported assets. SalesGrowth is fraction change in sales divided by assets
from the prior year. PPE/Assets is net plant, property, and equipment divided by total assets.
Debt/Assets is book debt minus cash, divided by book assets. Capex/Assets is capital expenditures
divided by lagged assets. Sales/Assets is sales divided by lagged assets.

                           (1)            (2)           (3)            (4)     (5)          (6)
                        Observations     Mean        Std Dev          10th    Median       90th
                                         Panel A: Spill statistics

 Total spills            185,671          0.11            0.76         0        0           0
 Spill indicator         185,671          0.05            0.22         0        0           0
 Evacuation indicator    185,671         0.0030          0.0547        0        0           0
 Injuries indicator      185,671         0.0032          0.0564        0        0           0
 Fatalities indicator    185,671         0.0006          0.0252        0        0           0
                                       Panel B: Compustat variables

 CashFlow/Assets         157,809         -0.12            0.62        -0.56    0.06         0.22
 Assets (millions)       173,378         1,523           5,141          3       92         2,759
 Log(Assets)             159,257         4.54            2.62         1.28     4.53         7.94
 SalesGrowth             147,984          0.31            1.19        -0.25    0.09         0.75
 PPE/Assets              159,044         0.30            0.26         0.03     0.22         0.72
 NetDebt/Assets          158,722          0.06           0.42         -0.52    0.09         0.56
 Capex/Assets            156,430         0.09            0.17            0     0.04         0.21
 Sales/Assets            158,465         1.25            1.16          0.09    0.99         2.58




                                                    40
                   Table III: Firm-level determinants of the total number of spills
This table presents esimates from OLS regressions of spill incidence on firm-level characteristics.
The unit of observation is a firm-year. The dependent variables is the number of spills. See Table
II for definitions of the explanatory variables. All regressions include firm and industry-year fixed
effects, where industry is measured as the firm’s primary 2-digit SIC code. Standard errors clustered
at the firm level are reported in parentheses below each point estimate. ***, **, and * indicate
statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively, based on a two-tailed t-test.

                                   (1)           (2)          (3)            (4)            (5)

 CashFlow/Assets, time t        -0.003***     -0.004***    -0.004***      -0.004***      -0.004***
                                  (0.001)       (0.001)      (0.001)        (0.001)        (0.001)
 CashFlow/Assets, time t-1      -0.006***     -0.005***    -0.005***      -0.005***      -0.005***
                                  (0.001)       (0.001)      (0.001)        (0.001)        (0.001)
 Log(Assets), t-1                0.011***      0.011***     0.011***       0.011***       0.012***
                                  (0.001)       (0.001)      (0.001)        (0.001)        (0.002)
 SalesGrowth, t                               0.001***     0.002***        0.001***       0.001**
                                                (0.000)      (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.000)
 PPE/Assets, t-1                                              0.017          0.018          0.018
                                                             (0.011)        (0.011)        (0.011)
 Debt/Assets, t-1                                             0.002          0.002          0.002
                                                             (0.003)        (0.003)        (0.003)
 Capex/Assets, t                                                             0.011          0.009
                                                                            (0.009)        (0.010)
 Sales/Assets, t                                                                            0.001
                                                                                           (0.001)
 Observations                    126,933      126,933       126,933        126,933        126,933
 Adjusted R2                      0.723        0.723         0.723          0.723          0.723




                                                  41
            Table IV: Environmental spills and cash flows over different horizons
This table presents estimates from OLS regressions of spill incidence on firm-level characteristics,
including cash flow measured at different horizons. The unit of observation is a firm-year. The
dependent variables is the number of spills. See Table II for definitions of the explanatory variables.
All regressions include firm and industry-year fixed effects, where industry is measured as the firm’s
primary 2-digit SIC code. Standard errors clustered at the firm level are reported in parentheses
below each point estimate. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10%
level, respectively, based on a two-tailed t-test.

                                   (1)           (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)

 CashFlow/Assets, time t+1                      -0.002         -0.003*                       -0.003*
                                               (0.001)         (0.002)                       (0.002)
 CashFlow/Assets, time t        -0.005***     -0.004***      -0.005***      -0.005***      -0.006***
                                 (0.001)       (0.001)         (0.002)        (0.002)        (0.002)
 CashFlow/Assets, time t-1      -0.006***     -0.004***      -0.005***       -0.004**       -0.004**
                                 (0.002)       (0.001)         (0.002)        (0.002)        (0.002)
 CashFlow/Assets, time t-2        0.001                         0.001                         0.002
                                 (0.001)                       (0.001)                       (0.002)
 Log(Assets), t-1               0.014***       0.012***      0.014***       0.013***       0.013***
                                 (0.002)        (0.002)        (0.002)       (0.002)         (0.002)
 SalesGrowth, t                 0.001***       0.002***       0.002***      0.002***       0.002***
                                 (0.001)        (0.001)        (0.001)       (0.001)         (0.001)
 PPE/Assets, t-1                  0.020          0.011          0.014         0.016           0.012
                                 (0.013)        (0.012)        (0.014)       (0.012)         (0.013)
 Debt/Assets, t-1                 0.002          0.003          0.002         0.002           0.002
                                 (0.004)        (0.003)        (0.004)       (0.004)         (0.004)
 Log(Assets), t-2                                                            0.003**          0.002
                                                                             (0.001)         (0.002)
 SalesGrowth, t-1                                                           0.002***       0.002***
                                                                             (0.001)         (0.001)
 PPE/Assets, t-2                                                              0.006           0.004
                                                                             (0.010)         (0.011)
 Debt/Assets, t-2                                                             0.001           0.002
                                                                             (0.003)         (0.003)
 Observations                   111,831        111,608         98,017        110,714        96,966
 Adjusted R2                     0.728          0.727           0.732         0.728          0.733




                                                  42
           Table V: Firm-level determinants of evacuations, injuries, and fatalities
This table presents esimates from OLS regressions of spill characteristics on firm-level characteris-
tics. The unit of observation is a firm-year. The dependent variables is indicated in each column.
See Table II for definitions of the explanatory variables. All regressions include firm and industry-
year fixed effects, where industry is measured as the firm’s primary 2-digit SIC code. Standard
errors clustered at the firm level are reported in parentheses below each point estimate. ***, **, and
* indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively, based on a two-tailed
t-test.

                                      (1)                        (2)                     (3)
                               Evacuation (x 100)        Any injuries (x 100)   Any fatalities (x 100)

 CashFlow/Assets, time t              0.002                      0.004                   0.003
                                    (0.015)                    (0.024)                 (0.009)
 CashFlow/Assets, time t-1          -0.052*                    -0.034*                   0.005
                                    (0.027)                    (0.021)                 (0.007)
 Log(Assets), t-1                   0.035**                   0.045***                  -0.003
                                    (0.017)                    (0.017)                 (0.008)
 SalesGrowth, t                      -0.001                    0.014*                   -0.001
                                    (0.006)                    (0.008)                 (0.002)
 PPE/Assets, t-1                     0.135                     0.306*                  0.131*
                                    (0.138)                    (0.162)                 (0.068)
 Debt/Assets, t-1                    0.012                      -0.062                  -0.021
                                    (0.052)                    (0.044)                 (0.018)
 Observations                       126,933                    126,933                 126,933
 Adjusted R-squared                  0.180                      0.195                   0.184




                                                    43
Table VI: Effect of cash flow on spills caused by operator error versus equipment malfunction
This table presents esimates from OLS regressions of spill incidence on firm-level characteristics.
The unit of observation is a firm-year. The dependent variables is an indicator for a spill due to the
cause listed above each column. All coefficients and standard errors have been scaled by 100. See
Table II for definitions of the explanatory variables. AAll regressions include firm and industry-year
fixed effects, where industry is measured as the firm’s primary 2-digit SIC code. Standard errors
clustered at the firm level are reported in parentheses below each point estimate. ***, **, and *
indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively, based on a two-tailed
t-test.

                                    (1)               (2)                    (3)                (4)
                             Spill due to equipment failure (x 100)   Spill due to operator error (x 100)

 CashFlow/Assets, time t         -0.10*               -0.10               -0.09**             -0.09*
                                 (0.06)              (0.07)                (0.04)             (0.05)
 CashFlow/Assets, time t-1      -0.17***            -0.19**                 -0.05              -0.07
                                 (0.06)              (0.08)                (0.04)             (0.05)
 CashFlow/Assets, time t-2                            -0.02                                     0.01
                                                     (0.06)                                   (0.04)
 Log(Assets), t-1                0.39***            0.45***               0.19***            0.21***
                                  (0.06)             (0.07)                (0.04)             (0.05)
 SalesGrowth, t                  0.09***            0.10***                -0.02*            -0.04**
                                  (0.02)             (0.03)                (0.01)             (0.02)
 PPE/Assets, t-1                   0.28               0.47                  -0.02              -0.12
                                  (0.49)             (0.57)                (0.29)             (0.34)
 Debt/Assets, t-1                  0.12               0.01                   0.06               0.09
                                  (0.15)             (0.17)                (0.09)             (0.11)
 Observations                    126,933            111,831               126,933            111,831
 Adjusted R-squared               0.51               0.51                  0.29               0.29




                                                  44
              Table VII: Environmental spills and cash flow in the cross-section
This table presents esimates from OLS regressions of spill incidence on firm-level characteristics,
including interactions with proxies for the degree to which a firm is likely to be cash-constrained.
The unit of observation is a firm-year. The dependent variables is the number of spills. See Table
II for definitions of the explanatory variables. All regressions include firm and industry-year fixed
effects, where industry is measured as the firm’s primary 2-digit SIC code. Standard errors clustered
at the firm level are reported in parentheses below each point estimate. ***, **, and * indicate
statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively, based on a two-tailed t-test.

                                                            (1)          (2)               (3)

 CashFlow/Assets, time t                                 -0.004***    -0.005***         -0.004***
                                                           (0.001)     (0.002)           (0.001)
 CashFlow/Assets, t-1                                    -0.005***    -0.010***         -0.006***
                                                           (0.002)     (0.002)           (0.002)
 (CashFlow/Assets, t) × (Debt/Assets, t-1)                -0.004**
                                                           (0.002)
 (CashFlow/Assets, t-1) × (Debt/Assets, t-2)                -0.003
                                                           (0.002)
 (CashFlow/Assets, t) × log(Assets, t-1)                                 0.001
                                                                        (0.001)
 (CashFlow/Assets, t-1) × log(Assets, t-2)                             0.004***
                                                                        (0.001)
 (CashFlow/Assets, t) × (Dividends/Assets, t-1)                                           -0.267
                                                                                         (0.212)
 (CashFlow/Assets, t-1) × (Dividends/Assets, t-2)                                         0.038
                                                                                         (0.134)
 Log(Assets), t-1                                        0.014***      0.012***         0.014***
                                                          (0.002)       (0.002)          (0.002)
 SalesGrowth, t                                          0.001***      0.001***         0.002***
                                                          (0.001)       (0.001)          (0.001)
 PPE/Assets, t-1                                            0.020        0.018             0.019
                                                          (0.013)       (0.013)          (0.013)
 Debt/Assets, t-1                                           0.000        0.001             0.002
                                                          (0.004)       (0.004)          (0.004)
 Debt/Assets, t-2                                          -0.001
                                                          (0.003)
 Log(Assets), t-2                                                      0.003**
                                                                       (0.001)
 Dividends/Assets, t-1                                                                    -0.013
                                                                                         (0.063)
 Dividends/Assets, t-2                                                                    0.084
                                                                                         (0.052)
 Observations                                            111,922       112,072          111,436
 Adjusted R-squared                                       0.728         0.728            0.727




                                                    45
Table VIII: Comparision of characteristics of treated and control firms in AJCA and crisis
experiments
This table presents comparisons of the mean pre-treatment values of observable characteristics
for treatment and control firms in the two quasi-natural experiments that we analyze. Panel A
presents the comparisons for the AJCA experiment. A firm is in the treatment group in the AJCA
experiment if it reported positive cumulative foreign profits over the three years prior to 2004 (the
year of the AJCA). Panel B presents the comparisons for the financial crisis experiment. A firm
is in the treatment group in the financial crisis experiment if its debt due in the next year divided
by assets as of fiscal year end 2007 is greater than a specified threshold. We use three separate
thresholds: 0.07, 0.05, and 0.03. The control group for each treatment group is constructed via
propensity score matching without replacement.

                                             Panel A: AJCA
                                 PosFrgnProf                                 Control
 CashFlow/Assets                    0.084                                     0.084
 Log(Assets)                        6.829                                     6.867
 SalesGrowth                        0.111                                     0.100
 PPE/Assets                         0.249                                     0.250
 Debt/Assets                        0.069                                     0.058
 Spills/year                       0.254**                                    0.175
 Firms                               886                                       886

                                        Panel B: Financial crisis
                        0.07 cutoff                     0.05 cutoff                  0.03 cutoff
                    HighMat Control                 HighMat Control              HighMat Control
 CashFlow/Assets     -0.214    -0.181                   -0.151      -0.136         -0.096    -0.095
 Log(Assets)          5.271    5.381                    5.544        5.739          5.753     5.860
 SalesGrowth          0.418    0.374                     0.390       0.457        0.319**     0.216
 PPE/Assets          0.306     0.306                    0.310        0.311          0.316     0.330
 Debt/Assets         0.265     0.270                    0.239        0.230          0.213     0.212
 Spills/year         0.747      0.767                    0.099       0.084          0.116     0.136
 Firms                 348       348                      478         478            771       771




                                                   46
                        Table IX: Difference-in-differences around AJCA
This table presents difference-in-differences analysis of the change in number of spills after the
American Jobs Creation Act of 2004 for firms with and without recent foreign profits prior to
the Act. The sample consists of firm-year observations in the periods 2001-2003 and 2005-2007
for matched treatment and control groups. The dependent variable is the number of spills. The
indicator P osF rgnP rof takes a value of one if the firm’s cumulative reported foreign profits in 2001-
2003 were positive and zero otherwise. The indicator P ost2004 takes a value of one for observations
in the period 2005-2007 and zero for observations in the period 2001-2003. The indicators Y earT
take a value of one for observations in year T , T = 2005, 2006, 2007, and zero otherwise. The
indicator Y ear2006 − 07 takes a value of one for observations in the years 2006 and 2007 and zero
otherwise. All regressions include firm and year fixed effects. Standard errors clustered at the firm
level are reported in parentheses below each point estimate. ***, **, and * indicate statistical
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively, based on a two-tailed t-test.

                                 (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)         (5)          (6)

 Post2004 * PosFrgnProf        -0.024*                               -0.025*
                               (0.013)                               (0.014)
 Year2005 * PosFrgnProf                      -0.014       -0.014                   -0.015      -0.015
                                            (0.016)      (0.016)                  (0.016)     (0.016)
 Year2006 * PosFrgnProf                      -0.017                                -0.019
                                            (0.018)                               (0.018)
 Year2007 * PosFrgnProf                    -0.043**                              -0.044**
                                            (0.018)                               (0.018)
 Year2006-07 * PosFrgnProf                               -0.030*                             -0.031**
                                                         (0.016)                              (0.016)
 Controls                         No          No           No          Yes         Yes         Yes
 Observations                   12,063      12,063       12,063      11,890       11,890      11,890
 Adjusted R2                    0.815       0.815        0.815        0.816       0.816       0.816




                                                    47
                    Table X: Difference-in-differences around financial crisis
This table presents difference-in-differences analysis of the change in number of spills after the onset
of the financial crisis for firms with and without high levels of debt maturing within one year as
of the onset. The sample consists of firm-year observations between 2005 and 2010 for matched
treatment and control groups. The dependent variable is the number of spills. The indicator
HighM at takes a value of one if a firm has debt due within one year as of the end of fiscal year
2007 divided by total assets exceeding a specified threshold. The thresholds in Panels A, B, and C
are 0.07, 0.05, and 0.03, respectively. The indicator P ost2007 takes a value of one for observations
in the period 2008-2010 and zero for observations in the period 2005-2007. The indicators Y earT
take a value of one for observations in year T , T = 2008, 2009, 2010, and zero otherwise. The
indicator Y ear2009 − 10 takes a value of one for observations in the years 2009 and 2010 and zero
otherwise. All regressions include firm and year fixed effects. Standard errors clustered at the firm
level are reported in parentheses below each point estimate. ***, **, and * indicate statistical
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively, based on a two-tailed t-test.

                        Panel A: HighMat = 1 if DebtDueIn1Year/Assets ≥ 0.07
                              (1)          (2)             (3)       (4)           (5)          (6)

 Post2007 * HighMat          0.013                                  0.011
                            (0.012)                                (0.013)
 Year2008 * HighMat                        -0.024         -0.024                 -0.026        -0.026
                                          (0.017)        (0.017)                (0.018)       (0.018)
 Year2009 * HighMat                        0.026                                  0.025
                                          (0.019)                               (0.020)
 Year2010 * HighMat                      0.047***                               0.048**
                                          (0.017)                               (0.019)
 Year2009-10 * HighMat                                   0.036**                             0.036**
                                                         (0.015)                             (0.016)
 Controls                     No           No              No        Yes          Yes          Yes
 Observations                3,973        3,973           3,973     3,779        3,779        3,779
 Adjusted R2                 0.794        0.794           0.794     0.795        0.796        0.796




                                                    48
                Table X: Financial Crisis (continued from previous page)

                        Panel B: HighMat = 1 if DebtDueIn1Year/Assets ≥ 0.05
                              (1)         (2)            (3)        (4)          (5)        (6)

Post2007 * HighMat          0.024*                                0.028*
                            (0.014)                               (0.015)
Year2008 * HighMat                       0.012          0.012                   0.016      0.016
                                        (0.015)        (0.015)                 (0.016)    (0.016)
Year2009 * HighMat                       0.018                                  0.023
                                        (0.019)                                (0.020)
Year2010 * HighMat                      0.044**                                0.050**
                                        (0.019)                                (0.020)
Year2009-10 * HighMat                                  0.030*                             0.036**
                                                       (0.017)                            (0.018)
Controls                      No          No             No        Yes           Yes        Yes
Observations                 5,481       5,481          5,481     5,208         5,208      5,208
Adjusted R2                  0.739       0.739          0.739     0.741         0.741      0.741


                     Panel C: HighMat = 1 if DebtDueIn1Year/Assets ≥ 0.03
                              (1)         (2)            (3)        (4)          (5)        (6)

Post2007 * HighMat           0.003                                 0.007
                            (0.012)                               (0.012)
Year2008 * HighMat                     -0.034**        -0.034**                -0.031**   -0.031**
                                        (0.014)         (0.014)                 (0.015)    (0.015)
Year2009 * HighMat                      0.030*                                 0.034**
                                        (0.017)                                 (0.017)
Year2010 * HighMat                       0.020                                   0.024
                                        (0.016)                                 (0.017)
Year2009-10 * HighMat                                  0.025*                             0.030**
                                                       (0.014)                            (0.014)
Controls                      No          No             No        Yes           Yes        Yes
Observations                 8,872       8,872          8,872     8,486         8,486      8,486
Adjusted R2                  0.790       0.791          0.791     0.794         0.794      0.794




                                                  49
                     Appendix A.               Data Appendix
    In this section, we describe in detail the procedure by which we match firms in the
National Response Center (NRC) database to firms in the Compustat database. Matches
are year-specific. A spill can only match to one company-year in Compustat, but a company-
year can be matched to multiple spills. We adopt a heirarchial matching procedure, where
we first identify the highest-quality matches and then consider the possibility of lower quality
matches for the remaining spills.

Basic processing First, we standardize the naming conventions in both the NRC and
Compustat databases by replacing words like “company” and “corporation” with their ab-
breviations (i.e., “co”, “corp”, etc). We also replace the word “and” with the symbol “&”,
remove all punctuation, and convert all text to lower case.
   Compustat reports both a firm’s “legal name” and its “common name”, while the NRC
database has only one entry with a company’s name (“responsible company”). We first
identify spills where there is perfect agreement between either a firm’s legal name and the
responsible company name or a firm’s common name and the responsible company name.
This yields 4,400 “perfect” matches. We then identify 3-digit SIC codes in the Compustat
database that never appear among the perfect matches and drop all Compustat firm-years in
these sectors from further consideration (7,955 company-year observations out of 271,930).
This step is done to minimize false positives. Next, we remove the following common suffixes
from company names in both datasets: “corp”, “co”, “inc”, “llc”, “ltd”, “plc”, “comp”,
“coop”, and “lp”. We repeat the string matching again, and add the resulting new matches
to our set of perfect matches. At this point, the matched database will include all firms
whose names match exactly or only differ by a suffix.

Non-perfect matches To aid us in identifying less straightforward matches, we next
calculate the frequency of each word in the responsible company name in the entire NRC
database and identify the 200 top common words and their variations that are also common
English words. For example, we exclude the word “Chevron” from this list of common words
because even though it appears frequently in the NRC database, it is not a common English
word. However, we do include proper nouns and adjectives such as “American”, provided
they are sufficiently general. The final word list is available upon request. As explained
below, this step is also done to minimize false matches.
    Next, we calculate the “similarity ratio” between the responsible party name for each of

                                              50
the unmatched spills and the firm legal and common names in the Compustat database for
that year. The similarity ratio for a pair of strings is defined as 2 MT
                                                                         . M is the number of
matching elements and cannot be larger than the length of the shorter string; T is the total
number of elements in the two strings. Thus, the similarity ratio is bounded below by zero
(two strings with no common letters) and bounded above by 1 (two identical strings). To
implement this comparison, we use SequenceMatcher from the difflib library in Python. We
differentiate the results by whether (a) the common words in company names, if any, match
and (b) whether the firms’ reported locations match. Intuitively, we should discount pairs
with high similarity ratios if the names contain common words and have higher confidence
in matches if the reported firm locations are the same.
    Specifically, if firm names in the two datasets each contain a common word and the
common words do not match (after allowing for word varitions), we classify the pair as
a non-match. If the common words do match (again, allowing for word variations), if one
company name contains a common word but the other does not, or if neither company name
contains a common word, we compare the non-common parts of the responsible company
name to the Compustat company names. If the common words match up to simple word
variations and the non-common parts match perfectly, we record the pair as a match. This
step adds 8,653 matched spills where slight differences in common words between company
names exist.
    The remaining pairs are further split into four categories, ranked by the expected like-
lihood that the pairs are a true match: (1) common words and locations both match; (2)
common words match but locations do not; (3) at most one name contains common words
and locations match; and (4) at most one name contains common words and locations do
not match.
    It is not feasible to manually check all the imperfectly matched pairs. Instead, for each
of these categories, we visually inspected the data to determine similarity ratio cutoffs above
which roughly 90 percent of the pairs looked like true matches. Pairs with similarity ratios
above these cutoffs were recorded as matches. Similarly, we determined similarity ratio
cutoffs below which only 25 percent or so of pairs looked like true matches. Pairs with
similarity ratios below these cutoffs did not qualify as matches. The lower and upper bounds
as well as the number of matches (i.e., pairs whose similarity ratio exceeds the upper bound)
for each category are shown in Table B3.
    In a few cases, the procedure for determining non-perfect matches results in the same
responsible company matching to two different Compustat companies (i.e., because both


                                              51
pairs will exceed the relevant threshold in the same category or in different categories).
Visual inspection of such cases revealed that it would be difficult to systematically determine
the match status in such cases, and they were dropped from the set of possible matches.

Mechanical Turk Pairs with similarity ratios between the lower and upper bounds in
their respective category in Table B3 were manually reviewed by Mechanical Turk workers to
determine if they are a likely match. The total number of potential matches in this category
was 13,957. However, because these pairs are year-specific, only 6,067 pairs spanning all
unique name combinations were necessary to classify the uncertain matches.
   Each worker was asked to “evaluate whether two sets of information identify the same
company.” The overall instructions given to the worker were as follows.
      You will be given the name of a company responsible for a chemical spill. You
      will also be given information about a “suspect company”, including its name,
      industry, and a desription of what it does. Your task will be to decide if the two
      match.

Each entry was laid out as follows, with italicized text indicating which pieces of information
the workers received.

     Give your opinion about the likelihood that the two companies
     about which information is provided below are the same company.
     Company responsible for spilling material such as oil or hazardous
     waste

         • Company Name: Name of responsible company


     Suspect Company

         • Company Name: Legal name of Compustat company

         • Industry Sector: Description of the company’s 3-digit SIC code

         • Business Description: Business description of Compustat company


The workers were then asked to answer:
     How likely is it that the responsible company and the suspect company are the
     same company?

                                              52
           Very likely

           Somewhat likely

           No opinion

           Somewhat unlikely

           Very unlikely


   Each pair of potential matches was reviewed by three Mechanical Turk workers. Workers
could review multiple pairs but could not review the same pair twice. A pair was deemed a
match if at least two workers said that it was “very” or “somewhat” likely that the responsible
company and the suspect company were the same company. As a result, 8,057 matched pairs
were added to our database and 5,900 non-matches were discarded.




                                              53
                      Appendix B.               Appendix Tables

                      Table B1: Robustness to ignoring imperfect matches
This table presents esimates from OLS regressions of spill incidence on firm-level characteristics.
The unit of observation is a firm-year. The dependent variables is the number of spills. See Table
II for definitions of the explanatory variables. All regressions include firm and industry-year fixed
effects, where industry is measured as the firm’s primary 2-digit SIC code. Standard errors clustered
at the firm level are reported in parentheses below each point estimate. ***, **, and * indicate
statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively, based on a two-tailed t-test.

                                 (1)            (2)           (3)            (4)            (5)

 CashFlow/Assets, time t       -0.002**      -0.002**      -0.002***      -0.002**       -0.002**
                                (0.001)       (0.001)        (0.001)       (0.001)        (0.001)
 CashFlow/Assets, time t-1    -0.003***      -0.003**       -0.002**      -0.002**       -0.002**
                                (0.001)       (0.001)        (0.001)       (0.001)        (0.001)
 Log(Assets), t-1             0.008***       0.008***       0.008***      0.008***       0.008***
                                (0.001)       (0.001)        (0.001)       (0.001)        (0.001)
 SalesGrowth, t                              0.001**        0.001**        0.001**       0.001**
                                              (0.000)        (0.000)       (0.000)        (0.000)
 PPE/Assets, t-1                                              0.011         0.012          0.012
                                                             (0.010)       (0.010)        (0.010)
 Debt/Assets, t-1                                             0.002         0.002          0.002
                                                             (0.003)       (0.003)        (0.003)
 Capex/Assets, t                                                            0.008           0.009
                                                                           (0.008)        (0.008)
 Sales/Assets, t                                                                           -0.001
                                                                                          (0.001)
 Observations                  126,933        126,933       126,933        126,933        126,933
 Adjusted R-squared             0.700          0.700         0.700          0.700          0.700
 Fixed effects               gvkey, SIC-    gvkey, SIC-   gvkey, SIC-    gvkey, SIC-    gvkey, SIC-
                              2-by-year      2-by-year     2-by-year      2-by-year      2-by-year




                                                 54
                    Table B2: Robustness to excluding industries with few spills
This table presents esimates from OLS regressions of spill incidence on firm-level characteristics,
excluding 3-digit SIC industries that average fewer than 0.01 spills per firm-year. The unit of
observation is a firm-year. The dependent variables is the number of spills. See Table II for
definitions of the explanatory variables. Standard errors clustered at the firm level are reported in
parentheses below each point estimate. All regressions include firm and industry-year fixed effects,
where industry is measured as the firm’s primary 2-digit SIC code. ***, **, and * indicate statistical
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively, based on a two-tailed t-test.

                                   (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)            (5)

 CashFlow/Assets, time t         -0.004**     -0.004**      -0.005***       -0.004**       -0.005**
                                  (0.002)      (0.002)        (0.002)        (0.002)        (0.002)
 CashFlow/Assets, time t-1      -0.008***    -0.007***      -0.006***      -0.006***      -0.007***
                                  (0.002)      (0.002)        (0.002)        (0.002)        (0.002)
 Log(Assets), t-1               0.016***      0.016***       0.016***      0.017***        0.017***
                                  (0.002)      (0.002)        (0.002)        (0.002)        (0.002)
 SalesGrowth, t                              0.002***       0.002***       0.002***       0.002***
                                               (0.001)        (0.001)        (0.001)        (0.001)
 PPE/Assets, t-1                                               0.018          0.019          0.019
                                                              (0.015)        (0.015)        (0.015)
 Debt/Assets, t-1                                              0.002          0.003          0.002
                                                              (0.005)        (0.005)        (0.005)
 Capex/Assets, t                                                              0.018          0.016
                                                                             (0.012)        (0.013)
 Sales/Assets, t                                                                             0.001
                                                                                            (0.002)
 Observations                    93,740        93,740        93,740         93,740          93,740
 Adjusted R-squared               0.723         0.723         0.723          0.723          0.723
 Fixed effects                 gvkey, SIC-   gvkey, SIC-   gvkey, SIC-    gvkey, SIC-    gvkey, SIC-
                                2-by-year     2-by-year     2-by-year      2-by-year      2-by-year




                                                  55
           Table B3: Similarity ratio cutoffs for imperfect matches, by category

Category                                  Lower bound    Upper bound    Number of matches
Common words and locations both match            0.50        0.61                  73

Common words match but locations do not          0.66        0.84             1,109

At most one name contains common words;          0.62        0.90             1,316
locations match
At most one name contains common words;          0.85        0.95             4,693
locations do not match




                                            56
 Table B4: Difference-in-differences around AJCA - matching on pre-AJCA spill rate only
This table presents difference-in-differences analysis of the change in number of spills after the
American Jobs Creation Act of 2004 for firms with and without recent foreign profits prior to the
Act. The sample consists of firm-year observations in the periods 2001-2003 and 2005-2007 for
matched treatment and control groups. Controls here are matched only on similarity of spills per
year over the period 2001-2003. The dependent variable is the number of spills. The indicator
P osF rgnP rof takes a value of one if the firm’s cumulative reported foreign profits in 2001-2003
were positive and zero otherwise. The indicator P ost2004 takes a value of one for observations in
the period 2005-2007 and zero for observations in the period 2001-2003. The indicators Y earT take
a value of one for observations in year T , T = 2005, 2006, 2007, and zero otherwise. The indicator
Y ear2006 − 07 takes a value of one for observations in the years 2006 and 2007 and zero otherwise.
All regressions include firm and year fixed effects. Standard errors clustered at the firm level are
reported in parentheses below each point estimate. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance
at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively, based on a two-tailed t-test.

                                (1)         (2)          (3)        (4)         (5)         (6)

 Post2004 * PosFrgnProf        -0.015                              -0.019
                              (0.014)                             (0.014)
 Year2005 * PosFrgnProf                     0.003       0.003                  -0.000      -0.000
                                          (0.018)      (0.018)                (0.018)     (0.018)
 Year2006 * PosFrgnProf                    -0.020                              -0.025
                                          (0.020)                             (0.020)
 Year2007 * PosFrgnProf                    -0.032                             -0.036*
                                          (0.020)                             (0.020)
 Year2006-07 * PosFrgnProf                              -0.026                            -0.030*
                                                       (0.017)                            (0.017)
 Controls                        No          No          No          Yes        Yes         Yes
 Observations                  12,064      12,064      12,064      11,899      11,899      11,899
 Adjusted R2                   0.808       0.808       0.808        0.809      0.809       0.809




                                                  57
        Table B5: Difference-in-differences around AJCA, matching within industry
This table presents difference-in-differences analysis of the change in number of spills after the
American Jobs Creation Act of 2004 for firms with and without recent foreign profits prior to the
Act. The sample consists of firm-year observations in the periods 2001-2003 and 2005-2007 for
matched treatment and control groups. Treatment and control firms are matched within 2-digit
SIC industry. The dependent variable is the number of spills. The indicator P osF rgnP rof takes
a value of one if the firm’s cumulative reported foreign profits in 2001-2003 were positive and zero
otherwise. The indicator P ost2004 takes a value of one for observations in the period 2005-2007
and zero for observations in the period 2001-2003. The indicators Y earT take a value of one for
observations in year T , T = 2005, 2006, 2007, and zero otherwise. The indicator Y ear2006 − 07
takes a value of one for observations in the years 2006 and 2007 and zero otherwise. All regressions
include firm and year fixed effects. Standard errors clustered at the firm level are reported in
parentheses below each point estimate. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%,
5%, and 10% level, respectively, based on a two-tailed t-test.

                                (1)         (2)          (3)        (4)         (5)         (6)

 Post2004 * PosFrgnProf        -0.006                              -0.007
                              (0.014)                             (0.014)
 Year2005 * PosFrgnProf                     0.003       0.003                   0.002      0.002
                                          (0.016)      (0.016)                (0.017)     (0.017)
 Year2006 * PosFrgnProf                    -0.011                              -0.011
                                          (0.020)                             (0.020)
 Year2007 * PosFrgnProf                    -0.012                              -0.013
                                          (0.019)                             (0.019)
 Year2006-07 * PosFrgnProf                              -0.011                             -0.012
                                                       (0.017)                            (0.017)
 Controls                        No          No          No          Yes        Yes         Yes
 Observations                  10,543      10,543      10,543      10,387      10,387      10,387
 Adjusted R2                   0.797       0.797       0.797        0.797      0.797       0.797




                                                  58
    Table B6: Difference-in-differences around financial crisis, matching within industry
This table presents difference-in-differences analysis of the change in number of spills after the onset
of the financial crisis for firms with and without high levels of debt maturing within one year as
of the onset. The sample consists of firm-year observations between 2005 and 2010 for matched
treatment and control groups. Treatment and control firms are matched within 2-digit SIC industry.
The dependent variable is the number of spills. The indicator HighM at takes a value of one if a
firm has debt due within one year as of the end of fiscal year 2007 divided by total assets exceeding
a specified threshold. The thresholds in Panels A, B, and C are 0.07, 0.05, and 0.03, respectively.
The indicator P ost2007 takes a value of one for observations in the period 2008-2010 and zero for
observations in the period 2005-2007. The indicators Y earT take a value of one for observations
in year T , T = 2008, 2009, 2010, and zero otherwise. The indicator Y ear2009 − 10 takes a value
of one for observations in the years 2009 and 2010 and zero otherwise. All regressions include firm
and year fixed effects. Standard errors clustered at the firm level are reported in parentheses below
each point estimate. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level,
respectively, based on a two-tailed t-test.

                         Panel A: HighMat = 1 if DebtDueIn1Year/Assets ≥ 0.07
                               (1)         (2)            (3)        (4)          (5)           (6)

 Post2007 * HighMat           0.019                                 0.020
                             (0.012)                               (0.013)
 Year2008 * HighMat                       0.001          0.001                    0.001        0.000
                                         (0.015)        (0.015)                  (0.016)      (0.016)
 Year2009 * HighMat                       0.007                                   0.010
                                         (0.020)                                 (0.021)
 Year2010 * HighMat                     0.056***                                0.060***
                                         (0.020)                                 (0.021)
 Post2009-10 * HighMat                                  0.030*                                0.033*
                                                        (0.015)                               (0.017)
 Controls                     No           No            No          Yes          Yes          Yes
 Observations                3,853        3,853         3,853       3,646        3,646        3,646
 Adjusted R2                 0.809        0.810         0.809       0.811        0.812        0.811




                                                   59
                Table B6: Financial Crisis (continued from previous page)

                        Panel B: HighMat = 1 if DebtDueIn1Year/Assets ≥ 0.05
                              (1)         (2)            (3)       (4)           (5)       (6)

Post2007 * HighMat           0.005                                0.006
                            (0.013)                              (0.014)
Year2008 * HighMat                       -0.021         -0.021                  -0.018    -0.018
                                        (0.017)        (0.017)                 (0.018)   (0.018)
Year2009 * HighMat                        0.015                                 0.017
                                        (0.017)                                (0.018)
Year2010 * HighMat                        0.026                                 0.028
                                        (0.019)                                (0.020)
Post2009-10 * HighMat                                   0.020                             0.022
                                                       (0.014)                           (0.015)
Controls                     No           No             No       Yes            Yes       Yes
Observations                5,345        5,345          5,345    5,113          5,113     5,113
Adjusted R2                 0.758        0.759          0.759    0.763          0.764     0.764


                        Panel C: HighMat = 1 if DebtDueIn1Year/Assets ≥ 0.03
                              (1)         (2)            (3)       (4)           (5)       (6)

Post2007 * HighMat           0.015                                0.017
                            (0.011)                              (0.011)
Year2008 * HighMat                       -0.008         -0.008                  -0.006    -0.006
                                        (0.013)        (0.013)                 (0.013)   (0.013)
Year2009 * HighMat                        0.024                                 0.026
                                        (0.016)                                (0.016)
Year2010 * HighMat                      0.035**                                0.037**
                                        (0.015)                                (0.016)
Post2009-10 * HighMat                                  0.029**                           0.031**
                                                       (0.013)                           (0.014)
Controls                     No           No             No       Yes            Yes       Yes
Observations                8,537        8,537          8,537    8,186          8,186     8,186
Adjusted R2                 0.782        0.782          0.782    0.786          0.786     0.786




                                                  60
Table B7: Difference-in-differences around AJCA, matching within industry, alternative fixed
effects
This table presents difference-in-differences analysis of the change in number of spills after the
American Jobs Creation Act of 2004 for firms with and without recent foreign profits prior to the
Act. The sample consists of firm-year observations in the periods 2001-2003 and 2005-2007 for
matched treatment and control groups. Treatment and control firms are matched within 2-digit
SIC industry. The dependent variable is the number of spills. The indicator P osF rgnP rof takes
a value of one if the firm’s cumulative reported foreign profits in 2001-2003 were positive and zero
otherwise. The indicator P ost2004 takes a value of one for observations in the period 2005-2007
and zero for observations in the period 2001-2003. The indicators Y earT take a value of one for
observations in year T , T = 2005, 2006, 2007, and zero otherwise. The indicator Y ear2006 − 07
takes a value of one for observations in the years 2006 and 2007 and zero otherwise. All regressions
include 2-digit SIC industry by year and 3-digit SIC industry fixed effects. Standard errors clustered
at the firm level are reported in parentheses below each point estimate. ***, **, and * indicate
statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively, based on a two-tailed t-test.

                                 (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)

 Post2004 * PosFrgnProf         -0.036                             -0.046**
                               (0.023)                              (0.023)
 Year2005 * PosFrgnProf                     -0.017       -0.017                  -0.033      -0.033
                                           (0.025)      (0.025)                 (0.025)     (0.025)
 Year2006 * PosFrgnProf                     -0.043                              -0.052*
                                           (0.027)                              (0.027)
 Year2007 * PosFrgnProf                    -0.051*                             -0.055**
                                           (0.027)                              (0.027)
 Year2006-07 * PosFrgnProf                              -0.047*                            -0.053**
                                                        (0.025)                             (0.025)
 Controls                        No          No           No          Yes        Yes         Yes
 Observations                  10,532      10,532       10,532      10,369      10,369      10,369
 Adjusted R2                   0.345       0.345        0.345        0.381      0.381       0.381




                                                   61
Table B8: Difference-in-differences around financial crisis, matching within industry, alter-
native fixed effects
This table presents difference-in-differences analysis of the change in number of spills after the onset
of the financial crisis for firms with and without high levels of debt maturing within one year as
of the onset. The sample consists of firm-year observations between 2005 and 2010 for matched
treatment and control groups. Treatment and control firms are matched within 2-digit SIC industry.
The dependent variable is the number of spills. The indicator HighM at takes a value of one if a
firm has debt due within one year as of the end of fiscal year 2007 divided by total assets exceeding
a specified threshold. The thresholds in Panels A, B, and C are 0.07, 0.05, and 0.03, respectively.
The indicator P ost2007 takes a value of one for observations in the period 2008-2010 and zero for
observations in the period 2005-2007. The indicators Y earT take a value of one for observations
in year T , T = 2008, 2009, 2010, and zero otherwise. The indicator Y ear2009 − 10 takes a value of
one for observations in the years 2009 and 2010 and zero otherwise. All regressions include 2-digit
SIC industry by year and 3-digit SIC industry fixed effects. Standard errors clustered at the firm
level are reported in parentheses below each point estimate. ***, **, and * indicate statistical
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively, based on a two-tailed t-test.

                        Panel A: HighMat = 1 if DebtDueIn1Year/Assets ≥ 0.07
                              (1)          (2)            (3)        (4)           (5)          (6)

 Post2007 * HighMat          0.034                                  0.032
                            (0.026)                                (0.025)
 Year2008 * HighMat                       0.011          0.011                   0.008         0.008
                                         (0.027)        (0.027)                 (0.026)       (0.026)
 Year2009 * HighMat                       0.020                                  0.020
                                         (0.031)                                (0.031)
 Year2010 * HighMat                      0.079**                                0.079**
                                         (0.032)                                (0.033)
 Year2009-10 * HighMat                                  0.048*                                 0.047
                                                        (0.029)                               (0.029)
 Controls                     No           No            No          Yes          Yes          Yes
 Observations                3,843        3,843         3,843       3,634        3,634        3,634
 Adjusted R2                 0.378        0.379         0.378       0.402        0.403        0.402




                                                   62
               Table B8: Financial Crisis (continued from previous page)

                        Panel B: HighMat = 1 if DebtDueIn1Year/Assets ≥ 0.05
                              (1)         (2)            (3)        (4)          (5)        (6)

Post2007 * HighMat           0.036                                 0.032
                            (0.022)                               (0.021)
Year2008 * HighMat                        0.010         0.010                   0.005      0.005
                                        (0.023)        (0.023)                 (0.022)    (0.022)
Year2009 * HighMat                       0.048*                                0.045*
                                        (0.028)                                (0.027)
Year2010 * HighMat                      0.055**                                0.051*
                                        (0.027)                                (0.027)
Year2009-10 * HighMat                                  0.051**                            0.048**
                                                       (0.024)                            (0.024)
Controls                      No          No             No         Yes          Yes        Yes
Observations                 5,335       5,335          5,335      5,101        5,101      5,101
Adjusted R2                  0.273       0.273          0.273      0.317        0.318      0.318


                     Panel C: HighMat = 1 if DebtDueIn1Year/Assets ≥ 0.03
                              (1)         (2)            (3)        (4)          (5)        (6)

Post2007 * HighMat         0.044**                                0.047**
                           (0.019)                                (0.019)
Year2008 * HighMat                       0.022          0.022                    0.027     0.027
                                        (0.020)        (0.020)                  (0.020)   (0.020)
Year2009 * HighMat                      0.054**                                 0.058**
                                        (0.023)                                 (0.023)
Year2010 * HighMat                      0.059**                                0.060***
                                        (0.023)                                 (0.023)
Year2009-10 * HighMat                                  0.056***                           0.059***
                                                        (0.021)                            (0.021)
Controls                      No          No             No         Yes          Yes        Yes
Observations                 8,532       8,532          8,532      8,181        8,181      8,181
Adjusted R2                  0.236       0.236          0.236      0.267        0.267      0.267




                                                  63
