                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     THE PRODUCTION OF COGNITIVE AND NON-COGNITIVE HUMAN CAPITAL
                        IN THE GLOBAL ECONOMY

                                          Chong Xiang
                                         Stephen Yeaple

                                      Working Paper 24524
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24524


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                           April 2018, Revised February 2019




Chong Xiang gratefully acknowledges financial support from the Purdue University Research
Center of Economics, or PURCE (2015). Stephen Yeaple's contribution to this paper was funded
in part by National Science Foundation Research Grant (SES-1360209, 2014-2017). The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Chong Xiang and Stephen Yeaple. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Production of Cognitive and Non-cognitive Human Capital in the Global Economy
Chong Xiang and Stephen Yeaple
NBER Working Paper No. 24524
April 2018, Revised February 2019
JEL No. F16,F63,F66,I21,I25,I26,O15,O43,O47

                                          ABSTRACT

A country’s welfare depends on its ability to accumulate cognitive and non-cognitive human
capital. In this paper, we model the productions of cognitive and non-cognitive human capital in
general equilibrium. We use revealed comparative advantage to infer countries’ non-cognitive
and cognitive productivities without a direct measure for the non-cognitive dimension. Our model
also delivers analytical expressions for how non- cognitive and cognitive productivities can be
aggregated into a single human-capital quality index, or HCQI, and how HCQI relates to output
per worker.

Our model allows us to obtain the values of non-cognitive and cognitive productivities and
HCQI, using publically available data for a sample of mostly high-income countries. We find
that: 1. many countries with low test scores have high non-cognitive productivities; 2. the hard-
to-measure non-cognitive human capital is important for HCQI, and HCQI is important for output
per worker; 3. the trade-o¤ between cognitive- and non-cognitive productivities can be visualized
and analyzed using an iso-HCQI curve: e.g. uneven cognitive and non-cognitive productivities
tend to lower HCQI; 4. this trade-o¤ can be quantified, and has policy implications: e.g. excessive
attention to test scores may decrease aggregate output; 5. international trade matters,
theoretically, for HCQI, because the gains from trade help to compensate a country for uneven
productivity across human capital types: e.g. the iso-HCQI curve would have a very different
shape under free trade.


Chong Xiang
Department of Economics
Purdue University
403 West State Street
West Lafayette, IN 47907-2506
cxiang@purdue.edu

Stephen Yeaple
Department of Economics
The Pennsylvania State University
520 Kern Building
University Park, PA 16802-3306
and NBER
sry3@psu.edu
      The Production of Cognitive and Non-cognitive
         Human Capital in the Global Economy
                           Chong Xiang, Purdue University
            Stephen Ross Yeaple, Penn State University and NBER

                                        January 2019


                                           Abstract

         A country’s welfare depends on its ability to accumulate cognitive and non-cognitive
     human capital. In this paper, we model the productions of cognitive and non-cognitive
     human capital in general equilibrium. We use revealed comparative advantage to infer
     countries’non-cognitive and cognitive productivities without a direct measure for the
     non-cognitive dimension. Our model also delivers analytical expressions for how non-
     cognitive and cognitive productivities can be aggregated into a single human-capital
     quality index, or HCQI, and how HCQI relates to output per worker.
         Our model allows us to obtain the values of non-cognitive and cognitive productivi-
     ties and HCQI, using publically available data for a sample of mostly high-income coun-
     tries. We …nd that: 1. many countries with low test scores have high non-cognitive pro-
     ductivities; 2. the hard-to-measure non-cognitive human capital is important for HCQI,
     and HCQI is important for output per worker; 3. the trade-o¤ between cognitive- and
     non-cognitive productivities can be visualized and analyzed using an iso-HCQI curve:
     e.g. uneven cognitive and non-cognitive productivities tend to lower HCQI; 4. this
     trade-o¤ can be quanti…ed, and has policy implications: e.g. excessive attention to test
     scores may decrease aggregate output; 5. international trade matters, theoretically, for
     HCQI, because the gains from trade help to compensate a country for uneven produc-
     tivity across human capital types: e.g. the iso-HCQI curve would have a very di¤erent
     shape under free trade.



1    Introduction
Human capital is central to both economics and other social sciences, and so it is important to
understand how well countries produce their human capital. A large body of work quanti…es
human capital for cross-country comparison (e.g. Mankiw, Romer and Weil 1992, Barro

                                                1
and Sala-i-Martin 1995, Klenow and Rodriguez-Clare 1997, Hall and Jones 1999, Bils and
Klenow 2000, Hendricks 2002, Caselli 2005, Caselli and Coleman 2006, Erosa, Koreshkova
and Restuccia 2010, Schoellman 2012, Jones 2014, Manuelli and Seshadri 2014, Malmberg
2017). These studies consider a single type of human capital.1
    Human capital, however, is multi-dimensional. Consider scores on international assess-
ment tests, an often-used metric for human capital in the literature (e.g. Hanushek and
Kimko 2000, Hanushek and Woessmann 2011, Cubas, Ravikumar and Ventura 2016). The
best known of these tests is PISA. The U.S.’low PISA scores have alarmed policy makers2
and motivated major policy changes (e.g. No Child Left Behind of 2001 and Race to the
Top of 2009) in the U.S. Like the U.S., many other countries worry that their test scores are
too low (e.g. U.K., Slovakia and Qatar).3
    Oddly, many countries whose students excel in international exams worry that their
test scores are too high! i.e. their educational systems overemphasize formal examination
pro…ciency, and their students spend too much time studying for exams.4 This concern has
also in‡uenced policy; e.g. the Education Ministry in China declared a ban on homework
assignments for young children in August 2013, and South Korea declared a 10 pm curfew on
private tutoring. The fear is that the educational systems emphasize testing to such a degree
that students do not e¤ectively develop soft, or non-cognitive, skills, such as leadership, co-
operation, and communication.
    The multi-dimensionality of human capital poses challenges for researchers; e.g. how to
quantify multiple types of human capital, and what is the appropriate aggregation? If the
policy implication is to increase human capital, which type to increase? On top of these, the
second dimension is non-cognitive. While the importance of non-cognitive skills has been
clearly established (e.g. Heckman and Rubinstein 2001), many of them do not show up in test
scores (e.g. Heckman and Kautz 2012). Hanushek and Woessmann (2011) recognize that “the
systematic measurement of such skills has yet to be possible in international comparisons”.
Lundberg (2017) agrees that "we are far ... from a clear understanding of how to ... measure
non-cognitive skills in a way that would allow for meaningful cross-country analysis".5
   1
      The focus on a single type of human capital is also common for other literatures. e.g. the studies on
how international trade a¤ects skill acquisition examine years of schooling (e.g. Findlay and Kierzkowski
1983, Atkin 2016, Li 2016, Blanchard and Olney 2017).
    2
      e.g. President Obama said that the nation that "out-educates us today will out-compete us tomorrow."
    3
      For example, in February 2014, Elizabeth Truss, the U.K. education minister, visited Shanghai, China,
whose test score is much higher than the U.K.’s, to “learn a lesson a math”.
    4
      For example, the Wall Street Journal reports that “A typical East Asian high school student often must
follow a 5 a.m. to midnight compressed schedule, …lled with class instruction followed by private institute
courses, for up to six days a week, with little or no room for socializing” (February 29, 2012), and that
“many students prepare for [the national college] entrance exams from an early age, often studying up to 16
hours a day for years to take these tests” (November 10, 2011).
    5
      An example for this challenge is Schmitt, Allik, McCrae and Benet-Martinez (2007), who conduct a

                                                     2
    In this paper, we take a …rst step in answering these questions. We develop a general
equilibrium (GE) framework to quantify how countries produce human capital along multiple
dimensions. Our model is based on two intuitive premises. The …rst premise is that peoples’
occupational choices reveal information about their skills at di¤erent types of tasks, and
these skills re‡ect di¤erent types of human capital. For example, a manager issues directions
and guidance to subordinates, while a secretary follows these orders and an engineer uses
the knowledge in math and science to solve problems. Intuitively, this allows us to infer
a country’s comparative advantage in fostering non-cognitive relative to cognitive human
capital from occupational choice data. The second premise is that countries’performances
on international exams are informative about their cognitive human capital.
    Our model then allows us to combine these two elements to infer countries’productivities
for both non-cognitive and cognitive human capital. In other words, we are able to make
cross-country comparisons for the non-cognitive dimension, without a direct measure for this
dimension. Intuitively, this is because revealed comparative advantage allows us to lean on
the measure for the cognitive dimension (test score) using occupational choice data. Our
model also allows us to aggregate the multi-dimensional di¤erences in cognitive and non-
cognitive productivities into a single metric, which we call human-capital quality index, or
HCQI.
    The main elements of our framework are as follows. We write down the production
functions of cognitive and non-cognitive human capital, where output (e¢ ciency-equivalent
units of human capital) depends on resources inputs and TFP (Total Factor Productivity).
TFP di¤ers across the two types of human capital, and also across countries. These TFP
parameters are countries’cognitive and non-cognitive productivities.
    We have heterogeneous workers make optimal decisions about which types of human
capital to invest in, and how much.6 They do so given their own comparative advantages
in non-cognitive and cognitive skills, as in Willis and Rosen (1979), which, in turn, are
determined by their innate abilities at birth and by the human capital that they accumulated.
When workers decide how much human capital to obtain, they factor in the returns of human
capital on the labor market, recognizing that non-cognitive and cognitive occupations require
di¤erent types of human capital. This implies that in our model, individual workers’human
capital accumulation is a¤ected by their occupational choices, which, in turn, depend on
cross-country survey of conscientiousness. The top nations for conscientiousness turn out to be Ethiopia and
the Democratic Republic of Congo, while the bottom ones include Japan and S. Korea.
   6
     We do so because researchers have long recognized that incentives matter for educational outcomes,
which is closely related to human capital production. Heckman and Kautz (2012) survey earlier studies,
which show that incentives, in the form of money or even candy, improve the scores of IQ tests. In more
recent work, Behrman, Parker, Todd, and Wolpin (2015) show that providing monetary incentives to Mexican
high-school students has substantial and immediate e¤ects on their test scores.



                                                     3
the non-cognitive and cognitive productivities of the economy. It then follows that this
comparative advantage is revealed by the ratio of occupation employment shares. Intuitively
speaking, the fact that many individuals in country k choose the non-cognitive occupation
suggests that country k has a strong comparative advantage for non-cognitive human capital.
    If, in addition, country k has a high cognitive productivity, then this country must also
have a high non-cognitive productivity. For cognitive productivities we use test scores as the
starting point, and remove the confounding factors of resources inputs and incentives under
the guidance of our GE model.
    Our GE model shows that HCQI is the weighted power mean of cognitive and non-
cognitive productivities, the weights being the employment shares of cognitive and non-
cognitive occupations. The power coe¢ cients of HCQI depend on both the supply elasticity,
which is governed by the dispersion of workers’innate abilities, and the demand elasticity,
which is the substitution-elasticity across di¤erent types of human capital in aggregate pro-
duction. In addition, the ratio of output per worker between any pair of countries can be
decomposed into a power function of HCQI, multiplied by a power function of the ratio of
output TFP. In other words, HCQI is the right index to quantify human capital according
to our model.
    We then infer the values of non-cognitive and cognitive productivities and compute HCQI,
using publically available data for a sample of mostly high-income countries. Our theoretical
and empirical results provide the following new perspectives.
    First, countries’rankings in non-cognitive and cognitive productivities are substantially
di¤erent from their PISA-score rankings. In particular, countries’non-cognitive-productivity
rankings have zero correlation with their PISA score rankings, many countries with low test
scores have high non-cognitive productivities (e.g. the U.S. and U.K.), and those with the
highest test scores do not necessarily have the highest cognitive productivities (e.g. S. Korea,
Hong Kong).
    Second, test scores are not informative about countries’ di¤erences in HCQI, either,
because most variation in HCQI comes from the non-cognitive dimension. In addition, these
di¤erences in HCQI are economically signi…cant. e.g. France’s HCQI is lower than the U.S.,
the e¤ect of which (according to our model) puts France’s output per worker at 91.15% of
the U.S. level.
    Third, we graph the combinations of cognitive and non-cognitive productivities that
produce the same HCQI. This iso-HCQI curve allows us to visualize and analyze the trade-
o¤ between cognitive and non-cognitive productivities in terms of overall quality. Speci…cally,
the countries with imbalanced human capital productivities, such as Portugal and S. Korea,
tend to have low HCQI. In addition, we can quantify this trade-o¤ using our model. e.g.
a 1% increase in U.S. cognitive productivity increases her output by 0:85%, but this payo¤


                                               4
shrinks to 0 if her non-cognitive productivity decreases by 2:95%.
    Fourth, this trade-o¤ has policy implications; e.g. test score and aggregate output may
move in opposite directions in our model. This is because test score primarily re‡ects cog-
nitive human capital, whereas both types of human capital are important for HCQI and
so aggregate output. e.g. a 1% increase in U.S. non-cognitive productivity increases U.S.
output by 0.29%, but decreases her test score by 0.05%. This message resonates with a large
body of applied-micro studies on early childhood intervention programs in the U.S.7 Here, a
common …nding is that the programs boost participants’adult outcome (e.g. higher wages),
but have little long-term e¤ects on their test scores. Quoting Chetty et al. (2011), the
results "suggest that policy makers may wish to rethink the objective of raising test scores
and evaluating interventions via long-term test score gains".
    Fifth, international trade matters, in theory. e.g. under free trade, the power coe¢ cients
of HCQI depend only on the supply elasticity, not on the demand elasticity. Intuitively, this
is because countries are no longer constrained by local labor-market demand, and imbalance
in human-capital productivities helps countries specialize and enjoy gains from trade. We
show that the iso-HCQI curve would have a very di¤erent shape under free trade. We also
show that the countries with strong comparative advantages (e.g. S. Korea, the Netherlands)
would see large changes in HCQI and enjoy large welfare gains under free trade.8 On the
other hand, in the open-economy setting with trade costs, the e¤ects of trade are summarized
by its factor content in terms of cognitive and non-cognitive human capital. Looking at our
data, we …nd small values of factor content trade, consistent with previous studies.9
    Finally, we provide two external validations for the values of our non-cognitive produc-
tivities and HCQI. First, we show that HCQI has more positive correlation with output per
worker than PISA score in our data. This is intuitive: test score mainly captures cognitive
human capital, and HCQI captures some non-cognitive human capital that test score has
missed. Second, we show that the countries with strong comparative advantages for non-
cognitive human capital tend to have high normalized net exports of non-cognitive-intensive
industries. This is also intuitive: cognitive and non-cognitive productivities are about the
supply of human capital, and abundance in relative supply shows up in the patterns of trade.
    We now further clarify how our study complements previous work. Erosa et al. (2010),
   7
     For the Head Start program, see Garces, Thomas and Currie (2002), Ludwig and Miller (2007), Deming
(2009), and U.S. DHHS 2010. For Perry, see Schweinhart et al. (2005) and Heckman et al. (2010). For Star,
see Chetty, Friedman, Hilger, Saez, Schanzenbach and Yagan (2011). Recent surveys include Duncan and
Magnuson (2013) and Heckman and Kautz (2013).
   8
     We derive an analytical expression relating the change in HCQI to countries’gains from trade. It is a
conservative estimate of gains from trade, because we abstract away from product di¤erentiation and intra-
industry trade, which have been extensively studied in the trade literature (e.g. Costinot and Rodriguez-Clare
2012, or ACR 2012).
   9
     e.g. Tre‡er (1995), Davis and Weinstein (2001), and Costinot and Rodriguez-Clare (2014).


                                                      5
Manuelli and Seshadri (2014) and Cubas et al. (2016) model the production of one type of
human capital, making the point that human-capital production can amplify small di¤erences
in output TFP. We model the production of multiple types of human capital and carry out
theoretical explorations and empirical quanti…cations of HCQI, abstracting away from many
ampli…cation mechanisms.
    Hsieh and Klenow (2009) and Hsieh, Hurst, Jones and Klenow (2018) investigate how
market frictions for capital, …nal goods and labor distort resource allocation and output,
using micro data from China, India, and the U.S. We focus on cross-country comparisons of
non-cognitive and cognitive productivity and HCQI, and abstract away from market frictions
and distortion in our model.
    Caselli and Coleman (2006), Jones (2014) and Malmberg (2017) examine imperfect sub-
stitutability among workers with di¤erent schooling years. These studies abstract away from
the production of human capital, and the key parameter there is the substitution elasticity in
aggregate production. We model human-capital production, and so HCQI depends on both
supply and demand elasticities. We abstract away from imperfect substitutability within a
given type of human capital.
    Like our study, Ohsornge and Tre‡er (2007), Lagakos and Waugh (2013), Burnstein,
Morales and Vogel (2016) and Lee (2017) model heterogeneous workers making optimal
choices across occupations (or industries). On the other hand, these studies abstract away
from human-capital production, which is the focus of our study.
    An applied micro literature examines the formation of cognitive and non-cognitive skills
using worker-level data from a single country (e.g. Kuhn and Weinberger 2005, Cunha,
Heckman and Schennach 2010, Jackson, Johnson and Persico 2015). We take a macro
perspective by quantifying the ways in which di¤erent countries produce multiple types of
human capital, and then clarifying the implications of such di¤erences for aggregate output
in a GE model.
    More broadly, the ways countries produce their human capital are related to their edu-
cational systems, which often have deep historic roots and so are an important part of their
institutions. We thus also contribute to the institutions literature (e.g. Acemoglu, Johnson
and Robinson 2001) by quantifying key characteristics of the educational institution and
their implications for aggregate output.
    For the remainder of our paper, section 2 clari…es how we group occupations into non-
cognitive and cognitive. Section 3 spells out our theoretical framework, and section 4 explains
how it makes contact with macro data. Section 5 examines falsi…able predictions of our
model and obtains the values of our parameters. Section 6 presents our results and draws
out their policy implications. Section 7 extends our model to open economy, and section 8
collects additional extensions and robustness exercises. Section 9 concludes, and discusses


                                              6
implications for future research.


2      Non-cognitive and Cognitive Occupations
A large literature has examined many non-cognitive skills, without reaching a consensus
about which should be the standard measure(s).10 However, there is a common approach:
this literature typically uses surveys or occupation-characteristics data sets, such as the
U.S. O*NET, to proxy for non-cognitive skills and provides empirical evidence that these
measures are di¤erent from the measures of cognitive skills.
    We follow this approach, and use leadership to measure non-cognitive occupations. Ac-
cording to our …rst classi…cation, an occupation is non-cognitive if the O*NET characteristic
“providing guidance and direction to subordinates . . . ”is important for that occupation, and
we classify all the other occupations as cognitive. For our second metric, we classify occupa-
tions on the basis of the …rst principal component of the following 8 O*NET characteristics
of leadership: guiding and directing subordinates; leadership in work style; coordinating the
work and activities of others; developing and building teams; coaching and developing oth-
ers; recruiting and promoting employees; monitoring and controlling resources and spending;
and coordinate or lead others in work (see Data Appendix 1 for more details).
    To be clear, we are not proposing leadership as the measure for non-cognitive human
capital. Rather, we demonstrate that leadership is a useful measure; i.e. it captures some
skills that are not well measured by test score, and it is also useful for cross-country compar-
ison. We show the …rst point in this section, using micro data, and show the second point
in section 5 below, using macro data.
    We now demonstrate that the two occupational categories that we have created di¤er
in the extent to which performance on test scores matters for workplace productivity. A
large literature shows that individuals’AFQT (Armed Force Quali…cation Test) scores are
strongly correlated with their wages (e.g. Neal and Johnson 1996, Altonji and Pierret 2001).
We use this framework to show that the wages of leadership occupations are less correlated
with test scores than those of the other occupations.
    The data used in Table 1 is the 1979 NLSY (National Longitudinal Survey of Youth).
The dependent variable is the log of individuals’wages in 1991, and the main explanatory
variable is their AFQT score in 1980, before they enter the labor force. Column 1 shows that
the coe¢ cient estimate of AFQT score is positive and signi…cant, and this result replicates
  10
    Examples include communications (e.g. Hummels, Jorgensen, Munch and Xiang 2014), grit (e.g. Alm-
lund, Duckworth, Heckman and Kautz 2011), leadership (e.g. Kuhn and Weinberger 2005), self-esteem (e.g.
Heckman and Rubinstein 2001), and social skills (e.g. Deming 2017). Recent surveys include Heckman and
Kautz (2013) and Lundberg (2017).



                                                  7
Neal and Johnson (1996).11 Columns 2 and 3 show that AFQT score has a smaller coe¢ cient
estimate for the subsample of non-cognitive occupations than for the subsample of cognitive
occupations,12 where we classify non-cognitive occupations using the leadership principal
component. To show this pattern more rigorously, we pool the data in column 4 and intro-
duce the interaction between AFQT score and the non-cognitive-occupation dummy. The
coe¢ cient estimate of this interaction term is negative and signi…cant.13 Column 5 uses
guiding-and-directing-subordinates to classify non-cognitive occupations, and obtains simi-
lar results. In column 6 we use the O*NET characteristic of enterprising skills as another
alternative measure for leadership. The interaction between enterprising skills and AFQT
score is negative but not signi…cant.
    In section 8 below, we examine additional O*NET characteristics as candidates for oc-
cupation classi…cation, and show that they do not exhibit the correlation patterns in Table
1.
    Having classi…ed occupations as non-cognitive and cognitive, we next bring in employ-
ment data by 3- or 4-digit occupations from the International Labor Organization (ILO)
(more details are in Data Appendix 3) to show that countries di¤er in the extent to which
their workforces have accumulated cognitive versus non-cognitive skills. We keep only the
countries whose raw data are in ISCO-88 (International Standard Classi…cation of Occupa-
tions), because O*NET occupations can be easily mapped into ISCO-88 occupations but the
mappings among other occupation codes are very scarce (e.g. we cannot …nd the mapping
between Canadian and U.S. occupation codes).14 This leaves us with a cross-section of 34
countries, and most of the observations are for the year 2000. Examples of non-cognitive oc-
cupations include business professionals (ISCO-88 code 2410), managers of small enterprises
(1310), building frame and related trades workers (7120), nursing and midwifery profession-
als (3230), etc. Examples for cognitive occupations include architects, engineers and related
professionals (2140), …nance and sales professionals (3410), secretaries (4110), motor vehi-
cle drivers (8320), etc. We show the variation of the employment share of non-cognitive
occupations across our sample countries by plotting its histogram in Figure 1.
    In this section, we have shown that occupations di¤er in terms of the nature of the human
capital required, and that countries di¤er in the occupational composition of their workforce.
  11
     We include both men and women in Table 1, while Neal and Johnson (1996) do the estimation separately
for men and women. We have experimented with this and obtained very similar results. We also use the
same sample cuts as Neal and Johnson (1996) (Data Appendix 2).
  12
     Note that the coe¢ cient estimates for AFQT square are not signi…cant.
  13
     Note that we have included the non-cognitive dummy itself, plus the college dummy and its interaction
with AFQT score, as additional controls.
  14
     The statistical agencies of Australia and New Zealand provided us with mappings from their (2-digit)
national occupation codes to ISCO-88, and we include them in our sample as well. We obtain very similar
results when we drop them.


                                                    8
In the next section, we provide an analytical method for aggregating multiple types of human
capital.


3     A Model of HCQI
In this section we develop a stylized model, a key feature of which is that heterogeneous
workers optimally choose their investment in both the quantities and types of human capital.
Our model delivers an analytical expression for HCQI, and shows that it is closely related to
output per worker. We start with the closed-economy setting, and provide the open-economy
extension in section 7.


3.1    Model Structure
There are K countries, indexed by k, each endowed with Lk heterogeneous workers. Workers
are endowed with non-cognitive and cognitive attributes "n and "c , drawn from the following
Frechet distribution:

                                                                1               e
                    F ("n ; "c ) = exp        Tc " c + Tn " n         ;             .                (1)
                                                                            1
In the context of the correlation patterns that we discussed in section 2, we think about
the attributes n and c as two distinct packages of skills, rather than two individual skills,
and these two packages may have common elements. We formalize these points in section 8
below.
    In equation (1), the parameter captures the degree to which non-cognitive and cognitive
packages are correlated.15 The parameter captures the dispersion of attributes across
workers. As rises, the distribution becomes more compressed, and so there is less worker
heterogeneity. Note that for the distribution to have …nite variance, we require > 1.
Finally, Tc and Tn , both positive, capture the locations of the attributes distribution; e.g. as
Tc rises, the distribution of cognitive abilities shifts to the right, so that the average worker
has better innate cognitive abilities.
    Following Hsieh et al. (2018), we specify the following production function for human
capital of type i, i = n (non-cognitive) or c (cognitive)

                                         hi (e) = hki e , i = c; n.                                  (2)

In equation (2), e is an individual worker’s spending on human capital accumulation, in units
of the …nal good (we specify its production below). The parameter captures decreasing
 15
    When = 0, they are independent; when        > 0, they have positive correlation; and when   ! 1, they
become perfectly collinear.

                                                     9
returns in the production of human capital, and guarantees an interior solution for workers’
optimal choice of e. The parameters hkn and hkc are country k’s TFP’s in the production
functions of non-cognitive and cognitive human capital, and they capture country k’s human
capital productivities along these two dimensions, net of resources inputs.
    We treat hkn and hkc as exogenous, because the educational institution, an important
contributor to human capital production, has deep historic roots in many countries. For
example, in the U.S., private universities and colleges are a main feature of the educational
institution, and their legal rights and status were enshrined by the Supreme Court in 1819 in
Dartmouth-College-vs-Woodward.16 In S. Korea, and many other East Asian countries, the
national exam has been a cornerstone of the educational institution for over 1,000 years.17
We capture, and quantify, such cross-country di¤erences in educational institutions as hkn
and hkc , and so we place no restriction on their values. On the other hand, we assume that
 , , , Tc , and Tn do not vary across countries.18
    Both non-cognitive and cognitive tasks are needed to produce the …nal good. When a
worker chooses task i, or occupation i, her output is

                                              hi (e)"i ; i = n; c                                          (3)

where hi (e) is the quantity of the worker’s human capital, accumulated according to the
technology (2), and "i her attribute, drawn from the distribution in (1).19 The educational
and occupational choices made by workers lead to aggregate supplies of cognitive and non-
cognitive human capital in country k of LkS       kS
                                          c and Ln (hence the S superscript), respectively.
  16
     In 1816, New Hampshire enacted state law to convert Dartmouth College from a private institution to
a state institution. The case went to the U.S. Supreme Court, the legal issue being whether Dartmouth’s
original charter with the King of England should be upheld after the American Revolution. In 1819, the
Supreme Court sided with Dartmouth, and this decision also guaranteed the private status of other early
colonial colleges, such as Harvard, William and Mary, Yale, and Princeton (e.g. Webb, Metha, and Jordan
2013).
  17
     China used archery competitions to help make promotion decisions for certain bureaucratic positions
before 256 B.C.E., and established the imperial examination system as early as 605 A.D., which remained
in use for over 1,000 years. In this system, one’s score in the national exam determines whether or not he is
appointed as a government o¢ cial, and if so, his rank. Through trade, migration, and cultural exchanges,
China’s imperial examination system spread to neighboring countries; e.g. Korea established a similar system
in 958 A.D. (Seth, 2002).
  18
     The assumption about , and is standard in the literature. Our intuition for the assumption about Tc
and Tn is that genetic di¤erences across countries have no signi…cant e¤ects on birth talents. It is reasonable
to imagine that severe malnutrition could change the T ’s. As we will consider a sample of primarily middle
and upper income countries, this issue is less of a concern.
  19
     Equation (3) assumes that occupation i uses skill i. In section 8 we have both occupations use both
skills, with occupation i being more intensive in skill i. This alternative speci…cation delivers very similar
results.



                                                      10
  The representative …rm hires workers in both cognitive and non-cognitive occupations to
maximize output
                                                      1                           1       1
                        Yk =       k
                                       Ac LkD
                                           c              + An LkD
                                                                n                                 (4)

In equation (4), k is country k’s output TFP, and Ac and An common technological pa-
rameters. The parameter         > 0 is the substitution elasticity between non-cognitive and
cognitive skills. LkD
                    n and Lc
                             kD
                                are the aggregate levels of non-cognitive and cognitive human
capital demanded (hence the D superscript) by …nal goods producers in country k.
     The key prices in country k are the price of an e¤ective unit of cognitive human capital,
wck , the price of an e¤ective unit of non-cognitive human capital, wnk , and the price of the
…nal output, P k . Given cost minimization of the perfectly competitive …nal goods producers,
the price of the …nal good (4) is given by
                                                                                          1
                        k    1                   1                            1       1
                      P =      k
                                   (Ac )     wck          + (An )         wnk                 :   (5)

Equation (5) says that P k varies across countries because wck and wnk may vary across coun-
tries. In addition, a country with high output TFP tends to enjoy low price of the …nal
good, ceteris paribus.
    All markets are perfectly competitive. The timing happens as follows. First, workers
choose how much and what type (cognitive or non-cognitive) of human capital to obtain.
Second, …nal goods producers choose how many workers of each type to employ. Finally, all
markets clear.


3.2    Equilibrium Conditions
We …rst analyze individual workers’ optimal choices for the quantity and type of human
capital accumulation. We then aggregate across individuals to obtain the aggregate supplies
of cognitive and non-cognitive human capital in country k, and bring in the demand side
and characterize the equilibrium.
    Recall that human capital investment is in terms of …nal output. This means that the
proper maximization problem facing an individual that will choose occupation i is

                                       max wi hki e       i   P ke ;
                                         e

and so the optimal choice of human capital investment is
                                                                      1
                                                     wik k        1
                                       e( i ) =         h     i           :                       (6)
                                                     Pk i
In equation (6), e( i ) is the quantity of human capital investment. Equation (6) says that,
intuitively, gifted individuals, of both occupations, make large quantities of human capital

                                                     11
investment. In addition, individuals in country k also have large quantities of human capital
investment if real wages are high.
   We now plug the worker’optimal choice in (6) into her maximization problem, and obtain
the following expression for her optimal net income in occupation i,
                                                                                 1
                                                                  wik k k    1
                              Ii ("i ) = (1       )     1            h "             .                             (7)
                                                                  Pk i i
Equation (6) and (7) show that net income, Ii ("i ), is proportional to human-capital spending,
ei ("i ). In addition, (6) and (7) show that the …nal-good price index, P k , has the same e¤ects
on e( i ) and Ii ("i ) for both occupations. This means that P k does not a¤ect individuals’
occupational choices, which are based on their comparative advantages. To be speci…c, equa-
tion (7) implies that the worker chooses occupation n if and only if wck hkc "kc wnk hkn "kn . This
is a classic discrete-choice problem (e.g. McFadden 1974). Using the Frechet distribution
(1), we show that the employment share of occupation i equals (Theory Appendix 1)

                                             Ti (wik hki )
                            pki =                                 , i = c; n:                                      (8)
                                    Tc (wck hkc ) + Tn (wnk hkn )

    Equation (8) says that the non-cognitive employment share, pkn , is high, if workers have
a strong comparative advantage in non-cognitive innate abilities (high Tn =Tc ), non-cognitive
skills have a high relative return in the labor market (high wnk =wck ), or country k has a
strong comparative advantage in fostering non-cognitive human capital (high hkn =hkc ). In (8),
  plays an important role. As rises and workers become more homogeneous, given changes
in wik or hki lead to bigger shifts in the proportion of workers that opt to work in di¤erent
occupations. Equation (8) characterizes individuals’optimal choices for the types of human
capital accumulated, and plays a key role in our model.
    To solve the model, we start by calculating the average net income of non-cognitive and
cognitive workers, which analytically involves taking the expected value of equation (7), with
respect to "i , conditional on type i, i = n; c. We show that the average net income is the
same for non-cognitive and cognitive workers; i.e. (Theory Appendix 2)
                                                    "                                            #   (1
                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                           )
                                                                 wck k                   wnk k
                  Ink = Ick = (1          )   1         Tc          h       + Tn            h                  ;   (9)
                                                                 Pk c                    Pk n
                                              1
           where      =       1                                  :
                                     (1       )(1            )
Equation (9) is a common feature of the solution to discrete choice problems with Frechet
distribution and homothetic demand (e.g. Eaton and Kortum 2002). In (9), the term in the
square brackets is proportional to the denominator of the employment-share expression, (8).
 (:) is the Gamma function and so is a constant.

                                                        12
   Equations (8) and (9) imply that the average educational expenditure is equalized for
non-cognitive and cognitive workers:
                                    2                                              !1 31
                                                                                           1



                                    4               wck k                  wnk k      5
                    Enk = Eck =               Tc       h       + Tn           h                .            (10)
                                                    Pk c                   Pk n

By equation (10), we now use E k , without an occupation subscript, to denote the average
educational spending in country k.20 Equation (10) will prove useful in pinning down , the
elasticity of the output of human capital with respect to input, as we show in section 5.
    We now solve for the aggregate supply of human capital of type i, LkS  i , i = n; c, and
obtain (Theory Appendix 3):
                                              0                                                    !1 111
                                    Lk pki    @ (P k )1                   wck k            wnk k     A
 LkS   k k    k
  i = L pi E(hi e jOccp:i) =                                     Tc          h     + Tn       h              :
                                     wik                                  Pk c             Pk n
                                                                                   (11)
Equation (11), together with        wck Lkc
                                    +              wnk Lkn       k    k
                                              = P Y , implies that the income shares of
cognitive and non-cognitive workers are given by
                                                   wik LkS
                                                        i
                                                      k   k
                                                            = pki :                                         (12)
                                                   P Y
To complete our characterization of the supply side of the economy, we use equations (8)
and (11) to derive the relative supply of non-cognitive human capital, which is given by

                                wnk LkS
                                     n    pkn       pkn   Tn (wnk hkn )
                                        =     where     =                                                   (13)
                                wck LkS
                                     c    pkc       pkc   Tc (wck hkc )

Equation (13) says that the relative supply of non-cognitive labor, LkS      kS
                                                                        n =Lc , is increasing in
the availability of raw talent in the country, the comparative advantage of that country in
non-cognitive human capital, hkn =hkc , and the relative return of non-cognitive human capital,
wnk =wck . As foreshadowed by our discussion of equation (8), it is clear from equation (13)
that is the supply elasticity: as workers’skills become more homogeneous, a given change
in hkn =hkc or wnk =wck a¤ects the occupational choices of more workers, and so solicits a larger
response in LkS n =Lc .
                       kS

     We now turn our attention to the demand side. Cost minimization by …nal goods pro-
ducers facing technology (4) determines the demand for cognitive and non-cognitive human
  20
    One could extend the model by having heterogeneous groups of workers (e.g. by gender, education) that
draw their talent from di¤erent Frechet distributions, and assuming that the number of workers by group is
…xed. This setting could generate variation in average education per worker across occupations (e.g. Galle,
Rodriguez-Clare, and Yi 2018). However, we do not have occupational employment data by group across
countries (see also section 2). As a result, we choose not to complicate the model along this dimension.

                                                         13
capital, implying that the cost share of input i = c; n is given by
                                                                      1
                                                 (Ai )      wik
                            ski   =                                                       :            (14)
                                      (Ac ) (wck )1         + (An ) (wnk )1

It follows immediately that the relative demand for non-cognitive human capital is given by
                                                                                          1
                          wnk LkD
                               n    skn       skn   (An ) wnk
                                  =     where     =                                                    (15)
                          wck LkD
                               c    skc       skc   (Ac ) (wck )1

Equation (15) is a standard relative demand equation where the demand elasticity is given
by .
   Combining the supply and demand side of the economy, we obtain

                                             LkD
                                              i  = LkS
                                                    i ; i = n; c                                       (16)

   We are now in a position to de…ne the equilibrium of our model.

De…nition 1 An equilibrium to our model is a set of factor prices wck and wnk that imply
quantities of factors supplied, given by (13), and factors demanded, given by (15). These
quantities clear domestic factor markets, given by (16), in conjunction with (11).


3.3    Output per Worker, HCQI and Output TFP
We now clarify the connections between hkc and hkn and income di¤erences across countries.
We derive an analytical expression that decomposes the di¤erences in output per worker
into a component that re‡ects di¤erences in human-capital productivities, and another that
re‡ects di¤erences in output TFP. To do so, we use equations (8) and (13)-(16) to solve for
relative wages:
                            "                               #1
                      wnk     Tc       hkc        An
                        k
                          =                                       ;                   +       1 > 0:   (17)
                      wc      Tn       hkn        Ac
We then de…ne a base country 0 against which any particular country can be compared. We
show that (Theory Appendix 4):

Proposition 1 Output per worker in country k relative to the base country 0 can be decom-
posed into the ratio of output TFP and HCQI; i.e.
                                                                              1
                                        Y k =Lk             k
                                                                  k
                                                                          1
                                                =                                 ,                    (18)
                                        Y 0 =L0             0




                                                       14
where HCQI is related to the ratios of cognitive and non-cognitive productivities and the
occupation employment shares of country 0:
                                0             (   1)                 (   1)
                                                                              1   (   1)

                           k    @p0c    hkc                    hkn            A
                                                       + p0n                               .          (19)
                                        h0c                    h0n

     Equation (18) says that relative to country 0, country k may have high output per worker
for two reasons: one, it may produce the …nal good more e¢ ciently (i.e. k = 0 is high);
and two, it may produce human capital more e¢ ciently (i.e. k is high). Equation (19)
says that country k’s HCQI (relative to country 0), k ; is a weighted power mean of the
ratios of cognitive and non-cognitive productivities, with the weights being the occupational
employment shares of the base country 0. This index summarizes the multi-dimensional
di¤erences in cognitive and non-cognitive productivities into a single numerical value. Unlike
LkS          kS
  c and Ln , the aggregate quantities of country k’s human capital (in e¢ ciency equivalent
units), HCQI is a relative metric, and captures the overall quality of country k’s human-
capital production relative to country 0.
     Because the powers in k are determined by the demand and supply elasticities, and ,
they play important roles in determining how HCQI relates to cognitive and non-cognitive
productivities, hkc and hkn . As both ,      ! 1, k goes to the maximum of hkc and hkn .
This is intuitive, as workers become equally capable at both perfectly substitutable tasks.
In this case, being strong in producing one type of human capital but weak in producing
the other type has few consequences for a country’s well-being. As          ! 1, however,
the aggregate production function becomes Leontief, k goes to the minimum of hkc and
hkn , and excelling along a single dimension in human-capital production does little good for
national well-being. For the more empirically relevant case found in our data (see below),
  k
      is reasonably well approximated as a geometric mean, where the relative importance
of cognitive and non-cognitive productivities is determined by the occupational shares. In
this case, both cognitive and non-cognitive productivities are important, and so a country
with high productivity along one dimension but low productivity along the other tends to
have low HCQI.21 We will further illustrate this intuition in section 6, by drawing a curve
along which k stays constant. We call this the iso-HCQI curve. We will also examine the
expressions for HCQI under more general settings in sections 7 and 8, and compare them
with equation (19).
     We now compare equation (19) with the literature. Caselli and Coleman (2006), Jones
(2014) and Malmberg (2017) consider aggregation functions of human capital, where workers
  21
    Note that as becomes smaller (i.e. cognitive and non-cognitive human capital become less substitutable
in aggregate production), equation (19) assigns a bigger penalty for given imbalances in cognitive and non-
cognitive productivities.


                                                       15
with di¤erent schooling years are imperfect substitutes. These studies abstract away from
the production of human capital, and so the results depend on the substitution elasticities
of the aggregation function. We focus on human-capital production, and so in (19), HCQI
depends on both , the substitution elasticity in aggregate production, and , which is like
a substitution elasticity in human-capital production. On the other hand, we abstract away
from imperfect substitutability within a given type of human capital; e.g. we compute the
aggregate supply (in e¢ ciency equivalent units) by summing across workers in equation
(11).22


4      Cognitive and Non-cognitive Productivities: Quan-
       ti…cation
In the previous section, we have shown that HCQI depends on non-cognitive and cognitive
productivities, hkn and hkc . In this section, we show how our model allows us to use data to
recover their values, in preparation for quanti…cation in the next section. These steps clarify
the intuition for the way we make cross-country comparisons for non-cognitive human capital.
They also highlight how our model, where human capital is multi-dimensional, di¤ers from
previous studies on human-capital production, which have a single type of human capital.


4.1     Comparative Advantage and hkn
We begin by backing out a country’s comparative advantage in human capital production.
Rearranging equation (8), we obtain
                                                                1
                                       hkc        pkc =Tc           wnk
                                           =                            :
                                       hkn        pkn =Tn           wck

Intuitively, if a large fraction of the population is employed in cognitive occupations despite
a low relative wage in that occupation, it must be that accumulating cognitive human capital
is relatively easy. We plug the expression for relative wage, (17), into the expression above,
and then divide country k’s expression relative to a base country 0. These steps yield

                          hkc =hkn     pkc =pkn   (    1)
                                   =                        ;          +    1 > 0.                (20)
                          h0c =h0n     p0c =p0n
  22
    Conceptually, we can think about embedding this literature in our framework by replacing LkDc   and
 kD
Ln in equation (4) with, say, CES aggregates of workers with di¤erent schooling years. However, we have
data for employment by occupation, not by occupation by education. In addition, in our sample of mostly
high-income countries, illiteracy is uncommon (see also section 2 and note 29).



                                                      16
    Equation (20) has the ‡avor of revealed comparative advantage: we can back out a
country’s comparative advantage for cognitive human capital, hkc =hkn , using the data and
parameter values on the right-hand side of (20). This term captures the e¤ects of the
endogenous choices of workers and the optimal hiring decisions of the …nal goods producers.
If we observe, in the data, that many have chosen the cognitive occupation in country k, we
can infer that country k has a strong comparative advantage for cognitive human capital.
    Equation (20) also delivers the values of non-cognitive productivity, hkn , if we have the
values of cognitive productivity, hkc . These hkn values compare how well di¤erent countries
produce non-cognitive human capital, and provide a solution to a major challenge for the
literature on non-cognitive human capital. To put our results into the context of this lit-
erature, we note that while there are direct measures to compare cognitive human capital
across countries, such as test score, no such measure is available for non-cognitive human
capital. Our discussions in Introduction suggest that it could be di¢ cult to come up with
such a measure.23 Equation (20) says that even without such a measure, we can still make
cross-country comparisons for the non-cognitive dimension, by leaning on the measure we
have for the cognitive dimension, and revealed comparative advantage.24
    Finally, to show the importance of the key demand-side elasticity, , we re-write (20) as
                                                               (   1)
                                       pkc =pkn     hkc =hkn
                                                =                       :
                                       p0c =p0n     h0c =h0n
Suppose hkc =hkn increases; i.e. country k has a stronger comparative advantage in producing
cognitive human capital. By equation (8), this has a direct e¤ect on the relative employment
share of cognitive occupations, pkc =pkn , as well as an indirect e¤ect on it, through the movement
of the relative return to cognitive human capital, wck =wnk . Equation (20) says that the net
e¤ect depends on . If > 1, demand is elastic, and so the movement in the relative return
is small, and the direct e¤ect dominates. Therefore, a larger relative employment share of
cognitive occupations re‡ects a greater comparative advantage for cognitive human capital.
When         1, however, this result does not hold. We show, in section 5 below, that data
indicates > 1.
  23
     See also Deming (2017b).
  24
     We have used U.S. data to classify occupations and applied this classi…cation across countries, with the
implicit assumption that occupational rankings in terms of the importance of leadership are similar across
countries. We do so because for most countries, occupation-characteristic data is not available. As a result,
many studies use the same approach as we do, drawing on the U.S. O*NET (e.g., Hummels, Munch and
Xiang 2018 provide a recent survey). We also provide some empirical evidence for this assumption in section
8.3.




                                                     17
4.2     Absolute Advantage and hkc
We now turn to backing out a country’s absolute advantage in producing human capital from
data. Because a large literature has argued that a country’s average score on international
exams, such as PISA, is a quality-adjusted measure of this country’s cognitive human capital,
we assume that country k’s average PISA score, S k , is informative about its average cognitive
human capital, LkS      k         kS
                   c =L , where Lc is given by (11);
                                                       25
                                                          i.e. for some positive constant b, we
assume that
                                                LkS
                                         S k = b ck ;                                      (21)
                                                L
We then start from assumption (21), and obtain k’s cognitive productivity by appropriately
adjusting S k for resources expenditures and occupational choices. To do so, we combine (21)
with equations (8), (10), (11) and (12), to obtain the following expression for country k’s
test score relative to a base country 0 (Theory Appendix 5):
                                                              1
                                                          1
                                  Sk       Ek       pkc           hkc
                                     =                                                           (22)
                                  S0       E0       p0c           h0c
    As expression (22) makes clear, a good showing on international tests can happen for
multiple reasons. First, a high test score could be obtained by a high level of spending on
education per capita, E k . The e¤ect of E k on cognitive human capital, and so test score, is
raised to the power of , because the production technology of human capital, (2), is subject
to diminishing returns.
    The second term in (22) captures the e¤ects of incentives and selection, and they arise
in general equilibrium because heterogeneous individuals make optimal choices for human
capital investment. To see these e¤ects, suppose that many choose the cognitive occupation
in country k; i.e. pkc is high. This means that the cognitive occupation is an attractive career
choice, and so individuals have strong incentives to accumulate cognitive human capital.
This incentive e¤ect implies high average test score for country k, and its magnitude is
raised to the power of 1.
    On the other hand, workers are heterogeneous, and so a high pkc implies that many
individuals with low innate cognitive abilities have self-selected into the cognitive occupation.
Their presence tends to lower the average cognitive human capital, and so the test score.
The magnitude of this selection e¤ect is pkc raised to the power of 1= . If is large,
the distribution of innate abilities becomes more compressed. This means less individual
heterogeneity and so the selection e¤ect is weaker. Note that, because > 1, the incentive
e¤ect always dominates. We allow the data to steer us to the most appropriate value for ,
and it will turn out that the value does indeed exceed one.
  25
    One may worry how the speci…c scale of PISA scores may a¤ect our results. We address this issue in
sub-section 8.1.

                                                 18
    Finally, cognitive productivity, hkc , soaks up all the other reasons why the test score
is high for country k, net of the e¤ects of resources, and incentives minus selection. An
important implication of equation (22) is that, in order to isolate hkc , one has to adjust test
scores for the convoluting factors of educational expenditures and occupational employment
shares.


4.3     Human Capital: Multiple Types, versus A Single Type
In this sub-section we compare our framework with a model where human capital is of a
single type. We begin by setting pkn = 0 and pkc = 1 in our model. Then equations (18) and
(19) imply
                                                   1
                              Y k =Lk      k
                                              k
                                                 1
                                                       k    hkc
                                      =              ;   =      ;                     (23)
                              Y 0 =L0      0                h0c
while (22) and (21) imply
                                       Sk           k       1
                                                                       k
                                                                               1
                                          =                                1
                                                                                   :                   (24)
                                       S0           0


   Equations (23) and (24) show that holding k …xed, a country that produces cognitive
human capital well (high hkc ) also has high test score and high output per worker. In
other words, the distinction between the quantity of cognitive human capital (in e¢ ciency
equivalent units), S k , and its TFP, hkc , is not important, and there is a monotonic relationship
between this quantity and output per worker. These results are intuitive. In this one-
dimensional world, there is no comparative advantage; thus only absolute advantage matters,
and HCQI, k , is the same as cognitive productivity, hkc .
   Equations (23) and (24) also show that we are using two parameters, k and hkc , for
absolute advantage, and so one is redundant. Setting hkc = h0c for all k, we obtain
                                                        1
                                Y k =Lk         k   1
                                                                    Sk             k   1
                                        =                       ;      =
                                Y 0 =L0         0                   S0             0


This expression says that a country with high output TFP (high k ) has a large quantity of
cognitive human capital (high S k ) and so high output per worker.26 In addition, a given dif-
ference in output TFP can be ampli…ed through human-capital production.27 This explains
why in the human-capital production literature, the focus is on the mechanisms that a¤ect
the degree of ampli…cation, such as demographics, the complementarity between physical
capital and human capital, and whether human capital is produced using time, physical
  26
     Erosa et al (2010) and Manuelli and Seshadri (2014) measure the quantity of human capital (in e¢ ciency
equivalent units) using spending, while Cubas et al (2016) use average PISA score.
  27
     Findlay and Kierzkowski (1983) does not have ampli…cation, because the input to human-capital pro-
duction is not produced by human capital, but has an exogenously given quantity, like an endowment.


                                                        19
goods, or services. The main question there is the relative contribution of human capital
versus output TFP in explaining cross-country di¤erences in output per worker.28
    In comparison, we have taken a di¤erent path, and abstracted away from many ampli-
…cation mechanisms. In our framework, a country with a high test score may not produce
cognitive human capital well, by (22); i.e. we need to distinguish between the quantity of
cognitive human capital and its TFP. More importantly, a country with a high test score,
or a large quantity of cognitive human capital, may not have high output per worker, by
equations (18) and (19); i.e. the non-cognitive dimension is potentially important. As a
result, we need to derive the theoretical expression for HCQI and compute this index using
data.
    These discussions do not suggest that we have a better model for human-capital produc-
tion. After all, both the magni…cation mechanisms and the multi-dimensionality of human
capital can be important. The point is that our model has a very di¤erent focus as, and
so is complementary to, the existing literature on human-capital production. In addition,
the building blocks of our framework, including (22) and (21), are compatible with this
literature.
    So far we have focused on how our framework makes a di¤erence, in theory. In the data,
how do countries’PISA scores di¤er from their cognitive productivities? How do countries
compare in terms of their TFP’s for non-cognitive human capital? Does this second dimension
matter? How does HCQI compare with test score, as a measure for the overall quality of
human capital? We answer these questions by quantifying our model.


5      Data and Parameter Values
Our model is based on the premise that both non-cognitive and cognitive occupations require
human capital, and one may wonder whether there are occupations in our data for which
human capital is not relevant. Columns 4 and 5 of Table 1 show that the coe¢ cient estimate
of test score remains positive and signi…cant after we control for the college dummy. Kuhn
and Weinberger (2005) report that the marginal e¤ect of leadership skills is as strong for
low-education individuals as for high-education ones. When we tabulate the distribution of
average schooling years across occupations using the 2000 US Census, we …nd that this distri-
bution is compressed in the left; e.g. the median is 12.8 years while the 5th percentile is 10.9
years. These results are intuitive, because the U.S. is a high-income country, where illiteracy,
  28
    A key parameter in these studies is the ampli…cation elasticity. It is between 2 and 3 in Erosa et
al. (2010) and Cubas et al. (2016), and exceeds 9 in Manuelli and Seshadri (2014). In comparison, our
ampli…cation elasticity, 1=(1 ), is close to 1, given our estimate of 0:1255 (see the next section).




                                                 20
subsistence farming and the informal sector are not salient features of the economy.29 We
therefore use the 28 high-income countries as our main sample. These high-income countries
account for 42.94% of world GDP in 2000.
     The upper panel of Table 2 reports the summary statistics for our main sample, and
Table 3 lists the countries and years in this sample. We already discussed the occupation
employment shares, pkc and pkn , in section 2. For test score, S k , we obtain mean PISA scores
in reading, math and science from the o¢ cial PISA website.30 31 For aggregate output,
Y k , we use labor income, or compensation of employees from NIPA (National Income and
Product Account), since we do not have physical capital in our model.32 We obtain the ratios
of private plus public expenditures on education to GDP in 2004 from the UNESCO Global
Education Digest of 2007. The lower panel reports the same statistics for our expanded
sample, which is our main sample plus the middle-income countries of Bulgaria, Estonia,
Latvia, Lithuania, Romania and Thailand. Note that all our data come from public sources.
     In the rest of this section, we use these data and our model to extract the values of the
elasticities, , , and , and …nal-good TFP, k , and the TFPs of human capital production,
hkn and hkc .


5.1     Elasticity of Human Capital Production,
We begin with , the elasticity of human capital output with respect to resources input. It
is straightforward to show that
  29
     Caselli and Coleman (2006) make a similar point, classifying primary-school completion as skilled labor
in the benchmark speci…cation.
  30
     We use PISA scores because they are widely reported in the media, and have in‡uenced education
policies in many countries. In addition, PISA samples students in a nationally representative way, covers
many countries, and controls qualities of the …nal data (e.g. the 2000 UK scores and 2006 US reading scores
are dropped because of quality issues). Finally, while PISA scores are for high-school students, they are
highly correlated with the scores of adult tests (e.g. Hanushek and Zhang 2009). Compared with PISA,
adult tests cover substantially fewer countries (they would cut our sample size by at least 25%) and also
have lower response rates (e.g. Brown et al. 2007). See also Data Appendix 4.
  31
     When PISA …rst started in 2000, only the reading test was administered, and only a small set of countries
participated. In order to obtain PISA scores in all three subjects for every country in our sample, we calculate
simple averages over time by country by subject, using all years of available data; e.g. Germany’s PISA math
score is the simple average of 03, 06, 09 and 2012, U.K.’s reading score the average of 06, 09 and 2012, etc.
In Data Appendix 4 we show that PISA scores do not have large over-time variation.
  32
     We experimented with stripping capital from GDP, obtained from PWT (Penn World Tables), by as-
suming a Cobb-Douglas production function and using the parameter values from the macro literature (e.g.
Klenow and Rodriguez-Clare 1997). The aggregate output of this second approach has a correlation of 0.9994
with our main output variable.




                                                      21
Proposition 2 Country k spends fraction             of its aggregate output on education; i.e.

                                            E k Lk = Y k .                                          (25)
                                                                  P k k             P k
Proof. By equations (9) and (10), wik Lki = Lk pki E k = , and so              k k
                                                                   i wi Li = L E      i pi =
                                                                           P
E k Lk . In our model aggregate output equals aggregate income, and so          k k
                                                                             i wi Li = Y .
                                                                                           k



    By equation (25), is the ratio of aggregate educational spending, E k Lk , to aggregate
output, Yk . Therefore, we set its value to match the mean share of public plus private
educational expenditure in output, 0.1255 (see Table 2). Note that the standard deviation
of this share (across countries) is low, at 0:0194. In addition, the mean remains almost
unchanged at 0:1228 in the expanded sample.
    Next, to obtain the values of and , we can either follow the common practice of using
the estimates from the literature, or do our own calibration. Although these two approaches
yield very similar results, we develop and discuss the steps of our calibration in the next two
sub-sections, because these steps produce falsi…able predictions that show whether or not
our model …ts the data.


5.2     Supply Elasticity, , and Cognitive Productivity, hkc
We start with , which measures the dispersion of innate abilities across workers and also
governs the elasticity of the aggregate supplies of human capital. Using the results of the
previous proposition and equation (22), we obtain

                                   Sk                        1
                          ln                 =D+ 1               ln pkc + ln hkc                    (26)
                               (Y k =Lk )

where D is a constant.33 Equation (26) is useful for several reasons.
   First, it is a falsi…able prediction of our model. It instructs us to construct novel variables
and to look for novel correlation patterns that previous research has not examined. We follow
these instructions in Figure 2. The vertical axis is log PISA math score, normalized by the
logarithm of output per worker raised to the power of . The horizontal axis is log cognitive
employment share. We weigh the data in the scatterplot using aggregate output.34 Figure
2a (2b) shows the main (expanded) sample. Figure 2 shows that, consistent with (26), the
countries in which workers are clustered in cognitive occupations are the countries that score
well on international tests (normalized by resources inputs), which can measure primarily
cognitive achievement.
  33
     Relative to (21), (26) has output per worker rather than educational expenditure per worker, because
we have more data points on output per worker.
  34
     The countries in our sample vary a lot in size (e.g. Switzerland, Germany, and the United States.)


                                                   22
    Second, recall that our occupation-employment data is based on our occupation classi-
…cation. In section 2, we have motivated this classi…cation using micro data from the U.S.
The correlation pattern, proposed in equation (26) and validated in Figure 2, shows that our
classi…cation is also consistent with cross-country macro data.
    Third, equation (26) provides the target for our value. Figure 2a plots the best-…t line,
and it has R2 = 0:175 and a slope coe¢ cient of 0:493. We choose the value of to match this
slope coe¢ cient, and obtain = 1:973 (since the slope coe¢ cient is 1 1 ).35 This estimate
is consistent with our assumption in section 3 that > 1.
    One may wonder whether cognitive employment share is correlated with cognitive pro-
ductivity in (26), and whether this correlation is an issue for our value. We use equations
(8) and (17) to show that
                                                          1
                                  pkc =                                 1

                                               An         Tn   hkn
                                          1+   Ac         Tc   hkc


This expression clari…es that cognitive employment share is determined by comparative ad-
vantage, hkn =hkc . Therefore, cognitive employment share is uncorrelated with cognitive pro-
ductivity if cognitive productivity, a measure of absolute advantage, is uncorrelated with
comparative advantage. We look at alternative speci…cations below, in Table 4, and alter-
native values in Table 5. We also compare our values with the literature.
    The upper panel of Table 4 shows the results for our main sample. All the columns
of Table 4 use PISA math score, and have aggregate output as weights.36 Column (2)
corresponds to the best-…t line in Figure 2a. In column (1) we add Australia and New
Zealand but dummy them out,37 and obtain very similar results. This is our benchmark
speci…cation, and we recap its value in row (1) of Table 5. In column (3) of Table 4 we use
the characteristic of guiding and directing subordinates to classify occupations. The slope
coe¢ cient becomes larger, implying a larger , which we list in row (3) of Table 5. The
R2 is also higher. Column (4) of Table 4 uses the characteristic of enterprising skills. The
coe¢ cient is positive but not signi…cant, and this pattern echoes column (6) of Table 1. The
lower panel of Table 4 shows the results for the expanded sample, and they are similar to
the results in the upper panel. We list the value for column (1) of the lower panel of Table
4 in row (4) of Table 5.
  35
     Card and Lemieux (2001) infer the substitution elasticity across di¤erent types of workers by regressing
relative wages on relative supply (plus other controls). This approach has a similar ‡avor to our approach.
  36
     We have experimented with di¤erent weights and the scores of other PISA subjects, and obtained similar
results. See Data Appendix 5.
  37
     In the raw data of Australia and New Zealand, the occupation classi…cation codes are their own national
codes rather than ISCO 88. See also note 14.



                                                     23
    One may be concerned that our estimates come from a single cross-section of 30 or
so countries. We compare them with the estimates from the literature. Our benchmark
value is = 1:973. Hsieh et al (2018)’s model also features a Frechet distribution of innate
abilities, but for identi…cation they use worker-level data and explore wage dispersion within
occupations and labor-force participation from the U.S.; i.e. their data and identi…cation
strategy are completely di¤erent from ours. Despite such di¤erences, Hsieh et al (2018)
obtain = 2.38 In other words, we will obtain similar results if we use the estimates from
the literature.
    We now plug = 1:973 into equation (26) to compute cognitive productivities, hkc .39
These values are relative, and so we normalize the U.S. value to 1. Since we have gone
through several speci…cations, we compare their hkc values with the benchmark values in
Table 5. They are all similar to the benchmark values. We summarize the way we have
obtained , and hkc in Table 6. Table 6 also lists the literature’s estimates for .
    Finally, we address the issue of test score scale in section 8, and discuss our hkc values in
section 6. We now move on to , the substitution elasticity on the demand side.

                                                                           k
5.3     Demand Elasticity,                   , Output TFP,                     , and Non-cognitive
        Productivity, hkn
We combine equations (4), (13), (15), (16) and (21) to obtain (Theory Appendix 6)
                                 Yk                                  pkn           k
                         log             =F+               log 1 +         + log                          (27)
                                S k Lk                 1             pkc
where the constant F has no cross-country variation.
    Equation (27) is an input-output relationship. The output is Y k , and there are two
inputs. The …rst is the quantity of cognitive human capital (in e¢ ciency equivalent units),
represented by Lk S k , since test score, S k , represents average cognitive human capital by
equation (21). The second input is the relative quantity of non-cognitive human capital used
in production, and it is a monotonic function of pkn =pkc . Therefore, equation (27) shows how
aggregate output, normalized by the quantity of cognitive human capital, varies with the
relative quantity of non-cognitive human capital.
    For our model, (27) is another falsi…able prediction that can be taken to the data. It
instructs us to use the average test score as one input and the ratio of employment shares
as the relative quantity of another input. These are novel ways to measure the quantities of
  38
     The range of values is 1:5 to 2:5 in Hsieh et al (2018), 1:78 to 2:62 in Burnstein et al. (2016), and 1:48
to 2:5 in Lee (2016). Lagakos and Waugh (2013), whose model has industries and not occupations, obtain
  = 2:7 for the non-agricultural sector. In comparison, our range is 1:746 to 3:014 (see Table 5).
  39
     By attributing the residual in equation (26) to ln hkc , we follow the common approach in the literature
that output TFP is the residual of the aggregate production function.

                                                      24
human capital that previous research has not considered. In addition, equation (27) provides
the target for our value of .
    Table 7 shows the results of …tting our data using (27). The structure of Table 7 is sim-
ilar to Table 4, where all columns use PISA math score and aggregate output as weights.40
                                                                            k
Column (1) is our benchmark speci…cation. The coe¢ cient of log 1 + ppnk is positive and
                                                                             c
signi…cant, and implies = 1:676. This estimate for provides an additional validation
of our model, which, as we discussed in section 3, requires > 1. Column (2) drops Aus-
tralia and New Zealand, and column (3) uses guiding-and-directing-subordinates to classify
occupations. The results are similar to column (1). Column (4) uses enterprising skills, and
                                                                  k
obtains a positive, but not signi…cant, coe¢ cient of log 1 + ppnk , echoing Tables 1 and 4.
                                                                   c
The lower panel shows the results for the expanded sample, and they are similar to the upper
panel. Table 5 lists the values of several of the speci…cations we have gone through, and
show that they are similar to the benchmark value of 1:676.
    We now compare our estimates with the literature. Burnstein et al. (2016) feature
a CES aggregate production function, like us, but for identi…cation they use cross-section
and over-time variations in occupational wages and employment in micro data for the U.S.
Although Burnstein et al. (2016)’s data and identi…cation strategy are completely di¤erent
from ours, they obtain = 1:78. This means that we will obtain similar results if we use
the estimates from the literature.
    We then plug = 1:676 into equation (27) to compute the output TFP, k , normalizing
the U.S. value to 1. We check the correlation coe¢ cients between our output TFP estimates
and those reported in the literature. They are all positive and signi…cant, ranging from 0.447
(Klenow and Rodriguez-Clare 1997) to 0.669 (PWT 8.0), and provide an external validation
for our approach (see Data Appendix 6 for more details).
    Finally, we use the values of and and equation (20) to compute the comparative
advantage for cognitive human capital, hkc =hkn . We combine these values with hkc to back out
non-cognitive productivity, hkn . The hkn values are again relative, and we normalize the U.S.
value to 1. Table 5 shows that the hkn values of our alternative speci…cations are similar to
the benchmark values. Table 6 summarizes the way we have obtained , k , and hkn , and
also lists the estimates from the literature.


6       Results
In this section we present the values of cognitive productivities, non-cognitive productivi-
ties, and HCQI. We draw out their economic signi…cance, and then discuss their potential
implications for policy.
 40
      See Data Appendix 5 for alternative weights and subjects, with similar results.


                                                      25
6.1    Cognitive Productivity
Figure 3 plots the countries’ rankings in hkc against their rankings in PISA math score,
and Table 3 lists these rankings by country. These two rankings are positively correlated
(0:561), since both test score and cognitive productivity measure the cognitive dimension.
However, Figure 3 shows that they are quite di¤erent for many countries. We highlight these
di¤erences using the 45 degree line. These di¤erences arise because in our model, human
capital is multi-dimensional; test score is the outcome along the cognitive dimension, and
so distinct from the underlying TFP of this dimension. Equation (26) shows two sources of
their di¤erences.
    The …rst is resources, (Y k =Lk ) . Other things equal, a country with more resources
inputs is expected to produce better outcome. To see this, consider Poland, Czech Republic,
Hungary and Slovakia. They have decent PISA scores, ranked outside of top 10. However,
our model says that this outcome should be viewed in the context of low output per worker
in these countries, and so limited resources for human capital production. Therefore, their
cognitive productivities are better than their test scores suggest.
    The second is incentives (minus selection), 1 1 ln pkc . The country where individuals
are strongly incentivized to learn cognitive skills will perform well in international tests. To
see this, consider Hong Kong, South Korea and Switzerland. They are superstars in PISA
scores, all ranked within top 5. However, our model says that this outcome should be viewed
in the context of high cognitive employment shares and so strong incentives to accumulate
cognitive human capital. Therefore, their cognitive productivities are not as good as their
test scores suggest.
    Finally, we look at the U.S. First, the U.S. has very high output per worker. The
abundance of resources makes the low U.S. PISA scores even harder to justify. Second,
the employment share of cognitive occupations is relatively low in the U.S., implying weak
incentives to accumulate cognitive human capital. The e¤ects of resources and incentives
o¤set each other, leaving the U.S. ranking in cognitive productivities very close to its ranking
in PISA scores, near the bottom in our set of 28 countries. In our Introduction, we discussed
the worries and concerns about the quality of the U.S. educational institution. Figure 3
quanti…es these concerns and shows that they are well justi…ed, when we look at the cognitive
dimension. We now turn to the non-cognitive dimension.


6.2    Non-cognitive Productivity
Figure 4 plots the countries’rankings in hkn against their rankings in PISA math score, and
Table 3 lists the rankings by country. Figure 4 clearly shows that the PISA-math rankings
are simply not informative about non-cognitive productivity rankings (correlation = 0:029


                                              26
with p-value = 0:884). Thus non-cognitive productivities open up a novel dimension for
cross-country comparison, which is hidden from PISA scores. This new dimension gives us
new perspectives.
    First, Figure 4 shows that PISA scores overstate the pro…ciency of South Korea, Hong
Kong and Switzerland in producing non-cognitive human capital. While these countries are
top performers in PISA score, they are at the bottom in terms of non-cognitive productiv-
ity, for two reasons. First, they have decent, but not stellar, cognitive productivities (see
Figure 3). In addition, in these countries, many choose the cognitive occupations, implying
weak comparative advantages for non-cognitive human capital, by equation (20). In our
Introduction, we discussed the concerns in S. Korea and many East Asian countries that
the educational systems emphasize exams so much that students are unable to develop non-
cognitive skills. Our results in Figure 4 quantify this issue and suggest that these concerns
are well grounded.
    Second, Figure 4 shows that PISA scores substantially understate the pro…ciency of the
U.S. and U.K. in fostering non-cognitive human-capital. While both the U.S. and U.K. have
low PISA-score rankings, their rankings in non-cognitive productivity are No. 7 and No. 4,
respectively. Many in the U.S. have long argued against focusing exclusively on test scores
in education.41 Figure 4 provides quanti…cations for this argument, showing that the U.S. is
indeed strong along the non-cognitive dimension.
    Finally, Figures 3 and 4 show that Finland, Netherlands and Belgium have high rankings
in both cognitive and non-cognitive productivity. Intuitively, this is because they have high
PISA scores but low cognitive employment shares (relative to the other countries in our
sample). This implies that if education-policy makers would like to choose some countries
to emulate, Finland, Netherlands and Belgium might be better candidates than, say, South
Korea and Hong Kong.
    Below we condense the multi-dimensional di¤erences in cognitive and non-cognitive pro-
ductivities into a single index, HCQI.


6.3     HCQI
We compute HCQI, k , using equation (19). Figure 5 plots the value of hkc against the
value of hkn , and provides a 2-dimensional illustration of the di¤erences in hkc and hkn across
our sample countries. It also serves as our canvas for the iso-HCQI curve, the combinations
of hkc and hkn that yield a constant level of overall quality of human capital. We draw the
iso-HCQI curve through the U.S., our benchmark country with hUc S = hUn S = 1. This curve
  41
       For example, the National Education Association states that, in response to NCLB and RTT, “We see
schools across America dropping physical education . . . dropping music . . . dropping their arts programs
. . . all in pursuit of higher test scores. This is not good education.”


                                                   27
illustrates the countries whose HCQI’s are similar to the U.S. (e.g. Sweden and Austria),
those with higher HCQI’s relative to the U.S. (e.g. the U.K. and Finland), and those with
lower HCQI’s (e.g. Italy and S. Korea).42
    The curvature and shape of the iso-HCQI curve are determined by equation (19), and
they tell us the trade-o¤s of increasing cognitive productivity for non-cognitive productivity.
Intuitively speaking, given the values of and , equation (19) says that both cognitive
and non-cognitive productivities are important in overall human-capital quality. We see, in
Figure 5, that the countries with high productivity along one dimension but low productivity
along the other (e.g. Portugal and Hong Kong) lie below the iso-HCQI curve, meaning that
they have lower overall human-capital quality than the U.S. This is because the imbalance of
their productivities holds down their HCQI. There is, however, a silver lining: this imbalance
would be a useful asset under free trade, as we show in section 7.
    We now spell out the connection between HCQI and output per worker, by implementing
the decomposition of equations (18) and (19) in Table 8. Column 1 shows output per capita
                                                   k    k
by country, relative to the United States (i.e. YY 0 =L
                                                     =L0
                                                          ). Columns 2 and 3 show, respectively,
                                   h k i11                         1
the contribution of output TFP, 0          , and of HCQI, k 1 . To interpret these results,
consider France. The overall quality of France’s human capital is low relative to the U.S.,
the e¤ect of which puts France’s output per worker at 91.15% of the U.S. level (column 3).
On top of this, France also has low output TFP relative to the U.S., the e¤ect of which
places its output per worker at 80.41% of the U.S. level (column 2). Aggregating these two
e¤ects, France’s output per worker is 73.29% (= 91.15% x 80.41%) of the U.S. level (column
1). The decomposition in columns 1-3 is exact for every country, even though column 1 is
obtained directly from data while columns 2-3 are calculated using our model parameters.
    Column 3 shows that the di¤erences in HCQI across countries have large implications for
output per worker. For example, although S. Korea’s system of human-capital production
delivers high test scores, it puts S. Korea’s output per worker at 76.15% of the U.S. level,
other things equal. Finland, on the other hand, has one of the highest HCQI’s in our sample,
which puts Finland’s output per worker at 151.96% of the U.S. level, ceteris paribus.
    We now explore whether the cognitive dimension or the non-cognitive dimension drives
the variation in HCQI. We construct the non-cognitive component of HCQI by setting hkc = 1
for all k in equation (19),43 and show, in row (2) of Table 5, that it is highly correlated with
HCQI itself (the correlation coe¢ cient is 0:947). This means that most of the variation in
HCQI is along the non-cognitive dimension, the novel dimension of our analyses.
  42
     Figure 5 shows our main-sample countries. We show our expanded-sample countries in Figure A3 in the
Appendix, and it is similar to Figure 5.
  43
     "Non-cognitive component" is a slight abuse of terminology, since the functional form of HCQI in (19)
does not allow for an exact decomposition into the contributions of hkc and hkn .



                                                   28
6.4       HCQI vs. Test Score
We now compare HCQI, a quality measure for multiple types of human capital, with relative
PISA score, a widely-used quality measure for a single type of human capital.
    Columns (1) and (5) of Table 9 show the results of regressing log PISA math on log
output per worker. The left (right) panel uses output (labor-force size) as weights, and the
upper (lower) panel is for our main sample (expanded sample). PISA score has negative and
signi…cant correlation with output per worker in our main sample of high-income countries.
This is puzzling, given that relative test score measures the quality of human capital, which
is presumably an input in the aggregate production function. With the addition of middle-
income countries in the expanded sample, this correlation loses statistical signi…cance. It
remains negative under output weight, and turns positive under labor-force-size weight.
    In comparison, when we regress log HCQI on log output per worker, we obtain more
positive correlation. Columns (2) and (6) of Table 9 use the principal component of leadership
characteristics, while columns (3) and (7) use the characteristic of guiding and directing
subordinates. For the main sample, where the correlation is negative and signi…cant for test
score, it is slightly positive, and insigni…cant, for HCQI. For the expanded sample, where the
correlation is positive and insigni…cant for test score, it is positive and signi…cant for HCQI,
with almost twice the R2 .
    These results are intuitive for our framework. Human capital is multi-dimensional, and
test score captures only the cognitive dimension. In comparison, HCQI captures some of the
non-cognitive elements that test score has missed. As we show in the previous sub-section,
the variation along the non-cognitive dimension is substantial among high-income countries.
    These results also provide the …rst external validation for the values of our non-cognitive
productivities and HCQI. This is useful, given that ours is the …rst to o¤er a theoretical
derivation of HCQI, and to provide cross-country comparisons of non-cognitive human capital
and HCQI in the data.


6.5       Comparative Statics
In this sub-section we discuss the potential policy implications of our framework, by showing
how changes in the human capital productivities, hkc and hkn , a¤ect test scores and aggregate
output for any country k. We assume that there is no change in the labor-force size, Lk , or
output TFP, k .
    Let zb denote the value of variable z at the subsequent equilibrium relative to its value at
the initial equilibrium; i.e. zb = z 0 =z. Equation (19) simpli…es to44
 44
      The base "country 0" in equation (19) can be interpreted as the initial equilibrium of country k itself.




                                                       29
                                                 (   1)                 (   1)       +    1 1
                            Yck = [pkc (hbkc )   +    1          ck )
                                                          + pkn (hn
                                                                        +    1   ]   (   1) 1                  (28)
Equation (28) says that, because hkc and hkn a¤ect aggregate output through HCQI, the
output change depends on the weighted power mean of the changes in hkc and hkn , with
occupation employment shares as weights.
   On the other hand, for small changes in test score, we have45

                                                                                         (      1)(   1)
         (1     )d ln S k = (1 + Bpkc )d ln hkc           (Bpkn )d ln hkn ; B =                            ;   (29)
                                                                                                  +    1
where B = 0:169 according to our parameter values. Equation (29) says that an increase in
test score, S k , can be achieved by either an increase in cognitive productivity, hkc , and/or
a reduction in non-cognitive productivity, hkn . The latter works because an educational
institution with a very low level of non-cognitive productivity simply pushes most people
away from choosing the non-cognitive occupation, by equation (8). This creates very strong
incentives to accumulate cognitive human capital, showing up as an increase in test score.
As a result, a rise in test score may result from a higher HCQI along the cognitive dimension,
or a worse one along the non-cognitive dimension.
    Equations (28) and (29) suggest that in our framework, aggregate output and test score
may move in opposite directions. To illustrate this point, suppose the U.S. implements an
education policy that places less emphasis on test scores and more emphasis on non-cognitive
skills. Assume that this policy increases U.S. non-cognitive productivity by 1%, and leave
her cognitive productivity unchanged. Looking at test score, we might conclude that this
policy is unsuccessful, because by equation (29), U.S. test score would drop, slightly, by
0.05%. Looking at output, however, we would likely draw the opposite conclusion, because
by equation (28), U.S. aggregate output would increase by 0.29%.
    This result is intuitive for our model. There are multiple types of human capital, and
heterogeneous individuals respond to policies by changing the types of human capital they
invest in. Both absolute and comparative advantages matter for HCQI and aggregate output.
In comparison, in a model with a single type of human capital, there will be a monotonic
relationship between test score and output, because only absolute advantage matters (see
equations (23) and (24)).
    This result could also be relevant for several early childhood intervention programs in the
U.S. A large body of work shows that these programs tend to have little long-term e¤ects
on program participants’ test scores, but positive e¤ects on their adult outcome, such as
higher wages, and lower probabilities of poverty and crime (see the Introduction). This
body of work also makes the inference that the intervention programs primarily boost the
  45
    In Theory Appendix 7 we derive the expression for the exact change of S k . We present equation (29)
because it shows the intuition more clearly.


                                                           30
participants’non-cognitive skills. It follows, then, that our macro framework and this body
of applied-micro studies share the same policy implication: a real outcome, such as aggregate
output or wage, is a better objective for education policies than test scores.
    Many education policies likely a¤ect both cognitive and non-cognitive skills. For example,
No Child Left Behind, implemented in the U.S. in 2001, is designed to raise test scores, but
has been criticized because of the fear that it may adversely a¤ect non-cognitive skills.46
Our model provides a potentially useful tool to quantify the net e¤ect of a given policy on
aggregate output, if the e¤ects of this policy on cognitive and non-cognitive productivities are
available. Using equation (28), we compute, for our sample countries, the marginal output
changes following a 1% increase in hkc or hkn , and report these results in columns (4) and
(5) of Table 8. For example, a U.S. policy that increases hUc S by 1% increases U.S. output
by 0:85%, holding hUn S …xed. However, this payo¤ shrinks to 0 if hUn S decreases by 2:95%
(= 1% 0:85%=0:29%) instead.47
    Finally, the e¤ect of a given policy on aggregate output provides an upper bound estimate
for the amount of resources to be spent on this policy, or an estimate for its potential returns
if we know the amount of resources spent. This means that our model could also be useful
for the cost-bene…t analysis of education policies.


7      Open Economy
So far we have not considered international trade. Without trade, imbalance in human-
capital productivities tend to imply low HCQI. With trade, however, this imbalance may
help countries specialize and enjoy gains from trade. In this section, we extend our model
to incorporate trade, and show how the expression for HCQI changes. We also provide a
second external validation for the values of our cognitive and non-cognitive productivities.


7.1     Setting and Main Equations
To introduce trade into our model, we assume that the individuals can sell the services of
their human capital as intermediate inputs around the globe. The services of cognitive and
non-cognitive labor are embodied in traded intermediates. Countries can costlessly export
intermediates to an international clearinghouse for factor content and import intermediates
  46
     A large empirical literature, surveyed in Figlio and Loeb (2011), uses micro data to evaluate the e¤ects
of No-Child-Left-Behind on individual outcome.
  47
     Columns (4) and (5) show that a 1% increase in hkc is associated with larger output changes than a 1%
increase in hkn . This is because the employment share of the cognitive occupation is higher in the data. This
result does not imply that improving the quality of cognitive education carries a higher payo¤, because it is
unclear how much resources are needed for the 1% increase in hkc or hkn .



                                                     31
at iceberg trade cost k from this clearinghouse. In order to relate the aggregate quantities
of cognitive and non-cognitive human capital to trade and occupation employment shares,
we de…ne net exports as quantity ratios

                                                LkS
                                                 i    LkD
                                                       i
                                      xki =               ; i = c; n:                                             (30)
                                                   LkS
                                                    i

For example, if xkc = 0:5%, country k imports cognitive human capital, the quantity of
which is 0.5% of its aggregate supply. On the other hand, we assume that the …nal good
itself is non-tradeable, because it is used as inputs in the production of human capital.
    With trade, equations (6) through (15) still hold. However, factor market clearing in
country k is now
                                       LkD
                                         n     LkS
                                                 n 1   xkn
                                            =              :                              (31)
                                       LkD
                                         c     LkS
                                                 c 1   xkc
Equation (31) says that the total quantities of country k’s human capital, LkS           kS
                                                                                n and Lc ,
can be di¤erent from the quantities used in aggregate production, LkD         kD
                                                                     n and Lc , because of
trade, xkn and xkc (see Theory Appendix 8 for the other equilibrium equations and de…nition
of equilibrium).
    Equation (18) still holds, but the expression for HCQI is now (Theory Appendix 9)
                  0                                                   0                                   1 11
                                           1              !                                   1
                                                                                                  1
                  B      p0c (1   x0c )         1
                                                    hkc                     p0n (1    x0n )           hkn A C
            k
                = @p0c                                        + p0n @                                       A .   (32)
                         pkc (1   xkc )             h0c                     pkn (1    xkn )           h0n

Equation (32) says that HCQI remains a weighted power mean involving the ratios of cog-
nitive and non-cognitive productivities. However, it also involves country k’s trade and
occupation employment shares, all of which are endogenous variables for k. To clearly show
the intuition, we consider the case of free trade, where there is a single global price per unit
of cognitive and non-cognitive human capital (i.e. wck = wc and wnk = wn for all k) .
    Under free trade, equation (32) simpli…es to (Theory Appendix 10)
                                                                                 !1
                                  k                 hkc                   hkn
                                      =   p0c                 + p0n                   :                           (33)
                                                    h0c                   h0n
The key di¤erence between equations (33) and (19) is in the power coe¢ cients in the con-
struction of the power mean. These coe¢ cients do not include under free trade, as local
labor market demand does not have to equal local labor market supply, by equation (31).
This has the e¤ect of increasing the size of these power coe¢ cients relative to the closed
economy case; i.e. as if ! 1 in equation (19). As a result, being relatively ine¢ cient at
producing one type of human capital is less of a drag on HCQI.


                                                          32
     Equation (32), then, represents an intermediate case between (19) and (33). Intuitively,
if trade ‡ows have small values, (32) is more similar to (19).
     The expression for comparative advantage is now
                                                      1       1                 1
                                                          +
                              hkc =hkn     pkc =pkn               1
                                                                      1   xkc       1
                                       =                                                .                   (34)
                              h0c =h0n     p0c =p0n                   1   xkn
The …rst term on the right-hand side of equation (34) is the same as equation (20). The
second term in (34) captures the e¤ects of international trade. If we observe, in the data,
that country k imports, in the net, the service of cognitive human capital (i.e. xkc < 0), we
can infer that country k has a stronger comparative advantage for cognitive human capital
than its employment shares suggest, because the cognitive workers in k have chosen their
occupation despite import competition.


7.2     Data, Parameter Values, and Results
For the trade ‡ows, xkc and xkn , we calculate the numbers of cognitive and non-cognitive
workers embedded in the net export ‡ows relative to the numbers of these workers in country
k’s labor force.48 Table 2 shows that the absolute values of these trade ‡ows are small,
consistent with the …ndings of the trade literature.
    We now brie‡y describe how we obtain the parameter values. We maintain the same
assumption, (21), under which (22) and (26) continue to hold. Equation (25) also holds, and
so we have the same values for , and hkc . Equation (27) needs to be modi…ed as (Theory
Appendix 11)
                                                                                            !
                      Yk   1                                   pk 1                 xkn
               log                    =F+               log 1 + nk                              + log   k
                                                                                                            (35)
                     S L 1 xkc
                      k  k                            1         pc (1               xkc )
in order to take into account net exports of the services of human capital. Equation (35)
gives us the values for and k . We then plug the values of , , and hkc into equation (34)
to obtain the value of hkn .
    Column (5) of Table 7 shows the results of implementing equation (35). Row (5) of Table
5 summarizes the open-economy parameter values, and Column 6 of Table 8 reports the
decomposition based on equations (18) and (32), obtained using these values.49 All these
results are similar to our benchmark; e.g. the open-economy HCQI has a correlation of 0:918
with the benchmark HCQI. This outcome is intuitive, because trade ‡ows, xkc and xkn , tend
to be small.
  48
      In computing the trade ‡ows we follow similar steps as Costinot and Rodriguez-Clare (2014). See Data
Appendices 7 and 8 for the details.
   49
      We only report the contribution of HCQI, ( k )1=(1 ) , to save space. The contribution of output TFP
is column 1 divided by column 6.

                                                      33
    On the other hand, columns (4) and (8) of Table 9 show that the open-economy HCQI has
more positive correlation with output per worker than the benchmark HCQI. For our main
sample, the correlation for the open-economy HCQI is either marginally signi…cant (output
weight) or signi…cant (labor-force-size weight). For our expanded sample, the correlation
for the open-economy HCQI is always signi…cant, with higher R2 than for the benchmark
HCQI.


7.3      Free-Trade Equilibrium
As we know from equations (19) and (33), a country’s HCQI depends on the extent of
openness to factor service trade. While the data suggest that the world is closer to autarky
than to free trade, it is instructive to see what HCQI and output per worker would be across
countries were international trade frictionless.50
    To compute the (counterfactual) free-trade equilibrium, we assume that the data we
observe (e.g. Lk , Y k , pkc and pkn ) are well approximated by the benchmark closed-economy
equilibrium, and use the benchmark parameter values.51 This counterfactual exercise shows
that the iso-HCQI curve changes dramatically from closed economy to free trade. Using
equation (33), we compute the free-trade iso-HCQI curve, and plot it in Figure 6. Figure 6
has the same values of cognitive and non-cognitive productivities as Figure 5. In addition,
the U.S. occupation employment shares under free trade are similar to their values under
closed economy. However, the iso-HCQI curve bends sharply towards the origin in Figure 6,
in contrast to Figure 5. We also see, in Figure 6, that several countries that are exceptional
along the cognitive dimension in human capital production (e.g. Hong Kong and Slovenia)
lie above the iso-HCQI curve, meaning that they would have higher overall quality for human
capital than the U.S. under free trade. These results are intuitive: the countries that have
imbalanced productivities in human-capital production bene…t from being able to specialize
in the occupations in which they excel.
    To help visualize this intuition, we plot the changes in HCQI against non-cognitive and
cognitive productivities in Figure 7. In this 3D plot, the countries in the middle, who have
  50
      Our motivations for this world-is-‡at counterfactual are as follows. First, free trade might be more useful
for regional di¤erences within countries, complementing the economic geography literature (e.g. Krugman
1991, Davis and Weinstein 2002, Redding and Sturm 2008, Allen and Arkolakis 2014). Second, internation-
ally, while service trade has been growing faster than goods trade (e.g. wto.org), it has seen less liberalizations
than goods trade, and so has more scope for further liberalization. Finally, new technology may decrease
the cost of service trade.
   51
      Note that we are unable to apply the standard techniques of Deckle, Eaton and Kortum (2008), or DEK
2008, because xkc = xkn = 0 under closed economy. However, our computation still has the ‡avor of DEK
2008, in that we do not need to make additional assumptions about unidenti…ed parameters. See Theory
Appendices 12 and 13 for the details.



                                                        34
balanced cognitive and non-cognitive productivities, have limited changes in HCQI. However,
changes in HCQI are large for the countries on the edges of the …gure, who have strong
comparative advantages in either cognitive or non-cognitive human capital. For example, S.
Korea would see a 24:3% increase in HCQI, the Netherlands 14:2%, and Belgium 13:2%.
   These changes in HCQI are closely related to output gains from trade. Equation (18)
implies that
                                                          1
                                     Yb k = Yb 0 ( b k ) 1 :                           (36)
Equation (36) says that country k’s gains from trade is equal to the change in its HCQI,
ampli…ed by the power 1=(1      ), multiplied by the base country’s (here the U.S.) gains from
      52
trade.
    Column (1) of Table 10 shows the changes in HCQI from closed-economy to free trade.
Column (2) reports the output changes in this movement. We see that column (1) is very
similar to column (2), because U.S. gains from trade are small,53 and so is the power ampli-
…cation, 1=(1     ).
    Finally, we explore the policy implications under the free-trade equilibrium, by comput-
ing the marginal changes in aggregate output in response to a 1% increase in hkc or hkn .54
We report the results in columns (3) and (4) of Table 10. They are quite di¤erent from the
closed-economy results in Table 8, because comparative advantage plays a major role. For
the countries with strong comparative advantages in non-cognitive human capital (e.g. Bel-
gium, Netherlands, U.K. and U.S.), a 1% increase in hkn elicits much larger output responses
under free trade than under closed economy, because this change reinforces these countries’
comparative advantages. In comparison, the 1% increase in hkn leads to very limited output
responses for the countries with strong comparative advantages in cognitive human capital
(e.g. France, Hong Kong and S. Korea).


7.4     External Validation: Patterns of Trade
We now provide the second external validation for our values of non-cognitive productivities
using industry level trade data. Our idea is that the hkc and hkn values re‡ect countries’
relative abundance in non-cognitive human capital, a source of comparative advantage. It
  52
     We show (Theory Appendix 14) that equation (36) can be re-written as the counter-part of the ACR-
2012 formula for our model. We also show (Theory Appendix 15) that a country must gain from trade as
long as it is a net importer of at least one type of factor service (i.e. Yb k > 1 if xki < 1 for at least one i).
  53
     U.S. gains from trade are small because she has the largest labor-force size and second highest output
TFP in our main sample. In Theory Appendix 16, we consider an alternative scenario of adding Japan and
China, and obtain larger gains for the U.S.
  54
     We derive the counterpart of equation (28) in Theory Appendix 17. This expression relates countries’
output changes to changes in their absolute advantage, comparative advantage, and terms of trade.



                                                       35
thus follows that non-cognitive abundant countries should be net exporters of the industries
that use non-cognitive human capital intensively.
     To take this prediction to the data, we follow the literature (e.g. Nunn 2007, Bombardini,
Gallipoli and Pupato 2012) and examine the correlation between the patterns of trade and the
interactions between relative factor abundance and factor-use intensities. For each country
in our sample, we collect aggregate import and export for the 31 NAICS manufacturing
industries in the 2000 U.S. census, and the 9 1-digit service industries in the UN service-
trade database (see Data Appendix 7 for more details). To measure trade patterns, we
calculate net export divided by the sum of import and export by industry by country. For
each country, we measure its relative abundance in non-cognitive human capital, physical
capital and skilled labor as, respectively, the ratio of hkn to hkc , the ratio of physical capital
stock to population, and the fraction of college-educated labor force. For each industry, we
measure the intensities of non-cognitive human capital, physical capital and skilled labor
using U.S. data. Finally, we control for industry …xed e¤ects and country …xed e¤ects.
     Table 11 reports the results. Column (1) includes only the interaction for non-cognitive
human capital. We add the interaction for physical capital in column (2), and then the
interaction for skilled labor in column (3). The interaction for non-cognitive human capital
has positive and signi…cant coe¢ cient estimates in all speci…cations. These results suggest
that our hkc and hkn values are useful for the variation of trade patterns by industry by country,
even though we did not use such variation to obtain them. In addition, the hkc and hkn values
mainly re‡ect the supply of (not demand for) human capital, because the countries with high
hkn =hkc tend to have large net exports (not imports) of non-cognitive intensive industries.


8     Additional Extensions and Robustness
In this section, we show that we obtain similar results in the following scenarios. First, we
incorporate the scale of PISA scores into our quanti…cation. This is a robustness check on
how we relate PISA scores to cognitive human capital. Second, we explicitly model non-
cognitive and cognitive occupations as packages of skills. Third, we explore alternative ways
to classify non-cognitive and cognitive occupations in the data. Finally, we experiment with
alternative parameter values.


8.1    Test Score Scale
One concern is that the PISA score, whose mean is normalized to 500 and standard deviation
to 100, may be inconsistent with the way we have normalized the unit of cognitive human




                                                36
capital.55 A more general way to scale PISA scores is, (S k ) , where > 0 is a scaling factor.
We have so far assumed that = 1. In this subsection we conduct robustness analyses to
show that scaling is not a serious concern.
    To obtain an estimate for , we go back to the wage-AFQT regressions of Table 1,
which anchor the AFQT scores to wages, and rescale AFQT to have mean 500 and standard
deviation 100, and use the log of this score in the estimation. Column (7) of Table 1 shows
an estimate of 0.912 for the elasticity of wage with respect to PISA-scaled AFQT score.56 57
We next turn to our model, where the quantity of an individual’s cognitive human capital
(in e¢ ciency equivalent units) is given by equations (2) and (3). These choices of units
imply that across individuals, wage moves one-for-one with the quantity of cognitive human
capital (Theory Appendix 18). Combining this result with column (7) of Table 1, we infer
that the elasticity of the quantity of cognitive human capital with respect to PISA-scaled
AFQT score is also 0.912, and so we set = 0.912.58
    We replace S k in equation (26) with (S k ) and re-estimate. The results, shown in column
(5) of Table 4, are similar to column (1), our benchmark speci…cation. We then replace S k
with (S k ) in equation (27) and re-esetimate. The results, shown in column (6) of Table 7,
are similar to our benchmark, column (1). In row (6) of Table 5, we list the and values
of this speci…cation and show that we obtain similar values for non-cognitive and cognitive
productivities and HCQI.
    Finally, we take the opposite approach of rescaling the PISA scores to have the same scale
as the raw AFQT scores. In the NLSY79 data, which we use for Table 1, the raw AFQT
score has a mean of 38.6 and standard deviation of 27.8. We re-estimate the wage-AFQT
regression using the log of raw AFQT score. The wage elasticity for AFQT is now 0:150,
because of re-scaling, but the other aspects of the results are similar to column (7) of Table
1. We then re-scale PISA math score, in macro data, to also have mean 38.6 and standard
deviation 27.8, and use (S k ) , = 0:150, in equations (26) and (27). The results are shown in
column (6) of Table 4 and in column (7) of Table 7. They are also similar to our benchmark
speci…cations.59
  55
      Our results use the log of PISA scores, and so they are una¤ected if the normalization is for standard
deviation only.
   56
      We are not aware of any study that examines the relationship between individuals’PISA scores and the
wages that they obtain later in their lives.
   57
      The coe¢ cient estimate is 0:706 for the non-cognitive sub-sample and 0:927 for the cognitive sub-sample;
i.e. changing the scale of the AFQT scores does not a¤ect our occupation classi…cation.
   58
      Cubas et al (2016) also consider the speci…cation (S k ) , but assume that (S k ) maps into the location
of the talent distribution (which is like Tc in our model). The other aspects of their model are also di¤erent
from ours. As a result, they obtain a di¤erent value for .
   59
      We have 31 observations in the expanded sample because 3 countries’PISA math scores become negative
after re-scaling.



                                                      37
8.2    Cognitive- and Non-Cognitive-Intensive Occupations
In this subsection, we formalize the intuition that non-cognitive and cognitive attributes are
packages of skills. We do so by assuming that occupations require both skills but di¤er in the
mix of skills required. To be speci…c, suppose that the workers accumulate human capital
for occupation i, i = 1; 2, according to

                                     lik = hc (e) i hn (e)1                    i   "i ;                     (37)
                                  hc (e) = hkc e ; hn (e) = hkn e

In this expression, i captures the cognitive intensity of occupation i. Let 1 > 2 ; i.e. occu-
pation 1 is cognitive-intensive. hkc and hkn are the cognitive and non-cognitive productivities.
We adapt the other aspects of our setting in section 3 for occupations; e.g. workers now
draw their birth talents for occupations 1 and 2, "1 and "2 , from the Frechet distribution,
(1). We show that (Theory Appendix 19)

Proposition 3 Let heki = hkc i hkn        i 1
                                            ; i = 1; 2. Our results in sections 3 and 4.1 hold
    ek
for hi . e.g. equation (18) continues to hold, and HCQI is
                              0             !   (   1)                     !   (      1)   1   (   1)

                          k   @p01   hek1                           hek2                   A
                                                         + p02                                          .
                                     he0
                                       1                            he0
                                                                      2

    The intuition of our results is as follows. Both occupations now use cognitive and non-
cognitive human capital, and so both occupations are packages of skills. What matters for
human-capital productivity of country k, then, is the productivities of these packages, hek1
and hek2 . On the other hand, the structure and mechanism of our model remain unchanged,
relative to sections 3 and 4.1, and so all the results there hold for hek1 and hek2 .
    Proposition 3 has three quantitative implications. First, we can interpret the values of
“non-cognitive productivity” and "cognitive productivity" as values of hek2 and hek1 . Second,
with this interpretation, the procedure for computing comparative advantage, which use
equation (20), remains unchanged. Third, we can compute HCQI in the same way. It
then follows that we will obtain similar HCQI values if we have similar values for cognitive
productivities.
    The one substantive change is in the way we obtain the values of cognitive productivities.
The counterpart of equation (26) (Theory Appendix 20) is
                         Sk                                   1
                ln              = constant + (1                   ) ln pk1 + ln hek1 + ln (pk1 ):           (38)
                     (Y k =Lk )
Relative to (26), equation (38) is augmented by the term ln (pk1 ), which represents (one
plus) the non-cognitive-intensive occupation’s contribution relative to the cognitive-intensive

                                                         38
occupation. While the expression for ln (pk1 ) is complicated,60 there are multiple ways to
evaluate its variation across countries in our data.
                              k
   First, we compute ln (Y kS=Lk ) (1 1 ) ln pk1 using our data and the literature’s estimate
of = 2. This variable corresponds to ln hek + ln (pk ), by equation (38), and we …nd that it
                                               1          1
has little correlation with  ln pk1in our data (correlation coe¢ cient = 0:0065 , with p-value
of 0:9749). This result suggests that the positive correlation between normalized test score,
         k
ln (Y kS=Lk ) , and log cognitive employment share, ln pk1 , which we document in section 5,
remains useful evidence for our model, and for our occupation classi…cation. Second, we
experiment with proxying ln (pk1 ) using the 2nd through 4th powers of ln pk1 . We regress
         k
ln (Y kS=Lk ) (1 1 ) ln pk1 on (ln pk1 )2 through (ln pk1 )4 , …rst individually, and then jointly, and
obtain statistically insigni…cant coe¢ cient estimates. We also experimented with adjusting
our cognitive productivities using these speci…cations (even though the coe¢ cient estimates
are not signi…cant), and obtained similar results (see Data Appendix 9). These results
suggest that the cross-country variation of ln (pk1 ) in our data may have limited e¤ects on
the values of our cognitive productivities. They also imply that we obtain similar HCQI
values, because we retain the same values for comparative advantage, and the bulk of the
variation in HCQI comes from the non-cognitive dimension.


8.3     Alternative Occupation Classi…cation
So far we have used the numerical values of occupation characteristics to classify occupations
as cognitive or non-cognitive. As the literature that classi…es occupations often uses ratios
of the characteristics61 instead of levels, we experiment with ratios, following the approach
of Autor, Levy and Murnane (2003). We specify two types of cognitive characteristics, math
and information processing. For each category we collect several O*NET characteristics
and compute the …rst principal component. We then calculate the ratio of the leadership
principal component, which we have been using, to the sum of the principal components of
leadership, math and information processing. Looking at occupation-characteristics data,
we …nd that this ratio is qualitatively similar to the measures we have used; e.g. it has a
correlation coe¢ cient of 0:648 with the numerical value of leadership principal component,
and a higher mean for our non-cognitive occupations than for cognitive occupations. When
we estimate the wage-AFQT regressions, however, we obtain weaker results; i.e. while we
obtain smaller coe¢ cient estimates for the non-cognitive sub-sample than for the cognitive
  60
     We spell out this expression in Theory Appendix 20. There, we also show that, under some technical
assumptions, we can make the inference of 2 < 1 from the result that the wage-AFQT regression in Table
1 delivers a smaller coe¢ cient estimate for the non-cognitive subsample (see also note 57).
  61
     Examples of numerical values include Hummels et al. (2014) and Deming (2017). Examples of ratios
include Ebenstein, Harrison, McMillan and Phillips (2014). Autor, Levy and Murnane (2003) use both.


                                                   39
sub-sample, the di¤erence is not statistically signi…cant.62
    One may also be concerned that the O*NET occupation scores are noisy and that their
values are ordinal but not cardinal. This is why we focus on the dichotomy between the
non-cognitive group and the cognitive group; i.e. our implicit assumption is that occupa-
tions have similar rankings across countries in terms of the importance of leadership (see also
note 24). This assumption implies that the type of human capital a worker has acquired in
her birth country will also be useful after she emigrates to the U.S.; i.e. we should observe
a positive correlation between countries’ comparative advantages for non-cognitive human
capital, hkn =hkc , and the fractions of their U.S. emigrants in non-cognitive occupations.63
We use the 2000 U.S. Census to investigate this prediction. We follow the literature (e.g.
Hendricks 2002, Schoellman 2012) and focus on the adult immigrants who arrived in the
U.S. after their expected graduation dates (see Data Appendix 10 for the details). Figure
8 plots, for our main-sample countries, their U.S. emigrants’shares in non-cognitive occu-
pations against their comparative advantages for non-cognitive human capital. It shows a
clear positive correlation (0:618 with p-value = 0:001), consistent with our assumption that
occupational requirements for skills are similar across countries.
    Finally, we have also experimented with measuring non-cognitive skills using the following
O*NET characteristics: investigative skills, originality, social skills, and artistic talents. As
we show in Data Appendix 10, when we use investigative skills, originality or social skills, we
…nd that the wage-AFQT regressions have larger coe¢ cient estimates for the non-cognitive
sub-sample. When we use artistic talents, we …nd that the artists with high test scores earlier
in life tend to have low wages later. However, artists account for less than 1% of the labor
force.
    In summary, we are not proposing leadership as the measure for non-cognitive skills;
instead, we have shown that it is a useful measure that enables us to compare countries’
productivities for non-cognitive human capital in the absence of a direct measure along the
non-cognitive dimension. It is beyond the scope of our paper to explore all the occupa-
tion characteristics used in the literature, or those in O*NET. In addition, this occupation
classi…cation is consistent with both micro data (Table 1) and macro data (Tables 4 and 7).


8.4     Alternative Parameter Values
Rows (3)-(6) of Table 5 recap our and values under the alternative speci…cations and
samples that we have discussed. They also show that we obtain similar values of cognitive
  62
     See Data Appendix 10 for more details. There, we also show that we obtain similar results using other
speci…cations.
  63
     We do not expect this correlation to be perfect; e.g. the restrictiveness of U.S. immigration policy may
vary across countries and across occupations.


                                                     40
and non-cognitive productivities, and HCQI, under these alternative and values. Row
(7) of Table 5 shows that we also get similar results when we set = 4 and = 2.


9      Conclusion and Discussions
We have developed a GE framework, in the spirit of Roy (1951), to model the productions
of cognitive and non-cognitive human capital. Our stylized model allows us to use revealed
comparative advantage to infer countries’non-cognitive and cognitive productivities without
a direct measure for the non-cognitive dimension. Our model also delivers analytical expres-
sions for how non-cognitive and cognitive productivities relate to HCQI, and how HCQI
relates to output per worker.
    Our framework allows us to obtain the values of the full set of parameters using publically
available data for a sample of mostly high-income countries. Our quanti…cation exercises
show that hard-to-measure non-cognitive human capital is important for HCQI, and HCQI
is important for output per worker. Many countries that perform well on international
tests have below-the-average productivities on non-cognitive human capital, and this is large
enough to drag down their HCQI. In addition, policy reforms that increase test score may
reduce aggregate output, and vice versa. This points to the importance of spelling out the
impacts of education policies on aggregate output when we formulate their objectives and
conduct cost-bene…t analyses. Here, our model provides a potentially useful tool.
    While we show that globalization and associated trade in factor services are critical,
theoretically, in assessing the quality of a country’s human capital, the data suggest that
the world is closer to autarky than it is to free trade. For the moment at least, educational
institutions that focus on one type of human capital to the great detriment of another are
the source of substantially lower income per capita; i.e. imbalance is a source of weakness.
However, the countries with imbalanced human-capital productivities would reap substantial
output gains if countries were to engage in free trade of the services of human capital; i.e.
under free trade, imbalance would be a source of strength.
    We now discuss additional caveats. First, in our quantitative exercises, although we do
not need direct measures of both cognitive and non-cognitive human capital, we need at
least one. This measure must be available in macro data, for cross-country comparison,
and in micro data as well, to guide occupation classi…cation. The measure we have used is
test score.64 We understand that test score is not perfect; e.g. high-stake tests may distort
teachers’incentives (e.g. Neal and Schanzenbach 2010), while low-stake tests may not solicit
  64
    Another widely used measure for human capital is returns to schooling in Mincer wage regressions (e.g.
Bils and Klenow 2000, Banerjee and Du‡o 2005, Schoellman 2012). We are unable to use this measure
because it’s unclear how it di¤ers for the cognitive dimension vs. the non-cognitive dimension.



                                                   41
enough student e¤orts (e.g. Akyol, Krishna and Wang 2018). Should a better measure
become available in the future, it can be incorporated into our framework.
    Second, the di¤erent ways in which countries produce human capital may provide incen-
tives for immigration; e.g. those educated in high relative-cognitive-productivity countries
(e.g. S. Korea) may have incentives to migrate to where such relative productivities are low
(e.g. the U.S.). This intuition for immigration is similar to trade, which we have in our
model. In addition, in our model, the individuals who migrate at young ages are not distin-
guishable from native-borns, and it is unclear whether data for immigrants show how much
human capital they accumulate in their birth countries. If such data is available for future
research, it will be interesting to explore the implications of the cross-country di¤erences in
cognitive and non-cognitive productivities for the welfare gains of immigration.
    Finally, we have taken cognitive and non-cognitive productivities as exogenous parame-
ters. Our motivation is to quantify these parameters and to draw out their implications for
HCQI and output per worker, given that previous estimates of their values do not exist.
Could policies a¤ect the values of cognitive and non-cognitive productivities? If so, what
policies? How much resources do these policies require? Could there be optimal policies,
and how might they vary in closed vs. open economies? We leave these questions for future
research.


References
 [1] Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson. "The Colonial Origins of
     Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation." American Economic Review
     91.5 (2001): 1369-1401.

 [2] Akyol, Ş. Pelin, Kala Krishna, and Jinwen Wang. Taking PISA Seriously: How Accurate
     are Low Stakes Exams?. No. w24930. National Bureau of Economic Research, 2018.

 [3] Allen, Treb, and Costas Arkolakis. "Trade and the Topography of the Spatial Economy."
     The Quarterly Journal of Economics 129.3 (2014): 1085-1140.

 [4] Almlund, M., Duckworth, A. L., Heckman, J., & Kautz, T. (2011). Personality psychol-
     ogy and economics. In Handbook of the Economics of Education (Vol. 4, pp. 1-181).
     Elsevier.

 [5] Altonji, Joseph G., and Charles R. Pierret. "Employer learning and statistical discrim-
     ination." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 116.1 (2001): 313-350.

 [6] Arkolakis, Costas, Arnaud Costinot, and Andrés Rodríguez-Clare. "New trade models,
     same old gains?" The American Economic Review 102.1 (2012): 94-130.

                                              42
 [7] Atkin, David, 2016. "Endogenous Skill Acquisition and Export Manufacturing in Mex-
     ico", American Economic Review 106(8), 2046-2085.

 [8] Autor, David H., Frank Levy and Richard J. Murname, 2003. “The Skill Content of
     Recent Technological Change: An Empirical Exploration”, Quarterly Journal of Eco-
     nomics 118(4).

 [9] Banerjee, Abhijit V., and Esther Du‡o. "Growth theory through the lens of development
     economics." Handbook of economic growth 1 (2005): 473-552.

[10] Barro, Robert J. and Sala-i-Martin, Xavier. Economic Growth. New York: McGraw-
     Hill, 1995.

[11] Behrman, J. R., Parker, S. W., Todd, P. E., & Wolpin, K. I. (2015). Aligning learning
     incentives of students and teachers: results from a social experiment in Mexican high
     schools. Journal of Political Economy, 123(2), 325-364.

[12] Bils, Mark, and Peter J. Klenow. "Does schooling cause growth?." American economic
     review 90.5 (2000): 1160-1183.

[13] Blanchard, Emily and William Olney, 2017. "Globalization and Human Capital Invest-
     ment: Export Composition Drives Educational Attainment", Journal of International
     Economics, 106, 165-183.

[14] Bombardini, Matilde, Giovanni Gallipoli, and Germán Pupato. "Skill dispersion and
     trade ‡ows." American Economic Review 102.5 (2012): 2327-48.

[15] Burnstein, Ariel, Eduardo Morales and Jonathan Vogel, 2016. “Changes in Between-
     Group Inequality: Computers, Occupations and International Trade”, mimeo.

[16] Card, David, and Thomas Lemieux. "Can falling supply explain the rising return to
     college for younger men? A cohort-based analysis." The Quarterly Journal of Economics
     116.2 (2001): 705-746.

[17] Casselli, F. 2005. “Accounting for Cross-Country Income Di¤erences.”in Handbook of
     Economic Growth.

[18] Caselli, Francesco, I. I. Coleman, and Wilbur John. "The world technology frontier."
     American Economic Review 96.3 (2006): 499-522.

[19] Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, Nathaniel Hilger, Emmanuel Saez, Diane W. Schanzen-
     bach, and Danny Yagan. 2011. “How Does Your Kindergarten Classroom A¤ect Your
     Earnings? Evidence from Project STAR.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(4):
     1593 –1660.

                                           43
[20] Costinot, Arnaud and Andrés Rodríguez-Clare, 2014. "Trade Theory with Numbers:
     Quantifying the Consequences of Globalization", in Handbook of International Eco-
     nomics, edts. Gita Gopinath, Elhanan Helpman, and Kenneth Rogo¤, vol. 4, chapter
     4.

[21] Cunha, Flavio, James Heckman and Susanne Schennach. “Estimating the Technology of
     Cognitive and Non-cognitive Skill Formation”, Econometrica 78(3), May 2010, 883-931.

[22] Davis, Donald R., and David E. Weinstein. "An account of global factor trade." Amer-
     ican Economic Review 91.5 (2001): 1423-1453.

[23] Davis, Donald and David Weinstein. "Bones, bombs, and break points: the geography
     of economic activity." The American Economic Review 92.5 (2002): 1269-1289.

[24] Deckle, Jonathan Eaton, and Samuel Kortum. 2008. “Global Rebalancing with Gravity.”
     International Monetary Fund Sta¤ Papers 55: 511-540

[25] Deming, David. 2009. “Early Childhood Intervention and Life-Cycle Skill Development:
     Evidence from Head Start.”American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 1(3): 111–
     34.

[26] Deming, David J. "The growing importance of social skills in the labor market." The
     Quarterly Journal of Economics 132.4 (2017): 1593-1640.

[27] Deming, David J. "The value of soft skills in the labor market." NBER Reporter 4
     (2017): 7-11.

[28] Duncan, Greg J., and Katherine Magnuson. "Investing in preschool programs." Journal
     of Economic Perspectives 27.2 (2013): 109-32.

[29] Eaton, Jonathan and Samuel Kortum, 2002. “Technology, Geography and Trade”,
     Econometrica, 70(5), 1741-1779.

[30] Ebenstein, A., Harrison, A., McMillan, M., Phillips, S. Estimating the impact of trade
     and o¤shoring on American Workers Using the Current Population Surveys. Review of
     Economics and Statistics 96(4): 581–595.

[31] Figlio, David and Susanna Loeb, 2011. “School Accountability”, in Handbook of the
     Economics of Education, Volume 3, Edited by Eric Hanushek, Stephen Machin and
     Ludger Woessmann, Elsevier North-Holland: Amsterdam, 383-421.

[32] Findlay, Ronald and Henryk Kierzkowski, 1983. "International Trade and Human Capi-
     tal: A Simple General Equilibrium Model", Journal of Political Economy, 91(6), 957-978.

                                            44
[33] Galle, Simon, Andres Rodriguez-Clare, and Moises Yi. 2018. “Slicing the Pie: Quantify-
     ing the Aggregate and Distributional E¤ects of Trade.”Mimeo University of California-
     Berkeley.

[34] Garces, Eliana, Duncan Thomas, and Janet Currie. 2002. “Longer-Term E¤ects of Head
     Start.”American Economic Review 92(4): 999 –1012.

[35] Hall, Robert E. and Charles I. Jones, "Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much
     More Output per Worker than Others?", Quarterly Journal of Economics, February
     1999, Vol. 114, pp. 83-116.

[36] Hanushek, E., "Education Production Functions", The New Palgrave Dictionary of
     Economics, 2008.

[37] Hanushek, Eric A., and Dennis D. Kimko. "Schooling, labor-force quality, and the
     growth of nations." American economic review 90.5 (2000): 1184-1208.

[38] Heckman, James J., Seong Hyeok Moon, Rodrigo Pinto, Peter Savelyev, and Adam
     Yavitz. 2010. “A New Cost–Bene…t and Rate of Return Analysis for the Perry Preschool
     Program: A Summary.”NBER Working Paper 16180.

[39] Hanushek, Eric, and Ludger Woessman. 2011. “How Much do Educational Outcomes
     Matter in OECD Countries?”Economic Policy 26(67): 427-491.

[40] Heckman, James J., and Tim Kautz. "Hard evidence on soft skills." Labour economics
     19.4 (2012): 451-464.

[41] Heckman, James J., and Tim Kautz. Fostering and measuring skills: Interventions that
     improve character and cognition. No. w19656. National Bureau of Economic Research,
     2013.

[42] Heckman, James J. and Yona Rubinstein. 2001. “The Importance of Noncognitive Skills:
     lessons from the GED Testing Program”, American Economic Review Papers & Pro-
     ceedings 91(2): 145-149.

[43] Hendricks, Lutz. "How important is human capital for development? Evidence from
     immigrant earnings." American Economic Review 92.1 (2002): 198-219.

[44] Hsieh, Chang-Tai, and Peter J. Klenow. "Misallocation and manufacturing TFP in
     China and India." The Quarterly journal of economics 124.4 (2009): 1403-1448.

[45] Hsieh, Chang-Tai, Erik Hurst, Charles Jones and Peter Klenow. “The Allocation of
     Talent and U.S. Economic Growth”, NBER working paper 18693.

                                            45
[46] Hummels, D., Jørgensen, R., Munch, J., & Xiang, C. (2014). The wage e¤ects of o¤-
     shoring: Evidence from Danish matched worker-…rm data. American Economic Review,
     104(6), 1597-1629.

[47] Hummels, David, Jakob R. Munch, and Chong Xiang. "O¤shoring and Labor Markets."
     Journal of Economic Literature.

[48] Jackson, Kirabo , Rucker C. Johnson, and Claudia Persico. 2016. “The E¤ects of School
     Spending on Educational and Economic Outcomes: Evidence from School Finance Re-
     forms,”The Quarterly Journal of Economics 131(1): 157-218.

[49] Jones, Benjamin. 2014. “The Human Capital Stock: A Generalized Approach.” Amer-
     ican Economic Review 104(11): 3752-3777.

[50] Klenow, Peter, and Andres Rodriquez-Clare. 1997. “The Neoclassical Revival in Growth
     Economics: Has It Gone Too Far?”NBER Working paper.

[51] Krugman, Paul. "Increasing returns and economic geography." Journal of political econ-
     omy 99.3 (1991): 483-499.

[52] Kuhn, Peter, and Catherine Weinberger. 2005. “Leadership Skills and Wages.”Journal
     of Labor Economics 23(3): 395-436.

[53] Lagakos, David, and Michael E. Waugh. "Selection, agriculture, and cross-country pro-
     ductivity di¤erences." American Economic Review 103.2 (2013): 948-80.

[54] Lee, Eunhee, 2017. "Trade, Inequality, and the Endogenous Sorting of Heterogeneous
     Workers", mimeo, University of Maryland.

[55] Li, Bingjing, 2016. "Export Expansion, Skill Acquisition and Industry Specialization:
     Evidence from China", mimeo, National University of Singapore.

[56] Ludwig, Jens, and Douglas L. Miller. 2007. “Does Head Start Improve Children’s Life
     Chances: Evidence from a Regression Discontinuity Design.”Quarterly Journal of Eco-
     nomics 122(1): 159 –208.

[57] Lundberg, Shelly. "Non-cognitive skills as human capital." Education, Skills, and Tech-
     nical Change, and Future US GDP Growth. University of Chicago Press, 2017.

[58] Malmberg, Hannes. 2017. “Human Capital and Development Accounting Revisited.”
     mimeo Institute for International Economic Studies.

[59] Neal, Derek A., and William R. Johnson, “The Role of Premarket Factors in Black –
     White Wage Di¤erences”, Journal of Political Economy 104 (5), October 1966, 869-895.

                                            46
[60] Nunn, Nathan. "Relationship-speci…city, incomplete contracts, and the pattern of
     trade." The Quarterly Journal of Economics (2007): 569-600.

[61] Ohnsorge, Franziska and Daniel Tre‡er, "Sorting it Out: International Trade and Pro-
     tection with Heterogeneous Workers." Journal of Political Economy 115(5) (2007): 868-
     892.

[62] Redding, Stephen J., and Daniel M. Sturm. "The costs of remoteness: Evidence from
     German division and reuni…cation." The American Economic Review 98.5 (2008): 1766-
     1797.

[63] Roy, Arthur. 1951. “Some Thoughts on the Distribution of Earnings.”Oxford Economic
     Papers 3(2): 135-146.

[64] Seth, Michael J. Education fever: Society, politics, and the pursuit of schooling in South
     Korea. University of Hawaii Press, 2002.

[65] Schmitt, D. P., Allik, J., McCrae, R. R., & Benet-Martínez, V. (2007). The geo-
     graphic distribution of Big Five personality traits: Patterns and pro…les of human
     self-description across 56 nations. Journal of cross-cultural psychology, 38(2), 173-212.

[66] Schoellman, Todd. "Education quality and development accounting." The Review of
     Economic Studies 79.1 (2011): 388-417.

[67] Schweinhart, Lawrence J., Jeanne Montie, Zongping Xiang, W. Steven Barnett, Clive
     R. Bel…eld, and Milagros Nores. 2005. Lifetime E¤ects: The HighScope Perry Preschool
     Study through Age 40. Monographs of the HighScope Educational Research Founda-
     tion,14. Ypsilanti, MI: HighScope Press.

[68] Tre‡er, Daniel. "The case of the missing trade and other mysteries." The American
     Economic Review (1995): 1029-1046.

[69] US Department of Health and Human Services, Administration for Children and Fam-
     ilies. 2010. Head Start Impact Study: Final Report. Washington, DC.

[70] Webb, L. Dean, Arlene Metha, and Kenneth Forbis Jordan. Foundations of American
     education. Merrill, 2013.

[71] Willis, Robert and Sherwin Rosen. “Education and Self-Selection”, Journal of Political
     Economy 87(5), October 1979, S7-S36.




                                              47
   Figure 1 Histogram of Employment Share of Non-cognitive Occupations



   8
   6
Density
  42
   0




            .1        .15         .2          .25        .3     .35
                            non-cog share, leadership PC
Figure 2 Normalized Test Score and Cognitive Employment Share
                       2a. Main Sample




                    2b. Expanded Sample
  Figure 3 Cognitive-Productivity Ranking vs. PISA-Math Ranking




Figure 4 Non-Cognitive-Productivity Ranking vs. PISA-Math Ranking
     Figure 5 Iso-HCQI Curve




Figure 6 Iso-HCQI Curve, Free-trade
         Figure 7 Changes in HCQI, Autarky to Free Trade




Figure 8 Immigrants’ Non-cognitive Share vs. Comparative Advantage
                             Table 1 AFQT Score and Wages of Non-cognitive and Cognitive Occupations

                                   (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)            (5)            (6)           (7)
                                             Non-Cog.       Cog.                     Guide &                        Full
      VARIABLES                 Replicate   SubSample   SubSample    Interaction      Direct     Enterprising      Sample
      Black                    -0.0537***   -0.0740**   -0.0462**    -0.0656***    -0.0661***    -0.0641***     -0.0522***
                                 (0.0196)    (0.0355)     (0.0230)     (0.0191)      (0.0191)      (0.0192)       (0.0195)
      Hispanics                 0.0425**      0.0276      0.0455*     0.0424**       0.0413**     0.0414**       0.0433**
                                 (0.0211)    (0.0375)     (0.0251)     (0.0205)      (0.0206)      (0.0206)       (0.0211)
      Age                       0.0349***   0.0465***   0.0286***     0.0320***     0.0323***     0.0316***      0.0202***
                                (0.00708)    (0.0126)    (0.00839)    (0.00687)     (0.00689)     (0.00690)      (0.00710)
      Non-cog. Occp.                                                  0.131***      0.121***      0.127***
                                                                       (0.0163)      (0.0163)      (0.0186)
      College                                                         0.179***      0.187***      0.195***
                                                                       (0.0265)      (0.0264)      (0.0263)
      AFQT                      0.183***    0.146***    0.183***      0.140***      0.137***      0.125***
                                (0.00964)   (0.0179)     (0.0114)      (0.0115)      (0.0115)      (0.0113)
      AFQT2                      -0.0130     -0.0185    -0.00453     -0.0356***    -0.0369***    -0.0358***
                                (0.00802)   (0.0140)    (0.00971)     (0.00948)     (0.00950)     (0.00956)
      AFQT x Non-Cog.                                                -0.0541***     -0.0345**      -0.00749
                                                                       (0.0160)      (0.0159)      (0.0182)
      AFQT x College                                                  0.0582**      0.0525**      0.0495**
                                                                       (0.0245)      (0.0245)      (0.0244)
      log(AFQT PISA Scale)                                                                                      0.912***
                                                                                                                (0.0437)
      Constant                  6.233***    6.178***    6.276***      6.218***      6.218***      6.232***      0.798***
                                 (0.112)     (0.199)     (0.133)       (0.109)       (0.109)       (0.109)       (0.283)
      Obs. No.                    3,210        973        2,237         3,210         3,210         3,210         3,210
      R2                          0.168       0.130       0.167         0.217         0.214         0.211         0.169


Notes: The dependent variable is log wage, and the sample is NLSY 79. Standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.1. Columns (1)-(3) are discussed in section 2, (4)-(6) in sections 2 and 5, and column (7) in section 8.
                              Table 2 Summary Statistics

                        Obs         Mean       Std. Dev.    Min        Max
Main Sample
  Labor Force Size      28        12541.24     23132.62     156.43   120464.70
 Non-cog. Emp. Share    28         0.2448       0.0565      0.1018    0.3775
Cognitive Emp. Share    28         0.7552       0.0565      0.6225     0.8982
 Total Output ($000)    28        4.69E+08     1.19E+09    4196242   6.32E+09
  Edu. Exp./Output      20         0.1255       0.0194      0.0985    0.1695
 PISA Reading Score     28         498.96        18.30      468.93     539.34
  PISA Math Score       28         503.73        22.17      455.80     553.40
 PISA Science Score     28         506.81        19.70      470.07    554.28
   |Net Cog. Exp.|      28         0.0158       0.0127     0.00004     0.0458
 |Net Non-cog. Exp.|    28         0.0286       0.0257      0.0008     0.1002

Expanded Sample
   Labor Force Size     34        11367.97     21312.48     156.43   120464.70
 Non-cog. Emp. Share    34         0.2395       0.0619      0.1018    0.3775
 Cognitive Emp. Share   34         0.7605       0.0619      0.6225     0.8982
  Total Output ($000)   34        3.97E+08     1.09E+09    4196242   6.32E+09
   Edu. Exp./Output     23         0.1228       0.0197      0.0960    0.1695
 PISA Reading Score     34         491.20        27.54      421.48     539.34
   PISA Math Score      34         495.93        30.55      419.84     553.40
  PISA Science Score    34         500.28        28.39      428.45    554.28
    |Net Cog. Exp.|     34         0.0410       0.0847      0.0000     0.4543
  |Net Non-cog. Exp.|   34         0.0677       0.1135      0.0008     0.5261
         Table 3 Main-Sample Countries, Years and Rankings

                                Cog-Prod    PISA Math    Non-Cog
Country               Year       Rank          Rank      Prod Rank
Australia             2000         23            8          18
Austria               2000         16           11          16
Belgium               2000          3            6           2
Czech Republic        2000          4           13          12
Denmark               2000         14           10          11
Finland               2000          1            3           3
France                2000         22           15          23
Germany               2000         18            9          21
Greece                2000         25           28           8
Hong Kong, China      2001          7            1          24
Hungary               2000         11           23          19
Iceland               2000         10           12           9
Ireland               2000         15           17           6
Italy                 2000         27           27          25
Korea, Republic of    2000          8            2          28
Luxembourg            2000         28           22          13
Netherlands           2000          2            5           1
New Zealand           1996         24            7           5
Norway                2000         21           20          17
Poland                2000          6           16          20
Portugal              2000         19           26          27
Slovakia              2000          5           21          10
Slovenia              2000          9           14          22
Spain                 2000         20           24          15
Sweden                2000         17           18          14
Switzerland           1990         12            4          26
United Kingdom        2000         13           19           4
United States         2000         26           25           7
                    Table 4 Normalized Test Score & Cognitive Employment Share

                               Raw PISA Score                    Scaled PISA Score
                  (1)          (2)     (3)        (4)              (5)       (6)
               Leader.       Leader. Guide &                     AFQT to PISA to
                 P.C.         P.C.    Direct  Enterprising        PISA      AFQT
       Main Sample

        ln(pck)   0.493**    0.493** 0.668***       0.574         0.475**    0.491**
                   (0.213)   (0.219) (0.235)       (0.351)         (0.204)    (0.233)
        ASNZ      0.199**            0.221***     0.185**         0.193**    0.209**
                  (0.0757)           (0.0738)     (0.0791)        (0.0724)   (0.0823)
        Obs. #       28         26       28           28              28         28
         R2         0.277     0.175    0.337        0.208           0.282      0.255

       Expanded Sample

        ln(pck)    0.427** 0.427** 0.565***        0.558*         0.426** 0.484**
                   (0.179) (0.182) (0.198)         (0.300)        (0.171)  (0.222)
        ASNZ      0.193***         0.210***       0.184**        0.188*** 0.208**
                  (0.0693)         (0.0682)       (0.0715)       (0.0662) (0.0788)
        Obs. #        34      32       34             34             34       31
         R2         0.256   0.154    0.302          0.207          0.268    0.248


Notes: The dependent variable is the log of PISA score normalized by output per worker to the
power of η = 0.1255. Standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. ASNZ is
the dummy for Australia and New Zealand. Columns (1)-(4) are discussed in section 5, and (5)-
(6) in section 8.
                 Table 5 Parameter Values under Various Specifications

                                Values                  Correlation Coefficients
                                                                  Non-
                                                 Cognitive      cognitive
                              θ        α        Productivity Productivity       HCQI
(1) Benchmark               1.973    1.676         1.000          1.000         1.000
   (2) Non-cog. Component   1.973    1.676         0.000          1.000         0.947
(3) Guide & Direct          3.014    1.491         0.991          0.967         0.967
(4) Expanded Sample         1.746    1.438         0.998          0.991         0.996
(5) Trade                   1.973    1.726         1.000          1.000         0.918
(6) PISA Scaled             1.904    1.684         0.999          1.000         0.999
(7) Alt. θ & α values       4.000    2.000         0.970          0.994         0.995
                          Table 6 Summary of Main Parameters and Their Benchmark Values

Parameter            Intuition          Value                      Target                        Value in Literature
            Elasticity in Human Cap
   η                   Prod             0.126       Edu. spending as share of output, (25)
              Dispersion of Innate                 Correlation btw. normalized PISA score
   θ                  Ability           1.973             and cog. emp. share, (26)          2 (Hsieh et al. 2018)
             Sub Elasticity in Agg.
   α               Production           1.676             Agg. prod. function, (27)          1.78 (Burnstein et al. 2016)
   Θk              Output TFP          Table 8            Residual of (27), given α          Data Appendix 6

              TFP of Cog.-H.-Cap.                  Normalized test score net of cog. emp.
                  Production           Figure 4         share, given θ and η, (26)

            TFP of Non-Cog.-H.-Cap.                 Revealed comp. advantage by relative
                   Production          Figure 4      emp. share, given α, θ and , (20)
                   Table 7 Output/Cognitive Human Capital & Relative Quantity of Non-cognitive Human Capital

                                                  Raw PISA Score                                         Scaled PISA Score
                        (1)             (2)            (3)               (4)            (5)               (6)          (7)
                                                                                                        AFQT to      PISA to
                   Leader. P.C.    Leader. P.C.    Guide&Direct     Enterprising       Trade             PISA         AFQT
  Main Sample

             𝑝
   log(1 +     )
             𝑝       2.480**         2.464**          3.035**           2.949         2.377**            2.462**       2.478**
                     (1.059)         (1.086)          (1.201)          (1.740)        (1.032)            (1.053)       (1.073)
      ASNZ          -1.104***                        -1.178***        -1.040**       -1.107***          -1.098***     -1.115***
                     (0.376)                          (0.378)          (0.393)        (0.372)            (0.374)       (0.381)
     Obs. No.           28              26               28               28             28                 28            28
       R2             0.308           0.177            0.328            0.243          0.309              0.308         0.305

  Expanded Sample

             𝑝
   log(1 +     )
             𝑝      3.284***         3.278***         3.872***        4.086**        3.151***           3.282***       2.428**
                     (0.973)          (0.993)          (1.099)         (1.701)        (0.991)            (0.971)       (1.038)
      ASNZ          -1.163***                        -1.246***        -1.083**       -1.161***          -1.159***     -1.106***
                     (0.377)                           (0.379)         (0.405)        (0.385)            (0.377)       (0.370)
     Obs. No.           34              32                34              34             34                 34            31
       R2             0.348           0.266             0.363           0.248          0.328              0.348         0.289


Notes: The dependent variable is the log of output per worker divided by PISA score. Standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.1. ASNZ is the dummy for Australia and New Zealand. Columns (1)-(4) are discussed in section 5, column (5) in
section 7, and (6)-(7) in section 8.
                                     Table 8 HCQI and Output per Worker

                                        Decomposition                % Output change          Trade
                       1             2               3                4           5             6
                                Contribution
                   Output Per    of Output   Contribution of     1% Rise in   1% Rise in   Contribution
Countries           Worker          TFP           HCQI               hck          hnk       of HCQI
Austria             0.6434        0.6294          1.0224          0.88%         0.26%        1.0029
Belgium             0.6892        0.4277          1.6114           0.75%        0.39%        1.8103
Czech Republic      0.3293        0.2888          1.1403           0.87%        0.27%        1.1038
Denmark             0.5979        0.5505          1.0861           0.86%        0.28%        1.0733
Finland             0.5037        0.3315          1.5196           0.79%        0.35%        1.4919
France              0.7329        0.8041          0.9115           0.90%        0.24%        0.8607
Germany             0.6296        0.6617          0.9515           0.90%        0.24%        0.8748
Greece              0.5190        0.5106          1.0164           0.85%        0.29%        1.0405
Hong Kong, China    0.6864        0.7021          0.9776           0.92%        0.22%        0.9535
Hungary             0.3517        0.3372          1.0430          0.89%         0.26%        0.9982
Iceland             0.5110        0.4645          1.1001           0.87%        0.28%        1.1498
Ireland             0.6642        0.5759          1.1532           0.84%        0.31%        1.0343
Italy               0.6761        0.7998          0.8453          0.91%        0.23%         0.7842
S. Korea            0.4304        0.5652          0.7615           1.03%        0.12%        0.6259
Luxembourg          1.4376        1.5127          0.9503          0.85%         0.29%        0.9748
Netherlands         0.6712        0.4013          1.6729           0.75%        0.39%        1.8185
Norway              0.7289        0.7388          0.9866          0.88%         0.27%        0.9915
Poland              0.3045        0.2918          1.0436          0.90%         0.24%        1.0007
Portugal            0.3845        0.4343          0.8853           0.93%        0.22%        0.8436
Slovakia            0.2979        0.2617          1.1383           0.87%        0.27%        1.1007
Slovenia            0.3929        0.4003          0.9816           0.91%        0.23%        0.9207
Spain               0.6087        0.6088          0.9997           0.87%        0.27%        0.9826
Sweden              0.5937        0.5676          1.0459          0.87%         0.27%        0.9693
                                               Table 8 Continued

                                     Decomposition                         % Output             Trade
                     1             2             3                     4              5           6
                              Contribution
                 Output Per    of Output     Contribution of       1% Rise in   1% Rise in   Contribution
Countries         Worker          TFP            HCQI                  hkc          hkn       of HCQI
Switzerland       0.5855        0.6270          0.9338              0.93%         0.21%        0.8197
United Kingdom    0.6349        0.4782          1.3277               0.79%        0.35%        1.4006
United States     1.0000        1.0000          1.0000              0.85%        0.29%         1.0000
                                            Table 9 HCQI, PISA Score & Output per worker

                                  Weight = Output                                         Weight = Labor Force Size
                log(PISA)                   log(HCQI)                        log(PISA)                   log(HCQI)
                    (1)             (2)          (3)             (4)             (5)           (6)           (7)            (8)
                                  Leader.     Guide &                                        Leader.      Guide &
                                    PC         Direct          Trade                           PC          Direct          Trade
 Main Sample
  log(Y/L)   -0.0649***          -0.000924        0.0170       0.220*       -0.0557***         0.0166        0.0224       0.281**
              (0.0176)            (0.0848)       (0.0862)      (0.128)        (0.0176)        (0.0795)      (0.0818)       (0.130)
  constant    6.180***             0.0104        0.00334       0.0311        6.184***          0.0163       0.00508        0.0519
              (0.0075)            (0.0363)       (0.0369)     (0.0549)       (0.00970)        (0.0438)      (0.0451)      (0.0718)
  Obs. No.        28                 28             28           28              28              28            28            28
       2
     R          0.344               0.000         0.001         0.101          0.278            0.002         0.003         0.152

 Expanded Sample
  log(Y/L)     -0.0121            0.0775          0.0950      0.220**         0.0320*         0.142**       0.153**      0.247***
              (0.0191)           (0.0685)        (0.0705)     (0.0987)       (0.0190)         (0.0593)      (0.0628)     (0.0890)
  constant   6.191***             0.0264          0.0192       0.0312        6.209***          0.0527        0.0428       0.0416
             (0.00959)           (0.0343)        (0.0353)     (0.0495)       (0.0140)         (0.0436)      (0.0462)     (0.0655)
  Obs. No.        34                34              34           34              34              34            34           34
       2
     R          0.012              0.038          0.054        0.135           0.081            0.153         0.156        0.194

Notes: The dependent variable is the log of PISA score in columns (1) and (5), and log(HCQI) in the other columns. Standard errors in
parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Columns (1)-(3) and (5)-(7) are discussed in section 6, and columns (4) and (8) in
section 7.
    Table 10 Counterfactual Exercises for the Free-Trade Equilibrium

                                     Gains
                  Change in          From
                  HCQI               Trade          % Output, Free Trade
                                                   1% Rise     1% Rise in
                                                    in hck        hn k
Countries             (1)              (2)            (3)         (4)
Austria             1.0054           1.0067         0.94%       0.21%
Belgium             1.1322           1.1533         0.41%       0.72%
Czech Republic      1.0032           1.0043         0.92%       0.22%
Denmark             1.0004           1.0011         0.89%       0.26%
Finland             1.0489           1.0568         0.58%       0.56%
France              1.0252           1.0294         1.01%       0.14%
Germany             1.0248           1.0290         1.00%       0.14%
Greece              0.9995           1.0001         0.85%       0.30%
Hong Kong           1.0462           1.0537         1.05%       0.09%
Hungary             1.0097           1.0118         0.96%       0.18%
Iceland             1.0006           1.0013         0.90%       0.25%
Ireland             1.0043           1.0055         0.77%       0.37%
Italy               1.0344           1.0400         1.03%       0.12%
S. Korea            1.2432           1.2834         1.13%       0.01%
Luxembourg          0.9995           1.0000         0.85%       0.29%
Netherlands         1.1415           1.1641         0.41%       0.72%
Norway              1.0038           1.0049         0.93%       0.22%
Poland              1.0222           1.0261         1.00%       0.14%
Portugal            1.0511           1.0593         1.06%       0.09%
Slovakia            1.0018           1.0027         0.91%       0.24%
Slovenia            1.0326           1.0380         1.03%       0.12%
Spain               1.0025           1.0035         0.91%       0.23%
Sweden              1.0013           1.0021         0.90%       0.24%
Switzerland         1.0550           1.0637         1.06%       0.08%
United Kingdom      1.0471           1.0547         0.61%       0.52%
United States       1.0000           1.0006         0.84%       0.31%
   Table 11 Normalized Net Exports & Relative Abundance in Non-cognitive Human Capital

                                                       (1)         (2)          (3)
         Main Sample
         Non-cog abundance x non-cog intensity      1.636***    1.635***     1.090***
                                                      (0.43)      (0.43)       (0.41)
         Cap abundance x cap intensity                            0.000        0.000
                                                                  (0.00)       (0.00)
         Skill abundance x skill intensity                                   9.122***
                                                                               (1.97)
         industry FE                                   yes         yes           yes
         country FE                                    yes         yes           yes
         R2                                           0.355       0.355        0.389
         Obs. No.                                     1103        1103          1103

         Expanded Sample
         Non-cog abundance x non-cog intensity      2.225***    2.147***     1.157***
                                                      (0.45)      (0.44)       (0.40)
         Cap abundance x cap intensity                            0.000        0.000
                                                                  (0.00)       (0.00)
         Skill abundance x skill intensity                                   9.010***
                                                                               (1.93)
         industry FE                                   yes         yes           yes
         country FE                                    yes         yes           yes
         R2                                           0.31        0.314        0.376
         Obs. No.                                     1508        1508          1429


Notes: The dependent variable is net export value divided by the sum of import and export
values, by industry by country. Standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
