NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INDIVISIBILITIES IN DISTRIBUTION
Thomas J. Holmes
Ethan Singer
Working Paper 24525
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24525

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2018

We thank Dominic Smith and Jonathan Willard for their research assistance on this project. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve
Bank of Minneapolis, the Federal Reserve Board, the Federal Reserve System, or the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w24525.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Thomas J. Holmes and Ethan Singer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Indivisibilities in Distribution
Thomas J. Holmes and Ethan Singer
NBER Working Paper No. 24525
April 2018
JEL No. D24,F0,L0
ABSTRACT
This paper develops and estimates a model of indivisibilities in shipping and economies of scale
in consolidation. It uses highly detailed data on imports for which it is possible to observe the
contents of individual containers. In the model, a firm is able to adapt to indivisibility constraints
by using consolidation strategies, and by determining how dense to make its distribution network
in both space and time. Indivisibilities are found to create significant scale economies in
distribution.

Thomas J. Holmes
Department of Economics
University of Minnesota
4-101 Hanson Hall
1925 Fourth Street South
Minneapolis, MN 55455
and The Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
and also NBER
holmes@umn.edu
Ethan Singer
Compass Lexecon
200 State Street
9 th Floor
Boston, MA 02109
singe119@umn.edu

1

Introduction

Indivisibilities arise in the distribution sector when, for example, dividing a shipment in half
does not divide the cost in half. Such indivisibilities are common: an ocean container
shipping half empty or a truck delivering a half-empty trailer generally ship for the same
price as a full load. When deliveries are infrequent, loads accumulate, and this is one strategy
for helping to ensure that boxes ship full. However, it can be a costly strategy: infrequent
deliveries make it hard for firms to exploit new information technologies that respond to
demand and infrequent deliveries force firms to carry high inventories. An alternative
strategy is to expand scale to fill up the boxes, and expand the variety of goods carried that
can be consolidated into the boxes. Mass retailers with broad product lines like Walmart
and Target do this, and can be viewed as eﬃcient technologies for resolving indivisibilities.
In this paper, we develop and estimate a model of indivisibilities in shipping. We use
data on container imports to lay out a set of facts, including that big retailers like Walmart
and Target pack shipments fuller compared to smaller firms. We estimate the cost eﬀects
of indivisibilities, including frictions that arise when multiple shipments of diﬀerent goods
are consolidated within the same containers. We estimate the rate at which consolidation
frictions fall when the volume of operations increases. Higher scale makes it easier to get the
right combination of goods that will exactly fill the boxes and makes it easier to synchronize
the optimal shipping times of the various goods being consolidated. To identify scale
eﬀects on frictions, we consider both seasonal eﬀects on volume, as well as diﬀerences in
volume across import source locations. We find that Walmart and Target face relatively
low indivisibility costs for imports from China, where they enjoy massive economies of scale.
From other source countries, including India, Walmart’s indivisibility cost is relatively big.
We also estimate the model for a sample of small importers and find that such firms generally
experience significant indivisibility costs. We use the model to simulate the cost eﬀects of
splitting Walmart in half, and obtain relatively sharp bounds on the eﬀects. Specifically,
we estimate such dissolution would raise inbound freight costs for imports between 4.0 and
4.7 percent of expenditures on ocean freight, or, alternatively, 0.22 to 0.26 percent of import
retail revenue. As Walmart’s profit rate is approximately 3 percent of revenue, our estimates
show such a dissolution would have a significant impact on Walmart’s profit rate.
We also use the analysis to contrast the indivisibility costs of the traditional bricks and
mortar model of retail with the Amazon online model of retail. In the traditional model,
regardless of whether a good is low volume or high volume, a good needs to be in the store
for a consumer to buy it. In Walmart’s case, it has to figure out how to keep over 100,000
products continuously on the shelves of over 3,000 stores. In Amazon’s case, goods are not

1

on shelves for immediate purchase. To facilitate same day delivery, high volume goods tend
to be placed in numerous fulfillment centers near large metro areas. Low volume goods
can be held in a few places, ready to be shipped to any consumer in the country with a
one or two-day lag. We show that Amazon’s import strategy is indeed diﬀerent and more
flexible than Walmart’s, and we use the estimated model to quantify what the savings in
indivisibility costs would be for Walmart in an ideal case of perfect flexibility.
A highlight of our analysis is our data set on individual shipments, based on bills of
lading filed by importers. There has been a large body of work in recent years exploiting
confidential transaction-level data on imports including Bernard, Jensen, and Schott (2009),
and Bernard et al. (2007, 2010). The bills of lading data set is closely related to this
previous data but is diﬀerent in two key respects in terms of what we do. First, the data
lists container identification numbers, making it possible for us to identify diﬀerent shipments
being consolidated into the same containers. Our data are particularly granular for Walmart,
Target, and Amazon, and we are to determine how they consolidate products into containers
at the level of the item numbers these firms use for their internal stock-keeping. Second,
confidentiality restrictions in the previous data preclude reporting any analysis at the level
of a specific firm. In contrast, with the bills of lading, we are able to conduct and report
the analysis at the firm level, which is essential for our project.
We provide a few comments about our model and how we take it to the data. We
break the analysis of the firm’s problem into two parts: a (short-run) shipment-level decision
and a (long-run) decision about the broad structure of the distribution system. At the
shipment level, the firm chooses whether to make any adjustments to a given shipment size
(expanding the shipment to help fill a container or perhaps rounding down). The firm can
also incur a friction to consolidate the shipment with other shipments. A key feature of the
data that helps identify the magnitude of the friction is how much empty space a firm will
leave in a container before choosing to consolidate it with other shipments. Our measure
of indivisibility cost includes three components: (1) the frictions incurred to consolidate
shipments, (2) the distortions from rounding shipment quantities up or down to match
standard container sizes, and (3) the cost of empty space when neither the consolidation nor
rounding up strategies fill the container. The long-run decision made by the firm includes
the choice of the number and locations of import distribution centers to use for import
flows, as well as decision rules determining delivery frequency by product. Here the firm
faces a trade-oﬀ where the benefits of having more import distribution centers and higher
delivery frequencies are oﬀset by higher indivisibility costs. To quantify the trade-oﬀs, we
estimate a structural model of the shipment-level decision, and in this way obtain estimates
of indivisibility costs. We also obtain direct estimates of ocean and inland freight costs.
2

We use product-level data to estimate delivery frequency policy rules. When we put all of
this together, we are able to bound the cost eﬀects of splitting up Walmart.
Our work is related to several literatures. One literature concerns the economics behind
the phenomenon of mass discounters, a format that has come to dominate retail in recent
decades, and which has had a broader impact on the economy, including the labor market
(see Autor et al (2017)). Holmes (2001) develops a theory about how new information technologies complement high delivery frequency, which can be more eﬃciently achieved if firms
can consolidate a wider variety of goods into the same shipments. That paper focused on
the last stage of distribution (from regional distribution center to store shelves), while the
focus here is the front end (from foreign source to import distribution center, which is where
imports pass through on the way to regional distribution centers). However, indivisibility
issues on the front end are similar to the issues on the back end in many ways. The advantage of looking at imports is that we have access to detailed shipment data collected as
part of customs, data generally not available for domestic shipments. Holmes (2011) provides estimates of economies of density achieved by scale economies for distribution centers.
Here there is a diﬀerent mechanism underlying scale economies, one based on indivisibilities. Basker and Van (2010) provides an empirical analysis connecting the emergence of
mass discounters with increased imports from developing countries such as China. Our paper complements this research by fleshing out and estimating an underlying microeconomic
mechanism for why mass discounters have an advantage at importing high-variety, low-value
goods from China.
Another related literature attempts to integrate the analysis of international trade with
intra-regional trade. Examples include Holmes and Stevens (2014), Cosar and Fajgelbaum
(2016), Atkin and Donaldson (2015), and literature on the link between transportation and
the spatial organization of economic activity, surveyed in Redding and Turner (2015). In our
analysis, the location of within-home-country distribution services is endogenous, depending
on which ports a firm chooses to channel imports. In the data there have been reallocations
of import flows across ports, including a decline in Los Angeles’s import share. Our analysis
sheds light on these shifts.
There is also a literature specifically on the emergence of containerization and its contribution to stimulating increases in globalization. (See Cosar and Demir (2017), Bernhofen,
El-Sahli, and Kneller (2016) Rua (2014), Hummels (2007), and Levinson (2006).) What is
new here is the way we highlight the economics of indivisibilities that go hand in hand with
the adoption of this technology. Before containerization, cartons were packed individually
in the holds of ships, so indivisibility was less of an issue. Blum et al (2018) is a related
paper that incorporates “lumpiness” in shipping, and obtains this lumpiness by putting a
3

fixed order cost in an inventory model. This is diﬀerent from the mechanism for lumpiness
here, which arises from an explicit model of indivisibilities, rather than a fixed cost.
There is also an operations research literature that aims to assist firms in how to optimize
their distribution systems.1 We utilize previous work in this literature when we estimate
transportation costs and in particular appeal to studies by Leachman (2005, 2008, 2011).
Our modeling approach diﬀers from what researchers do in this literature.
The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 presents a simple version of our
model to fix ideas. Section 3 describes the data and presents descriptive results. Section
4 presents the theory. Sections 5, 6, and 7 present the main estimates and dissolution
counterfactual. Section 8 quantifies cost savings from flexibility. Section 9 concludes.

2

A Simple Example

Before getting into details of the data or the full model, it is useful to work through a
simple example to fix ideas. Suppose a firm imports from one source location (think of it
as Shenzhen) to be delivered to various locations in the home country. The home country
is a circle surrounded by an ocean, as illustrated in Figure 1. Consumers are uniformly
distributed throughout the circle.
There are  diﬀerent products, indexed by , and let  be the total volume of product 
distributed across all consumers in the home country over one year. National annual volume
 is exogenous.
The firm sets up import distribution centers (IDCs) at port locations on the circumference
of the circle, through which imports are funneled through. Let  be the count of IDCs.
Fixing , it will be optimal to equally space the IDCs. Figure 1 illustrates example spacing
for diﬀerent possible counts of IDCs.
There is an internal freight cost of  to ship one volume unit, per unit distance of inland
transportation within the home country. The greater the IDC count  the lower the average
domestic distance shipped. For example, suppose  = 1, as in Figure 1(a). Assuming a
circle of radius one, the average distance between the single IDC and every point in the
circle is 1.131. The mean inland freight cost is then 1131 . With  = 2, as in Figure 1(b),
average domestic freight cost drops to 0750 . Let  () be the average inland freight cost
given IDC count . It is strictly decreasing and convex.
Goods are shipped in containers. Suppose the volume of one container is  ◦ , and let
the ocean freight cost per container be ◦ . Note we assume that ocean freight is the same
1

For example, the literature has developed algorithms for packing containers (see e.g., Pisinger (2002)).

4

regardless of destination port, while inland freight varies proportionately with distance. In
the real world, the diﬀerences between ocean freight and inland freight are not this extreme,
but the abstraction is useful for the illustrative results we derive here. For now, assume
consolidation across diﬀerent goods is not possible, so each product  ships in its own containers.
To model a benefit of frequent deliveries, suppose that if there were no other considerations, it would be optimal to spread out deliveries continuously and uniformly over time.
This will not be practical, so instead let frequency  be the integer count of deliveries of
product  in a year chosen by the firm. Let  be the average penalty, per unit volume consumed, incurred by delivering good  at a rate other than the ideal of complete smoothing
over time. We refer to  as the waiting cost parameter for good . It potentially varies
across goods depending on the relative value of the goods and any issues of perishability.
We can summarize the discussion so far by writing the distribution cost of product ,
given IDC count  and delivery frequency  , as
(      ) =  () +


 +   ◦


(1)

where  is the number of containers used in a delivery, satisfying
 = (


)
 ◦

(2)

The first term is annual domestic freight cost for good , the second term is the waiting cost,
and the third term ocean freight. Note the volume of each shipment of product  equals

(annual national volume divided by the number of deliveries in a year and the
 ≡ 

number of ports). The order volume  is then divided by container capacity  ◦ and rounded
up to the nearest integer (the ceiling function) to determine the count  of containers per
shipment of good . The firm’s problem is to pick  and (1  2    ), all integers, to solve

min

1 2 


X

(      ).

(3)

=1

Note the constraint that  must be the same across all goods ; in Section 8, we relax this
constraint. We can rewrite the firm’s problem (3) by breaking it into two stages, where the
firm first chooses , and then chooses  for each product  given . Let  ∗ (    ) be
the cost-minimizing delivery frequency for good , given . It is straightforward to prove

5

that delivery frequency is weakly increasing in the annual volume  of product . It is also
weakly decreasing in the IDC count .
We define the fill rate of product  as follows,
_ ≡

 
,
◦

which is loaded volume per container   divided by container capacity. The empty rate is
one minus the fill rate. In general, the empty rate will be positive because of the indivisibility
constraint.
Consider a limiting case where container capacity  ◦ is made arbitrarily small, while the
freight rate per unit volume ◦  ◦ remains fixed. In the limit, indivisibility constraints disappear, and the optimal plan is to deliver continuously over time and use IDCs continuously
over space. Suppose instead we are not at this limit and for simplicity assume there is
only one product variety,  = 1. If 1 is very small, the optimal solution is obviously to
make one delivery per year to a single IDC. Moreover, with 1 very small it will not fill the
container, so the empty rate is positive. Next consider the opposite extreme where 1 is
arbitrarily large. It is immediate that the delivery frequency 1 and the IDC count  must
become arbitrarily large, and that the empty rate must go to zero. That is, with large 1 ,
the indivisibility becomes irrelevant.
Finally, we consider the possibility of consolidation. Assume that in an earlier environment, frictions existed precluding the consolidation of diﬀerent products. Suppose there is a
technological advance that makes it possible to frictionlessly consolidate diﬀerent products.
For simplicity, assume the waiting cost is constant across types,  = . It is immediate that
in the new regime, the firm will ship containers that consolidate all products. The optimal
IDC count  and delivery frequency   solve

min ( 



X

  )

=1

P
If the total aggregate volume =1  is large, the firm will choose high  and high   ,
and container empty rates will be small. As we will see, this is a good approximation of
what Walmart is doing.

6

3

The Data and Some Descriptive Results

This section begins by providing an overview of our data, leaving details to the data appendix.
We then establish three sets of facts that motivate our model and empirical approach. First,
we document that Walmart and Target–the two largest importers by container volume–do
a substantial amount of consolidation in their import operations. We contrast this with consolidation by intermediaries of shipments from small firms. Second, we show that Walmart
and Target use bigger, more cost eﬃcient container sizes than small importers and have lower
empty rates. Furthermore, we make an analogous comparison within Walmart, across import source locations that vary in volume, and find qualitatively similar scale eﬀects. Third,
we examine facts about the count of import distribution centers that firms use (variable 
in the simple model). Note, we will also develop facts about delivery frequency (variable 
in the simple model), but it is convenient to postpone this discussion until Section 6.

3.1

Data Overview

Bills of lading are receipts issued for transactions in international trade. They are filed with
the U.S. Department of Customs and Border Protection (CBP) as part of customs. The
CBP records around 1 million bills of lading per month for imports that arrive by water.
The CBP sells the waterborne import data to various shipping information companies, which
then resell it.2 Our data consist of the complete set of filings for a select set of 18 months
over the period 2007 to 2015.3 For Walmart, we have extracted additional data covering
all months between January 2007 through December 2015, obtaining what we estimate to
be a 60 percent sample of Walmart’s waterborne imports over this 9-year period. We will
restrict attention to imports that arrive by container, an exclusion that mainly leaves out
vehicles and bulk arrivals such as oil. (Virtually all of Walmart’s waterborne imports arrive
in containers.) Our 18-month sample consists of 18.8 million bills of lading, covering the
arrival of 17.0 million containers. Our extended Walmart sample consists of 2.0 million
Walmart bills of lading, covering the arrival of 1.8 million containers. The data appendix
provides details about our samples and the extensive processing we have applied to the raw
data.
The information in a bill of lading is best illustrated by examples. Table 1 is a partial list
of the information from a bill of lading for a shipment of a particular type of microwave (a
black, 1.1 cubic feet, digital, Hamilton Beach microwave) to Walmart that arrived in the Port
2

We obtained raw CBP records from Ealing Market Data Engineering as well as Panjiva Inc.
The months are November, December of 2008, 2012, 2013, 2014 (8 months); January, February, March
of 2013, 2014, 2015 (9 months); December 2007, for a total of 18 months.
3

7

of Houston on January 7, 2015. The record provides specifics such as the place of receipt
(Zhongshan, which is close to Shenzhen), the foreign port (Chiwan in Shenzhen), and the
vessel name. A bill of lading also specifies the shipper name and consignee. However, firms
have the option to redact these two fields from public disclosure, and the redaction option
was selected in this case. As discussed further in the data appendix, redaction of shipper
and consignee information is a major limitation of this data. Nevertheless, in the “Marks”
field (which cannot be redacted), we can easily see the shipment is to Walmart. Also, in
the products field, we see the text pattern “GLN: 0078742000008,” which is a marker for
Walmart. (A search on this GLN code is the source of the vast majority of the records in our
Walmart sample.) There are eight containers in the shipment, and the 11-digit international
container identification code is listed for each of the eight containers.4 The record specifies
the piece count for each container, which in this case is 640 microwaves in each container.
The product field reports various details about the shipment, including the 9-digit item
number (Walmart’s internal stock-keeping number), and the 10-digit HS product code used
for customs reporting.
This microwave example is useful for a brief digression on the topic of freight rates for
containers, and the value of the goods inside. As discussed further in Appendix A3, in our
sample period it generally costs around $2,500 to $3,000 to ship a container from Asia to a
U.S. port. In our microwave example with 640 units in a container, this works out to an
ocean freight cost of about $4 per unit. We use public U.S. Census Bureau tabulations on
imports from China in 2015 for this type of microwave to estimate that the wholesale cost
(including freight to a U.S. port) is approximately $42 per unit. (The wholesale cost of an
entire container load would be $26 880.) Thus for this good, the freight cost of delivering
the container to a U.S. port represents about 10 percent of the wholesale cost of getting
there. For more valuable goods, such as footwear and electronics, the share would be lower,
say 5 percent. Below we assume the share is 8 percent, and we say more about this in the
data appendix.
This particular microwave happens to be the highest volume product for 2015, at the item
number level, across all products imported by Walmart in 2015 arriving by ship. Walmart
imported 828 containers of this product in 2015, and virtually all of them were stuﬀed with
exactly 640 units, adding up to over half a million microwaves. Delivery frequency in 2015
for this item averaged twice a month ( = 24 in the notation of the simple model), and
Walmart uses 5 import distribution centers ( = 5), so the average number of containers in
= 7. For this particular high volume product, the
one shipment is approximately  = 828

4

The registry is the Bureau International des Containers, which determines a BIC Code for all containers
used in international trade.

8

indivisibility constraint limiting shipments to integers such as 6, 7, or 8 containers is unlikely
to be a big issue.5 However, it is the exceptional case of the largest volume good.
In Table 2, we turn to more typical cases where shipment volumes for particular products
are significantly less than what would fill a container. In these cases, Walmart typically
consolidates diﬀerent products within the same container. In the two examples in Table 2,
each distinct product (at the 9-digit item level) is given its own bill of lading. Henceforth,
we equate the terms shipment and bill of lading. Panel A is an example where a single
shipper (Buzz Bee Toys) accomplishes the consolidation, combining four diﬀerent products
that it sells to Walmart. Panel B is an example where consolidation takes place across five
diﬀerent products from five diﬀerent firms. These shipments arrived in 2007, a year when
Walmart generally did not invoke the redaction option, and so for these records we observe
shipper information.
The second to last column of Table 2 specifies the shipment volume, measured in cubic
meters (cbm). The total volume of the shipments in the first container is 54 cbm and in
the second is 69 cbm. We say more about container sizes below but mention here that
the first total volume is just below the practical carrying capacity of a standard 40-foot
container, and the second volume indicates use of the slightly larger “high-cube” container,
which Walmart commonly uses. For both cases, the combined weight of the goods shipped
sums to around 5,000 kg, which is about a fifth of the maximum capacity by weight. For
imports of consumer goods from China, the relevant capacity limitation in a container is
virtually always volume, not weight, so when we refer to the fill rate, volume will be the
relevant measure.
The place of receipt variable tells us the source location where a container was packed.
Panel A of Table 3 provides counts of shipments and containers for the 9-year Walmart
sample, including counts from China as source location, and more narrowly from Shenzhen,
China. (Over half of the containers from China originated in Shenzhen.) Over the 9-year
sample, 87 percent of Walmart’s shipments (1.7 out of 2.0 million) originated from China.
Note that Hong Kong is included as part of China throughout the paper. If we calculate the
China share at the container level rather than the shipment level, the share is approximately
the same, 86 percent (1.6 out of 1.8 million containers).
Walmart and other large importers negotiate shipping contracts directly with shipping
companies. For such transactions, the consignee in the bill of lading is referred to as the
Beneficial Cargo Owner (BCO). In contrast, smaller importers generally work with an intermediary called a freight forwarder, who then negotiates with the shipping company. In these
cases there are two shipping records for a given shipment, the Master Bill of Lading, covering
5

Only 12 of the 828 containers shipped had less than the full load of 640 microwaves..

9

the contract between the shipping company and the freight forwarder, and the House Bill of
Lading, covering the contract between the freight forwarder and the ultimate consignee. In
our analysis, we separate out the master bills of lading to avoid double counting. We will
refer to shipments with house records as Freight Forwarder (FF) Intermediated. The last
row of Table 3 reports that in the 18-month sample, just over half of all shipments are FF
intermediated (7.3 out of 14.0 million), and these account for 38 percent of containers (6.5
out of 17.0 million). Overall, China accounts for 44 percent of container imports (7.4 out of
17.0 million), and Shenzhen is the source of 27 percent of Chinese imports (2.0 out of 7.4).
Given the enormous role China plays in container imports, much of our analysis will focus
specifically on imports from China.

3.2

Evidence on Consolidation

We define a shipment as consolidated if any container listed on the shipment record is also
referenced by some other shipment arriving at the same time. We group shipments linked by
shared containers and call any such combination a consolidated shipment group. For example,
if shipment 1 is linked to shipment 2 through shared container A, while shipment 2 is linked
to shipment 3 through shared container B, then shipments 1, 2, and 3 are all part of the same
group. The shipments in Panel A of Table 2 are all in one consolidated shipment group,
and the shipments in Panel B are in another group. We refer to an individual shipment
such as the microwave example in Table 1 as an unconsolidated shipment.
We discuss consolidation by Walmart first and then turn to other firms. Walmart
completes its paperwork in a way that is convenient for our purposes. All shipments within
a container of a given product (at the item-number level) are generally reported on the same
bill of lading. Furthermore, each diﬀerent product in the container generally gets its own
bill of lading. Thus for Walmart, our bill-of-ladings based measure of consolidation captures
the actual degree of product consolidation. Appendix A1 provides additional discussion of
this point. We can say something about the extent to which consolidation is taking place
across diﬀerent Walmart suppliers (as in Panel B of Table 2), as opposed to within a single
supplier (Panel A). We use data from the first 15 months of our sample period, during which
Walmart generally did not invoke the option to redact the shipper and consignee. For this
sample, we estimate 34 percent of consolidated shipments, on a container-weighted basis,
aggregate products from two or more distinct suppliers.
In Table 4 we report the share of containers in consolidated shipments, and for unconsolidated shipments, we distinguish single container versus multi-container shipments. Panel
A uses our 9-year Walmart sample to report on imports from China, as well as from the next
10

four highest volume source countries. Consolidated shipments account for 42.0 percent of
all Walmart’s imports from China. The next largest source country is Bangladesh. (Note
the remarkable disparity in container volume between first and second highest: 1.57 million
from China, 0.03 million from Bangladesh.) The consolidation rate for Bangladesh is quite
high, 75.3 percent. Bangladesh specializes in clothing, a product segment where product
variety is important, and this magnifies the bite of the indivisibility issue. India’s rate is
a little less than China’s. After we estimate the model, we will have more to say about
Bangladesh and India.
We process the 18-month complete sample to derive information for additional firms. For
BCO records, we begin with a list of large companies and take various processing steps to
identify the records for these companies. Panel B in Table 4 lists the retailers for which we
found 40,000 or more container imports from China in the sample, which includes Walmart,
Target and four others. It is striking how similar Target is to Walmart in its consolidation
behavior. Later, when we estimate the model and incorporate additional aspects of the
data beyond Panel B, we will find that the estimated parameters for Target are remarkably
similar to those for Walmart. Next, skip a few rows to Costco. The measured consolidation
rate is zero. To understand why Costco is so diﬀerent from Walmart or Target, we need
to recognize the fundamentally diﬀerent business model used by Costco. In the Costco
format, there is very little product variety and very high volumes per product, and therefore
less of a need for consolidation. Now look at K-Mart, which is similar to Walmart and
Target in its type of business, but the reported consolidation share is only 10.2 percent.
From inspection of the records, it appears very common for K-Mart to consolidate diﬀerent
products into the same shipment record, and this reporting practice likely accounts for
much of the discrepancy between what we find for K-Mart and our results for Walmart and
Target. Finally, the hardware/building supply giants Lowes and Home Depot have very low
consolidation rates both because they often sell bulky items such as patio sets that need no
consolidation and because, like K-Mart, they appear to often consolidate multiple products
into a single shipment record. For this data reason, when we estimate the model we will
focus on Walmart, Target, and Costco.
We next turn to FF-Intermediated shipment records. One fortunate thing about these
records is that the option to redact consignee is generally not used. (BCO records are
quite diﬀerent. All the BCO retailers in Panel B, except Costco, generally redact.) We
process the consignee information to pull out address information and then link shipment
records by consignee name and address, obtaining 380,176 unique consignees. (We continue
to focus on imports from China.) We then classify each consignee by its total count of
diﬀerent consolidated shipment groups or unconsolidated shipments. Call this number the
11

consignee’s group count (think of an unconsolidated shipment as one shipment group). We
will treat this count as a measure of a firm’s size as an importer. For FF-Intermediated
shipments, we define a shipment as consolidated if and only if the shipment shares a container
with a shipment of at least one diﬀerent consignee. Note that in Panels A and B of Table 4,
where we are focused on BCOs, the consignee is the same (e.g. Walmart) across shipments
in a group. Diﬀerent products from the same or diﬀerent suppliers are being aggregated,
but all of the products are being shipped to the same consignee, with the ocean container
going all the way to the door of the consignee’s distribution center in the United States. In
contrast, the consolidations in Panel C are what is known as “Less than Container Load,”
or LCL shipments in the trade. Freight forwarders consolidate LCL goods for diﬀerent
consignees into containers at foreign ports, and then after arrival at U.S. ports unpack the
ocean containers and forward the individual LCL shipments to the ultimate consignees. In
other words, LCL shipments miss out on the “Full Container Load” or FCL benefit of a
locked, packed container delivered all the way to the door of the consignee.
The first point to make is that the share of freight-forwarded containers that consolidate
shipments going to diﬀerent consignees is quite low, equaling only 4.8 percent. Even if
we weaken the definition of consolidation to only require two diﬀerent shipments (and not
necessarily diﬀerent consignees), the overall rate is only 8.9 percent. Thus, we see that
consolidation of LCL loads for diﬀerent consignees is small compared to the consolidation
of diﬀerent products done by Walmart and Target. The share reported in the table is on a
weighted container basis. The unweighted shipment share (not reported) that is consolidated
is higher, of course, and equals 36.8 percent.6 However, the analogous statistics for Walmart
and Target are also higher (84 percent in both cases), and the wide diﬀerence persists. Our
point that the LCL market is relatively small may be surprising to some because there
are many well-known companies that oﬀer LCL service, such as DHL Global Forwarding.
However, DHL’s public statistics indicate that LCL container volume is only on the order of
a 2.5 percent share of the firm’s total volume, consistent with the low share we find here.7
Next, examine the pattern across consignees of diﬀerent size. At the bottom of Panel C,
we use the number of shipment groups a consignee received to classify the consignee into one
of six size categories. The very smallest consignees have the highest consolidation rate, but
it is still only 9.0. The rate sharply decreases as size increases, falling to only 1.4 percent
of containers for the largest consignees. Note also that larger consignees are substantially
more likely to ship multi-container, unconsolidated shipments, compared to single container
6

Unweighted shipment shares are reported by consignee size class in Table 9 below.
See DHL, "Ports of the World” (undated), which reports FCL shipments of 1.375 million 40-foot equivalents (FEU) and LCL of 2.0 million cbm, which we convert to FEU following Table 5 (58 cbm = 1 FEU).
7

12

shipments.

3.3

Evidence on Container Size and Empty Rates

In this subsection, we present evidence on container sizes and empty rates. Before getting to
the results, it is useful to provide background information about containers. There is some
variation in container size. (Table 5 lists the main choices.) A standard 40-foot container
has a rated volume of 67.7 cbm, but the practical volume is considered to be about 58 cbm.8
The half-size 20-foot container has a practical volume of 28 cbm, a little less than half of
the full size. The price discount on the half size is at most only about 25 percent compared
to the full size (see the data appendix for more about pricing), so price per usable volume
shipped is on the order of 50 or more percent higher (=0.75/0.50) when a half size is used.
There is also a 40-foot version that is one foot taller than the standard container, called
a high cube with 68 cbm of practical space. There can be a cost advantage to using a
high cube instead of a standard container. However, the diﬀerence is small relative to the
diﬀerence between the standard and half size. Also, while in our data we can separate out
half-size containers, we cannot always tell whether a given 40-foot container is standard or
the high-cube variant. For this reason, in our analysis we will generally lump together the
standard and high-cube sizes and refer to both as full-size containers.
We use the term fill amount to denote the volume of goods contained in a particular
imported container. We take the 18-month sample and consider the subsample for which
we have volume of the contents. In Figure 2(a), we start with a histogram of fill amounts
of container imports originating in China, derived from our 18-month complete sample.
Notice that there is a concentration of mass just below 28 cbm (the capacity of the half
size), another just below 58 (the capacity of the standard size), and another below 68 (the
capacity of a high cube).9 Also note that while there is mass near fill amounts consistent
with full containers, there is also mass in size levels with significant empty space, such as at
40 cbm, a point where a container would be about a third empty.
Figure 2(b) is constructed the same way, except we use Walmart’s imports from China.
Note the dramatic diﬀerence in fill levels. There is hardly a hint of the use of any half-size
containers. Also, there is virtually no probability weight around the 40 cbm range. We
only start seeing mass at fill levels above 50 cbm. There are two peaks above 50, one
corresponding to standard containers and the higher one to high-cube containers. Figure
8

See Cargo From China in the references for a table listing practical volumes.
We can see some even higher than 68. This is a combination of (1) there is yet another size, 45 foot; (2)
in certain cases, firms may be able to pack goods tighter and get closer to the theoretical maximum capacity;
(3) there is measurement error.
9

13

2(c) in the series depicts Walmart’s originations from India. India is the third largest source
country. Nevertheless, the volume obtained from India is tiny compared to the volume
from China. Unlike Bangladesh, where virtually all containers are packed in one place
(the port of Chittagong), source locations in India are geographically dispersed, which limits
the ability to consolidate. From the figure, we can see that Walmart sometimes uses halfsize containers for imports from India, and sometimes uses full-size containers shipped with
significant empty space.
Table 6 summarizes how much empty space there is in the various data samples considered
in Table 4. The first column reports for each sample the share of containers that are half size.
We have emphasized so far that for imports from China, containers tend to hit the volume
limit (“cube out”) before hitting the weight limit (“weigh out”). However, for dense goods
such as cement, the weight limits may hit first, and for these goods it can be economical to
use the half size. We have found that a good way to separate dense goods is to pull out
shipments that list two or more half-size containers.10 In the next column of Table 6, we
report half-size container shares, after these dense goods are pulled out. Either way, the
first point to make is that Walmart’s use of half-size containers is miniscule, equal to 0.6
percent for our preferred statistic. Note this is also true for Bangladesh, which is able to
achieve high levels of consolidation (recall Table 4). In contrast, Walmart makes some use
of half sizes out of India (4.3 percent) and the other source countries. These cross-country
diﬀerences in Walmart’s use of half sizes are little changed if we put in controls for product
(2-digit HS level). Next look at other large retailers out of China. Both Target and KMart are similar to Walmart. Next consider Costco. Since Costco is not consolidating,
it sometimes needs to use the half sizes, doing so at the relatively high rate of 7.2 percent.
Finally, the bottom part of the table shows how smaller importers that use freight forwarders
are behaving. In the smallest size category, a third of all containers are half size.11 The
half-size rate decreases monotonically with our measure of size, falling to only 7.6 percent
for the largest size category, which is about the same level as Costco.
Next, we define fill and empty rates. We exclude consolidated shipments and condition
on whether a half or full size is used. Let  be the cbm per container for shipment .
We define the empty rate for full sizes to be
_  = 1 −
10

min (  58)

58

If the weight limit is not binding, it would be much cheaper to use one full size rather than two half
sizes. We find that shipments using more than one half-size container are typically heavy and would be
above the weight limit if the contents were doubled and put in full-size containers.
11
For the statistics in Table 6 for FF-Intermediated firms, we restrict the sample to shipments that are
not consolidated.

14

where, again, 58 is the practical capacity of a standard container. The empty rate for
half sizes is analogous, using 28 as the cutoﬀ. Empty rates are reported in Table 6 for
the various samples. For Walmart’s goods coming out of China and Bangladesh in half
size containers, the empty rate is almost 20 percent. But recall it is very rare to use half
sizes, and when it happens it is probably some unusual circumstance where consolidation is
impossible. Nevertheless, note the empty rates out of China or Bangladesh are 20 points
lower than out of the other source countries. Looking farther down the table at the other
samples, we can see lots of empty space in the half-size containers throughout all samples.
In particular, on average, half-size containers ship a quarter empty. This is consistent
with standard advice that if a shipment fills at least 50 percent of a half-size container, it
is cheaper to send it unconsolidated rather than as a LCL shipment.12 The last column
presents empty rates for full sizes. For Walmart out of China or Bangladesh, the empty
rate is only about 1.7 percent. Empty rates out of the other countries are higher by a factor
of two or three. Looking at the bottom for FF-Intermediated out of China, we see for the
small size class that the empty rate is 6.6 percent, which is four times higher than the empty
rate out of China for Walmart.
Finally, in Figure 3 we plot the empty rate over time for Walmart out of China. While
noisy, there is a decreasing pattern from around 1.9 percent at the beginning of the sample
to 1.4 percent at the end.

3.4

Evidence on Counts of Import Distribution Centers

In the simple model of indivisibilities in Section 2, the optimal number of Import Distribution Centers (IDCs) is higher, the greater the product volume. This relationship is nicely
illustrated by the evolution of Walmart’s import supply chain. In the 1990s, Walmart’s
imports from China were relatively small, and it imported goods through one IDC in Savannah. As imports grew, Walmart changed its import strategy. Walmart added Los Angeles
and Norfolk in 2000, and Houston and Chicago in 2005/2006 (see MWPVL (2017)).
The expanded count of IDCs that coincided with the explosion in imports from Asia is
a more general phenomenon. Target, for example, has four IDCs (Los Angeles, Seattle,
Savannah, and Norfolk). In the logistics literature, the strategy of putting four IDCs
at approximate “corners” of the U.S., to minimize shipment distances within the U.S., is
sometimes called a “four corners” import strategy (see Leachman 2011). The "five corners"
strategy of Walmart adds Houston. Note that Walmart has a larger volume than Target,
and its choice of five IDCs versus Target’s four is consistent with the theory.
12

See Cargo From China.

15

4

Theory

Consider a firm that imports goods from foreign destinations. We model two aspects of
the firm’s decision making. The first is a long-run decision about the structure of import
distribution. This aspect is broad, including the choice of how many diﬀerent IDCs to use
in the supply chain, as well as delivery frequency. The result of this decision determines
the rate at which a particular-sized shipment will appear that will need to be sent from
a particular source location to a particular destination IDC. The arrival of a particular
shipment is the occasion for the second aspect of decision making. At each such point, the
firm has an opportunity to adjust the size of the particular shipment, up or down, to address
indivisibilities in shipping. The firm also has the option to consolidate the newly arriving
shipment with other shipments. In Section 2, we modeled the long-run decision about IDC
count and delivery frequency, but we kept the shipment-level decision simple. Here, we
develop a richer model of the shipment-level decision.
Formally, let  be an index summarizing all the long-run decisions that the firm has made.
For example, in the notation of Section 2,  = ( 1  2   ), which is the count of IDCs,
and the delivery frequency of each product .
We take the long-run decision  as fixed
throughout this section.
The choice of  determines the arrival distribution of shipments that will need to go
out. Let  index a particular shipment originating at  with destination , and let 
denote an initial targeted volume of the shipment, which is determined by issues separate
from indivisibilities. Let  (|) be the cumulative distribution function (cdf) of the target
volume , for goods from origin  to destination , given the long-run decision . To see why
the cdf  would depend on , observe that if  specifies a high level of delivery frequency
and a large number of IDCs, then we would expect to see small values of , as shipments
are finely divided up over time and space.
The firm chooses whether to send a given shipment consolidated or unconsolidated. For
simplicity, we assume costs for consolidated shipments are proportional to volume according
to the following specification:
 (| ) = (1 +   ).

(4)

Interpret parameter  as the shipping cost in an ideal world with no indivisibilities. We
will relate  to container prices below. The parameter  ≥ 0 is the consolidation friction,
which incorporates a variety of diﬀerent frictions. It includes any distortions in the timing
of shipments that are incurred as part of consolidation. The friction may be geographic in
16

nature, when it is necessary to combine diﬀerent goods from diﬀerent originating factories or
goods meant for diﬀerent downstream destination warehouses. The parameter also includes
the coordination cost. If there are computer advances that make it easier to keep track of and
coordinate processing across diﬀerent products, then   would decrease. Finally, note that
we allow the friction   to depend upon the source location  as well as the long run decision
. We expect there to be economies of scale in consolidation. If a distribution system is
chosen with a large number of destination IDCs, this reduces volume to any particular IDC,
and we expect that consolidation will be more diﬃcult. Below we will explicitly parameterize
how the friction depends upon volume.
If the firm chooses not to consolidate, then indivisibility issues must be confronted. In
this case, we allow the firm to make an adjustment to the order size as a way to minimize
indivisibility costs. In particular, it can round up to fill empty space or round down to
eliminate a partially filled container. Let  be shipment volume after adjustment. Assume
a change in the shipment size from  to  results in a net benefit to the firm (excluding
freight cost) equal to
¶2
µ
−
.
(5)
(  ) = ( − ) − 

The parameter  specifies a linear shadow benefit of the additional volume squeezed into a
container (if   ) or the lost benefit from a smaller order (if   ). The last term is a
quadratic adjustment cost from distorting the volume choice  from the initial target. Note
the cost of a given percentage deviation increases proportionately with the initial target size
. The parameter  governs the magnitude of adjustment costs. We assume  is a random
variable drawn from a discrete distribution  ∈ {1  2   } and let the probability the
firm draws  be  .
We allow for two container types: type 1 (half size) and type 2 (full size), with capacities
2
 1 = 12 2 . Assume the freight charge for the half size satisfies 2  1  2 , so the full size
is cheaper per unit volume when shipped full. We now define the parameter  introduced
earlier as cost per unit capacity of a full-size container,
≡

2
.
2

In our estimation, we also allow an additional charge  ≤ (2 − 1 ) if the firm sends a
shipment with a mix of type 1 and type 2 containers. Let ̃1 () = ( 1 ) be the number
of half-size containers that would be needed to ship the entire load of volume . The firm
would always use one full size instead of two half sizes, so the count of containers of each

17

type given  is
̃1 ()
)
2
̃1 () = ̃1 () − 2̃2 ().

̃2 () = (

(6)

The freight cost to ship  is
 () = 1 ̃1 () + 2 ̃2 () +  1{̃1 ()0 and ̃2 ()0} .
The firm chooses  after observing the realization of adjustment cost  . The optimum
adjustment  given the realization of  and  solves
µ

−
(  ) = max  −  
0


¶2

−  ().

Note we require that   0, that is, there is no option for the firm to round down and simply
not have any shipment go out.
We incorporate one last ingredient to the shipment-level decision, which adds shocks
 and  to the firm’s profit conditioned on whether or not the firm consolidates. Assume these random shocks are drawn, i.i.d., from the type 1 extreme value distribution with
standard deviation . We make the distribution proportionate to the initial target shipment size  to ensure that our setup has constant returns throughout, except what happens
through the indivisibility factor.
In summary, given the random realization of the initial target size , the adjustment cost
parameter  and the shocks ε = (   ), the firm chooses whether or not to consolidate
to maximize
∗ (   ) = max {− () +   (  ) +  } ,
where dependence on the long run decision  is implicit.
integrating over the shocks ε and the draws of  , is





The expected value given ,

¶
µ
¶¶
µ
µ
(  )
− ()
+ exp
.
() =
   ln exp


=1

X

(7)

To understand how this model works, suppose that if the firm were to ship the original
target value , there would be empty space in a full container. Suppose we solve the first18

order condition for the adjusted level  to maximize the benefit (5) at zero marginal cost of
additional freight. In this case, the optimum would adjust the shipment size upward at a
rate

=
2
yielding a choice

ª
©
 = min  (1 + )  ̃2 ()2 ,

which takes into account that the solution could be at the corner where the container is
filled. It is easy to see that as  becomes very large, the percentage increase needed to round
up the volume to fill empty space gets small. That is, for large  we will necessarily be at
the corner. Note that we will not necessarily round up: there is also the option to round
down. Either way, for large , the firm will choose to adjust the shipment  so that the
firm ships only full-size containers that are exactly filled. In short, the indivisibility issue
becomes inconsequential when shipment sizes are large.

5

Estimating the Shipment-Decision Model

In this section we produce estimates of the shipment-decision model. The model is a databe an
generating process for observations on shipments. For each shipment , let 

indicator variable for whether or not the shipment is consolidated. Let  be the volume
= 1, then  =  ; that is, the shipment
of a particular shipment. In the model, if 

= 0, then  =  ; that is, the
that goes out is the initial target level. If instead 

= 0, the
shipment going out is some adjustment from the target level. In cases where 

1
2
count of containers of each type,  and  , is determined by (6). A complete description
1
2
of observation  is {
       }. For constructing moments, it will also be useful to
define
 + 1{
(1 1 + 2 2 ) ,
̃ ≡ 1{
 =1} 
 =0}
which equals shipment volume in the event of consolidation and otherwise, if unconsolidated,
equals the volume of the containers used.13
To simplify estimation, we make parameter restrictions. First, for a given origin 
and destination , we assume the distribution  () of the initial target shipment level is
13

Under the assumption that there is no empty space in consolidated shipments, then the sum across ̃
will add up to all the containers used in the data. In the data appendix we explain how we use piece-count
information for each shipment and container to estimate ̃ for all observations. We observe  for some
observations, but not all.

19

lognormal, with parameters  and 2 . To motivate this assumption, consider Figure 4(a),
which is a histogram of log shipment volume (̃ ) for Walmart out of Shenzhen, including
both consolidated and unconsolidated shipments. We normalize the volume of one full-size
container to be one, 2 = 1. According to the model, we see the initial target  only in
= 1; otherwise we see   the volume after adjustments to respond to the
cases where 

indivisibility. In the figure, unconsolidated shipments are at the mass points ln(1), ln(2),
and so on. Excluding these mass points, the distribution of  appears to be approximately
log normal and motivates our choice of functional form.14
Second, we assume for our baseline estimates that the cost for a half-size container is
75 percent of that of a full size, 1 = 0752 . The data appendix discusses evidence on
container pricing motivating this assumption. We normalize 2 = 1, so dollar units are in
terms of the price of shipping one full-size container.
Third, we assume
2
(8)
 =  ≡ 2 = 1,

that is, the marginal value of one unit of empty space in a container exactly equals price
per unit volume in an idealized world with no indivisibility issues, normalized to one,. This
assumption is motivated by a consideration of the full problem where the firm picks the
distribution of arrival sizes of : If indivisibilities are negligible, then (8) must approximately
hold.
Fourth, we assume a two-point distribution for the adjustment cost  , with 2 = ∞
and 1 = 2. This implies growth for  = 1 is  1 = 025 with probability  1 and growth
for  = 2 is  2 = 0 with probability  2 = 1 − 1 . This boils down the analysis to a single
parameter  1 governing the firm’s ability to adjust. The extreme case of  1 = 0 shuts down
any possibility of adjustment. At the other extreme of 1 = 1, the firm is always willing
to make a 25 percent upward adjustment, up to the container capacity. This range of  1
allows for wide variation in the ability to adjust.
Finally, we set the mixing cost  = 2 − 1 so that the cost of combining one half size
and one full size in the same shipment equals the cost of two full sizes. In the data, cases
where one full and one half size go out in the same shipment are relatively rare. Adding
this additional parameter is a shortcut for allowing for the model to fit this particular fact.
The list of parameters to be estimated is  = (  1    ), where we leave the indices
for origination and destination implicit. Note that in the first stage when we estimate the
shipment model for a particular source location, we take the friction  as fixed. Then,
14

Of course, even away from these mass points, the distribution of  in the figure does not coincide with
the distribution of the original  because some of these observations have been adjusted.

20

having recovered the level of the friction for particular sources, in a second stage we estimate
parameters governing the level of .
We match the model to the 13 statistics listed below, using generalized method of moments (GMM).15 The moments capture features such as the size distribution of shipment
volumes, whether or not consolidation is taking place, and the amount of empty space in
unconsolidated containers.
Statistic Description
1.

= 0)
Pr(1 = 1) × Pr( ≤ 2  


2.

Pr(1 = 1) × Pr(   2  
= 0)


3.

[̃ ] × Pr(
= 0)


4.

[̃2 ] × Pr(
= 0)


5.

[̃ ] × Pr(
= 0)


6.

[̃2 ] × Pr(
= 0)


7.

 [̃ ]

8.

 [̃2 ]

9.

 [
= 0]


10.

[
= 0] × Pr (1  2 )


11.

[_ ] × Pr (1 = 0 2 = 1 
= 0)


12.

Pr {̃ =  2 }

13.

Pr {̃   2 }

We begin by estimating the model for Walmart, producing separate estimates for the
various leading source locations. We include the 10 largest source locations from China.
For Bangladesh, there is only one source, Chittagong. For India, we use the top five
locations. Appendix A2 shows that the shipment volumes to the five import distribution
centers are roughly the same. For simplicity we will assume the shipment distributions are
identically the same across all the destinations and estimate the model with pooled data
across destinations. Table 7 reports the point estimates of the model coeﬃcients. Given
the large number of shipment observations from each location, the estimated standard errors
15

We use a two-stage procedure to derive the weighting matrix. We use only the diagonal terms of the
weighting matrix. The moments below are mean zero after we diﬀerence the expected value in the model,
which we calculate through simulation.

21

are quite low, and are reported separately in the data appendix, to allow Table 7 to be more
readable.
We begin by discussing the estimates for Shenzhen-sourced imports. Our estimate for
the friction is  = 0126. This means the full cost of shipping through consolidation is 12.6
percent more than a completely-loaded full-size container, on a per volume basis. We think
of this as a fairly low friction, especially in relation to what we will see in other samples.
Two features of the Walmart data tell us the friction cannot be exactly zero. First, while
Walmart’s empty rates out of Shenzhen are quite low, they are not zero, and the fact that
unconsolidated containers go out even partially empty is evidence of some friction. Second,
while consolidation is common, many shipments are unconsolidated. If the friction were
zero, virtually all shipments would be consolidated because the chance that a randomly
selected shipment size would exactly fit in a container would be negligible. Next note the
estimate ̂ = 0785, which is the probability that the firm draws a low cost of adjustment.
This indicates that the degree to which the firm is able to make adjustments in shipping
size is significant. Thus, we see that out of Shenzhen the firm is able to respond to the
indivisibility constraint on two margins: consolidation and shipment-size adjustment.
The model fits the data relatively well. Figure 4(b) is the fitted value of the shipment
volume distribution. It closely resembles the data in Figure 4(a). (See Figure 4(c) for a
plot of the model and data together.) The main diﬀerence is that the right side of the
distribution is smoother in the data than in the model. Our modeling assumption that the
cost distribution has only two points is likely a contributing factor.
Figures 5(a) and 5(b) illustrate how underlying firm behavior varies with the initial target
size  (where again, units are defined in terms of a full-size container). Figure 5(a) plots
what the adjustment would be conditional on shipping an unconsolidated load and drawing
the low adjustment cost. Note in the figure that if a shipment is close to a half-size load, it
gets rounded to exactly a half-size load. If it is at least slightly above half size but below
full size, it gets rounded up. When  exceeds a full-size load, the policy, essentially, is to
round up or round down to the closest full-size load.
Figure 5(b) plots the probability of consolidation, given the initial target  and a low
adjustment cost draw. If  is less than around 60 percent of a full container, the probability
of consolidation is virtually one. For  just above 60 percent, the probability of consolidation
drops sharply and attains its minimum of 023 at  = 1, where the target shipment level
exactly matches the indivisibility constraints. It hits the minimum again at  = 2 at  = 3,
and so on. The fact that consolidation may still take place for such  is a consequence of
the random shocks to the profitabilities of choosing either consolidation or unconsolidation.
These shocks are governed by the parameter  = 0103, which is small but not negligible.
22

(The units are relative to the price of shipping a full-size container, again normalized to one,)
Note the local maximums at  = 15  = 25, and so on. At these points, the indivisibility
problem is at its worse, from the perspective of filling up a full-size container. (Use of a half
size exactly fits at these points, but half sizes are relatively expensive.)
Next, consider the estimates from the other source locations. There is substantial variation across locations in shipment volume. Figure 6 plots the estimated friction for each
sample against the shipment volume (in log scale). There is a clear tendency for high-volume
locations to have a lower friction. In the low-volume source locations, the friction is on the
order of 0.30 or more. The friction falls to less than half that level in high-volume locations.
Panel B of Table 7 reports model estimates for Target for originations from Shenzhen.
The estimates are remarkably close to the analogous Walmart estimates. This is consistent
with our earlier finding that Walmart and Target have similar descriptive statistics. The
estimates for Costco are presented right below those for Target. As discussed earlier,
Costco’s business model is to ship relatively few high-volume goods, where consolidation is
not an issue. For the Costco case, we assume consolidation is infeasible, implicitly setting
For Costco, we estimate that  = 1, which is the maximum
the friction to  = ∞.16
degree of adjustability. Costco’s log mean shipment size of 06 is substantially higher than
for Walmart or Target, which is approximately −07 for both.
Earlier we noted a downward trend in Walmart’s empty rate (Figure 3), which suggests
the possibility that Walmart has experienced technological improvement over time. In Panel
C of Table 7, we use the model to investigate this issue, estimating the model separately for
the earliest year (2007) and the latest year (2015) in the sample. The estimated friction
fell by a third over the time period ( fell from 0.148 to 0.095). The ability to adjust also
improved (1 increased from 0.754 to 0.857). Finally, mean shipment size has significantly
declined, ( fell from −0388 to −0809), which could be driven by increases in both variety
and delivery frequency.
As one might expect, there is a significant seasonal pattern in Walmart’s business. To
examine seasonal eﬀects, we divide the year into two-month intervals. Figure 7 plots average import volume from Shenzhen in two-month interval periods. We normalize average
container imports relative to the peak period, September/October, which is when huge volumes of goods are shipped in advance of the holiday shopping season. At the low point in
May/June, volume is only 40 percent as high as the peak. We estimate the model separately
for each two-month period and plot the estimated friction in blue in Figure 7. Note the
clear countercyclical pattern of the friction level. The friction falls to its lowest point of
16

The  parameter is irrelevant here. In estimation we eliminate moments that involve conditioning on
 = 1.

23

0.085 at the peak and is highest at 0.167 in March/April and in May/June, the low-volume
period in the months after Christmas.
For both the cross section of locations (Figure 6) and the seasons (Figure 7), there is
a negative relationship between the shipment volume and the estimated friction. Table 8
reports results of semi-log regressions for both the cross-sectional and seasonal cases, where
the horizontal axis is log container volume in each case. The semi-elasticities are similar,
equaling −0064 in the cross-sectional case and −0079 in the seasonal case. Using the
cross-sectional estimate, a 1 percent increase in volume is associated with a decrease in the
friction of 6 basis points.
One concern about giving a structural interpretation to the semi-elasticities in Table 8
involves the potential endogeneity of volume levels. In particular, if there are unobserved
location factors that lower the consolidation friction, then keeping everything else the same,
more advantageous locations will have higher volumes. As a result, ordinary least squares
regression estimates will tend to bias upward the magnitude of the treatment eﬀect of volume
in reducing frictions. However, we expect any bias to be minor because ocean freight is only
one part of overall wholesale cost and because  is only one part of the cost of ocean freight.
This point can be illustrated by an example. Take the baseline case of Walmart out of
Shenzhen, where the estimated friction is  = 0126. Now consider another location with
 = 0170, and assume everything else is the same as for the Shenzhen estimates. The
diﬀerence in  is substantial, and if the true structural semi-elasticity is −064, container
volume would have to be cut in half to achieve this increase in . We can use the model
estimates for Shenzhen to calculate that raising  from 0126 to 0170, everything else the
same, raises the price index for ocean freight by 2 percent. As noted earlier, for retailers
such as Walmart, ocean freight is on the order of 8 percent of the wholesale cost to import
goods from Asia to U.S. ports. Thus, the wholesale price in the second location is higher
by a factor 10016 = 1 + 002 × 008, which we expect would only have a small eﬀect on
sales volume. We will take the diﬀerences in volumes across locations as exogenous and
going forward will treat the slope −064 as the structural semi-elasticity. It is encouraging
that the estimate using seasonal variation is roughly similar because the assumption that
the seasonal pattern is exogenous can be easily motivated.
We conclude this section by estimating the model for freight-forwarder-intermediated
shipments. For such shipments from China, Los Angeles is the primary destination. We
condition on shipments originating in Shenzhen destined for Los Angeles.17 We break down
the sample by the consignee size measure we used previously. Table 9 presents the estimates.
17

We include all shipments to the Los Angeles customs district, which includes Long Beach. We require
that the shipments clear customs in the district in addition to being unladen in the district.

24

The model does not fit as well for these samples, as compared to our earlier estimates
(compare the GMM criterion). The last two columns report the share of shipments that are
consolidated in the model and the data. Note that before, in Table 4, consolidation rates
were reported as weighted by containers. Here we report the unweighted versions which are
obviously higher, since there are relatively many small shipments that get consolidated. The
model matches the overall qualitative pattern that larger consignees choose to consolidate at
a lower rate. This pattern is mainly driven by the larger shipment sizes of big firms; observe
the sharp increase in  as we go down the table.18 Notice also that the consolidation friction
sharply decreases with firm size.

6

Delivery Frequency

The simple model developed in Section 2 allows the firm to choose both delivery frequency
 and the count of IDCs . These decisions interact. In particular, the delivery frequency
policy function  ∗ (    ) for product  was found to be weakly decreasing in the IDC
count . In the counterfactual analysis to follow, we need to address how the firm’s choice of
delivery frequency adjusts under various scenarios. This section provides a brief treatment
of the issue.
It is convenient at this point to make explicit distinctions across products. Think of
product  as indexing a stock-keeping unit (SKU) or barcode. Assume products are grouped
into a product type , which will take into account various product characteristics such as
the relative value of the product as well as perishability. Let  be the type of product .
As in Section 2, products also diﬀer by projected annual national sales volume, which we
denote  . We assume products have one source location, which is generally the case in
our application, and let  be the source of product . Now write the policy function for the
delivery frequency of product  as  ∗ (      ). Here we are assuming that the product
type  subsumes  . Also we take into account that the consolidation friction   at the
source location  of product  can potentially aﬀect delivery frequency.
We assume the delivery frequency policy function is homogeneous in the following respect:
 ∗ (      ) =  ∗ (1  
18


     ).


(9)

Note we are defining consignee size categories by the count of shipment groups imported, not by the
volume of particular shipments (i.e., by the extensive margin, not the intensive margin). Our finding that
consignees that are bigger on the extensive margin are also larger on the intensive margin is not necessarily
true by definition.

25

This says that the optimal policy when there are  IDCs and national annual product

volume is  is the same as when there is one IDC with a national volume of  . In the
comparison, the total volume to destination IDC is fixed. (  units each to  IDCs on the
left-hand side,  to a single IDC on the right hand side.) Thus, the condition is that the
firm cuts up a fixed annual delivery volume into the same number of trips, regardless of the
market area served by the destination IDC, holding the product type fixed. Assumption
(9) is satisfied, for example, in the simple model of Section 2.
We now turn to the data on delivery frequency. Let Walmart’s 9-digit item number
correspond to the product classification  in the model. The item’s 6-digit HS code is taken
to be the product’s type  . We restrict attention to the primary source locations in China,
India, and Bangladesh that we have geocoded. (These are the 16 locations listed in Table 7.)
Of the 1.6 million containers in this set, we have item number information for the contents
of 1.0 million containers. We classify shipments by item, year shipped, and destination
IDC, yielding a sample with 481,665 diﬀerent item/year/IDC combinations.19 Define 
as the number of diﬀerent days in year  that a shipment containing item  arrived at IDC
. The 50th and 75th percentiles of delivery frequency  equal 2 and 3 deliveries a year.
Weighted by annual container volume, the corresponding figures are 5 and 10 deliveries a
year.
Table 10 reports the regression of log  on log annual product volume (in container
units) and a time trend. The coeﬃcient on log annual volume is 0.20.20 We have also run
the analogous regression for Amazon, and obtain a similar coeﬃcient on log annual volume.
The coeﬃcient 0.03 on the time trend indicates that delivery frequency for Walmart has
been increasing at a remarkable annual growth rate of 3 percent. Recall our earlier result
that the consolidation rate has increased over time for Walmart and that the consolidation
friction has declined. It is straightforward to see with the simple model of Section 2 how
increases in the ability to consolidate leads to higher delivery frequencies.
We have the 6-digit HS code for 81 percent of the observations in our sample, and in
the second specification we include fixed eﬀects for the HS code. We also include fixed
eﬀects for the source location and destination IDC. Inclusion of these fixed eﬀects makes
little diﬀerence for the volume or trend growth coeﬃcients. In the third specification we
19

In the final sample, we delete item/year observations with only a single destination IDC. This deletion
eliminates 8.5 percent of the containers in the sample. Cases with a single IDC arise in the data both
because of measurement error of the item number variable and also because for a limited set of goods (shoes
in particular) Walmart uses a single IDC rather than the standard 5-IDC model.
20
For a given   , we use as the volume measure total container volume for this  and  of other IDCs
besides . In this way, the right and left hand side are constructed from diﬀerent records, eliminating a
mechanical correlation. Doing it this way turns out to make virtually no diﬀerent, as to a first approximation,
the firm is sending similar amounts of each  and  to each IDC.

26

take out the source fixed eﬀect and instead include the estimated consolidation friction 
for each source, reported earlier in Table 7. As expected, the relationship is negative. We
expect the ability to consolidate would be more relevant for low-volume goods compared to
high-volume goods, like the microwave example of Table 1. In specification 4, we distinguish
high-volume goods (more than 3 containers per year per IDC) from low-volume goods and
make the parametric assumption that the consolidation friction only aﬀects the delivery
frequency of low-volume goods. The estimated coeﬃcient is −0593, which is much larger
than in specification 3, where the eﬀect is assumed the same across all volume sizes. To
provide a sense of magnitudes, the estimated diﬀerence in friction between Mumbai and
Shenzhen in Table 7 equals 0344 = 0470 − 0126, which according to specification 4 would
be associated with a 20 percent (−0024 = 0593 × 0344) decrease in delivery frequency
in Mumbai for low-volume products. Specification 5 adds location fixed eﬀects, and the
estimated coeﬃcient is even bigger.
Below we use specification 5 as a first-order approximation to the policy function  ∗ (       ),
for  = 5.21 Then we use (9) to predict how delivery frequency varies with counterfactual
changes in .

7

Firm Choice and Counterfactual Policy Analysis

This section provides a quantitative analysis of the firm’s choice of IDC count. It also
provides estimates of the eﬀects of counterfactual policies on costs. To develop the analysis,
we construct a measure of indivisibility cost and use the model estimates to determine how
indivisibility cost varies as the IDC count  varies. We also construct an estimate of
how freight cost varies with . An additional component of costs, the waiting cost that
depends upon delivery frequency, is not be measured in the analysis. This leads us to
develop a bounds approach to quantify choice behavior and to evaluate the welfare eﬀects of
policy changes. The bounds turn out to be relatively sharp. The section begins by laying
out our empirical methodology and then presents the results.

7.1

Methodology

Formally, let   (  ) be average cost arising from indivisibility, per unit volume shipped,
as a function of the IDC count , delivery frequency  , and the consolidation friction . We
21
We do not use specification 5, because the fixed location eﬀects will absorb eﬀects of  on high volume
goods.

27

derive an expression for this below. For now, we evaluate this for a given source location, and
in the quantitative analysis take a weighted average across locations. The delivery frequency
variable  is actually a vector that lists the delivery frequency for each individual product
shipped from the given source. A change in  aﬀects total volume shipped per IDC, which
in turn aﬀects the consolidation friction. Let ̂() denote the functional dependence of the
friction on . We use the relationship between the friction and volume estimated in Section
5 to pin this down. Optimal delivery frequency  ∗ ( ) depends upon  and , and we
use the homogeneity assumption in equation (9) and the cross-section relationship between
delivery frequency in Section 6 to pin this down. We then define ̂  () to include the
direct eﬀects of  as well as the indirect eﬀects through eﬀects on  and ,
̂  () ≡   (  ∗ ( ̂()) ̂()).
Let    () be average freight cost per unit volume shipped, including both ocean and
inland freight, excluding all costs related to indivisibility, which are absorbed in ̂  (). Below we use information about freight rates and store locations to directly estimate    ().
Let ̂  () be average waiting cost per unit volume shipped, as a function of . The
choice of  aﬀects delivery frequency, which in turn aﬀects average waiting cost. This will
remain unmeasured in our analysis. We assume the function is weakly increasing and weakly
convex.
The firm chooses  to minimize
() ≡ ̂  () +    () + ̂  ().
Let ∗ solve this problem. Consider the pseudo-problem of minimizing just the first two
terms,
 1 () = ̂  () +    (),
leaving out waiting cost. This is the first pseudo problem we consider, so we call this pseudo
1. Let ̄ minimize  1 (). It is clear that the solution to the first pseudo problem is
an upper bound to the solution of the actual problem, ∗ ≤ ̄
To construct a lower bound, define
 2 () = (), if  = 1,
=   (  ∗ ( − 1 ̂( − 1)) ̂()) +    () + ̂  ( − 1), for   1
28

This is the actual cost at  = 1. Otherwise, for   1, this is the cost when delivery
frequency is set at its level for  − 1, everything else the same. It is clear that () ≤
 2 () for   1, because cost at  can only be lower when the optimal delivery
frequency is used instead of what is chosen for  − 1 Define  as the minimum value of 
such that
 2 ( + 1) − () ≥ 0.
We are able to calculate this diﬀerence because the waiting cost is the same in both terms
and cancels out. It is clear that  is a lower bound to the solution of the actual problem,
∗ ≥.
We now turn to the details of how   (  ),  ∗ ( ), and ̂() are calculated.
Define the unit indivisibility cost for a given shipment target level  to be
  () =

−  ()
− 1,
− _ ()

(10)

where   () is the maximized value at  given indivisibilities (see equation (7)), and
 _ () is the analogous maximum in the No Indivisibilities case, which we define as the
case where (1) there is a continuum of container sizes with price per unit equal to  = 2 2
and (2) the consolidation friction is zero,  = 0. Note that under (1) and (2), the shipping
cost for unconsolidated and consolidated is identical, and the decision will depend upon the
random profit terms associated with each decision. The minus signs are included to flip
maximized profits to minimized costs. We diﬀerence the statistic from one to turn it into a
rate. If  = 0 and if  is a multiple of the full-size capacity level 2 , the indivisibility cost
is zero (i.e.,   (2 ) = 0,   (22 ) = 0, and so on). Otherwise it is strictly positive. We
define the average unit indivisibility cost as the weighted mean over ,



=

R∞
0

  ()()
R∞
.
()
0

(11)

Let ◦ denote the choice the firm actually makes, e.g. ◦ = 5 for Walmart, and ◦ = 4
for Target. Let  ◦ be the corresponding delivery frequency policy from a given source
location and let  ◦ be the resulting consolidation friction at the source. When we take the
parameter estimates of the model for a particular firm and source locations, and use them

with equation (11), we obtain an estimate of indivisibility cost at the
to calculate 


.
observed choice,  (◦   ◦  ◦ ) = 
To determine   (  ) at alternative evaluation points, we first show how   (  )
29

varies with , holding  and  fixed. We assume throughout the analysis that the firm
divides imports exactly  ways across the  IDCs. In the baseline model with ◦ destination IDCs, we can assume that for each shipment arrival of size , there are actually ◦ such
arrivals of size , one for each IDC. The total national shipment volume of the particular
product at this particular time is then ◦ . If instead, the firm were to divide shipments
0 ways, holding delivery frequency the same, the target shipment for each IDC would equal
◦
, a proportionate shift in the distribution. The assumption that  is log normal is
0 =  
0
convenient because the mean of log(0 ) equals
0 = ◦ + ln(◦ ) − ln(0 )

(12)

and the standard deviation stays the same,  0 = ◦ .
Next note that if the vector  scales by a proportionate factor, the eﬀect on the mean
of log  is the same as a proportionate increase in , and again the standard deviation
is unchanged. We assume the following functional form for the delivery frequency policy
function at level of an individual product ,
∗ ( )

µ


= 1 ( )2 ()


¶

,

for functions 1 () and 2 (), where the scaling is indeed proportional. Here we use the homogeneity assumption (9), and the first-order log-linear approximation of the policy function
estimated in Section 6, which gives us an output elasticity estimate equal to ̂ = 022. This
specification allows for product-type eﬀects (through 1 ( )), but these drop out through log
diﬀerencing. We make the functional form assumption 2 () = 0 1  , which corresponds
to specification 3 in Table 10.22
The last step is ̂() We use the semi-elasticity 0064 from the cross-sectional relationship in Table 8, and we can write it as
̂(0 ) = ̂(◦ ) + 0064(ln(0 ) − ln(◦ )).

(13)

22
The estimate of  1 in column (3) of table 10 is −0133. However, to be conservative we use the higher
absolute value of −0593 from column (4),.which assumes a great response and yields a more conservative
bound. The diﬀerence is negligible, however.

30

7.2

Indivisibility Cost Estimates

We use the model estimates in Tables 7 and 9 and the above methodology to estimate unit
indivisibility costs and how they vary with . These estimates correspond to ̂  (),
defined in the methodological section. Table 11 displays the results. The shaded cells are
the values obtained for the baseline IDC count the firm actually uses (i.e., where 0 = ◦ ).
All figures are reported as a percent of ocean freight.
The first row is for Walmart out of Shenzhen. At the IDC count of  = 5 that Walmart
actually uses, estimated unit indivisibility cost is 10.3 percent. Note there are three sources
of indivisibility cost in the model embodied in this statistic. First, if the firm consolidates,
it incurs the friction , which in this case equals 12.6 percent. Second, if the firm does not
consolidate and sends a partially loaded container or uses a half size, the unit freight cost
is higher than it would be for a completely-loaded, full-size container. Third, the firm may
distort the volume levels of unconsolidated shipments, up or down relative to the desired
target level, and these adjustments yield losses relative to the ideal with no indivisibilities.
Note that the estimated indivisibility cost is well above the empty rate of containers out of
Shenzhen, and reflects the fact that in order to keep the empty rate low, Walmart incurs
both consolidation frictions and distortions in shipment size for unconsolidated shipments.
As we move across the columns, we vary the IDC count . If Walmart were to use only
one IDC for imports out of Shenzhen, the indivisibility cost would fall to only 2.7 percent.
If Walmart doubled the count to  = 10, the cost would rise to 14.4 percent. Note the
calculation takes into account if Walmart were to double  to  = 10, it would endogenously
reduce delivery frequency, which attenuates the increase in indivisibility cost, compared to
what it would be if delivery frequency were held fixed. The calculation also takes into
account that doubling the IDCs would half volumes going to any one IDC, which eliminates
some of the scale benefits in consolidation.
The next row contains the estimates for Walmart out of Mumbai. The indivisibility cost
in the baseline is quite high, 25.3 percent. Given our earlier discussion of the relatively
high empty rates out of India and the high use of half-size containers, we expect to find high
indivisibility costs from this source.
We assume the firm picks the same  to process imports from all originating locations.
To minimize overall costs, the firm must take the volume-weighted average across all source
locations. The third row of Table 11 presents the volume-weighted average across all source
locations in Asia.23 The diﬀerence between the weighted average case and Shenzhen is quite
small. Shenzhen has a large weight in the average, and other leading sources such as Xiamen
23

We have geocoded source locations in China, Bangladesh, and India, but not other Asian locations. We
use our estimates for India as our estimate for the other Asian countries.

31

and Chittagong also have very low frictions, which oﬀset the high indivisibility costs from
places such as Mumbai.
Next we report the estimates for Target out of Shenzhen. Indivisibility cost is higher
for Target than Walmart. At Target’s choice of  = 4, its indivisibility cost 12.0 percent
compared to Walmart’s level of 10.3 percent at its choice of  = 5. Walmart’s container
import volume is about 50 percent higher than Target’s, and these estimated diﬀerences are
consistent with Walmart being able to enjoy larger scale economies than Target.
The last set of estimates are for freight-forwarded intermediated shipments, based on
the model estimates in Table 9. By definition of the sample, consolidation takes place
external to the firm. We expect any one firm to be a small portion of any one freight
forwarder’s business. For this reason, we take the consolidation friction as fixed when we
vary a particular firm’s import strategy. We continue to allow delivery frequency to vary
with volume, using the same elasticity estimated for Walmart. At the bottom of Table 11,
we report three of the cases: the smallest consignee size class (1), the largest (251 and up),
and a middle case (21-100). We take as a baseline that the firm is using a single IDC. Note
the sharp decrease in the indivisibility cost with firm size, going from 40.8 percent for the
smallest category to 18.5 percent for the medium and 14.3 percent for the largest firms. If
a firm were to choose to increase  above 1, indivisibility cost would become quite high.

7.3

Freight Costs

We now explain our estimates of how freight costs vary with IDC count . This is the
function    (), in the notation from above. We estimate this relationship for Walmart.
To determine the ultimate destination of imports, we take data on Walmart store locations
and sales, to estimate Walmart’s sales share across locations. We assume shipments are
sent directly from import distribution centers to stores. For Walmart, shipments actually
first pass through regional distribution centers. However, there are a large number of these
(42), allowing for a relatively direct flow of goods.
To facilitate comparisons with Table 11, we report the cost as a percentage of a rough
estimate of the ocean freight for shipping one standard container from Asia to a U.S. port.
We use $2,500 as our ocean freight estimate, which is approximately the average freight rate
(c.i.f.) in a sample of shipments based on public Census tabulations that we discuss in the
data appendix.
Walmart currently has five IDCs and is planning a sixth at Mobile, Alabama. We
constrain Walmart to chose locations among these six sites. We sequence the openings as
follows. The cost minimizing location with only one IDC is Los Angeles, and we let this
32

be the first one. The freight-cost minimizing location if we add a second, conditioned on
one already at Los Angeles, is Norfolk. Continuing on, the -th IDC minimizes freight cost
given  IDCS and given the locations of the first  − 1 IDCs. This yields a sequence order:
Los Angeles, Norfolk, Savanna, Houston, Chicago, Mobile.
The first row of Table 12 reports the results.24 Using various data sets on freight rates,
and making various assumptions discussed in the appendix, we calculate that with a single
IDC at Los Angeles, the total freight, as a percentage of $2500, equals 155.4 percent. When
the second IDC opens at Norfolk, the freight rate drops to 144.6, and the rate falls even more
if additional IDCs are opened. We note that by shipping containers to the East Coast instead
of the West Coast, additional ocean freight expenses are incurred. These incremental ocean
costs are included in our calculations, as explained in the appendix.

7.4

Bounding Optimal Choice

We now take our estimates of indivisibility cost and freight cost and use the methodology
developed above to estimate bounds on the firm’s choice of the IDC count . We begin by
taking the weighted Asia average indivisibility cost in Table 11 and pasting it in Table 12
directly under    . We label it ̂  , using the earlier notation. The next row contains
the sum    + ̂  . The IDC count minimizing this sum is ̄ = 5. This solves the first
pseudo problem that ignores changes in waiting costs caused by changing  (and delivery
frequency) and the solution provides an upper bound for the firm’s choice, as explained
above. Next we use the methodology to calculate a lower bound for ∗ , determined by
holding fixed waiting times, when evaluating an incremental increase in  The estimated
lower bound is = 5. Hence, our bounds are sharp, and the point estimate of the optimal
choice is ∗ = 5, which is consistent with Walmart’s behavior.
Walmart uses the same import distribution system across source countries and for this
reason we have used the weighted-average-from-Asia indivisibility cost measure. Suppose
instead that the firm could customize its system for diﬀerent sources. In the second to last
row of Table 12 we report indivisibility cost from Mumbai and then in the bottom row add in
freight. We can see that the upper bound number of IDCs if the firm could customize is only
2 for Mumbai, where the minimized cost level is 161.1. This is 2.8 percentage points lower
than the actual level of 163.9.25 Thus imports from low volume countries are disadvantaged
24

A technical issue that we do not address is that in estimating indivisibility costs in Table 11, under
counterfactual numbers of IDCs, we assume equal divisions across destinations. But in calculating freight
costs in Table 12, we do not enforce equal shares across destinations.
25
Note this is a lower bound for the cost diﬀerence because if  = 2 were set instead of  = 5, delivery
frequency would be higher, and therefore waiting cost would be lower.

33

as the firm designs its distribution system around what works best for imports from China,
its high volume source.
We note that various factors have been left out in the analysis. The analysis does not
include a fixed cost per IDC. Adding fixed costs into the analysis would tend to decrease
the optimal number of IDCs. The analysis does not include the possibility of disruptions,
including labor strife at ports or at the distribution centers themselves. Adding the possibility
of disruption would tend to increase the optimal number of IDCs.

7.5

The Cost Eﬀect of Dissolution

In this subsection, we determine the cost eﬀect of dissolution. We take as our baseline the
weighted-average-from-Asia case, where the firm optimally chooses ∗ = 5, as just explained.
Suppose the firm is dissolved into  equal-sized symmetric firms, all selling the same identical
set of products, to the same identical set of domestic destinations. In particular, assume
that for every target shipment  that would arrive for the merged firm, under dissolution
the same shipment is divided exactly  ways, so the target shipment level for each firm is
 =  .
We are able to calculate lower and upper bounds for the cost increases resulting from the
dissolution. To determine the lower bound, we allow the dissolved firms to respond both in
the choice of  and in delivery frequency. We calculate the eﬀect on the sum of indivisibility
and freight, ̂  +   . The eﬀect on this sum is a lower bound on the cost impact because
the dissolved firms also suﬀer increased waiting costs from less frequent deliveries, which is
not included in the calculation. To determine the upper bound, we hold fixed delivery
frequency, letting the dissolved firms optimize on . The cost eﬀect calculated this way is
an upper bound on the actual cost eﬀect because dissolved firms can always choose to leave
delivery frequency fixed, but instead will optimally adjust the frequency to attenuate the
negative cost consequences of the dissolution.
Table 13 reports the results, for three diﬀerent levels of dissolution, to 2, 10, or 100 firms.
Cutting the firm in half is roughly on the order of making Walmart the size of Target in
terms of import volume. While dividing the firm one hundred-fold is extreme, the size
diﬀerences between mass discounters like Walmart, Targets, Home Depot, etc., are extreme
compared to the firms they replaced. The table reports upper bounds for the dissolved
firms’ choices of IDC count , as well as lower and upper bounds on the cost eﬀects. The
estimated bounds are relatively tight. If the firm is cut in half, the range of the estimated
bound for the cost increase is between 4.0 and 4.7 percent of ocean freight, which strikes us
as large, considering the thin profit margins in the discount retail industry.
34

8

Indivisibility, Flexibility, and Online Retail

Earlier we calculated a gain to a type of flexibility where Walmart is able to customize its
distribution system to the particulars of source locations, i.e., do it one way in Shenzhen, and
another in Mumbai. Here we calculate gains from an additional degree of flexibility, where
the firm customizes its system at the individual-product level, in addition to the sourcelocation level. In Mumbai, for example, such flexibility turns out to be quite valuable in
resolving indivisibility issues. As some motivation for the exercise, we provide evidence
that Amazon operates at this high level of flexibility, and argue online retail is conducive to
such flexibility. To be clear, we are not formally modeling online retail, and in particular,
don’t say anything about a key indivisibility in online retail related to the last mile of getting
goods to the consumer’s doorstep.26 (A truck making a delivery might just as easily deliver
to the neighbor.) Rather, we are making a point that costs to the doorstep may be partially
oﬀset by advantages of online retail in dealing with indivisibilities at the front end of the
distribution system.
Walmart uses a relatively rigid supply chain for general merchandise imports. Imports
flowing to stores in western states go through the Los Angeles IDC; imports flowing to midwest stores go through the Chicago IDC, and so on.27 The path to a particular store is
the same, regardless of the characteristics of the imported good, and regardless of whether
the good comes from China India, Bangladesh, etc.28 In contrast, Amazon’s import supply
chain is flexible, and diﬀerent goods, in general, take diﬀerent paths to the same ultimate
destination. Traditional and online retail diﬀer in a fundamental way. Traditional retail
imposes a certain symmetry across goods, in that–regardless of whether goods are high
volume or low volume–they all need to be stocked on store shelves, ready for consumers
to buy them. However, in online retail, high volume and low volume goods can be treated
asymmetrically, with high volume goods stocked in a large number of local fulfillment centers, ready for quick delivery, and low volume goods held in a small number of warehouses,
available for delivery with a longer lag. Diﬀerences in the number of places where goods
are stocked naturally relates to indivisibilities, as such diﬀerences aﬀect how many ways
shipments need to be divided up.
A labor market slowdown at West Coast ports during our sample period provides striking
evidence of diﬀerences in flexibility between Walmart’s and Amazon’s import supply chains.
Figure 8 plots the average number of days to complete a container ship delivery from China to
26

See Houde, Newberry, and Seim (2017) for an analysis of this part of Amazon’s supply chain.
MWPVL (2009, page 32) maps the territory covered by each IDC.
28
Again, the supply chain we are describing is for general merchandise imports. Other kinds of imports,
such as bananas and footwear, have a diﬀerent supply chain.
27

35

Los Angeles, by month of delivery for 2014 and 2015.29 The contract covering all West Coast
dockworkers expired in July of 2014, and the figure shows delivery times started to rise after
that, culminating in a major disturbance in early 2015 when average delivery time spiked to
35 days–compared to the usual average of 17 days. Figure 8 also plots monthly averages of
shares of container imports from China that go through Pacific ports, for both Walmart and
Amazon. The Walmart calculation excludes containers destined for the Houston IDC, which
was set up to be able to alternate between getting goods via the Pacific (through Los Angeles
plus rail), or through the Panama Canal to the Gulf of Mexico. The calculation retains
goods destined for the Los Angeles and Chicago IDCs, set up to get Pacific deliveries (plus
rail to get to Chicago), and goods destined for the Norfolk and Savannah IDCs, set up to
get Atlantic deliveries. The figure shows that before the disturbance there is about a 50/50
split between Pacific and Atlantic deliveries. When the disturbance hits, there is very little
change in the split. In other words, to get goods to stores in the West and Midwest, Walmart
remained committed to the strategy of routing goods through the Los Angeles and Chicago
IDCs, tolerating the delays at Pacific ports. This contrasts with Amazon’s behavior, which
showed great flexibility in avoiding the delays. Before the slowdown, all Amazon imports
flowed through Pacific ports. After the contract expiration, Amazon immediately began
shifting away from Pacific ports. By the height of the crisis, virtually nothing was coming
in through the Pacific. When the crisis was over, it immediately switched back.
Analogous to the way Amazon is flexible over time in response to shocks, it is flexible
across goods at a point in time. To show this, we focus on a 24-month period after the
slowdown (June 1, 2015 through May 31, 2017), and restrict attention to bills of lading
referencing one or more Amazon Standard Identification Numbers (ASINs). (ASINs are
the unique product codes used by Amazon.) In the sample, there are 10,600 diﬀerent
ASINs, variously consolidated into 28,544 imported containers. Amazon posts web pages
for individual ASINs with information about retail price, weight, and sales rank. We
downloaded this information, obtaining matched data for 7,499 ASINs. Some products
are imported through only one coast, others come through both. Define _ to be
an indicator variable for whether or not both coasts were used for deliveries in at least one
sample month. We regress this on product characteristics in a linear probability model, and
29

We used the bill of ladings data to select container ships making deliveries to U.S. ports and then merged
in GPS-based information from Fleetmon, a vessel tracking service, about exact times of port departure.
The sample averages reported are for voyages leaving Shenzhen, Hong Kong, or Shanghai going directly to
Los Angeles. Trip length is diﬀence in time of departure out of Los Angeles and China.

36

obtain the following result:
_ =

0714
(0017)

+

0021

ln

(0002)

¡

1


¢

+

0086
(0005)

ln

³




´



with 2 = 007,  = 7 499, and standard errors in parentheses. The first regressor is a
measure of sales volume. The second, weight per dollar, is a proxy for transportation cost.
Increases in both variables are associated with a higher likelihood of using both coasts. The
magnitudes of the estimated eﬀects are significant. Evaluated at the mean characteristics,
the fitted probability 33.8 percent. A one standard deviation increase in the log inverse
sales rank is associated with a 7.0 percentage point increase in the probability. Sales
rank is a crude measure for volume, so the estimated relationship likely understates what
we would get with using more accurate sales data. A one standard deviation increase
in the transportation cost proxy is associated with an increase of 9.5 percentage points.
These empirical findings are consistent with the simple model of indivisibility introduced
in Section 2. Higher transportation cost goods tend to be imported through both coasts
to keep inland transportation cost down. Higher volume goods make it easier to divide up
shipments between both coasts without creating indivisibility problems. Finally, note that
while by the end of 2015, Amazon was using two coasts to import a third of its products,
previously (i.e., early 2014), all goods were imported through only one coast. Amazon grew
dramatically in this period (we estimate container import volume grew 72 percent between
2014 and 2015), which the theory suggests would be a reason to start using both coasts for
some goods.
Motivated by these findings, we now return to our estimated model of Walmart, and
calculate the cost savings if, for each product, the firm can flexibly choose whether to use
one port, two ports, etc., rather than have the firm be constrained to make this constant
across all goods. Formally, in our earlier analysis we assume that in a first stage, the firm
picks a count of import distribution centers  that will apply for all goods, and that results
in average indivisibility cost   (), and average domestic freight cost    (). Now
we change the model to allow the firm to choose  conditional on the desired shipment
size .30 Let   ( ) be the average indivisibility cost. The average cost savings from
flexibility choosing  for a given size , compared to fixing  = 5 for all  (the optimum
30

Note that for a given shipment of desired size , we assume the firm picks  before the realization of
the proft shocks  and  and the adjustment cost shock .

37

in the constrained case), is given as follows
¤ £
¤ª
£
R©
min≤5   ( 5 ) +    () −   (5 ) +    (5) ()
R∞
∆
=
.
()
0
(14)
Note we are defining  to be the desired shipping size given  = 5. If instead  = 1,
desired shipping size would be 5. For simplicity, we hold fixed the delivery frequency
for each good. In this way, the above calculation understates the gains from flexibility,
because in general, a change in  would induce the firm to choose a complementary change
in delivery frequency.31
We use the estimated model parameters to calculate ∆  . For Walmart out of Shenzhen,
flexibility reduces distribution cost by 2.3 percent, where again we measure cost changes as a
percent of ocean freight. For Walmart out of Mumbai, flexibility leads to a cost reduction of
12.5 percent. This is a surprisingly large eﬀect. The best way to understand this is to recall
that in the baseline constrained case, shipments are being divided up five ways, causing big
indivisibility problems because shipments divided this way generally don’t fill up the boxes,
and because consolidation frictions are large. Gaining the flexibility to instead divide things
up four, three, two or even one way, goes a long way towards ensuring boxes ship out full.
 

9

Concluding Remarks

This paper develops a model of indivisibility costs that incorporates three components: (1)
the cost of unused container space, (2) frictions in consolidation, and (3) the cost to distort
shipment sizes up or down to conform to lumpy container sizes. The model allows the
friction to depend upon shipment volume. We use unique data on the contents of imported
containers to estimate the model. We find significant scale economies in consolidation. We
examine the trade-oﬀ between indivisibility costs and inland freight costs in the choice of how
many domestic ports to use to bring in imports, and the estimated model does a good job of
fitting observed choices. We also show that supply chain flexibility can lead to substantial
cost savings.

31

The calculation also abstracts from how changes in flexibility aﬀect the consolidation friction, which
can go either way.

38

Data Appendix
A1. Source and Processing of Bill of Lading Data
We have a complete set of bills of lading for the 18 months listed in Table A1, for a total
of 18,809,816 records, that we obtained from Ealing Market Data Engineering. As discussed
in the text, we classify records as BCO, house, or master: Table A1 shows the percentage
distribution across types. There is also a category for shipments either not using containers
or using empty containers, representing 3 percent of the sample that we exclude.
Using the 18-month sample to begin with, we developed procedures for finding Walmart
records, and then we applied the search procedures over the entire period, January 2007
through December 2015. We did text searches for Walmart across the various fields, including looking for Walmart’s name as well as the GLN code, discussed in the text. We extracted
1,963,866 records, and of these, 82 percent include the GLN code. Table A2 presents the
distribution of our Walmart records across years, for both counts of shipments and counts of
containers. When counting containers, we use the container ID variable in each shipment
record to ensure that we do not double-count containers. To get a sense of the coverage
of our sample, we compare our counts with statistics on company-level aggregate annual
container imports, published by PIERS.32 Overall, the container count in our sample is 56
percent of the aggregates reported by PIERS. Our coverage is highest in 2007 and in the
first quarter of 2008, when Walmart was not redacting the consignee field. For the Walmart
records, we processed the products field to pull out the item number of the records as well
as the HS code.
We also developed procedures to find Amazon records and applied the search procedures
to extract these records over the period November 2013 through May 2017, excluding April
2014. Records from May 2014 through May 2017 were obtained from Panjiva, Inc.
We did extensive manual processing of the place of receipt field in order to identify the
origin of shipments, and we geocoded shipments from China to the level of prefecture or
county, and for India to the level of district or subdistrict. We processed the container
information in the shipment records to create a data set at the shipment/container level.
We developed an algorithm that seems to work well for determining whether a container is
a 20-foot container or a 40-foot container, based on the first five characters of the container
ID variable. As discussed in the text, we linked shipment records that reference the same
container ID and the same shipment arrival date into consolidated shipment groups.
To allocate volume in shipments that are part of consolidated shipment groups, we use
the information about piece count we have for each container used in each shipment, and
32

To produce these estimates, PIERS uses the same bill of lading data from CBP that we have; it also
uses additional information it obtains directly from shippers.

39

allocate capacity proportionate to piece count. We also have a cbm measure, but this is
missing for many records and is at the shipment-level. In contrast, the piece count variable
is available for all records and has the breakdown by container for multi-container shipments.
For house bills of lading, we processed the text information in the consignee field, pulling
out the zip code and state. We linked consignee shipments by linking on location of origination (prefecture level from China, subdistrict level from India), consignee zip code and
state, and consignee name (first four characters).
In the examples from Tables 1 and 2, each distinct shipment record lists only a single
Walmart item number. While this is typical, cases where a single shipment lists multiple
products do occur. We calculate that among unconsolidated shipments, 20 percent list
multiple product items. Among consolidated shipments, 34 percent list multiple products.
Thus, measuring consolidation across shipment records masks additional consolidation occurring within a shipment record. Despite this undercount, for our main results we focus on
consolidation measured through the shipment record information rather than the product
information. The data are much cleaner to work with at the shipment level, as we are
missing product information for about a third of the shipments.
A2. Walmart Import Distribution Shares
In the text, we note that Walmart’s five IDCs have import shares that are roughly equal.
Table A3 reports estimates of the import shares using the 9-year Walmart sample. We
exclude apparel and footwear (i.e., goods with HS2 codes 61, 62, 63, and 64), since fashion
goods are often distributed through a single IDC. The share of shipments is remarkably
constant across the five IDCs. There is more variation in container shares, ranging from
15.6 percent at the low end to 23.4 percent at the high end.
A3. Freight Rates
The U.S. Census Bureau publishes tabulations on imports at narrow detail including:
month, country of origination, commodity (10-digit HS 10), and ports of unlading and entry
(U.S. Bureau of the Census, 2007-2015). The statistics reported at this narrow detail include
freight charges (c.i.f.) associated with the import to deliver the good to the port of entry,
as well as the entered value of the good, which includes the freight. Other statistics include
weight and quantity (where the units depend on the type of commodity, e.g. number of
microwaves). The Census Bureau reports these detailed statistics even if there is only a
single shipment in a particular cell, so it is actually a transaction-level observation. Given all
the detailed information in the Census Bureau tabulations and the bills of lading, it is possible
to find some links between transactions-level observations in the published tabulations and
the bills of lading. For Walmart, we have obtained 483 such links. From the matched bill of
40

lading, we observe the number of containers in the shipment, and we can divide the freight
charge by the number of containers to calculate freight on a per-container basis. Table A4
reports that the median freight is about $3,100 in this sample. We also report statistics of
freight as a percentage of entered value, and the median is 7.6 percent.
As this is a small sample, we also consider a second strategy, with broader coverage.
Approximately two-thirds of Walmart bills of lading contain the HS product code used for
customs filings. We first use the public Census records from 2011 to 2015 to calculate the
average freight as a percentage of entered value at the level of six-digit HS codes, for imports
from China. These aggregate data combine transactions of Walmart with transactions
of other firms. Then we merge these six-digit-level data into our Walmart records. The
median freight percentage of value is 7.4 percent, across the 1.1 million Walmart records
with six-digit HS coverage.33
Now we turn to the issue of pricing for half-size containers. In the analysis, we set
the price of half-size containers equal to 75 percent of the full size. Here we motivate
this assumption in two ways. First, shipping companies publish tariﬀs, and this is the
approximate discount in the tariﬀs we examined. For Hapag Lloyd from China and India
to U.S. ports, the published tariﬀ for the half-size rate is approximately 75 percent of the
full-size rate. OOCL, another leading shipping company, posts half-size rates that are 80
percent of full-size rates.
The second way we motivate the assumption is to appeal to published Census tabulations.
As just noted, some observations published in the Census tabulations correspond to a single
transaction. Unfortunately, the Census does not publish the number of containers used in
a transaction and whether or not the containers are half size. However, linking in bills of
lading, we have been able to determine this information for two samples of the published
Census records. To construct the first sample, we first link observations across diﬀerent rows
of the Census tabulations to select out example records that are full-container loads, and
where this same type of shipment is being sent at least twice (i.e., two diﬀerent months or the
same month to diﬀerent ports).34 We then search for matching records in the bill of lading
data. In the second sample, we directly merge the two data sets on the various common
variables, such as origination, destination ports, weight, and HS code (where available in the
33

This is consistent with calculations in Leachman (2010). He assumes Walmart’s imports have an average
value of $14 per cubic foot. He assumes freight to the West coast is $0.96 per cubic foot and to the East
coast $1.47, for an average of $1.22 per cubic foot, which is 8.7 percent of the assumed import value and is
about $2,500 after converting units to a full-size container.
34
We look across diﬀerent months and diﬀerent destination ports for cases where for the same commodity,
there are exact matches in value per unit and weight per unit. We figure out what the piece count is for
a single container load and then verify that all the diﬀerent records are either a factor one times the single
container piece count, a factor two times this, and so on.

41

bill of lading data). Sample 1, where the matches involve multiple shipments of the item,
is more heavily weighted toward BCO transactions (68 percent), as compared to sample 2
(36 percent). For the two samples, we add the information about the quantity of containers
and the indicator for half-size usage, and then regress the log of freight charge per container
on the various shipment characteristics listed in Table A5.35 The implied freight cost of a
half size relative to a full size equals 76.5 percent for the first sample and 93.7 percent for
the second. The remaining coeﬃcients are roughly similar for the two samples. The result
from the second sample might understate the discount for the half size. This will be true
if small firms are likely to use half sizes (which we have already documented) and if small
firms face higher freight rates (which is consistent with the negative coeﬃcient on BCO in
both regressions). The bias should be less for the first sample because selecting only firms
importing multiple-full-container load shipments sweeps out the smallest firms. In any case,
both estimates imply significant indivisibility, with the rate for the half size being well above
50 percent.
A4. Inland Freight
Destination locations are defined as the core-based statistical areas (CBSAs) used in the
2010 Census. Rural counties are not included in CBSAs and for these we aggregate using
Economic Areas (EAs) as defined by the BEA. (In cases were EAs cross state lines, we break
them up to the level of state EAs.) To calculate Walmart sales shares across locations, we
begin with the 2015 list of Walmart stores obtained from their web site. We use store-level
sales data from Holmes (2006) to estimate a regression model of how location-level sales
vary with population and Walmart store counts, and then take fitted values using 2015 store
counts.
As the basis of our inland transportation costs, we rely on Leachman (2005), which
contains information on shipping costs for both rail and truck on intermodal routes from eight
U.S. ports (Charleston, Houston, LA-Long Beach, New York, Norfolk, Oakland, Savannah,
and Seattle) to 21 destinations within the U.S.36
In order to have a more complete set of costs for the entire U.S. ground transportation
network, we supplement the Leachman data with information from other publicly available
sources. For domestic freight rates (for both rail and truck), we appeal to worldfreightrates,
where we collected costs for 769 domestic shipping routes.
35

We restrict both samples to shipments from China and Europe. We select shipments to the following
West Coast customs districts: Los Angeles, San Francisco, Portland, and Seattle, and the following East
Coast districts: New York, Savannah, Norfolk, and Charleston.
36
See Leachman (2005), Tables 14 and 18.

42

Although the Leachman data and the supplemental data are highly correlated for routes
in both samples, we regress each of the Leachman measures (truck and rail costs) on each of
the supplemental measures to have more comparable estimates to combine into a single set of
costs. For the truck cost regression we obtain an estimated intercept of -67 and a slope near
one (1.03), implying that the worldfreightrates cost estimates are slightly more expensive
than the Leachman estimations. We transform the supplemental data using the regression
coeﬃcients so that it conforms with the Leachman data. Similarly, for rail costs, we regress
the cost from Leachman on the cost from worldfrieghtrates and an intercept. The estimated
intercept is 621 and the estimated slope is 0.35 indicating that the supplemental data has
costs that are lower than Leachman’s estimates for small costs and larger than Leachman’s
estimates for higher cost routes. With the combined data, we have information for nearly
800 domestic shipping routes. While this larger data set contains information for the major
intermodal routes, we need estimates of costs between the distribution centers and every
final destination within the United States. To fill in these unobserved costs we rely on the
large geographic scope of the observed data and interpolate the costs giving more weight to
observed costs that are closer a destination with unobserved costs.
A5. Standard Errors of Model Estimates
Simulated standard errors for the model estimates across the various samples are reported
in Table A6. The sample sizes are large, and the level of precision is high.

43

References
Autor, David, David Dorn, Lawrence Katz, Christina Patterson, and John Van Reenen,
(2017) “Concentrating on the Falling Labor Share,” American Economic Review Papers
& Proceedings, 107 (5): 180-85..
Atkin, David and Dave Donaldson (2015), “Who’s Getting Globalized? The Size and
Implications of Intra-national Trade Costs, unpublished manuscript.
Basker, Emek, and Pham Hoang Van (2010), “Imports "R" Us: Retail Chains as Platforms
for Developing-Country Imports.” American Economic Review, 100 (2), 414—418.
Bernhofen, Daniel M., Zouheir El-Sahli, and Richard Kneller (2016), “Estimating the Effects of the Container Revolution on World Trade,” Journal of International Economics
98, 36-50.
Bernard, Andrew B., J. Bradford Jensen and Peter K. Schott (2009), “Importers, Exporters
and Multinationals: A Portrait of Firms in the U.S. that Trade Goods,” in Producer
Dynamics: New Evidence from Micro Data, ed. Timothy Dunne, J. Bradford Jensen,
and Mark J. Roberts, 513-552. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Bernard, Andrew B., J. Bradford Jensen, Stephen J. Redding, and Peter K. Schott (2007),
“Firms in International Trade,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 21(3) 105—130.
Bernard, Andrew B., J. Bradford Jensen, Stephen J. Redding, and Peter K. Schott (2010),
“Wholesalers and Retailers in US Trade,” American Economic Review: Papers and
Proceedings 100(2), 408-413.
Blum, Bernardo S, Sebastian Claro, Kunal Dasgupta, and Ignatius Horstmann, (2018), “Inventory Management, Product Quality, and Cross-Country Income Diﬀerence,” University of Toronto Working Paper.
Cargo From China, “Ocean Freight Shipping from China: FCL or LCL?”, https://cargofromchina.com/fcllcl/, accessed March 5, 2017.
Cosar, A. Kerem and Banu Demir, (2017) “Shipping inside the Box : Containerization and
Trade,” University of Virginia manuscript.
Cosar, A. Kerem., and Pablo D. Fajgelbaum (2016), “Internal Geography, International
Trade, and Regional Specialization,” American Economic Journal: Microeconomics
8(1), 24-56.
44

DHL Global Forwarding Ocean Freight, “Ports of the World,” undated pamphlet.
Holmes, Thomas J., and John J Stevens (2014), “An Alternative Theory of the Plant Size
Distribution, with Geography and Intra- and International Trade”. Journal of Political
Economy 122(2), 369-421.
Holmes, Thomas J. (2001), “Bar Codes Lead to Frequent Deliveries and Superstores.” Rand
Journal of Economics, 32(4), 708—725.
Holmes, Thomas J. (2011), “The Diﬀusion of Wal-Mart and Economies of Density,” Econometrica, 79(1), 253-302.
Hummels, David L. (2007), “Transportation Costs and International Trade in the Second
Era of Globalization,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 21(3), 131—154.
Leachman, Robert C. (2008), “Port and Modal Allocation of Waterborne Containerized
Imports from Asia to the United States,” Transportation Research Part E: Logistics
and Transportation Review 44(2), 313-331.
Leachman, Robert C. (2005), “Final Report: Port and Modal Elasticity Study,” unpublished manuscript.
Leachman, Robert C. (2010), “Final Report: Port and Modal Elasticity Study, Phase II,”
unpublished manuscript.
Leachman, Robert C. (2011), “Evolving Strategies for Asia–USA Containerized Supply
Chains: Implications and Policy Recommendations," Proceedings of the 2011 Industry
Studies Association Annual Conference.
Levinson, Marc (2006), The Box: How the Shipping Container Made the World Smaller
and the World Economy Bigger. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
MWPVL (2009), “Supply Chain Strategy: What are the Leaders Doing,” Conference Presentation Slides, http://www.mwpvl.com/MWPVL_International_-_Supply_Chain_Strategy__What_Are_the_Leaders_Doing.pdf, accessed April 7, 2018.
MWPVL (2017), “The Walmart Distribution Center Network in the United States,” MWPVL White Paper, http://www.mwpvl.com/html/walmart.html. accessed February
12, 2017.
Pisinger, David (2002),"Heuristics for the container loading problem." European Journal of
Operational Research 141(2), 382-392.
45

Redding, Stephen J. and Matthew Turner (2015), "Transportation Costs and the Spatial
Organization of Economic Activity" in (ed.) Gilles Duranton, J. Vernon Henderson,
and William C. Strange, Handbook of Urban and Regional Economics, 1339-1398. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Rua, Gisela (2014), “Diﬀusion of Containerization,” Finance and Economics Discussion
Series 2014-88, Board of Governors of the Federal Resesve System.
Katja Seim, Peter Newberry, Jean-François Houde (2017), Economies of Density in ECommerce: A Study of Amazon’s Fulfillment Center Network, manuscript.
U.S. Bureau of the Census (2007-2015), U.S. Imports of Merchandise, Statistical Month January 2007 through December 2015 (DVD-ROM).

46

Figure 1: Simple Example of Alternative Distribution Systems

(a) m=1 →E[dist] = 1.13

(b) m=2 →E[dist] = 0.75

radius = 1

(c) m=3 →E[dist] = 0.59

(d) m=4 →E[dist] = 0.51

Figure 2. Histograms of Container Fill Levels (Cubic Meters) for Three Samples

(a) Sample 1: All Containers Originating in China

(b) Sample 2: Walmart Containers Originating in China

(c) Sample 3: Walmart Containers Originating in India

Figure 3
Empty Rate out of China for Walmart by Year, 2007-2015
2
1.9
1.8
1.7

empty
rate

1.6
1.5
1.4
1.3
1.2
1.1
1
2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

Figure 4(a)
Shenzhen Histogram of Log Walmart Shipment Volumes: Data (Green)

Figure 4(b)
Shenzhen Histogram of Log Walmart Shipment Volumes: Model (Blue)

Figure 4(c)
Shenzhen Histogram of Log Walmart Shipment Volumes: Model (Blue), Data (Green)

Figure 5(a): Plot of Optimal Adjusted Shipment y
Given Target x and Low Adjustment Cost Draw

y

x

Figure 5(b): Probability of Shipment Consolidation
Given Target Size x and Low Adjustment Cost Draw

probability
of
consolidation

x

Figure 6
Consolidation Frictions and Market Size
(Horizontal Axis Is Log Container Quantity)
0.6
0.5
0.4

friction

0.3
0.2
0.1
0
4

6

8

10

12

14

16

Figure 7
Walmart Seasonal Pattern out of Shenzhen and Estimated Consolidation Friction
1.200
1.000
0.800
0.600
0.400
0.200
0.000

0.180
0.160
0.140
0.120
0.100
0.080

shipments rel to peak

0.060

friction

0.040
0.020
0.000

Figure 8
A Labor Market Slowdown at Pacific Ports and Walmart’s and Amazon’s Responses

40

1

35
0.8

Pacific Share of
Container Imports
from China

30
25

0.6

20

0.4

Days to Complete
Trip, China to Los
Angeles

15
10

0.2

5
0
2014/01
2014/02
2014/03
2014/04
2014/05
2014/06
2014/07
2014/08
2014/09
2014/10
2014/11
2014/12
2015/01
2015/02
2015/03
2015/04
2015/05
2015/06
2015/07
2015/08
2015/09
2015/10
2015/11
2015/12

0

Pacific Share(Walmart)

Pacific Share (Amazon)

Voyage Length (Days)

Notes to figure: Pacific Share is the share of container imports from China unladed at Pacific
ports. For Walmart, containers destined to the Houston IDC are excluded. Voyage Length is
average number of days for container ship voyages leaving Shenzhen, Hong Kong, or Shanghai
ports and arriving at Los Angeles/Long Beach in the specified month.

Table 1
Example Bill of Lading
Field Name
Bill of Lading Number

Value of Record
CMDUUH2053195

Shipper

redacted

Consignee

redacted

Notify Party

Schneider Logistics Attn: Peter Beth 3101 S Packerland Dr
Green Bay,WI 54313 Phone: 800- 525-9358 X2244
Fax: 920-403-8627 Tewalmartdray Schneider.Com

Vessel Name

Felixstowe Bridge

Arrival Date

2015-01-07

Place of Receipt

Zhongshan,

Foreign Port

57067 - Chiwan, China

US Port

5301 - Houston, Texas

Container ID Number

CMAU5601550, CMAU4618671, …

Piece_Count

640, 640, …(each container)

Products

5120 Pcs Hb 1.1 Cu.Ft. Digital Mwo Blk(Microwave
Oven) Purchase Order Number 0254059971
ITEM No:550099354 This Shipment Contains No
Regulated Wood Packaging Materials Freight
Collect Load Type:Cy GLN: 0078742000008
Department No.: 00014 HTS:8516500060 …

Marks

To:Walmart Case Identification Number Us Dept 00014 (5
Digits-Counting Leading Zeros) Po 0254059971
Item 550099354 Supplier Stk P100n30als3b

Table 2
Examples of Consolidated Shipments
(Walmart Is Consignee in Each Case)
Panel A: Shipments in Container FCIU8099760 arriving 2007-01-05
Shipment

Shipper

Product Item Number

1

Buzz Bee Toys

000750151 (Toys: 3 Ball
Sport Packt
000722571 (Toys: The
5th Dimension)
000760687 (Toys: Water
Warrier Gremlin)
000722564 (Kwik Grip
XL Blasters.)
All Toys

2
3
4
Total

Buzz Bee Toys
Buzz Bee Toys
Buzz Bee Toys
4 Shipments

Piece
Count

Volume
(Cubic
Meters)

Weight
(Kg)

1214

44

3350

62

3

272

119

4

428

77
1472

3
54

358
4408

Panel B: Shipments in Container UGMU8950592 arriving 2007-04-19
Shipment

Shipper

Product Item Number

1

Hasbro Toy Group

2

Hong Kong City Toys

3

Cepia LLC

4

Reeves Intl INC

000780246 (Blaster
Toy)
000755447 (Stuffed
Doll Toy)
0251741746 (Speed
Shark Toy)
000727763 (Toys:
All-American...)
000719000 (Battle
Playset)
All Toys

5
Total

Zizzle (HK)
5 Shipments

Piece
Count

Volume
(Cubic
Meters)

Weight
(Kg)

262

14

1362

274

30

2219

665

16

1330

202

7

626

61
1464

2
69

238
5775

Table 3
Sample Statistics
(All statistics in millions)
Count of Shipments
(millions)

Count of Containers
(millions)

All
Sources

From
China

From
Shenzhen

All
Sources

From
China

From
Shenzhen

9−Year Walmart
Sample

2.0

1.7

1.0

1.8

1.6

0.8

18−Month Sample

14.0

6.3

1.6

17.0

7.4

2.0

6.7

2.7

0.9

10.5

3.9

1.2

7.3

3.6

0.7

6.5

3.4

0.8

Beneficial Cargo
Owners (BCO)
FF Intermediated
(HOUSE)

Table 4
Distribution of Shipments by Consolidated, Single, or Multi for Various Samples
Panel A :Walmart 9-Year Sample for Selected Source Countries
Single
MultiContainer Consolidated Container Container
Imports
Shipment
Shipment Shipment
Source Country
(millions)
(Percent)
(percent)
(percent)
China
1.57
42.0
8.1
49.9
Bangladesh
0.03
75.3
5.5
19.2
India
0.03
38.2
18.9
42.9
Thailand
0.03
15.5
26.0
58.5
Vietnam
0.03
39.8
13.2
47.0
Rest of World
0.14
30.5
23.7
45.8
Panel B: Selected Large BCO Retailers in 18-Month Sample (China is Source)
Single
MultiContainer Consolidated Container Container
Imports
Shipment
Shipment Shipment
Company
(millions)
(Percent)
(percent) (percent)
Walmart
230.5
46.2
8.6
45.2
Target
135.7
40.3
11.2
48.5
K-Mart
61.0
10.2
15.9
73.8
Lowes
61.0
0.0
56.3
43.6
Costco
57.6
0.0
100.0
0.0
Home Depot
44.4
1.3
68.9
29.8
Panel C: FF Intermediated Imports with China Source, by Importing Firm Size Category
(Consolidation Defined as Across Firm)
Single
MultiContainer Consolidated Container Container
Imports
Shipment
Shipment Shipment
Size Category
(millions)
(Percent)
(percent) (percent)
All Sizes
2,435.7
4.8
47.7
47.5
By Count of Linked Shipments
1
2-4
5-20
21-100
101-250
251 and above

103.6
196.5
570.1
927.6
398.5
239.4

9.0
7.0
5.9
4.7
2.9
1.4

61.4
59.0
53.1
45.5
40.7
40.1

29.7
33.9
40.9
49.8
56.4
58.5

Table 5
Alternative Container Sizes and Capacities
Container Size

20 Foot Half Size
40 Foot Standard Size
40 Foot High Cube

Maximum
Theoretical
Volume
(cbm)
33.2
67.7
76.3

Maximum
Practical
Volume
(cbm)
28
58
68

Maximum
Weight (kg)
28,200
26,200
26,580

Table 6
Half-Size Shares and Empty Rates for Various Samples of Unconsolidated Shipments

Sample
Walmart by Source Country
China
Bangladesh
India
Thailand
Vietnam
Rest of World
BCO (18 month, China, selected firms)
Walmart
Target
K-Mart
Lowes
Costco
Home Depot
FF Intermediated, China, by Size Class
1
2-4
5-20
21-100
101-250
251 and above

Half Size
Share
(percent)

Half-Size
Share
(percent)
(multi half size
excluded)

Empty
Rate
Half
Size
(percent)

Empty
Rate
Full Size
(percent)

1.3
1.0
5.0
2.2
4.8
5.7

0.6
0.9
4.3
2.2
4.3
3.9

19.6
18.3
39.9
41.8
43.6
39.4

1.7
1.6
3.6
4.5
3.1
5.8

1.1
0.8
2.0
13.6
7.2
10.1

0.6
0.3
1.1
10.1
7.2
2.2

21.2
20.3
25.4
14.5
16.4
33.4

1.7
0.9
1.4
3.2
2.2
2.5

39.6
35.5
30.9
24.6
18.8
13.8

33.2
27.6
22.0
15.9
10.4
7.6

22.4
22.3
23.1
24.9
23.5
28.1

6.6
5.9
5.3
5.5
4.8
4.6

Table 7
Estimates of Shipment-Level Model for Various Samples
Panel A: Cross Section of Walmart Source Locations, 2007-2015
Shipment
Count
GMM
mu
sigma
criterion
Sample
(1,000)
eta
omega1 zeta
China
0.103
Shenzhen
1,049
0.126
0.785
-0.771
1.598
0.006
0.133
-0.548
1.840
0.027
Shanghai
219
0.166
0.886
0.148
Xiamen
155
0.004
0.897
-0.648
2.031
0.044
0.110
Ningbo
136
0.159
0.856
-0.799
1.702
0.016
0.157
Qingdao
46
0.117
0.870
-0.273
1.756
0.044
0.124
-0.772
1.511
0.004
Hong Kong
43
0.166
0.719
0.316
Fuzhou
24 -0.157
0.796
-1.101
2.209
0.021
0.191
Tianjin
17
0.201
0.889
0.192
1.638
0.019
0.161
Dalian
6
0.334
0.494
0.011
1.365
0.071
0.000
Foshan
3
0.093
1.000
1.896
0.992
0.052
Bangladesh
Chittagong
50 -0.107
0.731
0.189 -0.879
1.681
0.020
India
0.007
-0.828
1.328
0.102
Mumbai
20
0.470
0.408
0.348
Tuticorin
6
0.437
0.680
-1.285
1.640
0.072
0.135
Mundra
2
0.235
0.888
0.694
1.140
0.257
0.137
Ludhiana
2
0.292
0.881
0.873
1.296
0.145
0.112
Chennai
2
0.556
0.624
-0.755
1.272
0.082
Panel B: Comparison of Target and Costco with 18-Month Sample
Shipment
18-Month Sample Count
GMM
(1,000)
eta
omega1 zeta
mu
sigma
criterion
Target/Shenzhen
90
0.154
0.942
0.094 -0.715
1.422
0.016
*
Costco/Shenzhen
19
∞
1.000
n.a.
0.554
0.202
0.000
*For Costco we take as given that consolidation is infeasible
Panel C: Variation over Time from Fixed Source
Walmart/Shenzen Shipment
Count
GMM
over time
(1,000)
eta
omega1 zeta
mu
sigma
criterion
2007
117
0.148
0.754
0.108 -0.388
1.605
0.003
2015
128
0.095
0.857
0.101 -0.809
1.530
0.014

Table 8
Regression Results: Consolidation Friction for Walmart and Shipping Volume
Parameter

Sample 1
Cross Section of
Locations

Constant

0.838
(0.245)

Sample 2
Average Seasonal
(Bimonthly)
Shenzhen
1.060
(0.318)

Log(Count of Containers)

−0.064
(0.024)

−0.079
(0.027)

R2

0.337

0.679

N

16

6

Table 9
Estimates for FF Intermediated Shipments
Shenzhen to Los Angeles
By Consignee Firm Size Category
Consignee
Size Category
(Count of
shipment groups)
1
2-4
5-20
21-100
201-250
251 or more

Total
Shipments
by Size
Category
(1,000)
eta
18
29
77
110
46
26

2.15
1.92
1.56
1.01
0.91
0.69

Share
Yescol = 1
omega
0.78
0.72
0.76
0.84
0.84
0.86

zeta
0.04
0.09
0.29
0.01
0.52
0.57

mu
-1.60
-1.12
-0.66
-0.10
0.23
0.18

sigma
1.80
1.57
1.44
1.28
1.18
1.38

GMM
criterion
0.24
0.39
0.49
0.45
0.44
0.57

Model Data
0.68 0.62
0.61 0.52
0.53 0.42
0.42 0.31
0.33 0.23
0.41 0.27

Table 10
The Relationship between Delivery Frequency and Volume Shipped
(Left-hand Side of Regression is Log Delivery Frequency at Item/Year IDC Level)
Variable

Walmart 9-Year Sample

1
2
Log Q (Annual
0.201
0.220
Volume)
(0.001) (0.001)
Years Since
0.031
0.032
2007
(0.000) (0.000)
Location
Friction η
Interaction Small
Volume and
Friction
(Q < 3) × η
Source Location
no
yes
FE
Product (HS6)
no
yes
FE
Destination IDC
no
yes
FE
Amazon
n.a.
n.a.
Indicator
0.191
0.336
R2
N
481,665 391,597

3
0.218
(0.001)
0.034
(0.000)
−0.133
(0.027)

4
0.212
(0.001)
0.034
(0.000)

5
0.207
(0.001)
0.031
(0.000)

−0.593
(0.022)

−1.149
(0.032)

no

no

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

0.332
391,597

0.333
391,597

0.334
391,597

Table 11
Estimated Unit Indivisibility Costs by Count of IDCs
(Cost Is Percentage of Ocean Freight)

Walmart
Shenzhen
Walmart
Mumbai
Walmart
Weighted
Averege from
Asia

1

2

2.7

5.8

Indivisibility Cost (Percent) by Number of IDCs
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
7.7

10

9.2

10.3

11.3

12.2

13.1

13.8

14.4

11.5 16.5 20.1 22.9

25.3

27.2

29.0

30.5

31.9

33.3

3.6

6.3

9.3

10.3

11.3

12.2

13.0

13.7

14.3

5.0

8.2 10.4 12.0

13.5

14.7

15.8

16.7

17.7

18.5

40.8 58.3 70.4 79.6

87.2

93.5

98.8 103.6 107.8 111.5

21-100

18.5 29.6 37.5 43.6

48.5

52.6

56.1

59.0

61.5

63.8

251 and up

14.3 20.7 25.4 29.2

32.2

34.8

37.1

39.1

40.8

42.4

Target
Shenzhen

8.0

Freight
Forward
Intermediated
By Count of
Linked
Shipments
1

The cells shaded in gray are the baseline cases that we use for the count m of IDCs generating
the data. The remaining cells are counterfactual levels of m.

Table 12
Freight Cost and Indivisibilty Cost by Count of IDCS

Cost Measure
Cfreight
Cind(weighted Asia)
Cfreight + Cind(weighted Asia)
Cind(Mumbai)
Cfreight + Cind(Mumbai)

1
2
155.4 144.6
3.6
6.3
159.0 150.9
11.5 16.5
166.9 161.1

Count of IDCs
3
4
5
6
141.9 140.1 138.6 137.8
8.0
9.3 10.3 11.3
149.9 149.4 148.9 149.1
20.1 22.9 25.3 27.2
162.0 163.0 163.9 165.0

Notes: Cfreight is estimated average inland freight as a percentage of $2,500, which we take as an
approximation of average ocean freight from Asia to a U.S. port. The data appendix provides
more details about ocean freight.

Table 13
Estimated Effects of Dissolution
(Based on Weighted Average from Asia Estimates)

Type of Change
Dissolution 2 firms
Dissolution 10 firms
Dissolution 100 firms

Upper
Bound
m
5
2
2

Effect on Total Cost
(Percent of Ocean Freight)
Lower Bound
Upper Bound
4.0
4.7
14.7
17.0
35.2
40.8

Total cost includes indivisibilty cost, inland freight, and waiting cost from infrequent delivery.

Table A1
Counts for 18-Month Bill of Lading Sample and Distribution by Type
Month

2007/12
2008/11
2008/12
2012/11
2012/12
2013/01
2013/02
2013/03
2013/11
2013/12
2014/01
2014/02
2014/03
2014/11
2014/12
2015/01
2015/02
2015/03
All Months

All

1,020,091
978,676
895,200
1,018,936
1,071,193
1,065,879
1,027,326
903,288
1,085,137
1,043,369
1,154,470
975,268
1,056,633
1,101,479
1,148,196
989,477
999,214
1,275,984
18,809,816

Percent Distribution by Type of Bill of Lading
No Container
BCO
House
Master
or Empty
36.8
38.5
21.3
3.4
35.9
39.2
21.7
3.2
36.1
39.0
21.2
3.6
35.4
39.1
22.3
3.2
34.6
39.9
22.6
2.8
36.0
38.5
22.7
2.8
35.6
39.0
22.4
2.9
37.9
36.9
21.5
3.7
35.3
39.1
22.7
2.8
34.2
40.1
23.0
2.7
35.3
39.0
23.1
2.6
36.1
38.5
22.4
3.0
36.9
37.7
22.2
3.2
35.7
39.1
22.5
2.7
35.2
39.0
22.6
3.2
35.7
38.7
22.4
3.2
35.7
39.5
21.6
3.1
36.1
37.0
24.1
2.8
35.8

38.8

22.4

3.0

Table A2
Counts of Bills of Lading and Containers in Wal-Mart Sample

Walmart Sample

All Years
By Year
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015

Count of
Count
Shipments Containers
(1,000)
(1,000)
1,964
1,820

235
202
172
185
188
194
245
264
278

PIERS
Published
Aggregates
Count
Containers
(1,000 FEU*)
3,267

Sample Share
Relative to
PIERS
(Percent)
55.7

360
351
342
348
355
360
366
388
‡
398

76.1
62.6
49.8
50.7
46.9
44.1
56.2
56.5
57.7

274
220
170
176
167
159
206
219
230

†

*FEU is Forty-†Foot Equivalent. PIERS reports units in TEU (Twenty Foot), so figures for
PIERS are 0.5 times the published figure.
†
The 2008 PIERS figure is based on interpolating 2007 and 2009.
‡
The 2015 PIERS figure is not available and is estimated based on trend growth.
Table A3
Import Destination Shares of Walmart’s Five Import Distribution Centers
(Apparel and Footwear Excluded)
Import Distribution Center
Los Angeles
Chicago
Houston
Savannah
Norfolk

Share of Shipments
20.8
17.9
20.4
20.7
20.3

Share of Containers
19.5
15.6
23.4
23.1
18.4

Table A4
Freight Charge Statistics
Walmart Shipments from China Matched to Public Census Tabulations

mean

Percentile
p50
p75

p25

N

Walmart Shipments with Exact Match to
Public Tabulations
Freight Charge Per Container

3360.8

2656.0

3121.6 3648.2

483

9.1

6.6

7.6

10.2

483

7.9

5.8

7.5

10.1

1,134,785

As Percentage of Entered Value
Walmart Shipments merged on HS6
Freight Charge as Percentage of
Entered Value

Table A5
Freight Charge Regressions with 18-Month Sample Linked to Census Tabulations
(Left-hand Side Variable is Log Freight Per Container)
Linked Sample 2
Linked Sample 1
Parameter

coefficient
7.376

s.e.
0.097

Half Size Discount

-0.268

China to East Coast

coefficent

s.e.

7.120

0.025

0.031

-0.065

0.004

0.173

0.014

0.242

0.006

Europe to East Coast

0.117

0.023

0.144

0.006

Europe to West Coast

0.090

0.036

0.211

0.008

Years since Jan 2007

-0.026

0.010

-0.007

0.005

(Years since Jan 2007)2

0.003

0.001

0.001

0.001

Entered Value (per container)

0.064

0.009

0.063

0.002

-0.159

0.014

-0.072

0.004

Intercept

BCO
R2
N

0.145
2,507

0.100
33,084

Table A6
Estimated Standard Errors of Model Estimates for Various Samples
(Estimated by Simulation)
Parameter
Sample
mu
sigma
eta
omega1 zeta
CN_Shenzhen
0.001
0.006
0.001
0.002
0.002
CN_Shanghai
0.001
0.004
0.002
0.007
0.003
CN_Xiamen
0.002
0.005
0.003
0.006
0.004
CN_Ningbo
0.002
0.007
0.001
0.005
0.006
CN_Qingdao
0.003
0.007
0.003
0.006
0.008
CN_HongKong
0.005
0.012
0.002
0.008
0.009
CN_Fuzhou
0.014
0.015
0.016
0.011
0.011
CN_Tianjin
0.005
0.009
0.006
0.012
0.010
CN_Dalian
0.012
0.020
0.007
0.015
0.015
BD_Bangladesh
0.008
0.015
0.006
0.006
0.007
IN_NhavaSheva
0.001
0.013
0.000
0.010
0.005
IN_Thooth
0.018
0.026
0.027
0.020
0.015
IN_Kachchh
0.010
0.027
0.011
0.024
0.020
IN_Ludhiana
0.016
0.021
0.010
0.022
0.020
IN_Chennai
0.023
0.053
0.031
0.028
0.030
Target_Shenzhen
0.003
0.011
0.002
0.004
0.005
Walmart_Shenzhen_2007
0.002
0.009
0.002
0.007
0.004
Walmart_Shenzhen_2015
0.002
0.008
0.001
0.006
0.005
House Size 1
0.035
0.012
0.001
0.021
0.012
House_Size 2-4
0.026
0.008
0.002
0.010
0.006
House_Size 4-20
0.011
0.007
0.007
0.006
0.004
House_Size 21-100
0.007
0.003
0.000
0.003
0.003
House_Size 101-250
0.008
0.004
0.003
0.007
0.003
House_Size 251 plus
0.007
0.006
0.002
0.008
0.005

