NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

COST OF EXPERIMENTATION AND THE EVOLUTION OF VENTURE CAPITAL
Michael Ewens
Ramana Nanda
Matthew Rhodes-Kropf
Working Paper 24523
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24523

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2018
We are extremely grateful to Shai Bernstein, Tony Cookson, Marco Da Rin, Lora Dimitrova,
Joan Farre-Mensa, Brent Goldfarb, Yael Hochberg, David Hsu, Ross Levine, Tom Nicholas,
Scott Stern, Ayako Yasuda and the participants at the NBER conference on The Changing
Financing Market for Innovation and Entrepreneurship, the Academy of Management, the 5th
HEC Entrepreneurship Workshop, the Economics of Strategy Workshop at NYU, the 5th
Entrepreneurial Finance and Innovation Conference, Western Finance Association 2016,
European Finance Assoc. 2016, FOM Conference 2016, UC Berkeley, Caltech, Carnegie Mellon
University, Columbia University, Arizona State University, Drexel University, Boston
University, University of Rochester, University of Michigan, Oxford University and Vanderbilt
University for helpful comments. The authors thank VentureSource and Correlation Ventures for
access to their data. Ewens and Rhodes-Kropf are advisors to and investors in Correlation
Ventures. Ewens recognizes the support of the Kauffman Foundation Junior Faculty Fellowship.
All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w24523.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Michael Ewens, Ramana Nanda, and Matthew Rhodes-Kropf. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Cost of Experimentation and the Evolution of Venture Capital
Michael Ewens, Ramana Nanda, and Matthew Rhodes-Kropf
NBER Working Paper No. 24523
April 2018
JEL No. G24,O31,O32
ABSTRACT
We study how technological shocks to the cost of starting new businesses have led the venture
capital model to adapt in fundamental ways over the prior decade. We both document and
provide a framework to understand the changes in the investment strategy of venture capitalists
(VCs) in recent years —an increased prevalence of a “spray and pray” investment approach —
where investors provide a little funding and limited governance to an increased number of
startups that they are more likely to abandon, but where initial experiments significantly inform
beliefs about the future potential of the venture. This adaptation and related entry by new
financial intermediaries has led to a disproportionate rise in innovations where information on
future prospects is revealed quickly and cheaply, and reduced the relative share of innovation in
complex technologies where initial experiments cost more and reveal less.

Michael Ewens
Caltech
HSS MC 228-77
1200 East California Ave
Pasadena, CA 91125
mewens@caltech.edu
Ramana Nanda
Harvard Business School
Rock Center 317
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
rnanda@hbs.edu

Matthew Rhodes-Kropf
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-617
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
mattrk@mit.edu

1

Introduction

Although technological change is increasingly seen as the primary driver of productivity growth (Aghion and Howitt, 1992), adaptation by financial intermediaries may be
equally important to realizing the benefits of these new technologies (King and Levine,
1993; Laeven et al., 2015). For example, Chandler (1965) documents the adaptation
by specialized investment banks as a response to the “vast sums of capital” required to
finance the construction of railroads and govern industrial corporations needing arm’slength capital from distant investors.1 Similarly, Nicholas (2016) shows how the modern
venture capital model arose in the mid-20th century in order to channel capital to the
myriad new technologies emerging outside of the corporate research and development
(R&D) model.
We provide evidence that the venture capital investment model has evolved in fundamental ways over the last decade, particularly in the early stage financing of software
and service oriented startup ventures. For these sectors, we document an increased prevalence of an investment strategy that has been colloquially referred to as “spray and
pray,” where early stage investors provide a little funding and limited governance to an
increased number of startups, most of which they abandon after their initial investment.
The “spray and pray” investment approach is a significant shift away from the traditional
value-added ‘governance’ in the early stages of a venture’s life and is particularly significant because venture capital investors are not just passive, but typically play a central
role in monitoring and governing new ventures through a successful exit (Hellmann and
Puri, 2000; Sorensen, 2007).
We argue that this change in the investment strategy of early stage investors has
been driven by technological shocks that have substantially lowered the cost of starting
new businesses, opening up a whole new range of investment opportunities that were
not viable before, but also necessitating new ways of financing them. To understand
the need for this adaptation by early stage investors, it is helpful to recognize that a
key feature of the venture capital context is a combination of extremely skewed ex post
returns and an inability to tell the biggest successes ex ante (Hall and Woodward (2010)
and Kerr, Nanda, and Rhodes-Kropf (2014)). VCs therefore stage their investment
across multiple rounds, and each round of investment can be seen as an experiment that
generates information about the ultimate value of the startup. Critically, staging also
allows VCs to abandon their investment if intermediate information is negative, so that
each investment stage is akin to a real option (Gompers, 1995; Cornelli and Yosha, 2003;
1

See also Chandler (1977); Baskin and Miranti (1997); Neal (1990), and Laeven et al. (2015).

2

Bergemann and Hege, 2005; Fluck et al., 2007; Bergemann et al., 2008; Tian, 2011).
From a theoretical perspective, therefore, the falling cost of starting firms has a firstorder effect on the value of these real options. We provide a simple theoretical framework
to highlight how the falling cost of starting firms can alter the way VCs select and govern
their portfolio of investments due to the higher value of these abandonment options.
Our paper aims to provide a deeper understanding of how the changing cost of starting
new ventures has impacted venture-capital backed entrepreneurship in the US. While
anecdotal accounts of this phenomenon and the changes in the market for early stage
finance have been documented in the press (e.g., Economist 2014) and the managerial
implications popularized in frameworks such as the “lean startup model,” we are not
aware of any systematic work examining how the changing cost of starting businesses
impacts the early stage financing market. Our approach combines rich data on the
investments and composition of venture capital portfolios with a theoretical framework
that emphasizes a core mechanism driving our findings.
We begin by providing evidence of a changing investment approach by VCs following
the advent of Amazon’s Web Services (AWS) in early 2006. The introduction of cloud
computing services by Amazon is seen by many practitioners as a defining moment
that dramatically lowered the initial cost of starting Internet and web-based startups.
Cloud computing allowed startups to ‘rent’ hardware space in small increments and
scale up as demand grew, instead of making large fixed upfront investments in hardware
when the probability of success for the startup was still extremely low. This allowed
entrepreneurs and investors to learn about the viability of startups before making large
fixed investments, and hence can be seen as lowering the costs of initial experiments.
Importantly, this technological shock impacted only a subset of firms. The cloud services
provided by AWS provided scalable bandwidth, storage, and computing resources for
companies with a strong online presence such as software-as-a-service, social networks, or
retail e-commerce websites. This cross-sectional variation in the changing cost of starting
firms allows us to systematically document our findings in a differences-in-differences
framework.
We show that subsequent to the shock, startups founded in sectors benefiting most
from the introduction of AWS raised significantly smaller amounts in their first round
of VC financing. On average, initial funding size fell 20%, but quantile regressions
demonstrate that this fall was across the board and even larger for many parts of the
funding-size distribution. Importantly, we find that the fall is confined to initial startup
costs. While startups in treated sectors raised less capital in their initial two years,
total capital raised by firms in treated sectors that survived three or more years was
unchanged. This is consistent with the notion that the primary effect that AWS had was
3

on the initial fundraising by startups rather than on the cost of running the business
at scale — effectively allowing startups to shift their large capital investments to later
stages when uncertainty had been resolved.
We turn next to showing how this fall in the cost of starting businesses impacted the
way in which VCs managed their portfolios. We show that in sectors impacted by the
technological shock, VCs responded by providing a little funding and limited governance
to an increased number of startups, which they were more likely to abandon after the
initial round of funding. The number of initial investments made per year by VCs in
treated sectors nearly doubled from the pre- to the post-period, without a commensurate
increase in follow-on investments, and VCs making initial investments in treated sectors
were less likely to take a board seat following the technological shock. In a reference to
the large number of startups that receive an initial investment, the lower governance,
and the smaller proportion of ventures that receive follow-on funding, this investment
approach is colloquially referred to as one where investors “spray and pray.”2
Our findings are consistent with anecdotal accounts of entry by several new financial
intermediaries such as ‘Micro-VCs’ and ‘Super Angels’ who specialize in early stage
investing using such an investment approach.3 However, the inclusion of VC fixed effects
in our regressions shows that this was not just a compositional shift in the types of
investors before and after the shock — VCs who were active in the pre-period were also
involved in deals where the initial funding size had fallen relative to their own deals in
untreated sectors. Moreover, VCs who were active investors in the pre-period were more
likely to invest through a spray and pray investment strategy in sectors that benefited
from the technological shock. As noted above, the “spray and pray” investment approach
is a significant shift away from value-added ‘governance’ in the early stages of ventures
to more passive ‘learning’ about startup potential.
The falling cost of starting new businesses allowed a set of entrepreneurs who would
not have been financed in the past to receive early stage financing. While these marginal
ventures that just became viable had lower expected value, they seemed to be largely
comprised of ventures with a lower probability of success, but a high return if successful
(what we refer to as “long shot bets”) rather than just ‘worse’ ventures with a lower gross
2
This “spray and pray” investment strategy is typified by a quote from Naval Ravikant, a prominent
angel investor and founder of the platform AngelList, who noted that “making an [early stage] investment
is like throwing darts in the dark.” Source: Fatima Yasmine, February 22, 2011, Naval Ravikant:
Twitter, Bubbles, New York and Start Fund [Interview Part 2].
3
Note that the term ‘Super Angel’ is somewhat of a misnomer, as these investors raise professionally
managed funds from limited partners, operating effectively as early stage VCs rather than as angel
investors.

4

return when successful. We find that in sectors impacted by the technological shock, VCs
increased their investments in startups run by younger, less experienced founding teams.
While these characteristics are consistent with anecdotal accounts of “long shot bets”
such as Google, Facebook, Airbnb, and Dropbox being founded by young, inexperienced
founders,4 it is of course also consistent more broadly with alternative mechanisms that
would point to the marginal firm just being a worse investment. To help distinguish
between these, we exploit the insight that “long shot bets” will see a greater increase
in valuation in the event that they receive another round of funding. This is because
long shot bets have a small chance of a huge payoff, so the relatively infrequent states of
the world where the initial experiment generates positive information will lead investors
to update their posterior beliefs about the startup’s expected value much more — and
hence lead to higher step-ups in value from the first to the second round of funding. Our
empirical results document that relative to the pre-period, startups in treated sectors
were more likely to fail, but conditional on another round of funding, had nearly 20%
higher step-ups in value across rounds than equivalent startups in untreated sectors.
This finding is consistent with the notion that on balance, there was an increase in long
shot bets being financed and is harder to reconcile with other potential channels through
which VCs might respond to the falling cost of starting new ventures. We supplement our
empirical results with a simple theoretical model that formalizes the intuition outlined
above.
An interesting implication of our results is that the value-added role of VCs may have
fallen at precisely the point in the startup’s lifecycle that value-add is needed the most.
Moreover, younger and more-inexperienced founders, who have a technology that holds a
lot of promise but are not experienced at running a firm, arguably need mentorship and
governance even more than those run by more experienced entrepreneurs. Yet the fact
that VCs need to “spray and pray” to make the investment profitable implies that these
startups only get financed with limited governance. This finding helps to explain the
rise of new financial intermediaries such as accelerators that provide scalable, lower cost
forms of mentorship to inexperienced founding teams (and which have only emerged
in the last decade), as these are a natural response to the gap in governance created
by the evolution of VCs’ investment behavior in early rounds to a more passive spray
and pray approach (Hochberg, 2016). A second implication of our result points to a
disproportionate increase in investments made in sectors with more discriminating early
experiments, even if there is no change in the number of investments in sectors with
4

See Kerr, Nanda, and Rhodes-Kropf (2014) for a description of how such ventures were not seen as
sure bets and how reputable investors chose to pass on the chance to invest in them.

5

a slower, or more costly, revelation of final project value. This change nevertheless
alters the trajectory of aggregate innovation and is consistent with a common refrain in
the popular press and among some prominent entrepreneurs that VCs are not devoting
sufficient attention to backing ‘fundamental’ innovations in recent years.
Our work is related to the literature on early stage financing (Kerr, Lerner, and
Schoar (2014); Hellmann and Thiele (2015); Puri and Zarutskie (2012)) and the emergence in recent years of new financial intermediaries that select and shape startups at the
earliest stages in their life (Cohen and Hochberg, 2014; Bernstein et al., 2017; GonzalezUribe and Leatherbee, 2017). Our paper provides a framework within which to view
the emergence of these new financial intermediaries. Our results are also related to a
small literature on financial innovations and the important role they play translating
technological change into economic growth (Allen and Gale, 1994; Laeven et al., 2015).
Historical work on entrepreneurship in the United States has documented the central role
of the financial innovations to commercialize new technologies as early as cotton and the
railroads (Cain, 2010). More recently, Janeway (2012) notes how venture capital evolved
to support the funding of biotechnology ventures. Our work builds on this line of research and documents the important feedback between technological change and financial
intermediaries — technological shocks to investment opportunities require adaptation by
investors. Indeed, without such adaptation, the benefits of new technologies may not
be fully realized. Yet, this adaption also has consequences for the future trajectory of
innovation by shaping the way in which financial intermediaries select and manage their
investments.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, we describe how the
introduction of Amazon Web Services impacted the cost of starting firms in certain
industries, and provide a simple theoretical framework to guide the interpretation of
our results. For interested readers, we note that a more comprehensive model on which
the framework is based is available in an Internet Appendix. In Section 3, we describe
the data we use to more systematically test these ideas and outline our identification
strategy. Section 4 outlines our results and Section 5 provides robustness tests. Section
6 discusses how new intermediaries are responding to the gaps created by the evolution
of traditional venture capital and Section 7 concludes.

6

2

Descriptive evidence and theoretical framework

2.1

Cloud computing

We first motivate our choice to use the introduction of cloud computing as the technological shock to identify adaptation by venture capital investors. A number of practitioners
have pointed to the introduction of cloud computing as a defining moment when the
initial cost of starting certain businesses fell.5 Cloud computing services were first introduced by Amazon in early 2006. Our research suggests that the products included
in Amazon’s Web Services (AWS) were “developed first and foremost for Amazon’s internal infrastructure” before opening these services up to developers outside Amazon in
2006, the timing of which was not anticipated by entrepreneurs or investors (Clark, 2012;
Vogels, 2011). Amazon’s Chief Technology Officer (CTO) Werner Vogels recalled that
“At Amazon we had developed unique software and services based on more
than a decade of infrastructure work for the evolution of the Amazon ECommerce Platform. This was dedicated software and operation procedures
that drove excellent performance, reliability, operational quality and security
all at very large scale... The thinking then developed that offering Amazon’s
expertise in ultra-scalable system software as primitive infrastructure building
blocks delivered through a services interface could trigger whole new world of
innovation as developers no longer needed to focus on buying, building and
maintaining infrastructure. AWS delivered the first storage service (Amazon
S3) in the spring of 2006 and compute (Amazon EC2) in the fall of that
year”(Vogels, 2011).
The ability to freely rent hardware in small increments that could scale with demand
was not possible before 2006. Firms had to make large upfront investments in hardware
to prepare for the small chance that they would be a success. The following quote by
Mark Andreessen, a prominent venture capital investor and serial entrepreneur describes
this process and the change:
“In the ‘90s, if you wanted to build an Internet company, you needed to
buy Sun servers, Cisco networking gear, Oracle databases, and EMC storage
5

As described by Hardy (2014), “Cloud computing refers to an efficient method of managing lots of
computer servers, data storage and networking. [This technological leap led to] immediate performance
gains, since stand-alone servers typically used only a fraction of their capacity in case there was a surge
in demand. By linking the machines together into a larger “virtual” system, the surge problem eased
and a lot of computation was freed.”

7

systems... and those companies would charge you a ton of money even just
to get up and running. The new startups today, they don’t buy any of that
stuff... They’re paying somewhere between 100x and 1000x [less] per unit of
compute, per unit of storage, per unit of networking.”
Andreessen also notes that the rise of services such as Amazons Elastic Compute
Cloud (EC2) transformed many infrastructure costs from upfront capital expenditures
to subscription services that could scale with a company as it grew, thereby reducing the
fixed costs associated with starting new firms.6
Of course, ‘renting’ hardware is more expensive on a unit cost basis than buying
the hardware outright. However, the ability to rent hardware allowed entrepreneurs to
initially raise smaller amounts of capital to test technological viability and customer
demand, only making large capital expenditures in hardware once their startup showed
initial success and had achieved some scale. Thus, the primary effect of cloud computing
was not to lower total costs, but rather to lower the cost of initial experiments when
the probability of failure was high. A prominent example is that of Dropbox, which
was founded in 2007, yet stored all of its files on Amazon’s Cloud Computing servers
until 2015, rather than on hardware that it owned and operated itself. Once it reached
scale, however, management migrated to its own servers to improve unit economics.
As Dropbox’s vice president noted in an interview about why it stopped renting from
Amazon, “Nobody is running a cloud business as a charity. There is some margin
somewhere.”(Metz, 2016).

2.2

A simple model of multi-stage financing

We turn next to providing a simple model of multi-stage financing in order to illustrate
how a fall in the cost of starting ventures might impact the investments made by VCs.7
Consider an investor who stages their investment across two rounds, preserving the
option to abandon their investment after the first stage if intermediate information is
negative. Specifically, let E[p2 ] denote the unconditional expectation about the second
stage success. The investor updates their expectation about the second stage probability
6

Source: Douglas Macmillan, Andreessen: Bubble believers “Don’t know what they’re talking about,”
Wall Street Journal, January 3, 2014.
7
While this simple model provides a theoretical framework within which to view our results, a more
fleshed out equilibrium model of multi-stage financing in the Internet Appendix outlines how a shift in
the cost of experimentation can not only impact marginal ventures but also have an impact on inframarginal investments, thereby having a much larger impact on the way in which venture capital investors
manage their portfolios.

8

depending on the outcome of the first stage.8 Let pS = E[p2 |S] denote the expectation of
p2 conditional on positive intermediate information (success in the first stage), while pF =
E[p2 |F ] denote the expectation of p2 conditional on negative intermediate information
(failure in the first stage).9 Success in the second stage yields a total payoff of V , to be
split between the entrepreneur and investor. Failure in the second stage yields a payoff
of zero. The probability of ‘success’ (positive information) in the first stage is p1 .
The startup requires $X of capital in the first round and $Y in the second round of
financing. The entrepreneur is assumed to have no capital while the investor has enough
to fund the project for both periods. An investor who chooses not to invest at either
stage can instead earn a safe return of r per period (investor outside option) which we
normalize to zero for simplicity. The extensive form of the game played by the investor
is shown in Fig. 1.

Success, Invest
Yes
$Y?
No
P1
Invest $X?

Yes

PS

Success, Payoff
V

1 – PS

Failure, Payoff
0

$Y

No
1 – P1
$X+$Y

Failure, Invest
Yes
$Y?
No

PF

1 – PF

Success, Payoff
V

Failure, Payoff
0

$Y

Fig. 1. Extensive form representation of the investor’s game tree
In order to focus on the interesting cases, we assume that if the project ‘fails’ in the
first period (i.e. intermediate information is negative), then it is NPV negative in the
second period, i.e., pF ∗ V < Y. Further, if the project ‘succeeds’ in the first period (i.e.,
intermediate information is positive), then it is Net Present Value (NPV) positive in the
second period, i.e., pS ∗ V > Y. Without these assumptions the first stage ‘experiment’
is not relevant as, for example, pF ∗ V > Y would imply that the investor will make
the second-round investment no matter what the result of the first stage investment
is. We therefore assume that VCs will always abandon the investment if intermediate
information is negative and always invest Y if intermediate information is positive. We
8

This might be the building of a prototype, initial traction with customers, or the Federal Drug
Administration (FDA) regulated Phase I trials on the path of a new drug, etc.
9
One particular functional form that is sometimes used with this set up is to assume that the first
and second stage have the same underlying probability of success, p. In this case p1 can be thought of
as the unconditional expectation of p, and E[p2 |S] and E[p2 |F ] just follow Bayes’ rule.

9

further assume that VCs compete away rents, so that the NPV of their investment in
each stage is always zero.
Note first that a VC will only be willing to invest in a startup if p1 ∗(pS ∗V −Y )−X > 0.
Moreover, the minimum probability of first stage success that the VC will be willing to
fund is:
p1min ≡ X/(pS ∗ V − Y ).
(1)
It is intuitive that a fall in the cost of starting ventures, X, would lead to a larger
number of investments from a VC’s portfolio and – given partner time is a scarce resource
— that this should lead to a fall in governance at the initial round of funding. However,
note that the composition of ventures that get funded will also change. To see why, note
that the denominator of Eq. (1) is the expected value of the startup at the second stage
conditional on success in the first stage experiment, also referred to as the “pre-money
valuation” of the venture at the second round of financing. Thus, the marginal venture
which just becomes NPV positive when X falls is either one with a lower expected value
conditional on initial success — we refer to these as “worse” startup ventures — or one
with a lower p1 . Note that startups with a lower p1 are ventures with greater option
value, or “long shot bets,” since they are more likely to fail, but conditional on positive
intermediate information are equally likely to have a big success.
Of course, these are not mutually exclusive outcomes in that both “worse” ventures
and “long shot bets” become viable investments when X falls. However, the model
generates discriminating predictions that can help distinguish whether, empirically, on
average, the increase in investments when X fell was driven by one type of venture or
another. In particular, if the dominant driver is an increase in “long shot bets”, we should
see this manifested in three ways. First, we should find ex ante evidence of long shot
bets, which we aim to capture empirically through the age and experience of founding
teams when they are first funded. Secondly, if the increase in investments is dominated
by ventures with a lower p1 (as opposed to a lower pS ∗ V − Y ), we should see an increase
in failure rates following the initial round of funding (as opposed to initial failure rates
remaining roughly constant). Finally, conditional on not failing after the first round,
firms with a lower p1 should see a higher step-up in value if they do get another round
of funding and should have the same, or higher exit values when they eventually reach
a liquidity event. The intuition behind a lower p1 leading to a higher step-up is that
if investors put a lower probability on the startup demonstrating intermediate success,
seeing success after the first round of funding leads them to update their priors more,
thereby leading to a higher change in valuation from the first round to the next. This
intuition can be seen formally in the model by noting that the step-up in value —
10

calculated as the pre-money valuation in round 2 divided by the post-money valuation
in round 1 — is inversely proportional to p1 .10 Hence if the VCs’ new investments are
comprised mostly of long shot bets, we should see higher step-ups in value for treated
firms in the post-period. On the other hand, if the dominant driver of the increased
funding is worse investments, then p1 will not change much and hence we should see
little change in the step-ups of ventures being funded in the post-period.

3

Data and estimation strategy

We turn next to a systematic analysis of VC financings. Our analysis is based on the VentureSource database of venture capital financings, investors, and entrepreneurial firms
provided by Dow Jones.11 However, the data are supplemented in several ways. First,
additional valuation information for both financings and exits comes from Correlation
Ventures and a merge of Thomson’s VentureEconomics.12 Second, additional information about the entrepreneurial firm’s founding team comes from CapitalIQ, LinkedIn,
Crunchbase, firm websites and Lexis Nexus.13 Founders were identified with data from
VentureSource and additional data collection detailed in Ewens and Fons-Rosen (2015).
We begin by including every first round of funding among VC-backed startups that
10

To put this in terms of a numerical example, suppose there is a 20% chance of success in round 1
and a 40% chance of success in round 2. Initially, it takes $4 million to reach round 2 and it takes a
further $10 million in round 2 to reach an exit of $100 million. Assume that if the firm fails in either
round 1 or round 2 it is worth zero. Working backwards, the post-money valuation in round 2 will be
$40 million (40% * $100 million) and the pre-money valuation in round 2 will be $30 million. Since
the probability of success in round 1 is 20%, the post-money valuation in round 1 is $6 million and
the pre-money valuation in round 1 is $2 million and the VC would take 66.7% of the company in the
first round of funding. Note also that the lowest probability of first-round success that a VC would be
willing to fund in round 1 would therefore be 4/30 = 13.33%. The step-up from round 1 to round 2 is
30/6 = 5, which is inversely proportional to the probability of success from getting from one round to
the next (1/20%). Suppose now that the first round of financing can be done with $2 million instead of
the original $4 million. The minimum possible probability of first round success falls to 2/30 = 6.67%.
That is, startups with a probability of initial success between 6.67% and 13.33% now become viable
investments. But note that for a firm whose probability of initial success is 10% (not viable before but
now viable), the step up from round 1 to round 2 (if the firm shows intermediate success) will be 1/10%
= 10X.
11
The coverage of financing rounds is extremely comprehensive in VentureSource and particularly so
during our period of analysis, because scanned pdf versions of Form D filings were available on the
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) website for much of our sample period, making it much
easier for data providers to collect comprehensive information.
12
Correlation Ventures is an active venture capital fund that invests using a data-driven quantitative
model.
13
For each entrepreneurial firm founder, we matched using name and company to these separate data
sources. The data sources provided past employment, person age, education background, and gender.
Lexis Nexus provides a service to collect individual birth years using name and state (of the company).

11

occurred between 2002 and 2010 and was labeled as an early stage round of financing.14
The focus is therefore on first, early stage financings of startups between 2002 and 2010.
The final sample includes 8,961 entrepreneurial firms financed by 2,815 unique investors.
The main sample has 16,944 observations at the investor-startup level of financing. Table
1 presents descriptive statistics for the key variables used in the analysis.

3.1

Assigning treated and control using industry variation

Importantly for our analysis, the advent of cloud computing in 2006 did not impact all
industries equally. Its effects were confined to businesses with a strong online presence
such as software-as-a-service, social networks, or retail e-commerce websites.
Paul Graham, the founder of prominent accelerator, Y-Combinator, noted in 2008
that
“[the reason] no one was doing quite what we do is that till recently it was
a lot more expensive to start a startup. You’ll notice we haven’t funded any
biotech startups. That’s still expensive.” 15
We exploit this cross-sectional heterogeneity in the impact of cloud computing across
industry sectors to identify the effect on venture capital investors. Specifically, we use
narrow industry classifications assigned to entrepreneurial firms in the VentureSource
database. VentureSource tracks venture capital activity in the United States and assigns
industries to entrepreneurial firms by looking at the answer to the question “What is the
essential product or service that the company provides?” We use the 26 distinct industrysegments in VentureSource to create our definitions of “treated” and “control.” Such
segments include “Consumer Information Services,” “Renewable and Non-Renewable
Energy,” and “Biopharmaceuticals.” The goal is to assign each one of the 26 categories
to “treated” or “control” based on whether the typical firm in that industry classification
benefited from the introduction of AWS. Firms that would benefit include those that
provided online services, high-traffic websites, file storage or services, web hosting, or
online retail.
14
We impose no further restrictions, either on the label of the round (e.g. only ‘Seed Rounds’) or the
size of the round), as they are also impacted by the introduction of AWS and hence are endogenous.
Nevertheless, we note that the results presented below are robust to dropping the small number of
financings greater than $25m or considering only seed rounds of financing.
15
Source: http://paulgraham.com/ycombinator.html. Note also that in the past few years technological advances in other sectors — for example, CRISPR/Cas genome editing techniques for biotechnology
startups — have made it cheaper to start companies in biotechnology as well. This is why we limit our
sample to a few years before and after 2006 to ensure a robust identification strategy.

12

To facilitate assignment of industry to treated and control, we begin with an analysis of the companies in each industry-segment. Table A.1 in the Appendix provides
a summary of the top ten words in the one paragraph company descriptions available
in VentureSource across all firms in each industry-segment from 2002 – 2010. Panel A
presents the list of keywords associated with the final eight treated industries from our
classification. Popular words include “software,” “web,” “online,” and “service.” The
introduction of the Amazon cloud effectively allowed firms such as these to outsource
their backend online services in ways that were not possible prior to 2006. In Panel B,
the 19 control industry segments exhibit words that reference tangible goods such as
“drug,” “devices,” and “system.” The control classification includes firms who produce
semiconductors or develop cancer drugs and thus have little to gain after the new cloud
technology became available.
To formalize this intuition of firms that are most likely to benefit from AWS, we
measure the fraction of firms whose description has at least one of the keywords “Online,”
“E-commerce,” “Hosting,” or “Web” in each industry segment, to provide an industrysegment-level exposure to the treatment. We deliberately choose not to define treatment
at the firm-level as this is endogenous. Rather, we define treatment based on likelihood
of benefit based on the description of activity among pre-period firms and show a strong
correlation between this and activity among firms in the same industry-segment in the
post-period. Table 2 provides the number of firms in each industry-segment and the
share of firms with at least one of the keywords above. As can be seen from Column 4,
the industry-segments categorized as “Treated” have a significantly higher share of the
keywords compared to those in “Non-treated” industries, where the prevalence is close
to zero. In addition, it can be seen by comparing Columns 2 and 4 that the incidence
of these words increased in most of the Treated segments in the post period, while they
remained equally non-existent in the the Non-treated segments. Finally, by comparing
Columns 1 and 3, it can be seen that there is a disproportionate growth in number of
firms entering treated segments in the post-period compared to those in Non-treated
segments. This provides us with confidence that the words we are picking up are indeed
good markers of industry-segments that benefited from the introduction of AWS.
With this cross-sectional separation of entrepreneurial firms by exposure to the introduction of the Amazon cloud technology, the eight industry-segments classified as treated
are “Business Support Services,” “Consumer Information Services,” “Financial Institutions and Services,” “Media and Content,” “Medical Software and Information Services,”
“Retailers,” “Software,” and “Travel and Leisure.” Importantly, nearly all of these industry classifications signal a service rather than production of good, and are likely to
benefit from cloud computing due to their delivery of the service over the web. The
13

remaining 19 industry segments classified as controls include “Aerospace and Defense,”
“Biopharmaceuticals,” “Communications and Networking,” “Electronics and Computer Hardware,” “Healthcare Services,” “Machinery and Industrial Goods,” “Materials
and Chemicals,” “Medical Devices and Equipment,” “Renewable and Non-Renewable
Energy,” and “Semiconductors.”16 Importantly, the category “Communications and Networking” includes firms that produce hardware or sell services such “leased-line and dial
up services,”“optical connectivity solutions,”and “high-performance tunable lasers.” Similarly, Healthcare Services were less likely to be delivered over the web due to privacy
concerns over this period.

3.2

Estimation strategy

Our estimation strategy is a standard differences-in-differences regression. Given the
timing of the technological shock, our analysis compares VCs’ investments between
2006–2010 with the investments from 2002–2005. Also, since the technological shock
disproportionately impacted early stage investments, our analysis focuses on the first,
early stage round of funding among VC-backed startups, although as we show in the
robustness section, we run placebo tests on later rounds of financing to highlight that
indeed the shifts are driven by changes in the initial rounds of financing rather than
changes across the board. Estimations are run at the VC firm-startup-year level and
take the form:
Yjit = β 1 T reatedi ∗ P ostt + β 2 Xi + γ t + ρj + ν jit ,
(2)
where Xi are entrepreneurial firm characteristics at the time of the investment, including
industry group fixed effects, geographic fixed effects, and an indicator for whether the
firm was in a treated industry-segment, γ t are year fixed effects corresponding to the
year of the investment. In many specifications, we also include VC-firm fixed effects, ρj ,
so that the β 1 estimate represents the within-VC dynamics of the dependent variable
Yjit . The main coefficient of interest (β 1 ) is the interaction between Treated and Post.
Note that since the definition of treated and control firms is based on industrysegments, which is more granular than broad industry group classifications, the inclusion
of industry group fixed effects (such Biopharmaceuticals and Healthcare, Information
Technology, etc.) in all our estimations effectively provides within-industry impacts of
the treatment. This is particularly useful as venture capital firms often have a broad
16

The remaining categories are “Agriculture and Forestry,” “Construction and Civil Engineering,”
“Food and Beverage,” “Household and Office Goods,” “Personal Goods,” “Utilities,” “Vehicles and
Parts,” and “Wholesale Trade and Shipping.”

14

industry or sector focus for their investments. Note also that since (2) includes year fixed
effects, the main effect of Post is not identified.
As with any differences-in-differences estimation strategy, our key identifying assumption is one of parallel trends — that is, that the “untreated” industry-segments provide
an appropriate counterfactual for what would have happened to the treated firms had
they not benefited from the introduction of cloud computing. While the parallel trends
assumption, by definition, cannot be proven, we aim to validate it in several ways. First,
Columns 1 and 3 of Table 2 document that the rate of investment in the Non-treated
sectors was quite comparable across the pre- and post-periods. Post-period investment
in the Non-treated sector rose by about 30% compared to the pre-period, rising from
350 firms per year in non-treated sectors receiving first financing from VCs to about 450
firms per year in the post-period. On the other hand, investment into firms in treated
sectors rose from about 375 firms per year to over 700 firms per year, showing that the
changes we observe are driven by firms in the treated sectors, as opposed to, for example, a smaller fall in investments in the control group. In addition, we show in dynamic
specifications that there is no evidence of pre-trends (and find in unreported figures that
there was no differential trend by industry across any of the outcome variables in the
pre-period), providing further support for the parallel trends assumption.
Our identification is also predicated on a second key assumption that no other systematic change in 2006 impacted precisely the set of firms we classify as treated, in a
manner consistent with our findings but through some other channel. We address three
such potential channels in detail in the robustness tests, documented in Section 5 of the
paper, but briefly outline them here as well. First, we document that our results are not
driven by any changes due to the financial crisis, which manifested itself relatively briefly
in the venture capital industry towards the end of our sample and was mostly confined
to 2009.
Second, we examine other potential technological changes to the VC opportunity set,
for example, the introduction of the iPhone and its related apps. Consistent with the
view that very few of these apps were funded by VC investors, we find that excluding
firms in any way related to the iPhone appstore does not impact our results at all.
Finally, we address other potential channels — such as younger entrepreneurs needing
more governance and hence needing more staging, or entry by new intermediaries driving
up prices, leading to smaller investments — that are consistent with some of our results.
We provide extensive evidence that these are unlikely to be the drivers of our findings
as they cannot account for the full set of patterns we see.

15

4
4.1

Results
Capital raised in first financing

We first document that the cost of starting businesses did fall following the introduction
of Amazon Web Services (AWS) in 2006, as suggested by practitioners. Table 3 reports
the estimation results from (2) where the dependent variable is log size of the investment
in the first round of funding for VC-backed firms in the period 2002–2010. Columns 1–3
include VC firms that were active at any point in the sample period. Columns 4–6 are
run on the subset of VCs that had at least three investments in the pre-2006 time period
(i.e., were active in the pre-period). For each set of firms, the first column includes only
industry fixed effects, the second column adds year fixed effects and the third column
further adds VC-firm fixed effects. As can be seen from Table 3, there is a significant
decrease in the capital invested by VCs in first financings for startups in treated industry
segments. Relative to the non-treated industry firms, capital invested in treated startups
is between 15% to 27% lower. This difference represents a $670 thousand to $1.3 million
fall in the average capital invested in the first round of funding in the pre-period.17 We
can also see that the smaller investment amount was a function of both entry by new
investors who wrote smaller checks as well as a change in behavior from incumbents. We
will continue to see this in all of the regressions below. Thus the effects we find seem to
stem both from entry as well as adaptation.
Table 4 reports the results from quantile regressions estimated at the 25th, 50th, and
75th percentiles, again for any VCs in the sample and for the subset that were most
active. It documents that the initial funding size fell in these industry-segments across
all points in the funding size distribution, not just on average as seen in Table 3. Fig.
2 reports the results from a dynamic specification of Eq. (2) where each point is an
estimate of the interaction of year and treated dummies, relative to year 2006. The
bands correspond to 95% confidence intervals. The patterns in the figure demonstrate
there is no pre-trend and that the timing of the falling cost of first financings is consistent
with the introduction of AWS.
17

Note that these magnitudes may seem small relative to what industry practitioners describe as the
importance of the shock. This is likely in part due to the fact that we are assigning ‘treated’ status to
industries rather than to firms to address concerns about endogeneity. Since not every firm in a treated
industry is treated, this measurement error will tend to bias estimates towards zero.

16

4.2
4.2.1

VC response: “Spray and pray” investing
Changes in the number of investments

Having shown the falling cost of starting businesses in“treated” industry-segments, we
turn next to understanding its consequences for the investment strategies of VCs and
the composition of their portfolios. First, we provide descriptive evidence of this by
calculating the number of newly financed firms in treated and non-treated industries
from 2002 to 2010. The ratio of these treated to non-treated numbers is reported in
Fig. 3, where a ratio of one implies that there were an equal amount of firms financed
in the two categories. There is a marked increase in investments that persists in the
post-period suggesting a shift in the financing rates of treated industry startups.
We next test for this change in a regression context by studying the total number of
first-time investments in entrepreneurial firms made by VCs in each year and industry.
The count is scaled by the total investors in the round so large syndicated investments
do not receive additional weight. A unit of observation is thus a VC firm, year, and one
of two industry groups — “treated” and “non-treated.” For years with no investment
activity by a given investor, the count is zero so that we have a balanced panel across
investor-year-industry cells. The dependent variable of interest is the log of one plus this
count. Table 5 reports the results for the sample of all VCs and those with pre-2006
investment activity.
Column 1 of Table 5 shows an increase in investments in treated industries after
2006 across all VCs. Column 2 show a similar magnitude when comparing changes in
investment rates within a VC’s portfolio over the sample period. When we condition on
the sample of VCs who have pre-2006 investments (Columns 3 and 4) the magnitudes are
slightly larger and still positive. The economic interpretation of the estimate in the final
column suggests 1.5 additional investments every two years in a VC fund. As the typical
VC fund invests in 10–15 investments, this increase represents a meaningful change in the
composition of the portfolio. When combined with the results in Fig. 3, these findings
suggest that the VC industry as a whole substantially increased investments to treated
sectors after 2005, although importantly, this increase did not come at the expense of
investments in non-treated sectors.18
18

In unreported analyses, we also examine fund raising by VC investors. We assign a fund as being
focused on treated sectors if at least 75% of its investments in the first year are made in treated segments.
Similarly, we define a fund as focused on non-treated sectors if less than 25% of its investments in the
first year are made in treated segments. The remaining funds are those that are not specialized in either
treated or non-treated segments. Studying both the number of funds raised and the total capital raised
by funds over the sample period, we find no evidence of crowding out of non-treated segments.

17

4.2.2

Changes in governance

An increase in the number of investments implies that VCs are less likely to actively
govern their portfolio companies, and instead emphasize a more passive learning role
in the earliest stages of their investments. To measure governance, we identify whether
any investor in the first financing took a board seat. Unfortunately, we cannot always
date the timing of the board’s creation and an individual investor’s start date on the
board. The sample of financings is thus smaller than that of the main analysis. If none
of the investors in the first financing are ever listed as a board member, then we label
the financing as having no board seat. If at least one investor can be identified as a
first financing board member, then the financing is labeled as such. Table 6 presents the
results from linear probability models where the dependent variable takes the value of
one if the VC is listed as a board member.
Columns 1 and 2 of Table 6 present the main results where we first include all investors
active in 2002–2010. The coefficient on “Treated X Post-2005” shows a lower probability
that a first financing has an investor with a board seat. The economic magnitude of
these estimates suggests a 14% lower probability of an investor joining the board. The
remaining columns of the table include only those financings with active investors with
and without VC firm fixed effects. Column 3 shows that on average, the use of boards
fell. Here, the economic magnitude is a 21% lower probability an investor takes a board
seat in the first financing. The last column indicates that this change is also present
within-VC, including for the more active investors. Overall, the results indicate that the
changes in governance styles are not just driven by a changing composition of investors
with different governance styles, but also due to adaptation by existing investors to focus
less on governance in the early stages of a firm’s life.

4.3
4.3.1

Characteristics of portfolio companies
Characteristics of founding teams

We next examine empirically how the characteristics of VC-backed entrepreneurial firms
changed after startup costs fell.
Table 7 presents the exante characteristics of investments made by VCs to see if
they shift in the post-2005 period. In particular, we consider two attributes of the
portfolio companies — average age of the founders (to proxy more broadly for founder
experience) and the specific entrepreneurial experience of the founding team. Columns
1 and 2 of Table 7 examine whether the average age of the founding team in newly
financed entrepreneurial firms changes after the introduction of AWS. A decrease in the
18

average age of entrepreneurial firm founders would suggest that investors are investing
in less experienced, riskier founding teams. The coefficient on the interaction term in
both samples “Treated X Post” indicates a statistically significant drop in the relative
age of founding teams in VC firm portfolios.
Next, Columns 3 and 4 of Table 7 study the relationship between the post-period
treated investments and the entrepreneurial experience of founding teams. Here, the dependent variable is an indicator that takes the value of one if at least one of the founding
team members has prior founding experience (i.e., serial entrepreneur). The coefficient
estimates on the interaction terms are again negative and statistically significant, suggesting that VC investors in treated segments are more willing to back founders with less
startup experience. While younger and less experienced founding teams could be consistent with either ‘worse’ teams or teams that are ‘long shot bets,’ we note that one might
have thought that investing in younger founders with less entrepreneurial experience
would require increased governance. This makes the falling governance as evidenced by
the fall in board activity early in the life of startups even more remarkable, and is a fact
that we return to in the following section.
4.3.2

Outcomes of investments

Having shown that the exante characteristics of entrepreneurial firms backed by VC changed after 2005, we next investigate whether these differences translate into outcomes and
success rates. Recall that the theoretical framework highlighted how an increase in ‘long
shot bets’ should be associated with an increase in failure rates following the first round
of funding, but with higher step-ups in value for firms that did in fact receive follow-on
financing. Table 8 shows first that initial investments in startups in “treated” industries
in the post-period were less likely to receive a follow-on investment (i.e., reinvestment by
VCs), and were more likely to fail. The results in Columns 1 and 2 of Table 8 show the
fall in follow-on rates in the treated group and also suggest that this effect was stronger
for those that receive capital from active, incumbent investors. This result is particularly
interesting in light of evidence that suggests that experienced VCs are potentially more
likely to be failure tolerant (Tian and Wang, 2014). Consistent with anecdotal accounts,
this suggests that even experienced VCs may be adapting their investment style towards
more “spray and pray” in the early stages, particularly in industries where the cost of
starting firms has fallen substantially and hence made abandonment options more valuable. The last two columns of Table 8 also show an increased likelihood of ultimate
failure, again particularly driven by active incumbents changing their investment strate-

19

gies in treated sectors.19 The lower likelihood of receiving follow-on funding is consistent
with the notion that the marginal investments were longshot bets, rather than just being
worse firms.
We next also consider two measures of success to ascertain if those firms that did not
fail differ in their outcomes. The first measure is the step-up in value across rounds, which
captures the change in valuation from the post-money valuation in the initial round of
financing to the pre-money valuation of the subsequent round of equity financing.
The second measure is the ratio of exit value to total capital invested (or “total
economic return”) for startups that ultimately had a successful exit. Columns 1 and 2
of Table 9 show that the increase in equity valuation — “step-up” — is 15%–20% larger
for the treated industry firms after 2005. The last two columns of Table 9 show that
this increased valuation change manifests itself in higher exit valuations to capital raised.
Thus, both interim valuations increase and the economic returns are larger. Combined
with the higher failure rates found in Table 8, the evidence is in favor of a shift to
higher option value rather than just lower quality investments after the treatment event
of AWS. We further validate this hypothesis by looking at whether the step-ups in value
and higher exit valuations are particularly high for younger teams and teams with no
serial entrepreneurs (that is, those that we considered to be ex ante long shot bets).
These results are documented in Table 10 and again provide support for the idea that it
was the longer-shot bets that were driving the outcomes we see.

5

Robustness checks

Thus far we have documented that post-2005, startups in industry-segments that benefited from the introduction of cloud computing experienced a shift towards ‘long shot bets’
and that VCs changed the way in which they managed their portfolios towards a ‘spray
and pray’ investment strategy. We posit that a core channel driving these results was the
fall in initial cost of founding new ventures following the introduction of cloud computing
services by Amazon Web Services. Since this technological shock substantially lowered
the initial costs needed to be incurred in order to learn about startups’ viability, this was
equivalent to a falling cost of experimentation and made the real options taken by VC
investors in the first round of funding much more valuable. We show how an increase in
19

The large rise in initial number of financing events, combined with a smaller follow-on rate
has been colloquially referred to as the “Series A crunch.” However, investors seem to share
the perspective that companies deserving of the next round of funding were receiving capital
(http://www.geekwire.com/2014/deserving-companies-will-weather-series-crunch-vcs-say/).

20

‘long shot bets’ due to the fall in cost of starting firms arises as a natural consequence of
this experimentation channel. Viewed through this lens of experimentation, it can also
be seen that a natural response by VCs to long shot bets is to shift to a ‘spray and pray’
investment strategy, putting a small amount of money into a larger number of firms,
but reducing their governance of these firms until they have learned whether the startup
finds intermediate success.
An important element of the narrative presented above is that the introduction of
AWS primarily impacted the initial investment decisions of investors — thereby changing
the cost of initial experiments. To validate this, we provide direct evidence to confirm
that the shock had a first-order impact on the size of first rounds, but had little measurable effect on total fundraising by startups over the subsequent five years. Table 11
presents regression estimates of log of total capital raised for each year after the firm’s
first financing event (up to five years). The sample includes financings of VCs who are
active both pre- and post-shock and the models include VC firm fixed effects. The estimates make clear that the relatively smaller financings in treated industries are confined
to the early years of firms. By three years after their initial capital raise, firms in treated and untreated industries exhibit no difference in capital raised. This is important
because many alternative explanations that relate to different investment opportunities
are about the level of capital required to run a business. Our evidence strongly suggests
that AWS impacted initial startup cost rather than total cost, and hence restricts the
set of potential explanations considerably. Relatedly, in unreported results we repeat
the exercise studying first capital raised in Table 3 for second-round financing size. We
again find little evidence that the funding size changes outside of first-round financings.
While our results are consistent with an experimentation channel and the timing
consistent with the introduction of AWS, our identification is also predicated on the
assumption that no other systematic change in 2006 impacted precisely the set of firms
we classify as treated, in a manner consistent with our findings but through some other
channel. We therefore examine the predictions from a set of alternative channels and
discuss the extent to which they can also explain our findings. We address three such
potential channels in detail below.
First, we document that our results are not driven by any changes due to the financial
crisis, which manifested itself relatively briefly in the venture capital industry towards the
end of our sample and was mostly confined to 2009. For example, while there was a 25%
fall in the number of deals from 2008 to 2009, deal volume actually increased 15% from
2009 to 2010. Moreover, since our specification includes year fixed effects, alternative
explanations must include a reason why treated industries were impacted differentially
in a manner that accounts for our results. If anything, one might expect the crisis to
21

have had the opposite effect, by leading investors to cut back more on the most capitalintensive industries such as biotechnology and energy — which were unaffected by AWS.
Nevertheless, we find that excluding new financings in the first full year of the financial
crisis (2009) has no material impact on our results.
Second, we examine other technological shocks that may have changed investment
opportunities for VCs. Two potential candidates are the growth of open-source software
and the iPhone and its resulting mobile ecosystem. We perform several tests to show
these are unlikely to be the drivers of the changes we see in our context. We use the
Google feature that has tracked search term frequency on their search engine since 2004
to compare search traffic for Amazon EC2 to these alternative events. Fig. A.1 in
the Appendix shows the rapid increase in the search for “EC2” after 2005, which is in
line with our identification assumptions. The next two figures in the Appendix show
search traffic for the App Store (Fig. A.2) and open-source software (Fig, A.3). For
the App Store, the interest level only rose in 2008, well after the shock we study and
towards the end of our sample period. As a second test, we exclude firms from our
sample that had a mention of mobile applications, iPhones, Android, and other similar
technologies.20 This is to ensure that what we capture is not simply the impact of
smart phones and mobile applications changing the opportunity set for VCs, impacting
both the characteristics of portfolio companies and the investment strategy of VCs. The
exclusion of this subsample has no material impact on our estimates, so we conclude
that our results are not primarily driven by the introduction of the iPhone. Turning
next to open-source, there is a perception that improvement and dissemination of certain
programming languages such as Ruby on Rails, PHP, and Python may have increased
during our sample period, making it cheaper to start and staff software startups. Our
search for the frequency of the terms “open-source” as well as for Python, a popular
programming language used for many VC-backed firms’ websites, suggests these were
prevalent well before the introduction of AWS and were largely constant across our time
period. Fig. A.3 shows this pattern for the “open-source software” search. Ruby on
Rails, which is another popular web programming framework introduced in July 2004,
shows rapid increases in search frequency two years prior to the introduction of AWS and
so is also unlikely to have driven these changes. More generally, however, we should note
that the role that these programming languages may have played is in fact consistent
with the thrust of our model. The cost of starting businesses has fallen in software and
other industries as well, making abandonment options more valuable for VCs and leading
20

We use the one-paragraph description of the company’s product and customers provided by VentureSource to identify such firms.

22

to a shift towards a new investment strategy. Empirically, we need to look for a large
shock that differentially impacted some industries but not others, and we believe that
AWS is such a shock and is one that practitioners have argued drove a large change
in the cost of starting new firms. This analysis does not discount the potential role of
other factors such as open-source that may have also impacted the initial cost of starting
businesses and impacted VC investment through the experimentation channel.
Third, we address other potential channels — such as younger entrepreneurs needing
more governance and hence needing more staging, or entry by new intermediaries driving up prices, leading to smaller investments — that explain some of our results. To
do so, we first note that the experimentation channel predicts that a fall in the cost
of learning should lead to less governance as investors ‘spray and pray’ and that conditional on initial success, firms should receive higher step-ups in value across rounds
— since firms that in fact succeed when they had a small chance of success generate a
significant amount of information that is incorporated in the next round’s prices. These
two predictions are difficult to generate together through other channels. For example,
if initial competition bid up prices, we should expect to see lower step-ups for firms that
ultimately succeeded, while in fact, we find the opposite is true. Alternatively, if the
composition of entrepreneurs changed in ways that required more governance, we should
see the increased staging (and smaller associated rounds of funding) come hand in hand
with other forms of increased governance, such as VCs taking more board seats. Again,
we find the opposite is true.
Aside from examining alternative channels, we also run robustness checks on our
estimation equation, by modifying the difference-in-difference specification in two ways.
To address the concern that our controls for industry and time are insufficient to capture
aggregate trends that coincided with the introduction of AWS, we include a linear time
trend in each of the models. Doing so does not impact the results. It is possible that AWS
simply coincided with other events in the 2000s that were not proxied by the cloud or
open-source measures discussed. First note that the patterns observed in Fig. 2 provide
no evidence that the results are driven by years immediately around the treatment date.
As an alternative test, we thus move the treatment year back and forward one year —
2005 and 2006 — to understand whether the results are a general phenomenon of the
time period. We estimate the main models where 2005 is the treatment year and 2006
is the post-treatment year. Similarly, we estimate the models where 2006 is the pretreatment year and 2007 is the post-treatment year. If there was no other shock in the
years surrounding the introduction of AWS, then these estimates should be significantly
attenuated relative to our core results. For capital raised and the other major variables,
the results are insignificant with these specifications, further bolstering the effect being
23

related to a shock experienced in 2006.

6

Entry of new intermediaries and trajectory of innovation

6.1

Entry

A natural implication of our results is that we should see an increase in financial intermediaries who specialize in ‘spray and pray’ investing. This is consistent with a rise in VC
funds focusing on early stage investing, often referred to as ‘Micro VCs’ or ‘Seed Funds.’
Our analysis also highlights the counterintuitive notion that governance by VCs seems
to have fallen for precisely the stages and the types of entrepreneurs who might need it
the most. It suggests that a natural response to the fact that VCs have shifted their
emphasis from governance to learning in the early stages of a venture would be entry of
financial intermediaries that specialize in scalable forms of mentorship and governance
in the early stages of a venture’s life.
In fact, there has been massive entry by new intermediaries known as accelerators,
defined as “fixed, cohort-based programs, including mentorship and educational components that culminate in a public pitch or demo day” (Hochberg, 2016; Cohen and Hochberg, 2014). Cohen and Hochberg (2014) note that the first accelerator, Y-Combinator,
was founded in 2005. Today, estimates of the number of accelerators range from 300 to
over 2,000. Accelerators also help to screen deal flow for VCs through forums such as
‘demo day,’ making the search process for long shot bets more efficient. In fact, Paul
Graham, referring to Y-Combinator, notes that “We’re not a replacement for venture
capital funds. We occupy a new, adjacent niche... our m.o. is to create new deal flow,
by encouraging hackers who would have gotten jobs to start their own startups instead.
We compete more with employers than VCs.”21 Similarly, in studying a prominent accelerator, Gonzalez-Uribe and Leatherbee (2017) find the primary role it plays is that of
mentorship, and find limited direct effect of financing it provides to new ventures.
21
Source: http://paulgraham.com/ycombinator.html. Cohen et al. (2017) provide further empirical
support for this notion by documenting the extremely small amounts that accelerators invest on average,
if they invest at all.

24

6.2

Trajectory of Innovation

The effect that such a shift in the investment strategy has on innovation is ambiguous.
On the one hand, it is likely to increase the chances of radical new business models —
companies such as Airbnb, that was founded by young, inexperienced entrepreneurs and
was by all accounts a “long shot bet” when it was founded.22 On the other hand, the shift
in investment strategy is likely to make it much harder for more complex technologies
where the costs of experimentation are higher or where there is a slower revelation of
information about the startup’s final value. For example, the very long time frames and
costs associated with learning about the potential of renewable energy technologies or
cancer therapies have led to relatively little financing of such ventures, despite intense
societal interest (Fernandez, Stein, and Lo, 2012; Nanda, Younge, and Fleming, 2015).

7

Conclusion

We study rich, novel data on the characteristics of VC-backed firms to show how technological shocks to the initial cost of starting new firms have had a fundamental impact
on the way in which investors manage their portfolios and the types of companies they
choose to finance. The falling cost of experimentation makes abandonment options for
investors much more valuable and this directly impacts the types of firms that investors
are willing to finance, as well as the investment strategy they choose to use. In particular,
we show how technological shocks to the cost of experimentation can play a central role
in shaping both the rate and trajectory of startup innovation, by allowing more long shot
bets to receive initial funding and thereby also reducing the chance of ‘false negatives’ in
the economy. Nevertheless, this comes hand in hand with an investment strategy where
several startups receive a small initial investment, but who do not get follow-on funding
when intermediate information is negative. We show how this adaptation of investors
towards a “spray and pray” investment strategy will tend to increase VC investment
in startups where information is revealed quickly and cheaply and hence may adversely
impact the extent to which more complex technologies, where information is revealed
22

For example, Kerr, Nanda, and Rhodes-Kropf (2014) highlight how Fred Wilson of Union Square
Ventures wrote about his “regret” at passing on Airbnb, a startup that lets people rent rooms or homes
to prospective guests online. Started in 2008, Airbnb currently lists 500,000 properties in more than
34,000 cities across 192 countries, far larger than any hotel chain, thereby making it the largest lodging
company and brand in the world (Levere, 2013). Fred Wilson writes of Union Square Ventures’ decision
to pass on the deal in 2009 that “we couldn’t wrap our heads around air mattresses on the living room
floors as the next hotel room.... Others saw the amazing team that we saw, funded them, and the rest
is history.” (Source: http://avc.com/2011/03/airbnb/)

25

more slowly, are funded. In doing so we document the important feedback between
technological change and financial intermediaries — technological shocks to investment
opportunities require adaptation by investors, but this adaption has consequences for
the future trajectory of innovation.

26

References
Aghion, P., Howitt, P., 1992. A model of growth through creative destruction. Econometrica 60, 323–351.
Allen, F., Gale, D., 1994. Financial Innovation and Risk Sharing. MIT Press.
Baskin, J. B., Miranti, P. J., 1997. A History of Corporate Finance. Cambridge University
Press, New York.
Bergemann, D., Hege, U., 2005. The financing of innovation: Learning and stopping.
RAND Journal of Economics 36, 719–752.
Bergemann, D., Hege, U., Peng, L., 2008. Venture capital and sequential investments.
Unpublished working paper, Yale University, Toulouse School of Economics, and The
Pennsylvania State University.
Bernstein, S., Korteweg, A., Laws, K., 2017. Attracting early-stage investors: Evidence
from a randomized field experiment. The Journal of Finance 72, 509–538.
Cain, L. P., 2010. Entrepreneurship in the antebellum united states. In: Landes, D. S.,
Mokyr, J., Baumol, W. J. (eds.), The invention of enterprise: Entrepreneurship from
ancient Mesopotamia to modern times, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ,
chap. 12, pp. 331–366.
Chandler, A. D., 1965. The railroads: pioneers in modern corporate management. Business History Review 39, 16–40.
Chandler, A. D., 1977. The Visible Hand: The Managerial Revolution in American
Business. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.
Clark, J., 2012. How Amazon exposed its guts: The history of AWS’s EC2. ZDNet June
7, https://goo.gl/5fovvO.
Cohen, S., Fehder, D., Hochberg, Y. V., Murray, F., 2017. The design and evaluation of
startup accelerators. Tech. rep., University of Southern California.
Cohen, S., Hochberg, Y., 2014. Accelerating startups: The seed accelerator phenomenon.
Unpublished working paper .
Cornelli, F., Yosha, O., 2003. Stage financing and the role of convertible securities.
Review of Economic Studies 70, 1–32.

27

Economist, T., 2014. A Cambrian moment. The Economist Special Report, Tech Startups, January 18.
Ewens, M., Fons-Rosen, C., 2015. The consequences of entrepreneurial firm founding on
innovation. Working paper, California Institute of Technology.
Fernandez, J.-M., Stein, R. M., Lo, A. W., 2012. Commercializing biomedical research
through securitization techniques. Nature Biotechnology 30, 395–400.
Fluck, Z., Garrison, K., Myers, S., 2007. Venture capital contracting: Staged financing
and later-stage syndication of venture capital investments. MIT Working paper .
Gompers, P., 1995. Optimal investment, monitoring, and the staging of venture capital.
Journal of Finance 50, 1461–1489.
Gonzalez-Uribe, J., Leatherbee, M., 2017. The effects of business accelerators on venture
performance: Evidence from start-up chile. The Review of Financial Studies p. hhx103.
Hall, R. E., Woodward, S. E., 2010. The burden of the nondiversifiable risk of entrepreneurship. American Economic Review 100, 1163 – 1194.
Hardy, Q., 2014. The era of cloud computing. New York Times. June 11.
Hellmann, T., Puri, M., 2000. The interaction between product market and financing
strategy: The role of venture capital. Review of Financial Studies 13, 959–984.
Hellmann, T., Thiele, V., 2015. Friends or foes? The interrelationship between angel and
venture capital markets. Journal of Financial Economics 115, 639–653.
Hochberg, Y. V., 2016. Accelerating entrepreneurs and ecosystems: The seed accelerator
model. In: Lerner, J., Stern, S. (eds.), Innovation Policy and the Economy, National
Bureau of Economic Research, Chicago, IL, vol. 16, pp. 25–51.
Janeway, W. H., 2012. Doing Capitalism in the Innovation Economy: Markets, Speculation and the State. Cambridge University Press.
Kerr, W., Lerner, J., Schoar, A., 2014. The consequences of entrepreneurial finance:
Evidence from angel financings. Review of Financial Studies 27, 20–55.
Kerr, W., Nanda, R., Rhodes-Kropf, M., 2014. Entrepreneurship as experimentation.
Journal of Economic Perspectives 3, 25–48.
King, R., Levine, R., 1993. Finance and growth: Schumpeter might be right. Quarterly
Journal of Economics 108, 717–737.
28

Laeven, L., Levine, R., Michalopoulos, S., 2015. Financial innovation and endogenous
growth. Journal of Financial Intermediation 24, 1–24.
Levere, J. L., 2013. Airbnb campaign uses birdhouses to widen its reach. New York
Times, December 15.
Metz, C., 2016. The epic story of Dropbox’s exodus from the Amazon cloud empire.
Wired Magazine Business Section, March 14.
Nanda, R., Younge, K., Fleming, L., 2015. Entrepreneurship in the antebellum united
states. In: Jaffe, A. B., Jones, B. F. (eds.), The Changing Frontier: Rethinking Science
and Innovation Policy, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL, chap. 7, pp. 199–232.
Neal, L., 1990. The Rise of Financial Capitalism: International Capital Markets in the
Age of Reason. Cambridge University Press, New York.
Nicholas, T., 2016. The origins of high-tech venture investing in America. In: Chambers,
D., Dimson, E. (eds.), Financial Market History: Reflections on the Past for Investors
Today, Research Foundation Publications, Charlottesville, VA, pp. 227–241.
Puri, M., Zarutskie, R., 2012. On the life cycle dynamics of venture-capital- and nonventure-capital-financed firms. Journal of Finance 67, 2247–2293.
Sorensen, M., 2007. How smart is smart money? An empirical two-sided matching model
of venture capital. Journal of Finance 62, 2725–2762.
Tian, X., 2011. The causes and consequences of venture capital stage financing. Journal
of Financial Economics 101, 132–159.
Tian, X., Wang, T. Y., 2014. Tolerance for failure and corporate innovation. Review of
Financial Studies 27, 211–255.
Vogels, W., 2011. How and why did Amazon get into the cloud computing business?
Quora January 14, https://goo.gl/31gIYj.

29

Fig. 2. Difference-in-difference estimates for first capital raised: treated and non-treated.
The figure plots the coefficients for the interaction terms of each financing year and
the treated industry dummy for an ordinary least squares (OLS) regression where the
dependent variable, Kit , is the log of the first VC capital raised and the unit of observation
is an entrepreneurial firm’s first financing event. The sample includes US-based startups
that received Seed or Series A financing from an investor in the Venture Source database
between 2002 and 2010. The 2006 interaction term is the excluded category, reported
as zero in the figure. The vertical lines represent the 95% confidence interval for the
coefficient estimates with robust standard errors.

30

Fig. 3. New VC-backed firms in treated industries. This figure reports the ratio of treated companies to untreated companies receiving a first, early stage financing as reported
by VentureSource. The sample includes US-based startups that received Seed or Series
A financing from an investor in the Venture Source database between 2002 and 2010. A
treated company is in one of the following industries (from VentureSource): “Business
Support Services,” “Consumer Information Services,” “Financial Institutions and Services,” “Media and Content,” “Medical Software and Information Services,” “Retailers,”
“Software,” and “Travel and Leisure.” A ratio of one implies that there were an equal
amount of new entrepreneurial firms financed in that year in treated and untreated industries. The vertical line represents the approximate date of the introduction of Amazon
Web Services, our treatment event.

31

Table 1
Descriptive statistics. This table reports descriptive statistics on US-based startups that
received Seed or Series A financing from an investor in the VentureSource database
between 2002 and 2010. The characteristics of firms and entrepreneurs are reported as
of the date of first funding. “First capital (m)” is the first capital raised in the firm’s first
VC financing. “Firm age (yrs.)” is the age of the startup at the time of first financing.
“Team age (yrs.)” is the average age of the founding team at the time of first financing.
“Serial founders” is the fraction of firms that have at least one repeat founder on the
founding team. “% Failed” is the fraction of firms that went out of business by the end
of 2015. “% Follow-on” is the fraction of firms that had a follow on investment by the
end of 2015. “Step-up in value” reports the ratio of pre-money in the subsequent round
to the post-money of the current round (if both are available). “Exit value to capital”
is the reported exit valuation divided by the total capital raised by the entrepreneurial
firm. “% First board” is the fraction of firms that had at least one investor who took
a board seat in the first financing round. The “# Firms” reports the total number of
firms for which we can calculate the variable.

2002–2010

First capital (m)
Firm age (yrs.)
Team age (yrs.)
Serial founder
% Failed
% Follow-on
Step-up in value
Exit value to capital
% First board

Firms

Mean

Median

Std. dev.

7,878
8,804
5,717
7,903
8,961
8,961
1,066
1,538
5,914

4.39
2.15
40.28
0.26
0.51
0.57
2.24
10.22
0.14

2.30
1.23
40.00
0.00
1.00
1.00
1.63
3.52
0.00

6.32
2.77
9.04
0.44
0.50
0.50
5.00
54.58
0.34

32

Table 2
Treated vs. non-treated industry segments. This table documents the categorization
of industry-segments to “Treated” or “Non-Treated” for the sample of firms described
in Table 1. It uses the description of each firm to characterize the degree to which
the introduction of AWS was likely to be beneficial to the firm in its early stages. In
particular, it measures the fraction of firms whose description has at least one of the
keywords “Online,” “E-commerce,” “Hosting,” or “Web” in each industry-segment, to
provide an industry-segment-level exposure to the treatment. We deliberately choose not
to define treatment at the firm-level as this is endogenous. Rather, we define treatment
based on likelihood of benefit based on the description of activity among pre-period firms,
show a strong correlation between this and activity among firms in the same industrysegment in the post-period. The column “# Firms” presents the count of firms with
the industry classification, while the column “Word share” provides the ratio described
above. “2002–2010” refers to firms in the full sample period, while “2002–2005” refers
to the measure based on pre-period firms only. We lose 47 firms because they lack a
business description or industry classification.
Industry-segment
Business Support Services
Consumer Information Services
Financial Institutions and Services
Media and Content
Medical Software and Information Services
Retailers
Software
Travel and Leisure
Industry-segment
Aerospace and Defense
Agriculture and Forestry
Biopharmaceuticals
Communications and Networking
Construction and Civil Engineering
Electronics and Computer Hardware
Food and Beverage
Healthcare Services
Household and Office Goods
Machinery and Industrial Goods
Materials and Chemicals
Medical Devices and Equipment
Non-Renewable Energy
Personal Goods
Renewable Energy
Semiconductors
Utilities
Vehicles and Parts
Wholesale Trade and Shipping

Panel A: Treated industries
# Firms Word share # Firms Word share
2002–2005
2002–2010
277
24%
1195
27%
137
53%
1061
55%
79
11%
271
18%
53
22%
252
35%
76
11%
225
14%
45
13%
111
33%
840
7%
1941
13%
32
31%
89
27%
Panel B: Non-treated industries
# Firms Word share # Firms Word share
2002–2005
2002–2010
12
0%
31
0%
5
0%
26
0%
347
0%
910
0%
187
2%
359
2%
20
0%
72
0%
141
3%
361
2%
16
0%
75
0%
62
2%
162
4%
5
0%
47
2%
20
0%
108
0%
49
0%
135
0%
292
0%
806
0%
14
0%
41
0%
19
0%
62
3%
36
0%
252
0%
176
1%
269
1%
0
0%
14
0%
5
0%
34
0%
1
0%
5
0%

33

Table 3
Initial funding size. This table reports results from OLS regressions where the dependent
variable is the log of initial investment for the startup in which a given VC invested.
A unit of observation is an entrepreneurial firm financing associated with an investor.
VCs who are active in the pre-period are defined as those investors with at least three
investments in the pre-2006 period. Industry fixed effects control for the five industry
groups: Biotechnology and health-care, Business and financial services, Consumer goods
and services, Energy and industrials, and Information technology. “Treated” industries
are defined at a more granular-level than these industry classifications so there is withinindustry variation in startups that are defined as “treated” vs. not. “Syndicate size”
is the log of the number of investors in the financing and the three “Startup based in”
variables are dummies for entrepreneurial firm headquarters state. “Year FE” indicate
dummies for financing year, “Industry FE” are dummies for the five major industries.
“VC firm FE” are VC firm fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by VC-firm.
Significance: ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.
(1)
-0.294∗∗∗
(0.0663)

All VCs
(2)
-0.269∗∗∗
(0.0673)

(3)
-0.152∗∗∗
(0.0375)

VCs active in pre-period
(4)
(5)
(6))
∗∗∗
∗∗∗
-0.319
-0.308
-0.148∗∗∗
(0.117)
(0.117) (0.0503)

Treated

-0.0293
(0.0504)

-0.0338
(0.0504)

-0.124∗∗∗
(0.0322)

-0.0732
(0.0675)

-0.0739
(0.0661)

-0.158∗∗∗
(0.0393)

Syndicate size

0.323∗∗∗
(0.0200)

0.325∗∗∗
(0.0197)

0.233∗∗∗
(0.00886)

0.356∗∗∗
(0.0371)

0.356∗∗∗
(0.0368)

0.238∗∗∗
(0.0118)

Startup based in CA

0.438∗∗∗
(0.0773)

0.424∗∗∗
(0.0766)

0.129∗∗∗
(0.0300)

0.484∗∗∗
(0.129)

0.475∗∗∗
(0.129)

0.0956∗∗
(0.0380)

Startup based in MA

0.465∗∗∗
(0.0797)

0.453∗∗∗
(0.0792)

0.175∗∗∗
(0.0388)

0.539∗∗∗
(0.141)

0.532∗∗∗
(0.141)

0.169∗∗∗
(0.0479)

Startup based in NY

0.276∗∗∗
(0.0743)

0.290∗∗∗
(0.0740)

0.0934
(0.0602)

0.205
(0.146)

0.221
(0.145)

-0.0718
(0.0770)

Post-2005

0.0741∗
(0.0435)
15526
7878
2647
0.117
Y
N
N

15526
7878
2647
0.108
Y
Y
Y

0.179∗∗∗
(0.0665)
7708
5062
506
0.138
Y
N
N

7708
5062
506
0.143
Y
Y
N

7708
5062
506
0.119
Y
Y
Y

Treated X Post-2005

Observations
Number startups
Number VCs
R2
Industry FE?
Year FE?
VC firm FE?

15526
7878
2647
0.130
Y
Y
N

34

Table 4
Initial funding size: quantile estimates. This table reports results from quantile regressions where the dependent variable is the log of initial investment for the startup in
which a given VC invested. A unit of observation is an entrepreneurial firm financing
associated with an investor. VCs who are active in the pre-period are defined as those
investors with at least three investments prior to 2006. Industry fixed effects control for
the five industry groups: Biotechnology and health-care, Business and financial services,
Consumer goods and services, Energy and industrials, and Information technology. “Treated” industries are defined at a more granular-level than these industry classifications
so there is within-industry variation in startups that are defined as “treated” vs. not.
“Year FE” indicate dummies for financing year, “Industry FE” are dummies for the five
major industries, and “VC firm FE” are VC firm fixed effects. Bootstrapped standard
errors (500 repetitions) are reported in parentheses. Significance: ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05,
∗∗∗
p < 0.01.
25th pctile
(1)
-0.216∗∗∗
(0.0609)

All VCs
Median
(2)
-0.301∗∗∗
(0.0497)

75th pctile
(3)
-0.230∗∗∗
(0.0413)

Treated

-0.0465
(0.0601)

-0.205∗∗∗
(0.0473)

-0.240∗∗∗
(0.0291)

-0.167∗∗
(0.0825)

-0.247∗∗∗
(0.0471)

-0.262∗∗∗
(0.0374)

Syndicate size

0.300∗∗∗
(0.00902)

0.248∗∗∗
(0.00756)

0.247∗∗∗
(0.00853)

0.343∗∗∗
(0.0160)

0.251∗∗∗
(0.0130)

0.242∗∗∗
(0.00824)

Startup based in CA

0.437∗∗∗
(0.0323)

0.388∗∗∗
(0.0254)

0.244∗∗∗
(0.0201)

0.526∗∗∗
(0.0607)

0.429∗∗∗
(0.0351)

0.220∗∗∗
(0.0277)

Startup based in MA

0.570∗∗∗
(0.0462)

0.471∗∗∗
(0.0444)

0.277∗∗∗
(0.0336)

0.718∗∗∗
(0.0716)

0.472∗∗∗
(0.0435)

0.245∗∗∗
(0.0375)

Startup based in NY

0.348∗∗∗
(0.0551)
15584
7897
2657
0.176
Y
Y
N

0.197∗∗∗
(0.0633)
15584
7897
2657
0.176
Y
Y
N

0.200∗∗∗
(0.0672)
15584
7897
2657
0.173
Y
Y
N

0.127
(0.118)
7738
5078
506
0.185
Y
Y
N

0.103
(0.101)
7738
5078
506
0.184
Y
Y
N

0.0752
(0.0880)
7738
5078
506
0.177
Y
Y
N

Treated X Post-2005

Observations
Number startups
Number VCs
R2 / psuedo-R2
Industry FE?
Year FE?
VC firm FE?

35

VCs active in pre-period
25th pctile Median 75th pctile
(4)
(5)
(6))
-0.223∗∗
-0.170∗∗∗
-0.149∗∗∗
(0.110)
(0.0629)
(0.0531)

Table 5
Total investments by investors. This table reports results from results of OLS and VC
firm fixed effects regression of total investments made by investors. Total investments are
scaled by the number of investors in each first-round investment to ensure that entrepreneurial firms with more investors do not receive additional weight. A unit of observation
is a quarter and industry, where industry is treated or non-treated as defined in Table 2.
For Columns 1 and 2, all VCs are included in the analysis in OLS and FE specification,
respectively. Columns 3 and 4 have the same specifications for the sample of VCs who
have investments in the pre-period (i.e., “Active” VCs). Industry fixed effects control for
the five industry groups: Biotechnology and health-care, Business and financial services,
Consumer goods and services, Energy and industrials, and Information technology. “Treated” industries are defined at a more granular-level than these industry classifications
so there is within-industry variation in startups that are defined as “treated” vs. not.
“Year FE” indicate dummies for financing year and “VC firm FE” are VC firm fixed
effects. Standard errors clustered by quarter are reported in parentheses. Significance:
∗
p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.
Log total investments in quarter-industry
All VCs
All VCs “Active” VCs “Active” VCs
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Treated X Post-2005 0.0277∗∗∗ 0.0412∗∗∗
0.0453∗∗∗
0.0506∗∗∗
(0.00772) (0.00850)
(0.0117)
(0.0113)
Treated
Observations
Number VCs
R2
Industry FE?
Year FE?
VC firm FE?

0.0136∗∗
(0.00585)
30340
2813
0.0254
N
Y
N

0.0152∗∗
(0.00688)
30340
2813
0.0215
N
Y
Y

36

0.0140∗∗
(0.00642)
17066
506
0.0296
N
Y
N

0.0158∗∗
(0.00754)
17066
506
0.0230
N
Y
Y

Table 6
Portfolio management by VCs: early stage governance. This table reports results from
results of OLS and VC firm fixed effects regression for the indicator of a board seat at
the time of the firm’s first financing. A unit of observation is an entrepreneurial firm
financing associated with an investor. VCs who are active (Columns 3 and 4) in the preperiod are defined as those investors with at least three investments in the pre-period.
Industry fixed effects control for the five industry groups: Biotechnology and health-care,
Business and financial services, Consumer goods and services, Energy and industrials,
and Information technology. “Treated” industries are defined at a more granular-level
than these industry classifications so there is within-industry variation in startups that
are defined as “treated” vs. not. “Year FE” indicate dummies for financing year and “VC
firm FE” are VC firm fixed effects. Standard errors clustered by VC-firm are reported
in parentheses. Significance: ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.
All VCs
(1)
-0.0266
(0.0171)

All VCs
(2)
-0.0301
(0.0188)

“Active” VCs
(3)
-0.0616∗∗
(0.0251)

“Active” VCs
(4)
-0.0534∗∗
(0.0268)

Treated

0.0159
(0.0181)

0.000412
(0.0177)

0.0584∗∗
(0.0232)

0.0252
(0.0251)

Syndicate size

0.0856∗∗∗
(0.00377)

0.0642∗∗∗
(0.00394)

0.105∗∗∗
(0.00554)

0.0750∗∗∗
(0.00541)

Startup based in CA

0.0426∗∗∗
(0.0120)

0.00598
(0.00953)

0.0587∗∗∗
(0.0189)

0.0110
(0.0164)

Startup based in MA

0.0617∗∗∗
(0.0167)

0.0425∗∗
(0.0199)

0.0682∗∗∗
(0.0232)

0.0554∗∗
(0.0273)

Startup based in NY

0.0511∗∗∗
(0.0166)
10250
5913
2158
0.105
Y
Y
N

0.0266
(0.0170)
10250
5913
2158
0.0693
Y
Y
Y

0.0737∗∗
(0.0329)
4760
3461
500
0.127
Y
Y
N

0.0271
(0.0316)
4760
3461
500
0.0752
Y
Y
Y

Treated X Post-2005

Observations
Number startups
Number VCs
R2
Industry FE?
Year FE?
VC firm FE?

37

Table 7
Ex ante characteristics of portfolio companies. This table reports results from results of
VC firm fixed effects regression for founder characteristics at the time of first financing.
A unit of observation is an entrepreneurial firm financing associated with an investor.
The dependent variable in Columns 1 and 2 is the log of the average entrepreneurial
team age at the time of financing. The dependent variable in Columns 3 and 4 is
an indicator that equals one if at least one of the founders is a serial entrepreneur at
the time of the financing event. VCs who are active in the pre-period (Columns 2
and 4) are defined as those investors with at least three investments in the pre-period.
Industry fixed effects control for the five industry groups: Biotechnology and health-care,
Business and financial services, Consumer goods and services, Energy and industrials,
and Information technology. “Treated” industries are defined at a more granular-level
than these industry classifications so there is within-industry variation in startups that
are defined as “treated” vs. not. “Year FE” indicate dummies for financing year and “VC
firm FE” are VC firm fixed effects. Standard errors clustered by VC-firm are reported
in parentheses. Significance: ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.
Log founding team age
All VCs “Active” VCs
(1)
(2)
∗∗∗
-0.0519
-0.0441∗∗∗
(0.0103)
(0.0101)

Serial entrepreneur?
All VCs “Active” VCs
(3)
(4)
∗∗
-0.0431
-0.0505∗∗
(0.0177)
(0.0233)

Treated

-0.0348∗∗∗
(0.00689)

-0.0373∗∗∗
(0.00869)

0.0887∗∗∗
(0.0143)

0.0916∗∗∗
(0.0190)

Startup based in CA

-0.0485∗∗∗
(0.00660)

-0.0487∗∗∗
(0.00730)

0.0730∗∗∗
(0.0133)

0.0617∗∗∗
(0.0156)

Startup based in MA

-0.00954
(0.00652)

-0.0142
(0.00924)

0.0538∗∗∗
(0.0190)

0.0651∗∗
(0.0291)

Startup based in NY

-0.0654∗∗∗
(0.00957)
11201
5717
2171
0.103
Y
Y
Y

-0.0806∗∗∗
(0.0166)
5623
3727
500
0.0965
Y
Y
Y

0.0136
(0.0172)
15266
7902
2594
0.0141
Y
Y
Y

-0.0285
(0.0263)
7589
5042
505
0.0143
Y
Y
Y

Treated X Post-2005

Observations
Number startups
Number VCs
R2
Industry FE?
Year FE?
VC firm FE?

38

Table 8
Portfolio management by VCs: likelihood of startup failure. This table reports results
from linear probability models for two outcome variables. A unit of observation is an
entrepreneurial firm financing associated with an investor. Columns 1 and 2 use the
indicator for the entrepreneurial firm having a subsequent exit or follow-on refinancing.
Columns 3 and 4 use the dummy variable that is one if the firm failed by the end of the
sample. VCs who are active (Columns 2 and 4) in the pre-period are defined as those
investors with at least three investments in the pre-period. Industry fixed effects control for the five industry groups: Biotechnology and health-care, Business and financial
services, Consumer goods and services, Energy and industrials, and Information technology. Industries are defined at a more granular-level than these industry classifications
so there is within-industry variation in startups that are defined as “treated” vs. not.
“Year FE” indicate dummies for financing year, and “VC firm FE” are VC firm fixed
effects. Standard errors clustered by VC-firm are reported in parentheses. Significance:
∗
p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.
Follow on?
All VCs “Active” VCs
(1)
(2)
-0.0193
-0.0518∗∗
(0.0169)
(0.0231)

All VCs
(3)
0.0117
(0.0200)

Treated

0.0486∗∗∗
(0.0140)

0.0516∗∗∗
(0.0190)

-0.125∗∗∗
(0.0145)

-0.137∗∗∗
(0.0200)

Startup based in CA

0.0434∗∗
(0.0173)

0.0230
(0.0153)

-0.0528∗∗∗
(0.0161)

-0.0348∗∗
(0.0158)

Startup based in MA

0.0384∗∗
(0.0180)

0.0261
(0.0195)

-0.0686∗∗∗
(0.0162)

-0.0599∗∗∗
(0.0218)

Startup based in NY

0.0462∗∗
(0.0219)
16940
8960
2815
0.00550
Y
Y
Y

0.0513∗
(0.0309)
8332
5617
506
0.00590
Y
Y
Y

-0.0172
(0.0204)
16940
8960
2815
0.0149
Y
Y
Y

0.0207
(0.0320)
8332
5617
506
0.0137
Y
Y
Y

Treated X Post-2005

Observations
Number startups
Number VCs
R2
Industry FE?
Year FE?
VC firm FE?

39

Failed?
“Active” VCs
(4)
0.0535∗∗
(0.0238)

Table 9
Portfolio management by VCs: valuations conditional on success. This table reports
results from VC firm fixed effects regressions for two outcome variables. A unit of observation is an entrepreneurial firm financing associated with an investor. Columns 1 and
2 use log of the ratio of the valuation of the next equity financing divided by the first.
Columns 3 and 4 use the log of the ratio of the final exit valuation (i.e., initial public
offering (IPO) valuation or acquisition price) to total capital invested in the firm at exit.
VCs who are active (Columns 2 and 4) in the pre-period are defined as those investors
with at least three investments prior to 2006. Industry fixed effects control for the five
industry groups: Biotechnology and health-care, Business and financial services, Consumer goods and services, Energy and industrials, and Information technology. “Treated”
industries are defined at a more granular-level than these industry classifications so there
is within-industry variation in startups that are defined as “treated” vs. not. “Year FE”
indicate dummies for financing year and “VC firm FE” are VC firm fixed effects. Standard errors clustered by VC-firm are reported in parentheses. Significance: ∗ p < 0.10,
∗∗
p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.
Step up in valuation
round 1 to round 2
All VCs “Active” VCs
(1)
(2)
∗∗∗
0.195
0.230∗∗
(0.0722)
(0.0902)

Log exit value to
capital raised (non-failed)
All VCs “Active” VCs
(3)
(4)
0.217
0.355∗∗
(0.139)
(0.167)

Treated

-0.0408
(0.0452)

-0.0657
(0.0552)

0.239∗
(0.129)

0.146
(0.154)

Startup based in CA

0.125∗∗
(0.0627)

0.0400
(0.0636)

-0.132∗
(0.0792)

-0.0740
(0.124)

Startup based in MA

-0.0448
(0.0906)

-0.115
(0.0818)

-0.238∗∗
(0.108)

-0.184
(0.148)

Startup based in NY

0.0235
(0.0703)
2442
1066
806
0.0440
Y
Y
Y

-0.0181
(0.111)
1373
802
343
0.0535
Y
Y
Y

-0.208∗
(0.119)
2488
1133
837
0.0336
Y
Y
Y

-0.166
(0.236)
1438
832
368
0.0409
Y
Y
Y

Treated X Post-2005

Observations
Number startups
Number VCs
R2
Industry FE?
Year FE?
VC firm FE?

40

Table 10
Portfolio management by VCs: valuations conditional on success. This table reports
results from the same analysis reported in Table 9 but with the inclusion of triple interactions. “Young” is a dummy variable equal to one if the startup team’s average age is
less than the observed pre-2006 average. “No serial” is one if none of the founding team
members has previous founding experience. All other controls and fixed effects are as
defined in the main specifications in Table 9. Standard errors clustered by VC-firm are
reported in parentheses. Significance: ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.

Treated X Post X Young

Step-up in valuation
Log exit value to
round 1 to round 2
capital raised (non-failed)
Founding team characteristics
Young vs. Old
Serial
Young vs. Old
Serial
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
0.0802
0.222
(0.0824)
(0.205)

Post-2005 X Young

-0.135
(0.0840)

0.135
(0.180)

Young team

0.181∗∗∗
(0.0453)

0.0680
(0.0969)

Treated X Post X No serial

0.175∗∗
(0.0762)

0.258∗
(0.153)

Post-2005 X No serial

-0.0939
(0.0719)

-0.104
(0.128)

No serial entrepreneurs

0.0108
(0.0322)

-0.0675
(0.0864)

Treated X Post-2005

0.160∗∗
(0.0786)

0.182∗∗∗
(0.0648)

-0.205
(0.159)

0.0324
(0.123)

Treated

-0.0546
(0.0429)
1807
800
642
0.0808
Y
Y
Y

-0.0591
(0.0413)
2442
1066
806
0.0610
Y
Y
Y

0.0943
(0.101)
1916
873
705
0.0564
Y
Y
Y

0.298∗∗∗
(0.0902)
2488
1133
837
0.0453
Y
Y
Y

Observations
Number startups
Number VCs
R2
Industry FE?
Year FE?
VC firm FE?

41

Table 11
Log capital raised by five years after first VC. This table reports results from VC firm
fixed effects regressions of the log of total capital raised by each year after the entrepreneurial firm’s first financing event for firms that survived at least three years. Column 1
effectively reports the main capital raised result found in Table 3. Column 2 measures
capital stock as of two years later (similarly for the remaining columns). The sample
considers only those investors that had investing activity before and after 2006. Industry
fixed effects control for the five industry groups: Biotechnology and health-care, Business and financial services, Consumer goods and services, Energy and industrials, and
Information technology. “Treated” industries are defined at a more granular-level than
these industry classifications so there is within-industry variation in startups that are
defined as “treated” vs. not. “Year FE” indicate dummies for financing year and “VC
firm FE” are VC firm fixed effects. Standard errors clustered by VC-firm are reported
in parentheses. Significance: ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.

Treated X Post-2005

1 year
(1)
-0.225∗∗∗
(0.0583)

Total raised N years since first VC
2 years
3 years
4 years
5 years
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
∗
-0.102
0.0114
0.00380
0.0361
(0.0562) (0.0578) (0.0617) (0.0672)

Treated

-0.127∗∗∗
(0.0404)

-0.222∗∗∗
(0.0419)

-0.243∗∗∗
(0.0459)

-0.259∗∗∗
(0.0482)

-0.266∗∗∗
(0.0533)

Startup based in CA

0.148∗∗∗
(0.0404)

0.183∗∗∗
(0.0407)

0.240∗∗∗
(0.0441)

0.249∗∗∗
(0.0507)

0.323∗∗∗
(0.0541)

Startup based in MA

0.188∗∗∗
(0.0472)

0.214∗∗∗
(0.0511)

0.279∗∗∗
(0.0514)

0.320∗∗∗
(0.0560)

0.361∗∗∗
(0.0608)

Startup based in NY

-0.0276
(0.0686)
7812
5153
506
0.0281
Y
Y
Y

0.0825
(0.0684)
7256
4769
505
0.0392
Y
Y
Y

0.128∗
(0.0772)
6813
4477
503
0.0456
Y
Y
Y

0.191∗∗
(0.0906)
6274
4130
504
0.0503
Y
Y
Y

0.129
(0.101)
5669
3760
503
0.0550
Y
Y
Y

Observations
Number startups
Number VCs
R2
VC firm FE?
Industry FE?
First-round year FE?

42

A

Appendix

Fig. A.1. Google trends data: Amazon EC2: treated and non-treated. The figure
presents the search term traffic for the phrase “Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud.”

Fig. A.2. Google trends data: App Store. The figure presents the search term traffic
for the phrase “App Store,” which is the marketplace for iPhone applications, a popular
place for firms to sell their products.

Fig. A.3. Google trends data: Open source software. The figure presents the search term
traffic for the phrase “Open Source Software,” which includes languages such as Python,
Ruby, and PHP.

43

Table A.1
Top words in company descriptions by industry classifications. Table reports the top ten
most common words in company descriptions in VentureSource by industry-segment after
excluding a list of common words. The excluded words beyond the standard common
words such as “the” and “about” are: company, design, focus, industry, keywords, offer,
product, provider and solutions.
Panel A: Treated industry-segments
Business Support Ser- service, platform, online, management, data, marketing, advertising, technovices
logy, web, software
Consumer Informa- online, users, web, service, platform, social, site, content, mobile, search
tion Services
Financial Institution- service, financial, payment, online, platform, credit, mobile, card, insurance,
sand Services
management
Media and Content
content, online, service, platform, web, media, video, news, learning, technology
Medical Software and healthcare, management, service, health, software, medical, patient, care, inInformation Services
formation, data
Retailers
online, service, accessories, web, stores, customers, platform, apparel, site,
retail
Software
software, service, management, data, platform, applications, mobile, technology, business, web
Travel and Leisure
travel, service, online, vacation, search, restaurants, platform, operator, web,
users
Panel B: Non-treated industry-segments
Aerospace and De- security, systems, video, surveillance, service, aircraft, military, system,
fense
technology, flight
Agriculture and Fore- service, cleantech, water, agriculture, traits, food, plant, crop, irrigation, agristry
cultural
Biopharmaceuticals
developer, treatment, drug, diseases, technology, disease, cancer, drugs, development, therapeutics
Communications and service, wireless, network, data, internet, applications, technology, networks,
Networking
mobile, systems
Construction and Ci- service, cleantech, water, energy, waste, treatment, technology, environment,
vil Engineering
systems, management
Electronics and Com- technology, storage, energy, systems, applications, data, developer, power, efputer Hardware
ficiency, devices
Food and Beverage
food, organic, tea, beverages, ingredients, natural, drinks, coffee, juice, foods
Healthcare Services
service, care, healthcare, health, management, medical, patients, treatment,
centers, physicians
Household and Office water, energy, cleantech, efficiency, service, systems, home, led, consumer,
Goods
lighting
Machinery and Indus- energy, technology, efficiency, cleantech, systems, applications, service, matetrial Goods
rials, industrial, system
Materials and Chemi- materials, technology, cleantech, applications, developer, service, process,
cals
energy, water, coatings
Medical Devices and developer, technology, devices, medical, treatment, device, system, patients,
Equipment
develops, patient
Non-Renewable
gas, oil, natural, technology, service, cleantech, coal, exploration, power,
Energy
energy
Personal Goods
skin, care, technology, accessories, online, performance, retailers, system, hair,
service
Renewable Energy
solar, cleantech, energy, generation, technology, power, energyelectricity, fuels,
developer, fuel
Semiconductors
technology, power, developer, semiconductor, applications, wireless, video, devices, integrated, digital
Utilities
energy, water, power, service, efficiency, cleantech, management, technology,
treatment, customers
Vehicles and Parts
electric, vehicles, transportation, cleantech, service, systems, vehicle, energy,
miles, drive
Wholesale Trade and transportation, management, shipping, service, containers, container, freight,
Shipping
online, sales, cargo

44

