NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

A MEASURE OF RISK APPETITE FOR THE MACROECONOMY
Carolin Pflueger
Emil Siriwardane
Adi Sunderam
Working Paper 24529
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24529

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2018

This paper was previously circulated under the title “Does Precautionary Savings Drive the Real
Interest Rate? Evidence from the Stock Market.” We thank Michael Brennan (discussant), John
Campbell, Robert Engle, Xavier Gabaix, Espen Henriksen (discussant), Bryan Kelly, Arvind
Krishnamurthy, Hanno Lustig (discussant), Thomas Maurer (discussant), Monika Piazzesi,
Robert Ready (discussant), Larry Schmidt (discussant), Martin Schneider, Andrei Shleifer,
Jeremy Stein, and Luis Viceira for helpful comments. We also benefited from the input of
seminar participants at the BI-SHoF Conference 2017, CEF 2017, CITE 2017, Chicago Harris,
CMU Tepper, Federal Reserve Board, FRBSF conference on Advances in Finance Research
2017, Harvard, HEC-McGill Winter Finance Workshop, London School of Economics, McGill
Desaultels, NBER Fall 2017 Asset Pricing Meeting, Northwestern Kellogg, SFS Cavalcade, SITE
2017, University of British Columbia, and University of Indiana. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Carolin Pflueger, Emil Siriwardane, and Adi Sunderam. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

A Measure of Risk Appetite for the Macroeconomy
Carolin Pflueger, Emil Siriwardane, and Adi Sunderam
NBER Working Paper No. 24529
April 2018
JEL No. E22,E44,G12
ABSTRACT
We document a strong and robust positive relationship between real rates and the
contemporaneous valuation of volatile stocks, which we contend measures the economy’s risk
appetite. Our novel proxy for risk appetite explains 41% of the variation in the one-year real rate
since 1970, while the valuation of the aggregate stock market explains just 1%. In addition, the
real rate forecasts returns on volatile stocks, confirming our interpretation that changes in risk
appetite drive the real rate. Increases in our measure of risk appetite are followed by a boom in
investment and output.
Carolin Pflueger
Sauder School of Business
University of British Columbia
2053 Main Mall
Vancouver, BC, V6T 1Z2
Canada
carolin.pflueger@sauder.ubc.ca
Emil Siriwardane
Harvard Business School
Baker LIbrary 261
Boston, MA 02163
esiriwardane@hbs.edu

Adi Sunderam
Harvard Business School
Baker Library 359
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
asunderam@hbs.edu

1

Introduction

Financial market participants often ascribe movements in asset prices to changes in investor risk
appetite. Intuitively, changes in risk appetite should affect the macroeconomy. When investors
have a greater appetite for risk, they should find safe bonds less attractive and be more willing to
fund risky projects. Thus, real interest rates should be high and investment should boom, spurring
an economic expansion. Conversely, when risk appetite is low, investors should seek out safe bonds
as they become less willing to fund risky investments, driving down the real rate and leading to an
economic contraction.1
This link between risk appetite and the macroeconomy has proven elusive empirically. Traditional rational asset pricing models with a representative agent (e.g., Campbell and Cochrane
(1999); Bansal and Yaron (2004)) suggest that the economy’s risk appetite should be reflected in
data on aggregate consumption or the aggregate stock market. However, measures of risk appetite
derived from aggregates (e.g., Lettau and Ludvigson (2004)) generally fail to explain meaningful
amounts of real rate variation or forecast future macroeconomic outcomes.2
In this paper, we propose a new measure of risk appetite that is highly correlated with real
interest rates and has significant predictive power for economic activity. Our empirical approach
relies on the idea that when risk appetite is low, investors should be more averse to holding highvolatility assets and instead prefer low-volatility assets like riskless bonds. We operationalize
this idea in the cross section of equities by comparing the price of volatile stocks (henceforth
PV St ) to the price of low-volatility stocks. Specifically, we define PV St as the average bookto-market ratio of low-volatility stocks minus the average book-to-market ratio of high-volatility
stocks. Consequently, PV St is high when the market values of high-volatility stocks are large
relative to low-volatility stocks. Using this measure, we document five key facts:
1. PV St has a strong, robust positive correlation with the one-year real rate, explaining 41% of
its quarterly variation from 1970 to 2016.
1 Risk

appetite is often labeled as precautionary savings or a flight to quality. We use these terms interchangeably.
While these terms are sometimes used to describe day-to-day variation in market prices, our focus is on quarterly
variation in risk appetite, which is more likely to have macroeconomic effects.
2 This echoes the Campbell and Ammer (1993) result that most variation in the aggregate stock market cannot be
attributed to real rate news or news about future cash flows. We confirm these findings through a variety of forecasting
regressions discussed below.

1

2. PV St and the real rate positively forecast returns on a portfolio that is long low-volatility
stocks and short high-volatility stocks. Both also forecast returns on volatility-sorted portfolios in other asset classes beyond equities.
3. PV St and the real rate are both only weakly correlated with standard measures of the quantity
of risk in the economy.
4. Outflows from high-volatility mutual funds are large relative to low-volatility funds when
the real rate is low.
5. Shocks to PV St initially lead to a boom in investment, output, and employment, which is
subsequently partially reversed.
Taken together, these facts strongly suggest that PV St measures the macroeconomy’s risk appetite.
The tight relationship between PV St and the one-year real rate is our headline result. This relationship is economically significant and robust. It appears in the data consistently through different
macroeconomic environments, holding in both levels and first differences. Furthermore, the link
between PV St and the real rate is robust to controlling for contemporaneous changes in the Taylor
(1993) monetary policy rule variables (the output gap and inflation) and measures of credit and
equity market sentiment (Greenwood and Hanson (2013); Baker and Wurgler (2006)). In addition,
PV St has similarly strong explanatory for longer term real rates. Consistent with the risk appetite
interpretation of our headline result, our emphasis on stocks’ total volatility in the construction of
PV St is critical. Using a combination of horse races and double sorts, we show that PV St contains
information about the real rate that is independent of how investors price other stock characteristics
such as size, value, leverage, duration of cash flows, and CAPM beta.
Return forecasting regressions further support the idea that PV St reflects the economy’s risk
appetite. As a valuation ratio, movements in PV St must be driven by variation in: (i) future cash
flow differences between low- and high-volatility firms; or (ii) future return differences between
low- and high-volatility firms. Thus, the correlation between the real rate and PV St must be driven
by one of these factors. The data points to expected returns, as the real rate and PV St both strongly
forecast future returns on a portfolio that is long low-volatility stocks and short high-volatility
stocks (Fact #2). Consistent with this finding, PV St mean reverts quite quickly, with a half life
2

of about 1.5 years. Intuitively, when risk appetite is low, PV St and the real rate are also low,
and investors require high future returns for holding volatile stocks. Neither PV St nor the real
rate forecasts cash flows for the same volatility-sorted portfolio, alleviating concerns that they are
jointly driven by time-varying growth expectations.
Evidence from other asset classes (Fact #2) bolsters the notion that PV St is a broad measure of
risk appetite, rather than one specific to equity markets. We show that the real rate and PV St forecast returns on portfolios that are long low-volatility securities and short high-volatility securities
within several different asset classes, including U.S. corporate bonds, sovereign bonds, options,
and credit default swaps (CDS). These results are particularly strong for credit markets. In this
regard, our work is related to recent findings that credit market conditions are related to future
macroeconomic performance (Gilchrist and Zakrajšek (2012); López-Salido, Stein, and Zakrajšek
(2017)). Our results suggest that a broader concept of risk appetite — one that is revealed by
common movements in the relative pricing of low- versus high-volatility securities in several asset
classes — plays a central role in determining macroeconomic outcomes and real interest rates.
Because movements in PV St are driven by changes in the returns investors demand for holding
volatile stocks, they must reflect changes in either investor aversion to risk or the quantity of risk.
We investigate the quantity of risk channel by examining correlations between the real rate, PV St ,
and a wide range of risk proxies, including the realized volatility of volatile stocks, the Herskovic
et al. (2016) common idiosyncratic volatility factor, the realized volatility of the aggregate stock
market, and total factor productivity (TFP) volatility. These variables explain substantially less
real rate variation than PV St , and importantly, controlling for them does not affect the explanatory
power of PV St for the real rate (Fact #3). While it is impossible to account for all potential sources
of time-varying volatility, these results suggest that PV St is mostly driven by time-varying aversion
to risk, again consistent with our interpretation that it measures the economy’s risk appetite.
We then move past asset prices and examine the behavior of mutual fund investors. If risk
appetite is really about investor attitudes towards volatile securities, then when risk appetite is low,
investors should exit high-volatility mutual funds and move into safe bonds. This is precisely what
we find in the data: high-volatility funds experience larger capital outflows than low-volatility
funds during periods of low real rates (Fact #4).
We close by directly examining the relationship between risk appetite and macroeconomic
3

performance, aiming to understand how the economy responds to risk appetite shocks. To start,
we first rule out the alternative explanation that changes in PV St are caused by changes in monetary policy. Following the literature on monetary policy shocks, we examine narrow windows
around the Federal Reserve’s policy announcements. We show that shocks to monetary policy are
uncorrelated with returns on the portfolio of low-minus-high volatility stocks in these windows,
confirming that monetary policy does not differentially affect the prices of high-volatility stocks.
We then turn to real variables, showing that when risk appetite is high, as measured by PV St ,
an economic boom follows. In particular, following a positive shock to PV St , private investment
and output rise over the following four quarters, while unemployment falls (Fact #5). The magnitudes are economically significant: a one-standard deviation increase in PV St is associated with an
increase in the investment-capital ratio of 0.4%. Similarly, output rises 0.6% relative to potential
and the unemployment rate decreases by 0.4%. These gains are then partially reversed over the
following eight quarters. These macroeconomic dynamics are broadly consistent with the notion
that fluctuations in risk appetite play an important role in determining the course of the business
cycle.
Collectively, these facts raise significant questions for theories of asset pricing and macroeconomics. A necessary ingredient for a model to fit the strong empirical correlation between PV St
and the real rate is that some investors must evaluate risk based on total volatility. This is challenging for standard rational models with perfect risk sharing, in which agents care about a security’s
systematic risk or beta – not its total volatility – because idiosyncratic risk can be diversified away.
Investors might care about total volatility for several reasons, including behavioral biases, institutional frictions, and market incompleteness. A second key ingredient for a model to fit our
empirical findings is that investor attitudes towards total volatility (i.e., risk appetite) must vary
over time. These two ingredients are sufficient to generate most of our results. When risk appetite
is low, investors will want to hold riskless bonds, driving down the real rate. At the same time,
they will be reluctant to hold high-volatility assets, driving their valuations down and their future
returns up, without much change in the quantity of risk. This reluctance to hold risky assets in
turn drives down real investment. Conversely, when risk appetite is high, investors will have less
demand for bonds and more demand for volatile assets, driving up the real rate, PV St , and real
investment.
4

Mechanically, the relationship between the one-year real rate and PV St must be intermediated
by the central bank, which sets short-term interest rates. Thus, our results imply that the Federal
Reserve treats shocks to risk appetite like traditional demand or discount rate shocks in a standard
New Keynesian framework and reacts to these shocks by adjusting interest rates. Moreover, the
quantitative strength of the relationship between the real rate and risk appetite suggests that risk
appetite shocks are a particularly important type of shock to the macroeconomy. Our results do
not imply that the Federal Reserve tracks PV St itself, but rather that the component of risk appetite
that the Fed reacts to is discernible from how investors price volatile stocks.
Our paper is related to several strands of the literature. The idea that risk and uncertainty drive
macroeconomic fluctuations has received significant attention in recent years (Bloom (2009); Caballero and Farhi (2017); Bloom et al. (2014); Hall (2016); Caballero and Simsek (2017); McKay
et al. (2016)). This work typically focuses on the quantity of risk as the driving force and studies
long-run changes in the real rate. By contrast, our empirical findings emphasize that time-varying
risk appetite plays an important role for understanding quarterly variation, after accounting for
long-term trends due to growth expectations and other factors. In this respect, our paper is closer
to the long literature in asset pricing arguing that considerations of risk drive variation in asset
prices (e.g., Campbell and Shiller (1988); Cochrane (2011); Cochrane (2016)). This also distinguishes our paper from the recent literature studying the trend in the natural rate of interest,
attributing decade-by-decade changes in real rates primarily to expected growth and Treasury convenience yields (Laubach and Williams (2003); Cúrdia et al. (2015); Del Negro et al. (2017);
Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgenson (2012)).
Our paper is also related to the literature studying how investor sentiment impacts asset prices
(De Long et al. (1990); Baker and Wurgler (2007)). While this literature has focused mainly on
connecting sentiment to mistaken beliefs about future cash flows, our results suggest that changes
in investors’ sentiment may also be driven by changes in their appetite for risk. This connection is intuitive for two reasons. First, PV St mean reverts quickly, suggesting it is not driven by
slow-moving fundamentals. Second, previous work finds that sentiment disproportionately affects
speculative securities with highly uncertain values (e.g., Baker and Wurgler (2006)), consistent
with the special role of volatility in our results. Indeed, PV St is correlated with measures of sentiment for both debt and equity markets, suggesting that variation in risk appetite induces common
5

movements in sentiment across markets. Our results suggest that recent work connecting credit
market sentiment to economic outcomes (e.g., Bordalo et al. (2018); Krishnamurthy and Muir
(2017); López-Salido et al. (2017)) may in part reflect the effects of a broad notion of investor risk
appetite that is common across markets, as opposed to one that is specific to credit markets.
This paper also contributes to the literature on the relation between risk premia in bonds and
stocks, a long-standing question in financial economics (Fama and French (1993); Koijen et al.
(2010); Baker and Wurgler (2012)). We build on this research by showing that the pricing of
volatility in the cross section of stocks sheds light on the fundamental drivers of the real rate,
despite the fact that aggregate stock market valuations do not reliably explain the real rate. Our
results differ from the literature on idiosyncratic risk in the stock market (Ang et al. (2006); Johnson
(2004); Ang et al. (2009); Fu (2009); Stambaugh et al. (2015); Hou and Loh (2016)) in that we
study time variation in risk premia of high-volatility stocks, whereas the previous literature has
primarily focused on their average risk premium. Herskovic et al. (2016) focus on a different
cross-section of stocks, sorting stocks by their exposure to the common factor driving idiosyncratic
volatility and studying how this exposure is priced. Our focus is on how the relative valuation of
high- and low-volatility stocks connects to real interest rates and macroeconomic performance.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the data and portfolio
construction. Section 3 presents the main empirical results. Section 4 describes the implications
of our results for models of asset prices and the macroeconomy. Section 5 concludes.

2

Data

We construct a quarterly data set running from 1970q2, when survey data on inflation expectations
begins, to 2016q2. We include all U.S. common equity in the CRSP-COMPUSTAT merged data
set that is traded on the NYSE, AMEX, or NASDAQ exchanges. We provide full details of all of
the data used in the paper in the Appendix. Here, we briefly describe the construction of some of
our key variables.

6

2.1

Construction of Key Variables

Valuation Ratios
The valuation ratios used in the paper derive from the CRSP-COMPUSTAT merged database. At
the end of each quarter and for each individual stock, we form book-to-market ratios. The value
of book equity comes from COMPUSTAT Quarterly and is defined following Fama and French
(1993). If book equity is not available in COMPUSTAT Quarterly, we look for it in the annual
file and then the book value data of Davis, Fama, and French (2000), in that order. We assume
that accounting information for each firm is known with a one-quarter lag. At the end of each
quarter, we use the trailing six-month average of market capitalization when computing the bookto-market ratio of a given firm. This smooths out any short-term fluctuations in market value. We
have experimented with many variants on the construction of book-to-market, and our results are
not sensitive to these choices.
Volatility-Sorted Portfolio Construction
At the end of each quarter, we use daily CRSP stock data from the previous two months to compute
equity volatility. We exclude firms that do not have at least 20 observations over this time frame.
This approach mirrors the construction of variance-sorted portfolios on Ken French’s website. We
compute each firm’s volatility using ex-dividend firm returns.3
At the end of each quarter, we sort firms into quintiles based on their volatility. At any given
point in time, the valuation ratio for a quintile is simply the equal-weighted average of the valuation
ratios of stocks in that quintile. The key variable in our empirical analysis is PV St , the difference
between the average book-to-market ratio of stocks in the lowest quintile of volatility and the
average book-to-market ratio of stocks in the highest quintile of volatility:


PV St = B/M

low vol,t



− B/M

high vol,t

.

(1)

PV St stands for the “price of volatile stocks.” When market valuations are high, book-to-market
3 In

earlier versions of the paper, we instead sorted stocks on idiosyncratic volatility as in Ang, Hodrick, Xing, and
Zhang (2006). Our results are nearly identical when using idiosyncratic volatility, mainly because the total volatility
of an individual stock is dominated by idiosyncratic volatility (Herskovic et al. (2016)) .

7

ratios are low. Thus, PV St is high when the price of high-volatility stocks is large relative to
low-volatility stocks. Quarterly realized returns in a given quintile are computed in an analogous
fashion, aggregated up using monthly data from CRSP.
The Real Rate
The real rate is the one-year Treasury bill yield net of one-year survey expectations of the inflation
(the GDP deflator) from the Survey of Professional Forecasters. We use a short maturity interest
rate because inflation risk is small at this horizon, meaning inflation risk premia are unlikely to
affect our measure of the risk-free rate. In addition, our focus is on understanding cyclical fluctuations in the real rate, as opposed to low-frequency movements that are likely driven by secular
changes in growth expectations (Laubach and Williams (2003)). To control for long run growth
and other trends as simply and transparently as possible, we use a linear trend to extract the cyclical component of the real rate. In the Appendix, we show that all of our results are essentially
unchanged if we just use the raw real rate or if we employ more sophisticated filtering methods
that allow for stochastic trends.

2.2

Summary Statistics

Table 1 contains basic summary statistics on our volatility-sorted portfolios. Panel A of the table
reports statistics on book-to-market-ratios, while Panel B reports statistics on excess returns. The
first thing to note in Panel A is that high-volatility stocks have lower valuations than low-volatility
stocks: on average, PV St is negative. However, as Figure 1 shows, this masks considerable variation in PV St . Indeed, the standard deviation of PV St is about twice the magnitude of its mean.
This variation is at the heart of our empirical work.
Panel B shows that returns on the low-minus-high volatility portfolio are themselves quite
volatile, with an annualized standard deviation of 29.6%. The highest-volatility quintile of stocks
on average has excess returns that are 2.71 percentage points per year lower than for the lowestvolatility quintile. This is related to the well-known idiosyncratic volatility puzzle, which emphasizes that stocks with high short-term volatility, but not long-term volatility, have traditionally underperformed (Ang et al. (2009)), potentially due to shorting constraints (Stambaugh et al. (2015)).

8

The second-to-last row of Table 1 Panel B shows that high-volatility portfolios load significantly
on the SMB factor, consistent with highly volatile stocks being smaller on average. We show that
our results are primarily about volatility and not size below.

3

Empirical Results

3.1
3.1.1

Valuation Ratios and Real Rates
The One-Year Real Rate

We begin by documenting the strong relationship between the one-year real rate and the bookto-market spread between low- and high-volatility stocks. Specifically, we run regressions of the
form:
Real Ratet = a + b × PV St + εt .

(2)

We report Newey and West (1987) standard errors using five lags. In the Appendix, we also
consider several other methods for dealing with the persistence of these variables (e.g., parametric
corrections to standard errors, generalized least squares, simulated bootstrap p-values, etc.). Our
conclusions are robust to these alternatives.
Column (1) of Table 2 reveals a strong positive correlation between the real rate and PV St —
the real rate tends to be high when investors favor high-volatility stocks, and is low when investors
prefer low-volatility stocks. This simple fact is the first piece of evidence that PV St captures
variation in the economy’s risk appetite. The magnitude of the effect is economically large and
measured precisely. A one-standard deviation increase in PV St is associated with about a 1.3
percentage point increase in the real rate. For reference, the standard deviation of the real rate is
1.9 percentage points. The R2 of the univariate regression is 41%, indicating that PV St explains a
large fraction of variation in the real rate. Column (2) of Table 2 separates PV St into its constituent
parts. The valuations of low-volatility and high-volatility stocks enter with opposite signs, so both
components of PV St play a role in driving the relation.
Figures 2 and 3 present visual evidence of our primary finding. Figure 2 plots the time series
of the real rate against the fitted value from regression in Eq. (2). As the figure shows, PV St tracks
a remarkable amount of real rate variation since 1970. Additionally, the scatter plot in Panel A of
9

Figure 3 reinforces our linear regression specification and confirms that outliers are not driving our
results. Panel B of Figure 3 shows that the relationship is equally strong if we remove recession
quarters, which are shaded in light gray. Thus, the relationship between PV St and the real rate is
stable across different macroeconomic environments.
Column (3) of Table 2 indicates that our focus on the cross section of stock valuations is important. There is no relationship between the book-to-market ratio of the aggregate stock market and
the real rate. This fact is not just an issue of statistical precision. The economic magnitude of the
point estimate on the aggregate book-to-market ratio is also quite small – a one-standard deviation
movement in the aggregate book-to-market ratio is associated with only a 17 basis point movement in the real rate.4 The aggregate book-to-market ratio is generally interpreted as a proxy for
expected stock market returns (Cochrane (2007)). Thus, its low correlation with the real rate suggests that expected returns on the aggregate market may be driven by factors beyond risk appetite
like growth expectations and sentiment. In contrast, column (3) of Table 2 shows that the statistical
significance and the magnitude of the coefficient on PV St are unchanged when controlling for the
aggregate book-to-market ratio.
In column (4), we control for variables thought to influence monetary policy: four-quarter
inflation, as measured by the GDP price deflator, and the output gap from the Congressional Budget
Office (Clarida et al. (1999); Taylor (1993)). While the output gap enters with a positive coefficient,
inflation enters with a slightly negative coefficient. However, both coefficients on the output gap
and inflation are statistically indistinguishable from the traditional Taylor (1993) monetary policy
rule values of 0.5.5 In the Appendix we do further tests to show that our results are not driven by
inflation or variables that enter into traditional monetary policy rules. Specifically, we decompose
the real rate into the one-year nominal Treasury bill rate and inflation expectations. The correlation
between PV St and the real rate primarily comes from the nominal rate, as one would expect if risk
appetite were driving demand for government bonds. In addition, we separate the real rate into
a component attributable to the Taylor (1993) rule and a residual, and show that the explanatory
4 As we discuss further in the Appendix, the aggregate book-to-market ratio does enter significantly in a small
number of variants on our baseline specification. However, the statistical significance is irregular across various
specifications, and the economic significance is always negligible.
5 Section A.5 in the Appendix shows that the economic and statistical significance of PV S remains unchanged when
t
controlling for expected growth and the volatility of industrial production implied by an ARMA(1,1)-GARCH(1,1,)
model.

10

power of PV St for the real rate comes from its explanatory power for the residuals. The main
takeaway is that the relationship between the real rate and PV St is stable throughout all of these
regression specifications, implying that PV St does not just simply capture the reaction of the central
bank to standard Taylor (1993) rule variables. We revisit the relationship between monetary policy,
the real interest rate, and PV St in Section 3.5.
In columns (5)-(8) of Table 2, we rerun the preceding regression analysis in first differences
rather than levels. This helps to ensure that our statistical inference is not distorted by the persistence of either the real rate or PV St . Running regression (2) in differences yields very similar
results to running it in levels. Changes in the real rate are strongly correlated with changes in
PV St . Moreover, the magnitudes and statistical significance of the point estimate on PV St are
close to what we observe when we run the regression in levels. The differenced regression also reinforces the nonexistent relationship between the real rate and the aggregate book-to-market ratio.
Overall, the evidence in Table 2 indicates a strong and robust relationship, both in economic and
statistical terms, between the real rate and PV St . This is the central empirical finding of the paper,
and as we show below, these results stand up to the inclusion of a battery of additional control
variables and various regression specifications.
3.1.2

Long-Term Real Rates

Does the relationship between the one-year real interest rate and PV St extend to the long-term real
rates? It seems natural to think that periods of low risk appetite coincide with a broad demand for
safe assets of all maturities. To explore this possibility further, we construct k-year real rates in the
same way we construct the one-year real rate: the k-year nominal Treasury bond rate minus the
one-year survey expectations of the inflation (the GDP deflator) from the Survey of Professional
Forecasters. We use one-year survey expectations when constructing the term structure of real rates
simply because the data go back further, though our conclusions are not sensitive to this choice.
Table 3 shows regressions of the following form:
k-Year Real Ratet = a + b × PV St + c × Agg. BMt + εt ,

11

k = 1, 2, 5, 7, 10.

These regressions mirror our baseline regression in Equation (2), but replace the one-year real
rate with longer-term rates as the dependent variable. In all regressions, we include the aggregate
book-to-market ratio as a control and compute Newey-West standard errors using five lags.
For comparison, Row (1) of Table 3 reproduces our results for the one-year rate from Table
2, Columns (3) and (7). Rows (2)-(5) of Table 3 show a strong positive relationship between
contemporaneous movements in PV St and longer-term real rates, similar to our results for the oneyear real rate. The results are statistically and economically significant in both levels and first
differences. When investors’ willingness to pay for volatile stocks falls, there is a simultaneous
increase in the price of all real safe assets, regardless of maturity. Furthermore, the R2 s in these
regressions indicate that PV St explains a large amount of real rate variation across the maturity
term structure. Short-term real rates increase a bit more than long-term rates when PV St rises, as
evidenced by the fact that the coefficients on PV St decrease with maturity. Thus, an increase in
PV St is associated with a strong increase in the level of the real yield curve and a slight decrease in
its slope. Because the correlation between PV St and real rates is largely independent of maturity,
we focus on the one-year real rate throughout the rest of the paper for brevity.

3.2

Robustness

Because the relation between PV St and real rates is at the heart of our empirical results, we now
show that this relation is robust to a wide range of additional tests. We first show our headline result
is robust to how we construct PV St . We then test whether our regression results change when we
control for cross-sectional valuation spreads formed on alternative stock characteristics like CAPM
Beta. The regression analysis that we use for our robustness analysis takes the following form:
0

Real Ratet = a + b × PV St + θ Xt + εt ,

(3)

where Xt is a vector of control variables that always includes the aggregate book-to-market ratio. In
our horse races, it also contains book-to-market spreads based on alternative cross-sectional sorts.
We run these tests in both levels and changes, using both the full sample and the pre-crisis sample.
In complementary robustness checks, we also form double-sorted versions of PV St by sorting on
volatility and these same alternative characteristics. As a preview of the results, the economic and
12

statistical significance of PV St remains essentially unchanged throughout these robustness checks
– investors’ willingness to hold volatile stocks indeed plays a special role in understanding real
rate variation.
We start our robustness analysis by exploring alternative definitions of PV St . The first row
of Table 4 reproduces our baseline results from columns (3) and (7) of Table 2. In row (2) of
Table 4, we recompute PV St by value-weighting the book-to-market ratio of stocks within each
volatility quintile, as opposed to equal-weighting. The coefficients and statistical significance are
comparable to the baseline, showing that our results are not exclusively driven by small stocks.
In row (3), we construct PV St by sorting stocks on volatility measured over a two-year window,
rather than a two-month window. As row (3) shows, this variant of PV St is still highly correlated
with the real rate. Computing volatility over a long period helps ensure that our results are not
driven by changing portfolio composition. That is, we are capturing changes in the valuations of
stocks with a long history of being volatile, not changes in the volatility of value stocks. This
distinction is critical to our interpretation of PV St as a measure of investors’ willingness to hold
volatile stocks. The fact that the relation between PV St and the real rate is robust to measuring
volatility over longer horizons also distinguishes our main result from the idiosyncratic volatility
puzzle, which centers around the fact that firms with low recent return volatility have historically
earned a risk premium (Ang et al. (2009); Stambaugh et al. (2015)).
In row (4), we run a horse race of PV St against the spread between 10-year off-the-run and onthe-run Treasury yields, a measure of liquidity premia in the fixed income market (Krishnamurthy
(2002)).6 The explanatory power of PV St for the real rate is unchanged, suggesting that PV St
subsumes any information about the real rate that is captured in the demand for liquid assets like
on-the-run Treasuries.
Next, we test whether volatility simply proxies for another characteristic that may drive the
relation between the real rate and the cross-section of stocks. We do so by controlling for bookto-market spreads based on alternative characteristics in regression (3). For an alternative characteristic Y , we sort stocks in quintiles based on Y and then compute the difference between the
6 The off-the-run spread is the difference between the continuously compounded 10-year off-the-run and on-the-run

bond yields. On-the-run bond yields are from the monthly CRSP Treasury master file. The off-the-run bond yield is
obtained by pricing the on-the-run bond’s cash flows with the off the- run bond yield curve of Gürkaynak et al. (2007).
For details of the off-the-run spread construction see Kang and Pflueger (2015).

13

book-to-market ratio of the lowest Y and highest Y quintiles. In other words, we construct bookto-market spreads for other characteristics the same way we construct PV St . Rows (5)-(9) of Table
4 shows the coefficient on PV St , while controlling for the Y -sorted book-to-market spread and
the aggregate book-to-market. As before, we run these horse races for both the full and pre-crisis
samples, as well as in levels and in changes.
Row (5) of Table 4 considers cash flow duration as an alternative characteristic. If low-volatility
stocks simply have longer duration cash flows than high-volatility stocks, then a decline in real rates
would increase their valuations relative to high-volatility stocks, potentially driving our results. To
rule out this particular reverse causality story, we follow Weber (2016) and construct the expected
duration of cash flows for each firm in our data. The duration-sorted valuation spread does not
drive PV St out of the regression. This observation cuts against the idea that low-volatility stocks
are “bond like” because of their cash flow duration (e.g., Baker and Wurgler (2012)) and instead
supports our point that volatility is the key characteristic determining whether stocks are bond like.
Row (6) shows that PV St is robust to controlling for leverage-sorted valuation ratios. Highlylevered firms may suffer disproportionately from a decrease in the real rate because they are effectively short bonds, but they may also have high volatility, which could confound our results. Row
(6) helps alleviate these concerns, as the leverage-sorted valuation ratio does not impact PV St in
the regression.
In row (7), we show that the economic and statistical significance of PV St is unchanged when
controlling for spreads based on systematic risk (i.e., beta). This test has important implications
for interpreting our results because perfectly diversified investors should care about beta and not
volatility. We use the past two months of daily returns to compute beta, mimicking our construction
of volatility.7 The regression coefficient on PV St is statistically and economically very similar to
our baseline results. Thus, it does not appear that our measure of volatility is simply picking up
on beta. The results in row (7) are consistent with the weak relation between the real rate and
the aggregate book-to-market ratio in Table 2, and more broadly, cut against the idea that PV St is
simply measuring aversion to aggregate stock market risk.
7 In

the Section 1.1 of the Appendix, we try a number of additional constructions of beta. Specifically, we compute
beta using (i) the past two years of monthly returns and (ii) the past ten years of semi-annual returns. In addition,
we compute a measure of cash-flow beta as opposed to stock market beta, using rolling twelve-quarter regressions
of quarter-on-quarter EBITDA growth on quarter-on-quarter national income growth. Our results are essentially unchanged using any of these additional measures.

14

In addition, we compare PV St to book-to-market spreads based on the popular Fama-French
sorting variables, size and value. Consistent with our value-weighted results in row (2), the horse
race in row (8) shows that the relationship between the real rate and PV St is robust to controlling
for the difference in valuation between small and large stocks. Row (9) shows that PV St is robust
to controlling for the book-to-market spread between value and growth stocks. The robustness to
value-sorted book-to-market spreads is reassuring because this sort is sometimes thought to capture
the value of growth options. Row (9) suggests that the relation between PV St and the real rate is
robust to controlling for the time-varying value of growth options.
In rows (10)-(16), we use double sorts as a complementary way to rule out alternative explanations for why PV S relates to the real rate. Specifically, we assemble a Y -neutral version of PV St :
the book-to-market spread from sorting stocks on volatility within each tercile of characteristic Y .
This spread measures the difference in valuations of low-volatility and high-volatility stocks that
have similar values of characteristic Y . For example, in row (10) we form a duration-neutral version
of PV St by first sorting stocks into terciles based on their cash flow duration. Within each tercile
we then compute the book-to-market spread between low and high volatility firms. The durationneutral version of PV S is the average low-minus-high volatility valuation spread across the three
duration terciles. In rows (10)-(14) of Table 4, we show that these double sorted book-to-market
spreads are still strongly correlated with the real rate.
Row (15) ensures that PV St is not driven by differences between dividend payers and nonpayers. We first divide stocks based on whether they have paid a dividend over the previous twentyfour months. We then compute PV St separately within the set of dividend-paying and non-dividend
paying firms. The dividend-adjusted PV St is just the average across the two. Row (15) indicates
that the explanatory power of PV St for the real rate is robust to controlling for dividends in this
fashion.
Finally, our PV St measure might be simply capturing industries that are particularly exposed
to interest rate changes like finance. To alleviate this concern, we construct an industry-adjusted
version of PV St . Within each of the Fama-French 48 industries, we compute the book-to-market
spread between low- and high-volatility stocks. The industry-adjusted PV St is then the average
of these spreads across all of the industry. Row (16) shows that this industry-adjusted spread still
possesses significant explanatory power for the real rate.
15

The upshot of these robustness tests is that the sorting stocks on volatility is the key to our
construction of PV St . Sorting on other characteristics does not perform nearly as well in terms
of informational content about the real rate. This is a key reason we view PV St as measuring the
economy’s risk appetite.

3.3

Unpacking the Mechanism

In this subsection, we provide additional empirical evidence suggesting that PV St captures the
economy’s risk appetite using several types of evidence, including forecasting regressions, data on
asset classes other than stocks, direct measures of the quantity of risk, and mutual fund flows.
3.3.1

Returns on Volatility-Sorted Portfolios and the Real Rate

Standard present value logic (Campbell and Shiller (1988); Vuolteenaho (2002)) implies that variation in PV St is driven by either changes in the future returns of a portfolio that is long low-volatility
stocks and short high-volatility stocks (i.e., the portfolio underlying PV St ) or the future cash flow
growth of this portfolio. If our interpretation of PV St as a measure of risk appetite is correct, its
variation should largely be driven by returns, as opposed to cash flow growth. When risk appetite
is low, investors should demand high compensation for owning volatile stocks. To explore what
drives variation in PV St , we begin by forecasting the return on the volatility-sorted portfolio with
either PV St or the real rate. Formally, we run:
Rt→t+k = a + b × Xt + ξt+k ,

(4)

where Xt is either PV St or the real rate. Table 5 contains the results of this exercise.
In Column (1) of Table 5, we set k = 1 and forecast one-quarter ahead returns, computing
standard errors using Newey and West (1987) with five lags. PV St has strong forecasting power
for returns on the long-short portfolio. A one-standard deviation increase in PV St is associated with
a 5.3 percentage point increase in returns on the long-short portfolio. To put this in perspective,
the quarterly standard deviation of the long-short portfolio is 15%. Thus, it appears that variation
in PV St largely reflects variation in expected returns, consistent with much of the empirical asset
pricing literature (e.g., Cochrane (2011)).
16

Column (2) makes the connection between the real rate and time-varying expected returns on
the volatility-sorted portfolio directly. It shows that the real rate also strongly forecasts returns on
the long-short portfolio. When the real rate is high, low-volatility stocks tend to do well relative
to high-volatility stocks going forward. In contrast, a low real rate means low risk appetite, with
investors requiring a premium to hold high-volatility stocks, as evidenced by the fact that these
stocks tend to do relatively well in the future. In economic terms, the real rate forecasts returns on
the long-short portfolio nearly as well as PV St . A one-standard deviation increase in the real rate is
associated with a 3.1 percentage point increase in returns on the long-short portfolio. As we discuss
in further detail below, this implies that the correlation between the real rate and PV St documented
in Section 3.1 is largely driven by changes in expected returns, not changes in expected cash flow
growth.
Columns (3) and (4) repeat these exercises, setting k = 4 and forecast four-quarter returns. We
use Hodrick (1992) standard errors to be maximally conservative in dealing with overlapping returns. The magnitude of the forecasting power of the real rate is again comparable to the forecasting
power of PV St . The forecasting R2 of 0.26 is large. For comparison, the aggregate price-dividend
ratio forecasts aggregate annual stock returns with an R2 of 0.15 (Cochrane (2009)). Return predictability is also large relative to average excess return on low-minus-high volatility portfolios.
While on average low-volatility stocks have outperformed high-volatility stocks by 2.71% over
our sample, a value of PV St one standard deviation below its average predicts an annual underperformance of low-volatility stocks relative to high volatility stocks of -8.63%.
In the remaining columns of Table 5, we show that neither the real rate nor PV St have much
forecasting power for the aggregate market excess return. Again, this highlights the importance of
our focus on volatility sorts as a proxy for the strength of the economy’s risk appetite.
3.3.2

Covariance Decomposition

The preceding forecasting regressions allow us to quantitatively decompose the source of covariation between the real rate and PV St . In Section A.3 of the Appendix, we use the present value
decomposition in Vuolteenaho (2002) to show that the covariance between PV St and the real rate

17

can be approximately decomposed as follows:
Cov (Real Ratet , PV St ) ≈ (1 − ρφ )−1 × [Cov (Real Ratet , Rett+1 )
−Cov (Real Ratet , ROEt+1 ) +Cov (Real Ratet , ξt+1 )] .

(5)

Here, ρ is a log-linearization constant, φ is the persistence of PV St , Rett+1 is the return on the
volatility-sorted portfolio, ROEt+1 is the return on equity of the same portfolio. We follow Vuolteenaho
(2002) in setting ρ = 0.969. The parameter φ = 0.88 is estimated using a simple AR(1) regression.
ξt+1 is an error term that is comprised mainly of future innovations to PV St , but also collects the
usual approximation errors that arise from these types of present value decompositions.
To operationalize Eq. (5) in the data we must estimate each of the terms on the right hand side.
The first covariance term on the right hand side can be inferred by forecasting future returns on
the volatility-sorted portfolio with the real rate, as we did in Table 5. Similarly, the second term
can be estimated by forecasting ROEt+1 on the volatility-sorted portfolio with the real rate. In
the Appendix, we directly show that neither PV St nor the real rate forecast ROE for low- versus
high-volatility stocks.8
Combining these estimates, we find that nearly 90% of the comovement between the real rate
and PV St arises because the real rate forecasts future returns to volatility-sorted stocks, consistent
with our interpretation of PV St as a measure of risk appetite. Since most of the variation in PV St
is driven by changing expected returns, most of its covariation with the real rate must be driven by
covariation between the real rate and expected returns. This fact corroborates our argument that the
covariance between the real rate and PV St is due to time-varying risk appetite, not time-varying
growth expectations. If the covariance were driven by growth, high expected aggregate growth
would increase the real rate, reflecting the desire of investors to borrow to smooth intertemporally,
8 Furthermore, we can show that this is not simply a product of sampling error in the regression. Following
Cochrane (2007)’s logic, the Vuolteenaho (2002) decomposition of returns implies that

β

= 1 − ρφ + βROE ,

where β is the coefficient from a regression of future returns on log book-to-market and βROE is the coefficient from a
regression of future log ROE on log book-to-market. Our point estimates are β = 0.14 and φ = 0.88, implying a point
estimate of βROE = β − (1 − ρφ ) = −0.01. Thus, both direct evidence from cash flow forecasting regressions and
indirect evidence from return forecasting regressions show that movements in PV St reflect changes in future returns,
not future cash flows.

18

and simultaneously increase PV St , reflecting high expected cash flow growth for volatile stocks.
In this case, high real rates would forecast high ROE for volatile stocks, contrary to what we find
in the data.
3.3.3

Other Asset Classes

Our evidence thus far has focused on the relationship between the price of highly volatile stocks
and real interest rates, which is driven by changes in the compensation investors demand to hold
volatile stocks. But if PV St is indeed a broad measure of risk appetite, the logic of our approach
should hold in other asset classes as well. Risk appetite should be revealed by common movements
in the pricing of volatile securities relative to less volatile securities. This implies that both PV St
and the real rate should forecast returns on volatility-sorted portfolios in other asset classes.
We explore these predictions in Table 6. Specifically, we use test asset portfolios from He et al.
(2017), which are drawn from six asset classes: U.S. corporate bonds, sovereign bonds, options,
CDS, commodities, and currencies.9 Within each asset class, we form a portfolio that is long the
lowest-volatility portfolio in the asset class and short the highest-volatility portfolio. Volatility
for each portfolio at time t is measured with a 5-year rolling window of prior monthly returns.
Table 6 contains some basic summary statistics on the volatility-sorted portfolios in each asset
class. Interestingly, the average returns of these long-short portfolios are not consistently positive
across assets, showing that the low volatility premium in U.S. equities (Ang et al. (2006)) is not a
systematic feature of all asset classes.
Table 6 also shows that both PV St and the real interest rate forecast quarterly returns on
volatility-sorted portfolios systematically across asset classes. The top row replicates our results
for U.S. equities from Table 5. The remaining rows show economically and statistically significant
evidence that PV St and the real interest rate similarly forecast long-short returns within three other
asset classes: U.S. corporate bonds, options, and CDS. There is also a positive, marginally significant correlation between PV St and sovereign bond returns, and a positive though insignificant
correlation between PV St and commodity returns. We obtain similar conclusions if we forecast
annual returns.
9 For

US stocks, He et al. (2017) use the Fama-French 25 portfolios. We use our own volatility-sorted portfolios
for consistency and because this induces a bigger spread in volatility. We obtain qualitatively similar results with the
Fama-French 25.

19

3.3.4

Prices versus Quantities of Risk

The analysis above reveals that movements in PV St , and comovement between PV St and the real
rate, are driven by variation in the expected return to the low-minus-high volatility stock portfolio.
What drives this movement in expected returns? Movements in expected returns must derive from
changes in either investor aversion to volatility or changes in the quantity of volatility. If the
quantity of the risk is the main driver, then the explanatory power of PV St for the real rate should
be subsumed by proxies for the quantity of risk.
In Table 7, we show that the relation between the real rate and PV St is not subsumed by contemporaneous volatility. Specifically, we run the regression in Eq. (2) with measures of contemporaneous realized volatility on the right-hand side. In particular, we include the realized return volatility
on our low-minus-high volatility portfolio in quarter t, computed with daily data. To proxy for
macroeconomic volatility, we include the volatility of TFP growth implied from a GARCH model,
as in Bloom, Floetotto, Jaimovich, Saporta, and Terry (2014).10 In addition, we include the realized within-quarter volatility of the aggregate market and the Fama and French (1993) factors,
computed using daily data, and the common factor in idiosyncratic volatility variable of Herskovic
et al. (2016).
The results are presented in Table 7. Column (1) finds no relationship between the real rate and
the volatility on our low-minus-high volatility portfolio, so the baseline relation between the real
rate and PV St does not appear to be driven by changes in the volatility of our portfolios. Column
(2) shows that there is some evidence that the real rate is related to volatility of the aggregate
market and volatility of the SMB portfolio. However, the five volatility measures in column (2)
jointly achieve only an R2 of 0.15, while the R2 rises to 0.60 when we include PV St in column (3).
In columns (4) to (6), we obtain similar results when running the analysis in first differences. Either
way, the only variable robustly correlated with the real rate is PV St , whereas the volatility variables
have a small impact.11 In the Appendix, we also show that the quantity of risk cannot be forecasted
with either the real rate or PV St and that the quantity of risk does not forecast excess returns on
the long-short portfolio of volatility sorted stocks. These additional findings are again consistent
10 See

Table A.1 of the Appendix for further discussion of the estimation of TFP volatility.
results are in contrast to Hartzmark (2016), who argues that changes in expected macroeconomic volatility
are an important driver of real interest rates. We attribute this difference to the fact that Hartzmark’s sample includes
the Great Depression, while ours does not. See Section A.5 of the Appendix for more detail.
11 These

20

with our results being mostly driven by time variation in investor aversion to volatility. Overall,
our results indicate that the strong relation between the real rate and the pricing of volatile stocks
cannot be explained by variation in volatility alone, or at least volatility that is easily observable in
the data. By deduction then, PV St appears driven by time-varying aversion to risk, consistent with
our interpretation that PV St measures the economy’s risk appetite.
3.3.5

Evidence from Mutual Fund Flows

So far, we have inferred investor preferences from asset prices, which have the advantage of aggregating over a broad range of investors, including households, institutions, firms, and international
investors. In this section, we provide evidence that a specific but important class of investors,
namely mutual funds investors, behaves consistently with the evidence from prices. If real rate
variation indeed reflects time variation in risk appetite, we expect investors to leave high-volatility
mutual funds when the real rate is low. Specifically, a decrease in risk appetite should lead to
outflows from high-volatility mutual funds, an increase in the demand for bonds, and a drop in the
real rate. Mutual fund flows are also useful because they allow us to separately verify our baseline
results in a completely different data set.
Our sample is the CRSP mutual fund data base, from which we have monthly return data
from 1973q2 through 2015q3. We first need to determine whether some mutual funds are more
exposed to high-volatility stocks than others. We use two simple measures. First, we estimate the
return beta of each fund with respect to the high-volatility portfolio. Second, we simply calculate
the volatility of the fund’s returns. We use the full sample of monthly return data available for
each fund to minimize measurement error. We then compute quarterly fund flows for each fund,
winsorizing at the 5th and 95th percentiles, and restrict our data set to fund-quarter observations
where the fund has total net assets of over $100 million to ensure that our results are not driven by
small funds.12
Panel A of Table 8 contains summary statistics for our sample of mutual funds. The average
fund appears in our sample for 31 quarters and has around $750 million in assets under management. We find substantial heterogeneity in mutual funds’ exposure to volatile stocks, regardless
of how we measure exposure. The average fund has an annualized return volatility of about 12%,
12 We

obtain similar results if we use the full sample.

21

though this ranges from 4.6% to 17.3% when moving from the 25th to 75th percentile of fund
volatility. Similarly, the beta of fund returns with respect to the high-volatility portfolio is 0.30 for
the average fund, with a cross-sectional standard deviation of 0.24. This cross-sectional dispersion
in volatility exposure allows us to study how movements in risk appetite differentially impacts our
sample of mutual funds.
In Panel B of Table 8, we explore the relationship between fund flows, the real rate, and fund
volatility. Specifically we run
Flows f ,t = α f + θ1 Real Ratet + θ2 Real Ratet ×VolExp f + ε f ,t ,
where VolExp f is a measure of the fund’s exposure to high-volatility stocks. In columns (1)-(3)
VolExp f is the beta of the fund’s returns with respect to the high-volatility portfolio. In columns
(4)-(6), it is the volatility σ f of the fund’s returns. For all regressions, we use Driscoll-Kraay
standard errors, clustered by fund and time with five lags.13
Panel B of Table 8 shows that mutual fund flows indeed tell the same story as our baseline
results. The magnitudes are economically meaningful. In column (1), a one percentage point drop
in the real rate is associated with a 0.9 percentage point outflow for a fund with zero exposure to
the high-volatility portfolio. A one-standard deviation increase in the fund’s volatility exposure
increases the impact of the real rate by over 50%: a one percentage point drop in the real rate is
now associated with a 1.4 percentage point outflow.14 Column (2) shows the results are robust to
including time fixed effects. Column (3) shows that they are robust to controlling for the fund’s
contemporaneous and lagged performance, so we are not simply picking up a performance-flow relationship. Similarly, Columns (4) through (6) show that mutual funds with higher overall volatility
tend to experience outflows when the real rate is low.
Overall, the results in this section show that investor behavior, as measured by mutual fund
flows, is consistent with our main results and support the interpretation that PV St is a good measure
of risk appetite. To be clear, we are not claiming that flows out of high-volatility equity mutual
funds are solely responsible for the contemporaneous fall in real rates. These results simply provide
13 We

have also tried double clustered errors by fund and time and are reporting the more conservative standard
errors.
14 Because we include fund fixed effects, the base effect of the fund’s volatility is absorbed.

22

a glimpse into the behavior of investors that we think is representative of the broader economy.
Indeed, the fact that the real rate forecasts returns on the low-minus-high volatility trade in other
asset classes suggests that investors in those asset classes likely behave similarly.

3.4

Other Measures of Financial Conditions

The evidence we have provided suggests that PV St is a good measure of risk appetite. One may
be concerned, however, that other measures of financial market conditions have similar properties
to PV St and thus are equally good measures of risk appetite. In this section, we examine the
properties other measures, including the BAA minus 10-year Treasury credit spread, the Gilchrist
and Zakrajšek (2012) credit spread, the Greenwood and Hanson (2013) measure of credit market
sentiment, the Baker and Wurgler (2006) measure of equity market sentiment, the Baker et al.
(2016) economic policy uncertainty index, and the Kelly and Pruitt (2013) optimal forecast of
aggregate equity market returns.15
The first set of columns in Table 9 show that PV St is correlated with many of these measures,
though the R2 s indicate that the magnitudes are generally not very large. PV St is most strongly
correlated with the Gilchrist and Zakrajšek (2012) credit spread and the Baker and Wurgler (2006)
measure of equity market sentiment. Interestingly, while the Greenwood and Hanson (2013) measure of credit market sentiment is negatively correlated with the Baker and Wurgler (2006) measure
of equity market sentiment, PV St is positively correlated with both. This suggests that our measure
of risk appetite induces common variation in sentiment across debt and equity markets.
The second set of columns in Table 9 runs univariate regressions of the real rate on these
alternative measures. Recall from Table 2 that PV St explains 41% of real rate variation on its own.
Thus, none of these measures match the ability of PV St to explain real rate variation, though the
Baker and Wurgler (2006) equity sentiment measure and the Baker et al. (2016) policy uncertainty
index have fairly high explanatory power. Importantly, the third set of columns show that the
relationship between PV St and the real interest rate remains unchanged when controlling for these
alternative measures. These results indicate that PV St contains information for the real rate that is
distinct from existing measures of financial conditions and market sentiment.
In the Appendix, we provide further evidence of the uniqueness of PV St from return forecasting
15 See

the Appendix for details about how we construct the the Kelly and Pruitt (2013) optimal forecast.

23

exercises. Specifically, we show that, in contrast to PV St , none of the alternative measures of financial conditions we examine here can forecast returns on volatility-sorted portfolios across asset
classes. In other words, as these measures of financial conditions move around, the compensation
investors demand for bearing volatility does not change.16

3.5

Macroeconomic Implications

Finally, we turn to the macroeconomic implications of time variation in risk appetite. This section
provides suggestive evidence that our new stock-market based measure of risk appetite is indeed
linked to fundamental elements of the macroeconomy.
3.5.1

Ruling out Reverse Causality

To start, we first rule out the alternative explanation that changes in PV St are caused by changes in
monetary policy, rather than our interpretation that risk appetite drives the real rate. We previously
provided evidence against this reverse causality story in Section 3.2 by controlling for a range of
additional firm characteristics. In this section, we provide further evidence, building on the literature on monetary policy shocks. This additional evidence is useful for interpreting the responses of
investment, unemployment, and output to PV St , because they show that PV St innovations reflect
risk appetite shocks and not monetary policy surprises.
The identification assumption shared across the monetary policy shocks literature is that within
a narrow window around the Federal Reserve’s announcements of monetary policy decisions, no
other information affects the federal funds rate. Individual measures of monetary policy shocks
differ in the details of their construction: Romer and Romer (2004) read transcripts of Fed meetings; Bernanke and Kuttner (2005) and Gorodnichenko and Weber (2016) use price innovations in
the federal funds rate futures market in a narrow window around monetary policy announcements;
and Nakamura and Steinsson (2018) use changes in a broader set of interest rates around monetary
policy announcements. Rather than tying ourselves to a particular measure, we show results for a
range of measures.
Table 10 provides evidence against the reverse causality story. We regress returns on the low16 None of the measures, including PV S , have the ability to forecast aggregate asset class returns across a variety of
t
asset classes.

24

minus-high volatility portfolio onto monetary policy shocks at both quarterly and daily frequencies. If reverse causality was responsible for our baseline result, we should see that high-volatility
stocks increase following a positive shock to interest rates. Since the independent variable is the
low-minus-high volatility return, reverse causality should therefore show up as negative coefficients in Table 10. In the first set of columns, we find that the coefficients are always statistically
insignificant with inconsistent signs. To ensure that policy changes outside of regularly scheduled
meetings do not confound our analysis, we exclude them for the second set of columns and find
similar results.17 In the third set of columns, we narrow the window and focus on daily data. While
the quarterly results are useful because they match the rest of our analysis, daily returns further alleviate concerns of endogeneity for the monetary policy shock measures. Using daily returns, we
find a positive correlation that is borderline statistically significant for some specifications. However, this is the opposite of what we would expect if there was reverse causality. Instead, a positive
correlation is consistent with the Fed cutting interest rates and stabilizing high-volatility stocks
in times of market turmoil. This interpretation is also consistent with the final set of columns,
where the coefficients are small and statistically insignificant using shocks on regularly scheduled
meeting dates only.18
The collective evidence from this exercise makes us confident that risk appetite drives the real
rate and not vice versa. We will use this identification assumption in the next section when we
estimate how the macroeconomy responds to risk appetite shocks.
3.5.2

Evidence from Local Projections

We next show in reduced form that when risk appetite is strong, as measured by PV St , an economic
boom follows. We estimate the impulse responses of macroeconomic variables to a shock to PV St
17 Anecdotally, such surprise policy changes are often driven by financial market conditions and could thus confound

our analysis. Moreover, on intermeeting dates the aggregate stock market does not follow its usual relation with
monetary policy shocks, suggesting that the cross-section of stock returns is also likely to be erratic (Gorodnichenko
and Weber, 2016). In restricting the analysis to regularly scheduled meetings, we exclude quarters after 1993Q4
where the Federal Reserve made policy changes outside of scheduled meetings. Prior to 1994, policy changes were
not announced after meetings so the distinction between scheduled and unscheduled meetings is not material.
18 Consistent with the idea that surprise policy changes are often driven by financial market conditions, the positive
correlation between policy shocks and the returns on the volatility-sorted portfolio when we examine all shocks appears
to be entirely driven by surprise changes in 2001. In that year, the Fed cut rates aggressively outside of regularly
scheduled meetings in the aftermath of the technology bubble.

25

using Jorda (2005) local projections. Specifically, we run regressions of the form:
yt+h = a + bhPV S × PV St + bhRR × RealRatet + bhy × yt + εt+h
where h is the forecast horizon.
Table 11 reports the results. In the first row, we forecast the ratio of private nonresidential investment to capital for horizons of h = 1 and h = 4 quarters. We find strong effects. A one-standard
deviation increase in PV St is associated with an investment-capital ratio that is 0.23 percentage
points higher at a one-quarter horizon and 0.36 percentage points higher at a four-quarter horizon.
The standard deviation of the investment-capital ratio is 1.16%. In the second row of Table 11, we
report results for the output gap. Here, a one-standard deviation increase in PV St is associated with
an output gap that is 0.30 percentage points more positive after one quarter, and 0.58 percentage
points higher after four quarters. In the third row of the table, we report results for the change in
the unemployment rate. A one-standard deviation increase in PV St is associated with a 0.13 percentage point fall in the unemployment rate after one quarter, and a 0.41 percentage point decline
after four quarters.
In Figure 4 we report the full impulse responses for these three macroeconomic variables to a
one-standard deviation shock to PV St for horizons of h = 1, ..., 12 quarters. The figure shows that
the effect of a shock to PV St on private investment is quite persistent, peaking around six quarters
and then slowly reverting over the next six quarters. In contrast, the effects on the output gap and
unemployment are somewhat less persistent, peaking after five quarters and then dissipating.
Taken together, our results suggest that risk appetite shocks act as macroeconomic demand
shocks and that the Federal Reserve considers these shocks sufficiently important to adjust interest
rates. Moreover, the positive macroeconomic responses are consistent with the Federal Reserve not
completely offsetting risk appetite shocks in interest rates and instead allowing for some quantity
responses. The intuition for this interpretation can be seen by writing the Euler equation in the
style of a New Keynesian model (Clarida et al., 1999; Woodford, 2003):
xt = Et xt+1 − ψ(rt − rtn ).

(6)

Here, xt is the output gap between current output and its natural rate, ψ is the elasticity of in26

tertemporal substitution, rt is the actual real rate, and rtn is the natural real rate: the interest rate
consistent with stable inflation and output at its natural rate.19 The important term in (6) is the last
one, showing that macroeconomic activity today depends negatively on the gap between the real
rate and the natural rate. While the natural rate rtn may reflect a range of factors, demand shocks
are an important component (Woodford (2003, p. 250)). A shock to PV St acts like a demand shock
that increases rtn , leading output to temporarily rise above its natural level unless the central bank
raises interest rates to completely offset the shock. In contrast, a typical monetary policy shock, or
a positive shock to rt , has the standard contractionary effect on output.
At first glance, one might be concerned that Figure 4 suggests that PV St reflects variation in
expected growth, not risk appetite. For instance, more volatile stocks could have cash flows that
are more sensitive to aggregate growth. As discussed above, we think this alternative explanation
is unlikely for two reasons. First, we find no evidence that PV St forecasts the cash flows of volatile
stocks, while it strongly forecasts their expected returns. Thus, for aggregate growth expectations
to explain our results, they would have to affect the discount rate associated with volatile stocks
without impacting the cash flows of those stocks. It is difficult to imagine a reasonable model of
asset markets and the macroeconomy with these features. Second, if aggregate growth expectations
were important, one would expect that aggregate stock market valuations as well as durationsorted stock valuations would explain more variation in the real rate. However, in the data, neither
can match the explanatory power of PV St for the real rate. We therefore believe that the most
natural interpretation of our results is that the risk appetite, as measured by PV St , is a fundamental
determinant of the natural real rate, and, in turn, shocks to PV St act as traditional demand or
discount rate shocks in a New Keynesian model.
3.5.3

Evidence from VARs

In this section, we complement our results in Table 11 and Figure 4 with standard vector autoregression (VAR) evidence. This evidence shows that monetary policy shocks and shocks to PV St
have opposite effects on economic activity, as predicted by the Euler equation (6).
We estimate a VAR that is as simple and transparent as possible, while following a common set
19 Here, r n
t

does not necessarily reflect the economy’s long-run equilibrium, but instead represents the hypothetical
interest rate that would obtain in a world without sticky product prices. For a central bank seeking price stability, it is
optimal to adjust interest rates one-for-one to shocks to rtn (Woodford, 2003, p. 250).

27

of recursiveness assumptions, similar to Sims (1980), Bernanke and Mihov (1998) and Gilchrist
and Zakrajšek (2012). We use the following strategy for measuring dynamic effects:
k

Yt =

Pt =

k

∑ BiYt−i + ∑ CiPt−i + Ayvy,t

i=1

i=1

k

k



∑ DiYt−i + ∑ GiPt−i + 

i=0

i=0

vPV S,t
vMP,t

(7)

.

(8)

Here, Yt is a vector of quarterly non-policy variables, consisting of unemployment, the investmentto-capital ratio, and detrended inflation. Pt is a vector of policy variables consisting of PV St and
the detrended real rate. Eq. (7) describes a set of structural relationships in the economy, where
macroeconomic variables depend on lagged values of macroeconomic and policy variables. Eq.
(8) describes the stance of monetary policy conditional on contemporaneous macroeconomic variables. Our baseline estimation uses k = 1 lag.
We estimate the structural policy shocks under the restriction that vPV S,t does not respond to
vMP,t contemporaneously, but vMP,t may respond to vPV S,t , consistent with the Federal Reserve
actively monitoring macroeconomic and financial variables. It is plausible that investors’ risk
preferences shift gradually over time and do not jump in response to monetary policy actions.
Indeed, this identification restriction is supported by our analysis of monetary policy shocks in
Table 10.20 We estimate the model using a two-step efficient GMM procedure, as in Bernanke and
Mihov (1998). The first step is an equation-by-equation OLS estimation of the VAR coefficients.
The second step consists of matching the second moments to the covariance matrix of the policy
block VAR residuals. We use two-step GMM using a Bartlett kernel with two lags and the initial
weighting matrix equal to the identity. See the Appendix for estimation details.
Both Wald and Hansen J-tests provide clear evidence that the real rate reacts contemporaneously to PV St , consistent with the Federal Reserve reacting to risk appetite shocks. For the reaction
coefficient vMP,t onto vPV S,t , we obtain a point estimate of 2.33 with a t-statistic of 3.71. The over20 This

identification restriction is not crucial to our findings. In the Appendix, we show that our conclusions are
unchanged if instead we make the opposite identification assumption that PV St responds to the real rate contemporaneously, but the real rate reacts to risk appetite demand with a lag. This second identification assumption is different
from saying that the Fed does not pay attention to the stock market. It merely requires that the Fed historically did not
react instantaneously to the cross-sectional valuation spread newly documented in this paper. Impulse responses are
also robust to excluding the post-crisis period and to including additional lags.

28

identifying restriction that the real rate does not react contemporaneously to vPV S is rejected by a
Hansen J-test at any conventional significance level with a p-value of 0.0008.
As a baseline, the left panel of Figure 5 shows responses to an unexpected tightening by the
Federal Reserve. Consistent with the long literature on monetary policy shocks, summarized in
Christiano et al. (1999), unemployment increases and and inflation decreases after a one-standarddeviation shock to the real interest rate. The effect on the investment-to-capital ratio is not statistically different from zero. Interestingly, PV St does not respond to monetary policy shocks with
tight 95% confidence intervals, consistent with our interpretation that risk appetite shocks drive the
real rate, and not vice versa.
The right panel of Figure 5 shows that a positive PV St shock significantly decreases unemployment and increases real investment, despite being associated with a similar increase in the real rate
as the MP shock. The difference in responses across the left and right panels in Figure 5 is exactly
what the Euler equation would suggest if an increase in PV St acts as a demand shock increasing
the natural real rate.
Risk appetite shocks are both statistically significant and quantitatively important for unemployment and investment, as shown by forecast error variance decompositions. Ten quarters after
the shock, PV St shocks explain 12% of variation in the unemployment rate and 21% of the variation in investment-to-capital ratios. It is intuitive that risk appetite shocks should matter most for
real investment, since it is the interface between financial market attitudes towards risk and the real
economy. For comparison, the monetary policy shocks explain 24% of variation in unemployment
and only 2.5% of variation in the investment-to-capital ratio.

4

Discussion

We have shown that real interest rates are strongly correlated with PV St , with the correlation driven
by the fact that real rates covary with future returns on volatile stocks – real rates are low when
investors demand more compensation for holding volatile stocks. This relationship appears to be
driven by changes in investor aversion to risk, rather than changes in the quantity of risk. Moreover,
we find that movements in PV St impact future macroeconomic outcomes, with increases in PV St
resulting in a boom in investment and output.
29

Taken together, these facts support the view that PV St measures the risk appetite of the economy. When risk appetite is low, investors want to hold riskless bonds, driving down real rates. At
the same time, they will be reluctant to hold high-volatility assets, driving their valuations down
and their future returns up, without changing the quantity of risk much. This reluctance to hold
risky assets in turn drives down real investment. Conversely, when risk appetite is high, investors
will have less demand for bonds and more demand for volatile assets, driving up real rates, PV St ,
and real investment. This simple intuition captures most of our results.
As mentioned before, the relationship between the one-year real rate and PV St must mechanically be intermediated by the central bank, which sets short term interest rates. Thus, our results
imply that the Fed treats shocks to risk appetite like an important type of demand or discount rate
shock in a standard New Keynesian framework. Of course, our results do not imply that the Federal Reserve tracks PV St itself, but rather that investors’ attitudes towards volatile stocks reflect
the same component of risk appetite that the Fed reacts to.
Our analysis in Section 3.4 indicates that PV St has distinct explanatory power for the real rate
compared to other measures of financial market activity and sentiment. This likely stems from two
factors. First, as shown in Section 3.2, our focus on volatility is key. The set of stocks that are
relatively volatile captures whatever risks markets are worried about at each point in time, even
if the nature of these risks varies over time (e.g., financial stability at some times, trade wars at
others). The price of volatile stocks then captures how worried markets are about these risks.
The second factor likely to drive the distinctive explanatory power of PV St is that it is based
on a long-short portfolio. This means factors affecting a single asset class will be netted out of the
measure. For instance, general optimism about firm cash flows affects aggregate equity valuations
and measures of equity market sentiment, but may not affect credit markets and credit market
sentiment much. The construction of PV St nets out such factors and reveals a broad measure of
risk appetite that operates across asset classes, as we showed in Section 3.3.3. Consistent with this
interpretation, PV St is positively correlated with both the Greenwood and Hanson (2013) measure
of credit market sentiment and the Baker and Wurgler (2006) measure of equity market sentiment,
despite the fact that the two sentiment measures are themselves negatively correlated.
Our measure of risk appetite relies on at least some investors having a particular notion of
risk: total volatility. This differs from the notion of risk in standard rational models with perfect
30

risk sharing, in which investors care about systematic risk. In such models, investors’ willingness
to hold risky assets is best summarized by the price of the aggregate claim or the risk premium
required to hold market beta, as opposed to their willingness to hold volatile securities.
Our empirical results do not shed light on the microfoundations for why some investors care
about total volatility, but there are several possibilities. Behavioral explanations include nonstandard preferences (Barberis and Xiong (2012)), narrow framing (Tversky and Kahneman (1981)),
or failures to diversify due to lack of sophistication (Benartzi (2001)). Alternatively, institutional
frictions like specialization (Shleifer and Vishny (1997); Gromb and Vayanos (2010)) or segmentation (Merton (1987)) may prevent investors from fully diversifying, rendering total volatility
relevant to their portfolio problem. For instance, financial intermediaries such as mutual funds
and broker-dealers take concentrated positions (Kacperczyk et al. (2005); Veldkamp (2006); Cremers and Petajisto (2009); Agarwal et al. (2013)), and recent research indicates that they appear
important for pricing a wide range of assets (He and Krishnamurthy (2013); Adrian et al. (2014);
He et al. (2017)). In the Appendix, we present a stylized model along these lines to illustrate
how one might generate our empirical facts. In the model, segmentation is the key reason that
total volatility, not just systematic risk, is priced into valuations. This exercise is also useful because it clearly demonstrates why models with perfect risk sharing will have trouble matching our
empirical findings.21
Regardless of the exact reason some investors care about total volatility, one might wonder why
other sophisticated diversified agents do not arbitrage away the return predictability we document.
For instance, when high-volatility stocks have high valuations relative to low-volatility stocks, sophisticated investors should short high-volatility stocks and go long low-volatility stocks, making
a positive risk-adjusted return. However, if they face standard limits to arbitrage (De Long et al.
(1990); Shleifer and Vishny (1997)), these investors will not completely eliminate return differ21 In

the model, investors have time-varying risk aversion and are borrowing constrained, so bonds are priced by the
investors with the highest bond valuations – precisely the investors with low risk appetite. Consequently, an increase
in the risk appetite of these investors simultaneously increases the valuations of high volatility stocks, reduces their
risk premia, and increases the real rate. It is worth noting that the opposite is true in the model of Herskovic et al.
(2016), despite the fact the main friction in their model is also a form of market incompleteness. In their model, a
positive shock to idiosyncratic volatility drives down the risk-free rate but drives up the price of high-volatility stocks
relative to low-volatility stocks due to a convexity effect. Empirically, we also find little evidence that their common
idiosyncratic volatility factor is correlated with the real rate. Rationalizing our findings therefore requires a different
pricing mechanism, which in our model is achieved with market segmentation and time-varying preferences.

31

entials between high-volatility and low-volatility stocks. Taking concentrated positions in stocks
with high idiosyncratic volatility would expose sophisticated investors to significant interim noise
trader risk while they wait for prices to correct. Moreover, our results show that their trading strategy would be exposed to economy-wide factors such as risk attitudes and interest rates, and thus
would involve bearing fundamental risk in addition to noise trader risk.

5

Conclusion

This paper proposes a new measure of macroeconomic risk appetite, PV St , based on the idea
that investors are more averse to holding volatile assets when their risk appetite is low. PV St has
several characteristics that strongly support our interpretation that it measures the economy’s risk
appetite. First, it is positively correlated with real interest rates: when risk appetite is low, investors
favor riskless bonds, driving down real rates. Second, variation in PV St is driven by variation in
the compensation investors demand for holding volatile assets, which appears to comove across a
variety of asset classes. Third, PV St is not strongly correlated with measures of the quantity of
risk. Fourth, when risk appetite is low, investors exit high-volatility mutual funds. Finally, we
show that risk appetite affects economic performance: when PV St is high, a boom in investment
and output follows.
Our results shed new light on connections between financial markets and the macroeconomy.
We show that a broad concept of risk appetite — one that is revealed by common movements in
the relative pricing of low- versus high-volatility securities in many asset classes — plays a central
role in determining economic outcomes and real interest rates. Our findings suggest that future
work seeking to understand the roots of fluctuations in risk appetite is likely to be fruitful.

32

References
Adrian, T., E. Etula, and T. Muir (2014). Financial intermediaries and the cross-section of asset
returns. Journal of Finance 69, 2557–2596.
Agarwal, V., W. Jiang, Y. Tang, and B. Yang (2013). Uncovering hedge fund skill from the portfolio
holdings they hide. Journal of Finance 68(2), 739–783.
Ang, A., R. J. Hodrick, Y. Xing, and X. Zhang (2006). The cross-section of volatility and expected
returns. Journal of Finance 61(1), 259–299.
Ang, A., R. J. Hodrick, Y. Xing, and X. Zhang (2009). High idiosyncratic volatility and low
returns: International and further US evidence. Journal of Financial Economics 91(1), 1–23.
Baker, M. and J. Wurgler (2006). Investor sentiment and the cross-section of stock returns. Journal
of Finance 61(4), 1645–1680.
Baker, M. and J. Wurgler (2007). Investor sentiment in the stock returns. Journal of Economic
Perspectives 21(2), 129–151.
Baker, M. and J. Wurgler (2012). Comovement and predictability relationships between bonds and
the cross-section of stocks. Review of Asset Pricing Studies 2(1), 57–87.
Baker, S. R., N. Bloom, and S. J. Davis (2016). Measuring economic policy uncertainty. Quarterly
Journal of Economics 131(4), 1593–1636.
Bansal, R. and A. Yaron (2004). Risks for the long run: A potential resolution of asset pricing
puzzles. Journal of Finance 59(4), 1481–1509.
Barberis, N. and W. Xiong (2012). Realization utility. Journal of Financial Economics 104, 251–
271.
Benartzi, S. (2001). Excessive extrapolation and the allocation of 401(k) accounts to company
stock. Journal of Finance 56(5), 1747–1764.
Bernanke, B. S. and K. N. Kuttner (2005). What explains the stock market’s reaction to federal
reserve policy? The Journal of finance 60(3), 1221–1257.
Bernanke, B. S. and I. Mihov (1998). Measuring monetary policy. Quarterly Journal of Economics 113(3), 869–902.
Bloom, N. (2009). The impact of uncertainty shocks. Econometrica 77, 623–85.
Bloom, N., M. Floetotto, N. Jaimovich, I. Saporta, and S. Terry (2014). Really uncertain business
cycles. NBER Working paper 18245.
Bordalo, P., N. Gennaioli, and A. Shleifer (2018). Diagnostic expectations and credit cycles.
Journal of Finance 73(1), 199–227.

33

Caballero, R. J. and E. Farhi (2017, Forthcoming). The safety trap. Review of Economic Studies 85(1), 223–274.
Caballero, R. J. and A. Simsek (2017, October). A risk-centric model of demand recessions and
macroprudential policy. Working paper, MIT.
Campbell, J. Y. and J. Ammer (1993). What moves the stock and bond markets? A variance
decomposition for long-term asset returns. Journal of Finance 48(1), 3–37.
Campbell, J. Y. and J. H. Cochrane (1999). By force of habit: A consumption-based explanation
of aggregate stock market behavior. Journal of Political Economy 107(2), 205–251.
Campbell, J. Y. and R. J. Shiller (1988). The dividend-price ratio and expectations of future dividends and discount factors. Review of Financial Studies 1(3), 195–228.
Christiano, L. J., M. Eichenbaum, and C. L. Evans (1999). Monetary policy shocks: What have
we learned and to what end? In J. B. Taylor and M. Woodford (Eds.), Handbook of Macroeconomics, Volume 1, pp. 65–148. Elsevier.
Clarida, R., J. Galí, and M. Gertler (1999). The science of monetary policy: A New Keynesian
perspective. Journal of Economic Literature 37, 1661–1707.
Cochrane, J. H. (2007). The dog that did not bark: A defense of return predictability. Review of
Financial Studies 21(4), 1533–1575.
Cochrane, J. H. (2009). Asset Pricing (Revised Edition). Princeton University Press.
Cochrane, J. H. (2011). Presidential address: Discount rates. Journal of Finance 66(4), 1047–
1108.
Cochrane, J. H. (2016, July). Macro-finance. Working paper, Stanford University.
Cremers, K. and A. Petajisto (2009). How active is your fund manager? A new measure that
predicts performance. Review of Financial Studies 22(9), 3329–3365.
Cúrdia, V., A. Ferrero, G. C. Ng, and A. Tambalotti (2015). Has US monetary policy tracked the
efficient interest rate? Journal of Monetary Economics 70, 72–83.
Davis, J. L., E. F. Fama, and K. R. French (2000). Characteristics, covariances, and average returns:
1929 to 1997. Journal of Finance 55(1), 389–406.
De Long, J. B., A. Shleifer, L. Summers, and R. Waldmann (1990). Noise trader risk in financial
markets. Journal of Political Economy 98(4), 703–738.
Del Negro, M., D. Giannone, M. P. Giannoni, and A. Tambalotti (2017). Safety, liquidity, and the
natural rate of interest. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2017(1), 235–316.
Fama, E. F. and K. R. French (1993). Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and bonds.
Journal of Financial Economics 33(1), 3–56.

34

Fu, F. (2009). Idiosyncratic risk and the cross-section of expected stock returns. Journal of Financial Economics 91(1), 24–37.
Gilchrist, S. and E. Zakrajšek (2012, June). Credit spreads and business cycle fluctuations. American Economic Review 102(4), 1692–1720.
Gorodnichenko, Y. and M. Weber (2016). Are sticky prices costly? evidence from the stock
market. American Economic Review 106(1), 165–99.
Greenwood, R. and S. G. Hanson (2013). Issuer quality and corporate bond returns. Review of
Financial Studies 26(6), 1483–1525.
Gromb, D. and D. Vayanos (2010). Limits of arbitrage. Annual Review of Financial Economics 2(1), 251–275.
Gürkaynak, R. S., B. Sack, and J. H. Wright (2007). The US treasury yield curve: 1961 to the
present. Journal of Monetary Economics 54(8), 2291–2304.
Hall, R. E. (2016, April). Understanding the decline in the safe real interest rate. NBER Working
paper 22196.
Hartzmark, S. M. (2016). Economic uncertainty and interest rates. Review of Asset Pricing Studies 6(2), 179–220.
He, Z., B. Kelly, and A. Manela (2017). Intermediary asset pricing: New evidence from many
asset classes. Journal of Financial Economics 126(1), 1–35.
He, Z. and A. Krishnamurthy (2013). Intermediary asset pricing. American Economic Review 103,
732–770.
Herskovic, B., B. Kelly, H. Lustig, and S. Van Nieuwerburgh (2016). The common factor in
idiosyncratic volatility: Quantitative asset pricing implications. Journal of Financial Economics 119(2), 249–283.
Hou, K. and R. K. Loh (2016). Have we solved the idiosyncratic volatility puzzle? Journal of
Financial Economics 121(1), 167–194.
Johnson, T. C. (2004). Forecast dispersion and the cross section of expected returns. Journal of
Finance 59(5), 1957–1978.
Jorda, O. (2005). Estimation and inference of impulse responses by local projections. American
Economic Review 95(1), 161–182.
Kacperczyk, M., C. Sialm, and L. Zheng (2005). On the industry concentration of actively managed equity mutual funds. Journal of Finance 60(4), 1983–2011.
Kang, J. and C. E. Pflueger (2015). Inflation risk in corporate bonds. Journal of Finance 70(1),
115–162.

35

Kelly, B. and S. Pruitt (2013). Market expectations in the cross-section of present values. Journal
of Finance 68(5), 1721–1756.
Koijen, R. S., H. Lustig, and S. Van Nieuwerburgh (2010). The cross-section and time-series of
stock and bond returns. NBER Working paper 15688.
Krishnamurthy, A. (2002). The bond/old-bond spread. Journal of Financial Economics 66(2),
463–506.
Krishnamurthy, A. and T. Muir (2017, August). How credit cycles across a financial crisis. Working paper, Stanford University.
Krishnamurthy, A. and A. Vissing-Jorgenson (2012). The aggregate demand for treasury debt.
Journal of Political Economy 120(2), 233–267.
Laubach, T. and J. C. Williams (2003). Measuring the natural rate of interest. Review of Economics
and Statistics 85(4), 1063–1070.
Lettau, M. and S. C. Ludvigson (2004, March). Understanding trend and cycle in asset values:
Reevaluating the wealth effect on consumption. American Economic Review 94(1), 276–299.
López-Salido, D., J. C. Stein, and E. Zakrajšek (2017). Credit-market sentiment and the business
cycle. Quarterly Journal of Economics 132(3), 1373–1426.
McKay, A., E. Nakamura, and J. Steinsson (2016). The power of forward guidance revisited.
American Economic Review 106(10), 3133–3158.
Merton, R. C. (1987). A simple model of capital market equilibrium with incomplete information.
Journal of Finance 42(3), 483–510.
Nakamura, E. and J. Steinsson (2018). High frequency identification of monetary non-neutrality:
The information effect. Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming.
Newey, W. K. and K. D. West (1987). A simple, positive semi-definite, heteroskedasticity and
autocorrelation consistent covariance matrix. Econometrica 55(3), 703–708.
Romer, C. D. and D. H. Romer (2004). A new measure of monetary shocks: Derivation and
implications. American Economic Review 94(4), 1055–1084.
Shleifer, A. and R. W. Vishny (1997). The limits of arbitrage. Journal of Finance 52(1), 35–55.
Sims, C. A. (1980). Macroeconomics and reality. Econometrica 48, 1–48.
Stambaugh, R. F., J. Yu, and Y. Yuan (2015). Arbitrage asymmetry and the idiosyncratic volatility
puzzle. Journal of Finance 70(5), 1903–1948.
Taylor, J. B. (1993). Discretion versus policy rules in practice. Carnegie-Rochester Conference
Series on Public Policy 39, 195–214.
Tversky, A. and D. Kahneman (1981). The framing of decisions and the psychology of choice.
Science 211, 453–458.
36

Veldkamp, L. (2006). Information markets and the comovement of asset prices. Review of Economic Studies 73, 823–845.
Vuolteenaho, T. (2002). What drives firm-level stock returns? Journal of Finance 57(1), 233–264.
Weber, M. (2016). Cash flow duration and the term structure of equity returns. Working paper,
University of Chicago.
Woodford, M. (2003). Optimal interest-rate smoothing. Review of Economic Studies 70(4), 861–
886.

37

FIGURES
Figure 1: Book-to-Market Spread Between Low- and High-Volatility Stocks (PVS)

0.5

PVS

0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
1972 1977 1982 1987 1992 1997 2002 2007 2012 2017

Date
Notes: This figure plots the spread in book-to-market ratios between low and high volatility stocks. For all NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ firms
in CRSP, we compute volatility at the end of each quarter using the previous sixty days of daily returns. We then form equal-weighted portfolios
based on the quintiles of volatility. Within each quintile, we compute the average book-to-market (BM) ratio, which we call PV St . The Appendix
contains full details on how we compute BM ratios. The plotted series is the difference in average book-to-market ratios between the low volatility
and high volatility portfolios. Data is quarterly and spans 1970Q2-2016Q2.

38

Figure 2: One-Year Real Rate: Actual and Fitted Value

Detrended One-Year Real Rate (%)

6

Real Rate
Price of Volatile Stocks (Scaled)

4
2
0
2
4

1972 1977 1982 1987 1992 1997 2002 2007 2012 2017

Date
Notes: This figure plots the linearly detrended one-year real rate, as described in Table 1, and the fitted value from a regression of the real rate on the
spread in book-to-market ratios between low and high volatility stocks (PV St ). For all NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ firms in CRSP, we compute
volatility at the end of each quarter using the previous sixty days of daily returns. We then form equal-weighted portfolios based on the quintiles
of volatility. Within each quintile, we compute the average book-to-market (BM) ratio. The Appendix contains full details on how we compute
BM ratios. The one-year real rate is the one-year Treasury bill rate net of one-year survey expectations of the inflation (the GDP deflator) from the
Survey of Professional Forecasters, expressed in percentage terms and linearly detrended. Data is quarterly and spans 1970Q2-2016Q2.

39

Figure 3: Scatter plot of One-Year Real Rate against PVS
Panel A: Full Sample

Detrended One-Year Real Rate (%)

6
4
2
0
2009Q1
2009Q2

2
1974Q4
1975Q1

4

1.5

1981Q3
1982Q2
1984Q3
1980Q1
1982Q1
1984Q2
1985Q1
1981Q2
2000Q11984Q1
1989Q1 2000Q2
1999Q4
2000Q3
1980Q4
1983Q3
1981Q4
1988Q4
1994Q4
1984Q4
2006Q2
1990Q1
2007Q1
1990Q2
1982Q3
2000Q4
1983Q2
1999Q3
2007Q2
1999Q2
2006Q4
1998Q2
2006Q3
1999Q1
1983Q4
2006Q1
1995Q1
1997Q4
1997Q2
1996Q3
1998Q1
1996Q2
1989Q3
1997Q1
1981Q1
1989Q2
1988Q3
1997Q3
1989Q4
2005Q4
1995Q3
1996Q1
1996Q4
1995Q4
1985Q3
1998Q4
2007Q3
1998Q3
1990Q3
1983Q1
1988Q2
1987Q4
1986Q1
1985Q4
1987Q3
1986Q2
1995Q2
2001Q1
1994Q3
1991Q2
1985Q2
1991Q1 1973Q3
2005Q3
1979Q4
1990Q4
1986Q3
1970Q2
1988Q1
1994Q2
1982Q4
2005Q1
1987Q2
2007Q4
2001Q2
2005Q2
1986Q4
1991Q3
1978Q4
1987Q1
1973Q21994Q1
2004Q4
1979Q1
1979Q3
2002Q1
2001Q3
1980Q3
2008Q2
1974Q2
1973Q1
2004Q2
1992Q1
2001Q4
2002Q2
1991Q4
2008Q3
1970Q3
1992Q2
2004Q3
1992Q4
2016Q1
1993Q4
2015Q4
1993Q2
2016Q2
2002Q3
2008Q1
2015Q3
2004Q1
1974Q3
1993Q1
2003Q4
2003Q3
2015Q2
2015Q1
1978Q3
2009Q3
1979Q2
1974Q1
2002Q4
2010Q1
2009Q4
2011Q1
2010Q4
1993Q3
1971Q3
1992Q3
2010Q3
2003Q1
2014Q4
1971Q2
1975Q3
1978Q2
2010Q2
1973Q4
2013Q4
2014Q1
2003Q2
2012Q1
2013Q3
2014Q2
2013Q2
1972Q3
2014Q3
2012Q3
1978Q1
2011Q2
2013Q1
1972Q4
2012Q2
2008Q4
2012Q4
2011Q3
2011Q4
1972Q2
1977Q4
1970Q4
1971Q4
1972Q1
1977Q3
1976Q2
1975Q2
1975Q4
1976Q11977Q1
1976Q3
1971Q1
1980Q2
1977Q2
1976Q4

1.0

0.5

0.0

0.5

PVS
Panel B: Excluding NBER Recessions

Detrended One-Year Real Rate (%)

6
4
2
0
2009Q1
2009Q2

2
1974Q4
1975Q1

4

1.5

1981Q3
1982Q2
1984Q3
1980Q1
1982Q1
1984Q2
1985Q1
1981Q2
2000Q11984Q1
1989Q1 2000Q2
1999Q4
2000Q3
1980Q4
1983Q3
1981Q4
1988Q4
1994Q4
1984Q4
2006Q2
1990Q1
2007Q1
1982Q3
1990Q2
2000Q4
1983Q2
1999Q3
2007Q2
1999Q2
2006Q4
1998Q2
2006Q3
1999Q1
1983Q4
2006Q1
1995Q1
1997Q4
1997Q2
1996Q3
1998Q1
1996Q2
1989Q3
1997Q1
1981Q1
1989Q2
1988Q3
1997Q3
1989Q4
2005Q4
1995Q3
1996Q1
1996Q4
1995Q4
1985Q3
1998Q4
2007Q3
1998Q3
1990Q3
1983Q1
1988Q2
1987Q4
1986Q1
1985Q4
1987Q3
1986Q2
1995Q2
2001Q1
1994Q3
1991Q2
1985Q2
1991Q1 1973Q3
2005Q3
1979Q4
1990Q4
1986Q3
1970Q2
1988Q1
1994Q2
1982Q4
2005Q1
1987Q2
2007Q4
2001Q2
2005Q2
1986Q4
1991Q3
1978Q4
1987Q1
1973Q21994Q1
2004Q4
1979Q1
1979Q3
2002Q1
2001Q3
1980Q3
2008Q2
1974Q2
1973Q1
2004Q2
1992Q1
2001Q4
2002Q2
1991Q4
2008Q3
1970Q3
1992Q2
2004Q3
1992Q4
2016Q1
1993Q4
2015Q4
1993Q2
2016Q2
2002Q3
2008Q1
2015Q3
2004Q1
1974Q3
1993Q1
2003Q4
2003Q3
2015Q2
2015Q1
1978Q3
2009Q3
1979Q2
1974Q1
2002Q4
2010Q1
2009Q4
2011Q1
2010Q4
1993Q3
1971Q3
1992Q3
2010Q3
2003Q1
2014Q4
1971Q2
1975Q3
1978Q2
2010Q2
1973Q4
2013Q4
2014Q1
2003Q2
2012Q1
2013Q3
2014Q2
2013Q2
1972Q3
2014Q3
2012Q3
1978Q1
2011Q2
2013Q1
1972Q4
2012Q2
2008Q4
2012Q4
2011Q3
2011Q4
1972Q2
1977Q4
1970Q4
1971Q4
1972Q1
1977Q3
1976Q2
1975Q2
1975Q4
1976Q11977Q1
1976Q3
1971Q1
1980Q2
1977Q2
1976Q4

1.0

0.5

0.0

0.5

PVS
Notes: This figure plots the detrended one-year real interest rate against the spread in book-to-market ratios between low and high volatility stocks
(PV St ). Panel A shows the full sample, while Panel B excludes NBER recessions. For all NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ firms in CRSP, we compute
volatility at the end of each quarter using the previous sixty days of daily returns. We then form equal-weighted portfolios based on the quintiles
of volatility. Within each quintile, we compute the average book-to-market (BM) ratio. The Appendix contains full details on how we compute
BM ratios. The one-year real rate is the one-year Treasury bill rate net of one-year survey expectations of the inflation (the GDP deflator) from the
Survey of Professional Forecasters, expressed in percentage terms and linearly detrended. Data is quarterly and spans 1970Q2-2016Q2.

40

Output Gap (%)

Investment-to-Capital (%)

Figure 4: Impulse Responses of the Macroeconomy to PVS Shocks (Local Projections)

0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5

Unemployment Rate (%)

1.0

0.5
0.0
0.5
0

2

4

6

8

10

12

Quarters After Risk Appetite Shock
Notes: This figure plots the estimated impulse response (and its associated 95% confidence band) of several macroeconomic variables to a onestandard deviation shock to PV St using local projections. We compute impulse responses using Jordà (2005) local projections of each macroeconomic outcomes onto PVSt . In all cases, we run regressions of the following form: yt+h = a + bhPV S × PV St + bhRR × Real Ratet + bhy × yt + εt+h .
We consider three different macroeconomic outcomes for the y-variable. The first is the investment-to-capital ratio, defined as the level of
real private nonresidential fixed investment (PNFI) divided by the previous year’s current-cost net stock of fixed private nonresidential assets
(K1NTOTL1ES000). The second is the real output gap, defined as the percent deviation of real GDP from real potential output. The third is the
change in the U.S. civilian unemployment rate. When forecasting the investment-capital ratio, yt+h is the level of the investment-capital ratio at
time t + h. For the output gap, yt+h is the level of the output gap at time t + h. Finally, for the unemployment rate, yt+h is the change in the
unemployment rate between t and t + h, and yt is the change between t − 1 and t. All macroeconomic variables come from the St. Louis FRED
database and are expressed in percentage points. PV St is defined as in the main text. The real rate is the one-year Treasury bill rate net of one-year
survey expectations of the inflation (the GDP deflator) from the Survey of Professional Forecasters, expressed in percent and linearly detrended.
For all regressions, we use Newey-West standard errors with five lags. Data is quarterly and spans 1970Q2-2016Q2.

41

Real Rate

PVS

Inflation Investment

Unemp

Figure 5: Impulse Responses to Monetary Policy and PVS Shocks (Traditional VAR)
MP Shock
PVS Shock
0.4
0.2
0
-0.2
0.2
0
-0.2
0.2
0
-0.2
0.2
0
-0.2
1
0.5
0
0

2

4

6

8

10

0

2

4

6

8

10

Notes: This figure plots impulse responses to monetary policy and PVS shocks. Impulse responses to one-standard deviation shocks are estimated
from a five-variable VAR(1) in unemployment, the investment-capital ratio, inflation, PVS, and detrended real rate with one lag using quarterly data
1970Q-2016Q2. Unemployment is the civilian unemployment rate (UNRATE). The investment-capital ratio is computed as private nonresidential
fixed investment (PNFI) divided by the previous year’s current-cost net stock of fixed private nonresidential assets (K1NTOTL1ES000). Following
Bernanke and Mihov (1998), structural innovations in the real rate are assumed to affect output, inflation, and precautionary savings demand with
a lag. Precautionary savings (PVS) shocks are assumed to affect output and inflation with a lag, but have a contemporaneous effect on the real
rate. Dashed lines denote 95% confidence bands, generated by simulating 1000 data processes with identical sample length as in the data from the
estimated VAR dynamics.

42

TABLES
Table 1: Summary Statistics for Volatility-Sorted Portfolios and the Real Rate
Panel A: Book-to-Market Ratios of Volatility Sorted Portfolios
High Volatility → Low Volatility

Mean
Std Dev
Min
Median
Max

PVS

5

4

3

2

1

1-5

1.04
0.45
0.45
0.92
3.10

0.87
0.31
0.48
0.78
2.13

0.83
0.26
0.48
0.78
1.80

0.82
0.25
0.51
0.74
1.71

0.86
0.28
0.54
0.75
1.70

-0.18
0.37
-1.72
-0.12
0.63

Panel B: Realized Excess Returns of Volatility Sorted Portfolios

Mean
Std Dev
Median
Min
Max
α
t(α)
CAPM-β
SMB-β
HML-β

5

4

3

2

1

1-5

7.44
39.17
-0.11
-44.87
74.19
-4.99
-2.08
1.25
1.86
0.19

9.65
31.19
6.83
-37.31
55.22
-0.96
-0.84
1.17
1.39
0.09

12.04
25.07
12.07
-31.72
45.14
2.57
3.87
1.03
1.04
0.18

11.15
19.99
13.13
-29.25
35.82
2.41
3.01
0.92
0.66
0.33

10.15
15.42
12.60
-22.28
27.32
2.94
2.52
0.73
0.40
0.37

2.71
29.57
9.47
-49.51
50.48
7.92
2.58
-0.51
-1.46
0.18

Mean

Volatility

Median

Min

Max

1.86
0.00

2.30
1.96

2.18
-0.21

-1.86
-4.62

8.72
5.81

Panel C: Real Rate

Raw Real Rate
Detrended Real Rate

Notes: This table presents summary statistics for portfolios formed on volatility. For all NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ firms in CRSP, we compute
volatility at the end of each quarter using the previous sixty days of daily returns. We then form equal-weighted portfolios based on the quintiles of
volatility. Panel A shows summary statistics on the average book-to-market (BM) ratio within each quintile. The Appendix contains full details on
how we form portfolios and compute book-to-market ratios. Panel B displays summary statistics on the realized excess returns of each quintile (in
percentage terms). The α is the (annualized) intercept from a regression of excess returns on the Fama and French (1993) factors. Standard errors
are computed via GMM by pooling all portfolios. We allow for within-portfolio heteroskedasticity and cross-portfolio correlations. The mean,
volatility, and median returns are all annualized. Data is quarterly and runs from 1970Q2 through 2016Q2. The riskless rate for computing excess
returns and quarterly returns on the Fama and French (1993) factors are aggregated using monthly data from Ken French’s website. The one-year
real rate is the one-year Treasury bill rate net of one-year survey expectations of the inflation (the GDP deflator) from the Survey of Professional
Forecasters, expressed in percent. We detrend the real rate using a linear trend and explore alternative methodologies in the Appendix..

43

Table 2: What Explains Real Rate Variation?
Dep. Variable:

One-Year Real Rate
Levels
(1)

PVS

(2)

3.44**
(5.36)

First-Differences
(3)

(4)

(5)

3.45**
(5.01)

3.34**
(4.70)

2.22**
(2.73)

(6)

BM Low-Vol

3.02**
(3.11)

1.99*
(1.80)

BM High-Vol

-3.46**
(-5.39)

-2.22**
(-2.70)

Aggregate BM

-1.10
(-0.71)

0.26
(0.12)

(7)

(8)

2.45**
(2.65)

2.09**
(2.36)

2.30
(0.88)

3.59
(1.16)

Output Gap

0.09
(0.79)

0.36**
(2.51)

Inflation

-0.12
(-0.95)

0.22
(1.16)

Constant

0.62**
(2.64)

1.01
(1.49)

0.62**
(2.65)

0.60**
(2.52)

-0.00
(-0.07)

-0.00
(-0.08)

-0.01
(-0.13)

-0.01
(-0.31)

Adj. R2
N

0.41
185

0.41
185

0.42
185

0.42
185

0.13
184

0.12
184

0.13
184

0.18
184

Notes: This table reports regression estimates of the one-year real rate on the spread in book-to-market (BM) ratios between high volatility and low
volatility stocks (PV St ). For all NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ firms in CRSP, we compute volatility at the end of each quarter using the previous
sixty days of daily returns. We then form equal-weighted portfolios based on the quintiles of volatility. Within each quintile, we compute the
average book-to-market (BM) ratio. The Appendix contains full details on how we compute BM ratios. PV St is defined as the difference in BM
ratios between the bottom (BM Low Vol) and top quintile (BM High Vol) portfolios. Aggregate BM is computed by summing book equity values
across all firms and divided by the corresponding sum of market equity values. The output gap is the percentage deviation of real GDP from the
CBO’s estimate of potential real GDP. Inflation is the annualized four quarter percentage growth in the GDP price deflator from the St. Louis Fed
(GDPDEF). The one-year real rate is the one-year Treasury bill rate net of one-year survey expectations of the inflation (the GDP deflator) from the
Survey of Professional Forecasters, expressed in percent and linearly detrended. We also independently detrend the output gap, inflation, and the
aggregate book-to-market ratio. Results using the raw series for all variables is contained in the Appendix. t-statistics are listed below each point
estimate in parentheses and are computed using Newey-West (1987) standard errors with five lags. * indicates a p-value of less than 0.1 and **
indicates a p-value of less than 0.05. Data is quarterly and spans 1970Q2-2016Q2.

44

Table 3: The Term Structure of Real Rates and PVS
k-Year Real Ratet = a + b × PV St + c × Agg. BMt + εt
Levels
First-Differences
2
b
t(b) R
b
t(b) R2
1-Year
3.45 5.01 0.42
2.45 2.65 0.13
2-Year
2.53 2.72 0.32
2.07 2.05 0.09
5-Year
2.90 3.82 0.35
1.87 2.63 0.12
7-Year
2.69 3.48 0.32
1.60 2.45 0.10
10-Year
2.51 3.32 0.30
1.40 2.41 0.10
Notes: This table reports contemporaneous regressions of real rates of various maturities on PV St . For all NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ firms
in CRSP, we compute volatility at the end of each quarter using the previous sixty days of daily returns. We then form equal-weighted portfolios
based on the quintiles of volatility. Volatility-sorted returns are returns on the lowest minus highest volatility quintile portfolios. Within each
quintile, we compute the average book-to-market (BM) ratio. The Appendix contains full details on how we compute BM ratios. PV St is defined
as the difference in BM ratios between the bottom and top quintile portfolios. The k-year real rate is the k-year Treasury bill rate net of one-year
survey expectations of the inflation (the GDP deflator) from the Survey of Professional Forecasters, expressed in percent and linearly detrended.
All regressions include the Aggregate BM (linearly detrended) as a control variable. The listed t-statistics are computed using Newey-West (1987)
standard errors with five lags. Italic point estimates indicates a p-value of less than 0.1 and bold indicates a p-value of less than 0.05. Data is
quarterly and the full sample spans 1970Q2-2016Q2.

45

Table 4: Robustness: The Real Rate and PVS
Levels

First-Differences
Pre-Crisis
2
R
b
t(b) R2
0.13
3.58 3.67 0.20
0.08
1.81 2.59 0.10
0.05
3.64 4.21 0.10

Baseline
VW
2YR Vol

b
3.45
3.16
4.49

Full
t(b) R2
5.01 0.42
4.48 0.32
6.27 0.52

Horse-Races:
(4) Liquidity
(5) Duration
(6) Leverage
(7) 2M-Beta
(8) Size
(9) Value

3.80
3.23
4.12
3.47
3.04
4.16

6.54
4.26
6.15
5.50
2.48
4.97

0.47
0.42
0.44
0.41
0.42
0.43

4.30
3.62
4.53
4.02
4.01
4.70

7.73
5.24
7.57
7.73
3.80
7.03

0.51
0.49
0.48
0.48
0.47
0.48

2.06
2.46
3.20
1.77
3.44
3.88

2.14
3.13
2.87
2.55
2.42
3.05

0.15
0.12
0.14
0.15
0.13
0.16

3.17
3.46
4.19
2.82
4.18
4.49

3.02
4.31
3.34
4.35
2.59
3.24

0.21
0.20
0.21
0.22
0.20
0.22

Double-Sorts:
(10) Duration
(11) Leverage
(12) 2M-Beta
(13) Size
(14) Value
(15) Dividend-Adj
(16) Industry-Adj

3.85
4.76
4.52
5.21
8.61
3.35
3.56

3.96
5.08
5.54
4.79
4.96
4.20
5.18

0.17
0.35
0.43
0.39
0.31
0.28
0.34

3.98
5.40
5.25
6.30
9.49
3.97
4.03

3.73
5.79
8.29
7.90
4.88
4.91
5.65

0.14
0.38
0.50
0.46
0.32
0.28
0.35

3.19
3.53
1.90
3.76
6.16
2.00
1.66

2.70
2.81
2.33
2.60
2.25
2.59
2.39

0.10
0.12
0.04
0.12
0.09
0.08
0.06

4.10
4.96
2.88
4.85
8.97
2.52
2.74

3.23
3.52
4.10
3.12
2.73
2.93
3.96

0.15
0.18
0.07
0.17
0.15
0.11
0.11

(1)
(2)
(3)

Pre-Crisis
b
t(b) R2
4.11 7.61 0.47
4.01 6.01 0.41
5.13 8.20 0.54

b
2.45
1.39
2.22

Full
t(b)
2.65
2.45
2.32

Notes: This table reports a battery of robustness exercises for our main results. Specifically, we report time-series regression results of the following form: Real Ratet = a + b × PV St + θ Xt + εt . We
run this regression directly in levels and in first differences. For all NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ firms in CRSP, we compute volatility at the end of each quarter using the previous sixty days of daily
returns. We then form equal-weighted portfolios based on the quintiles of volatility. Within each quintile, we compute the average book-to-market (BM) ratio. The Appendix contains full details on how
we compute BM ratios. PV St is defined as the difference in BM ratios between the bottom and top quintile portfolios. Xt is a vector of control variables, which always includes the Aggregate BM (linearly
detrended), computed by summing book equity values across all firms and divided by the corresponding sum of market equity values. Row (1) uses our baseline PV St measure and the full sample. Row
(2) uses value weights instead of equal weights when forming our PV St . Row (3) constructs our PV St using the past two years of return volatility, as opposed to the past two months. Row (4) controls for
the spread between off-the-run and on-the-run Treasury yields (Krishnamurthy (2002)). Rows (5)-(9) run bivariate horse races by adding book-to-market spreads based on other characteristic sorts to our
control variables Xt . See the Table 2 of the Appendix for a description of each characteristic. In rows (10)-(16), we instead use a double-sorted PV St , with complete details also contained in the Appendix.
The one-year real rate is the one-year Treasury bill rate net of one-year survey expectations of the inflation (the GDP deflator) from the Survey of Professional Forecasters, expressed in percent and linearly
detrended. The listed t-statistics are computed using Newey-West (1987) standard errors with five lags. Italic point estimates indicates a p-value of less than 0.1 and bold indicates a p-value of less than
0.05. Data is quarterly and the full sample spans 1970Q2-2016Q2 (pre-crisis ends in 2008Q4).

Table 5: Forecasting Returns with PVS and the Real Rate
Vol-Sorted Rett→t+1
(1)
PVSt

(2)

(3)

(4)

40.99**
(4.11)

14.42**
(5.07)

Real Ratet

Vol-Sorted Rett→t+4

Constant

3.15**
(2.83)

1.57**
(2.81)
0.58
(0.53)

Adj. R2
N

0.12
184

0.04
184

Mkt-Rft→t+1

Mkt-Rft→t+4

(5)

(7)

(6)

-2.22
(-1.25)

9.77**
(2.46)

4.13**
(2.13)
2.49
(0.59)

0.26
181

0.07
181

(8)

-6.27
(-0.90)

1.39**
(2.04)

-0.26
(-0.91)
1.79**
(2.82)

5.85*
(2.24)

0.03
(0.03)
6.95**
(2.73)

0.00
184

-0.00
184

0.01
181

-0.01
181

Notes: This table reports several return forecasting regressions. For all NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ firms in CRSP, we compute volatility at the end of each quarter using the previous sixty days of daily
returns. We then form equal-weighted portfolios based on the quintiles of volatility. Volatility-sorted returns are returns on the lowest minus highest volatility quintile portfolios. Within each quintile,
we compute the average book-to-market (BM) ratio. The Appendix contains full details on how we compute BM ratios. PV St is defined as the difference in BM ratios between the bottom and top
quintile portfolios. Vol-Sorted Ret in the forecasting regression corresponds to returns on the low-minus-high volatility portfolio. The real rate is the one-year Treasury bill rate net of one-year survey
expectations of the inflation (the GDP deflator) from the Survey of Professional Forecasters, expressed in percent and linearly detrended. When forecasting the aggregate stock market, we use the excess
return of the CRSP Value-Weighted index obtained from Ken French’s website. For quarterly regressions, standard errors are computed using Newey-West (1987) with two lags. For annual horizons we
use Hodrick (1992) standard errors. t-statistics are listed below point estimates in parentheses, * indicates a p-value of less than 0.1, and ** indicates a p-value of less than 0.05. Data is quarterly and spans
1970Q2-2016Q2. Returns are in percentage points.

Table 6: Evidence from Other Asset Classes
Forecasting Vol-Sorted Rett→t+1 with
PV St
Real Ratet
Asset Class

N

Mean

Volatility

b

t(b)

R2

b

t(b)

R2

U.S. Stocks
U.S. Corporate Bonds
Sovereign Bonds
Options
CDS
Commodities
FX

184
136
50
88
31
89
120

2.7
-3.1
-10.9
-16.0
-7.0
10.3
1.2

29.6
8.9
19.5
17.8
6.4
35.4
10.8

14.42
6.45
7.86
5.28
4.83
3.38
-0.60

5.07
3.39
1.81
2.41
4.44
0.51
-0.65

0.12
0.27
0.09
0.03
0.48
-0.01
-0.01

1.57
0.51
0.46
1.07
0.77
-0.34
-0.57

2.81
1.88
0.60
1.89
2.45
-0.26
-1.49

0.04
0.03
-0.02
0.02
0.11
-0.01
0.02

Notes: This table reports summary statistics and forecasting results for portfolios sorted on volatility in other asset classes. The portfolios we use are the test assets in He et al. (2017), except for U.S.
stocks. Within each asset class and in each quarter, we sort the test portfolios based on their trailing 5-year monthly volatility. We then form a new portfolio that is long the low-volatility portfolio and short
the high-volatility portfolio within each asset class. For U.S. stocks, we use our own low-minus-high volatility portfolio based on all CRSP stocks. The reported mean and the volatility are annualized and
in percentage terms.The columns under “Forecasting Vol-Sorted Rett,t+1 ” report the point estimate, t-statistic, and adjusted R2 from forecasting one-quarter ahead returns on the low-minus-high volatility
trade within each asset class using PVSt or Real Ratet . t-statistics are based on Newey-West (1987) standard errors with two lags. The real rate is the one-year Treasury bill rate net of one-year survey
expectations of the inflation (the GDP deflator) from the Survey of Professional Forecasters, expressed in percent and linearly detrended. Quarterly data from He et al. (2017) ends in 2012 and data
availability varies with asset class.

Table 7: The Real Rate and Contemporaneous Volatility
Dependent Variable:

Real Rate (Level)
(1)

σ (Vol-Sorted Portfolio)

(2)

(3)

(4)
0.02
(0.84)

0.03
(1.19)
-0.18**
(-3.94)
0.31**
(3.88)
0.07
(0.94)
0.09
(0.19)

-0.04
(-1.63)
0.06**
(3.28)
-0.05
(-1.44)
0.07
(1.36)
0.10**
(2.22)
0.06
(0.31)
4.01**
(8.66)

0.15
185

0.60
185

0.00
184

0.00
(0.05)

CIVt
σ (Mkt-Rf)
σ (SMB)
σ (HML)
σ (TFP Growth)
PV St
Adj R2
N

-0.01
185

Real Rate (Changes)
(5)

(6)

-0.04**
(-2.29)
-0.02
(-0.66)
0.09
(1.28)
0.03
(1.40)
0.71**
(2.54)

0.03
(1.19)
0.00
(0.12)
-0.05*
(-1.70)
0.07
(1.22)
0.02
(0.88)
0.72**
(2.81)
2.50**
(3.10)

0.08
184

0.20
184

Notes: This table reports regression estimates of the one-year real rate on various measures of risk. σ (TFP Growth) is the volatility of TFP growth
that is implied by a GARCH model (see Table A1 of the Appendix). σ (Mkt-Rf), σ (SMB), and σ (HML) are the within-quarter annualized
volatility (percentage terms) of the three Fama and French (1993) factors, which we compute using daily data. CIVt is the average idiosyncratic
volatility factor of Herskovic et al. (2016). PV St is the difference in book-to-market ratios between high volatility and low volatility stocks. For
all NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ firms in CRSP, we compute volatility at the end of each quarter using the previous sixty days of daily returns.
We then form equal-weighted portfolios based on the quintiles of volatility. Within each quintile, we compute the average book-to-market (BM)
ratio. The Appendix contains full details on how we compute BM ratios. σ (LMH-Vol Portfolio) is the annualized percentage volatility of the
low-minus-high volatility portfolio, which we compute using daily data. The real rate is the one-year Treasury bill rate net of one-year survey
expectations of the inflation (the GDP deflator) from the Survey of Professional Forecasters, expressed in percent and linearly detrended. Columns
(1)-(3) run the regression in levels. Columns (4)-(6) run the regression in first differences. t-statistics are listed below point estimates in parentheses
and are computed using Newey-West (1987) standard errors with five lags. * indicates a p-value of less than 0.1 and ** indicates a p-value of less
than 0.05. All regressions have a constant, but we omit the estimates to save space. Data is quarterly and spans 1970Q2-2016Q2.

49

Table 8: The Real Rate and Mutual Fund Flows
Panel A: Summary Statistics

Quarterly Obs./Fund
AUM ($ mm)
Net Inflows (%)
Quarterly Return (%)
Annual Volatility (%)
β f ,HVOL

Mean
31
754
5.55
1.47
11.84
0.30

Std. Dev.
28
2,049
8.53
2.32
7.92
0.24

p25
11
155
0.49
0.65
4.57
0.02

p50
24
266
3.21
1.38
12.61
0.32

p75
Min
43
2
597
100
7.80 -19.70
2.34 -38.77
17.29 0.31
0.49
-0.05

Max
170
65,339
66.54
58.76
36.62
0.83

# Funds
20,253
20,253
20,253
20,253
20,253
20,253

Panel B: High Volatility Funds and the Real Rate
Dependent Variable
Real Ratet
Real Ratet × β f ,HVOL

(1)
0.92**
(4.56)
2.08**
(4.11)

(2)

2.09**
(4.17)

Real Ratet × σ f
Ret f ,t
Ret f ,t−1
FE
Adj. R2
N

f
0.11
630,592

( f ,t)
0.15
630,592

Flows f ,t
(3)
(4)
0.94**
(4.27)
1.52**
(4.30)
0.04**
(3.09)
0.22**
(6.47)
0.22**
(6.85)
( f ,t)
f
0.16
0.11
630,592 630,592

(5)

(6)

0.04**
(3.12)

0.03**
(2.87)
0.23**
(6.46)
0.22**
(6.84)
( f ,t)
0.16
630,592

( f ,t)
0.14
630,592

Notes: This table studies whether high-volatility mutual fund flows are more sensitive to real rate movements, relative to low-volatility mutual
funds. In Panel B, our baseline regression is Flow f ,t = FE( f ) + b1 Real Ratet + b2 Real Ratet × β f ,HVOL + ε f ,t . Flow f ,t is the net percentage inflow
into fund f at time t, computed as the dollar inflow divided by assets under management. Flows are winsorized at the 5% tails. β f ,HVOL is the beta
of fund f ’s return with respect to a portfolio of high-minus-low volatility stocks. For all NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ firms in CRSP, we compute
volatility at the end of each quarter using the previous sixty days of daily returns. We then form equal-weighted portfolios based on the quintiles of
volatility. Betas of each fund are computed using the high-minus-low volatility portfolio return over the life of the fund. σ f is the return volatility
of the fund, computed using the full sample of year-quarter observations. We drop fund with assets under management of under $100 mm. Panel
A presents summary statistics for the funds in our sample. We first compute statistics for each fund (across time), and then report summary stats
across funds. In Panel B, t-statistics are listed below point estimates in parentheses and are computed using Driscoll-Kraay (1998) standard errors
with five lags within each fund cluster. * indicates a p-value of less than 0.1 and ** indicates a p-value of less than 0.05. Quarterly mutual fund data
derives from CRSP and spans 1973Q2-2015Q3. Returns are in percentage terms.

50

Table 9: Other Measures of Financial Conditions, PVS, and the Real Rate

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)

Z-variable
BAA-10Y Spread
GZ Spread
Credit Sentiment
Equity Sentiment
Policy Uncertainty
Et [Mkt-Rft,t+4 ]

N
185
151
133
182
126
180

Zt = a + b × PV St
b
t(b)
R2
-0.84 -2.52 0.18
-1.26 -2.24 0.23
0.13
2.65 0.15
1.19
3.98 0.24
-53.02 -4.25 0.23
-0.49 -1.27 0.06

RealRatet = a + c × Zt
c
t(c)
R2
-0.83 -2.77
0.09
-0.32 -1.53
0.02
1.44 0.78
0.00
1.35 6.33
0.37
-0.03 -6.54
0.30
-0.28 -0.62
0.00

RealRatet = a + b × PV St + c × Zt
b
t(b)
R2
3.36
5.08
0.41
3.80
6.15
0.48
3.17
4.47
0.35
2.41
3.97
0.52
1.62
2.75
0.38
3.53
6.04
0.41

Notes: This table compares other measures of financial conditions and market sentiment to PVSt . The first set of regressions in the table shows the results of a univariate regression of each alternative risk
appetite measure on PVSt . The second set of regressions in the table shows the results of a univariate regression of the real rate on contemporaneous values of each variable. The last set of results regresses
the real rate on both PVSt and each alternative risk appetite measure. In rows (1)-(6), the alternative risk appetite variables are the spread between Moody’s BAA credit yields and the 10-year Treasury
rate, the credit spread index from Gilchrist and Zakrajšek (2012), credit market sentiment from Greenwood and Hanson (2013) (four-quarter moving average), equity market sentiment (orthogonalized)
from Baker and Wurgler (2006), and the Baker et al. (2016) economic policy uncertainty index, respectively. In row (6), we use the procedure in Kelly and Pruitt (2013) to form a statistically optimal
linear forecast of one-year ahead excess stock market returns. The listed t-statistics are computed using Newey-West (1987) standard errors with five lags. Data is quarterly and the full sample spans
1970Q2-2016Q2. See the Appendix for more details on our optimal stock market forecast.

Table 10: Volatility-Sorted Returns and Monetary Policy Surprises
Vol-Sorted Rett→t+1 = a + b × MP Shockt→t+1 + εt→t+1
Quarterly Data
All
MP Shock

Daily Data

Scheduled

All

Scheduled

Sample

b

t(b)

b

t(b)

b

t(b)

b

t(b)

Start

End

Romer and Romer (2004)

0.75

0.47

0.71

0.44

-0.04

-0.30

-0.06

-0.43

1970.Q1

1996.Q4

Bernanke and Kuttner (2005)

-2.94

-0.19

-1.65

-0.07

5.55

1.32

-1.08

-0.49

1989.Q2

2008.Q2

Gorodnichenko and Weber (2016)

-1.14

-0.06

1.60

0.03

13.34

1.89

3.67

0.94

1994.Q1

2009.Q4

Nakamura and Steinsson (2018)

1.46

0.06

12.83

0.20

18.74

1.98

5.29

1.03

1995.Q1

2014.Q1

Notes: This table reports regressions of volatility-sorted returns onto monetary policy shocks. For all NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ firms in CRSP, we compute volatility at the end of each quarter using
the previous sixty days of daily returns. We then form equal-weighted portfolios based on the quintiles of volatility. Volatility-sorted returns are returns on the lowest minus highest volatility quintile
portfolios. Quarterly return regressions aggregate daily monetary policy shocks by summing over all shocks within a quarter. The Romer and Romer (2004) shock is the change in the intended Federal
Funds rate inferred from narrative records around monetary policy meetings, after controlling for changes in the Federal Reserve’s information. The Bernanke and Kuttner (2005) shock is derived from
the price change in Federal Funds future contracts relative to the day before the policy action. The Gorodnichenko and Weber (2016) shock is derived from the price change in Federal Funds futures from
10 minutes before to 20 minutes after an FOMC press release. The Nakamura and Steinsson (2018) shock is the unanticipated change in the first principal component of interest rates with maturity up to
one year from 10 minutes before to 20 minutes after an FOMC news announcement. Columns listed as “All” include all policy changes and “Scheduled” includes only changes that occurred at regularly
scheduled policy meetings. In restricting the analysis to regularly scheduled meetings, we exclude quarters after 1993Q4 where the Federal Reserve made policy changes outside of scheduled meetings.
Prior to 1994, policy changes were not announced after meetings so the distinction between scheduled and unscheduled meetings is not material. The listed t-statistics are computed using Davidson and
MacKinnon (1993) standard errors for heteroskedasticity in small samples.

Table 11: Shocks to Risk Appetite and Real Outcomes
Forecast Horizon (Qtrs)

Dep. Variable: Investment-to-Capital
PVSt

Dep. Variable: Output Gap
PVSt

Dep. Variable: ∆Unemployment Rate
PVSt

h=1

h=4

0.59**
(4.92)

0.97**
(3.59)

0.81**
(3.24)

1.58**
(2.14)

-0.36**
(-2.57)

-1.12**
(-2.20)

Notes: This table reports the results of running Jordà (2005) local projections of macroeconomic outcomes onto PVSt . In all cases, we run
regressions of the following form:
yt+h = a + bhPV S × PV St + bhRR × Real Ratet + bhy × yt + εt+h
and report the estimation results for bhPV S . We consider three different macroeconomic outcomes for the y-variable. The first is the investmentcapital ratio, defined as the level of real private nonresidential fixed investment (PNFI) divided by the previous year’s current-cost net stock of
fixed private nonresidential assets (K1NTOTL1ES000). The second is the real output gap, defined as the percent deviation of real GDP from real
potential output. Lastly, we consider is the change in the U.S. unemployment rate. When forecasting the investment-capital ratio, yt+h is the level
of the investment-capital ratio at time t + h. For the output gap, yt+h is the level of the output gap at time t + h. Finally, for the unemployment rate,
yt+h is the change in the unemployment rate between t and t + h, and yt is the change between t − 1 and t. All macroeconomic variables come from
the St. Louis FRED database and are expressed in percentage points. PV St is defined as in the main text. The real rate is the one-year Treasury bill
rate net of one-year survey expectations of the inflation (the GDP deflator) from the Survey of Professional Forecasters, expressed in percent and
linearly detrended. t-statistics are listed below each point estimate in parentheses and are computed using Newey-West standard errors with five
lags. * indicates a p-value of less than 0.1 and ** indicates a p-value of less than 0.05. Data is quarterly and spans 1970Q2-2016Q2.

53

