                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          THE OPTIMAL PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROVISION OF SAFE ASSETS

                                       Marina Azzimonti
                                         Pierre Yared

                                      Working Paper 24534
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24534


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2018




This paper was prepared for the 91st meeting of the Carnegie-Rochester-NYU Conference on
Public Policy which honored the contributions of Charles Plosser to economics. We are
especially grateful to Narayana Kocherlakota for initial discussions which inspired this project.
We would like to thank Yongsung Chang, Fatih Guvenen, Chris Moser, Sevin Yeltekin, and
seminar audiences at Carnegie-Rochester-NYU conference, Columbia, New York Fed, SED
meeting, and NBER for comments. We thank Saki Bigio for a valuable discussion of the paper.
Jay Hyun provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Marina Azzimonti and Pierre Yared. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Optimal Public and Private Provision of Safe Assets
Marina Azzimonti and Pierre Yared
NBER Working Paper No. 24534
April 2018
JEL No. E21,E25,E62,H21,H63

                                          ABSTRACT

We develop a theory of optimal government debt in which publicly-issued and privately-issued
safe assets are substitutes. While government bonds are backed by future tax revenues, privately-
issued safe assets are backed by the future repayment of pools of defaultable private loans. We
find that a higher supply of public debt crowds out privately-issued safe assets less than one for
one and reduces the interest spread between borrowing and deposit rates. Our main result is that
the optimal level of public debt does not fully crowd out private lending and maintains a positive
interest spread. Moreover, the optimal level of public debt is higher the more severe are financial
frictions.


Marina Azzimonti
Economics Department
Stony Brook University
100 Nicolls Road
Stony Brook, NY 11794
and NBER
marina.azzimonti@gmail.com

Pierre Yared
Columbia University
Graduate School of Business
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 823
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
pyared@columbia.edu
1       Introduction
There is a conventional wisdom that public debt can serve as a substitute for privately-
issued safe assets when private borrowing is limited. This view is not only the basis for
research which focuses on the public provision of liquidity, but it is also the basis for
policy proposals promoting the expansion of public liquidity.1
    In this paper, we study the optimal long-run supply of public and private liquidity. In
contrast to previous normative work, we allow for private liquidity with credit frictions
and consider the reaction of financial intermediaries to the level of public liquidity. We
are motivated by the empirical evidence that public debt increases are associated with
reductions in the issuance of other safe assets such as asset-backed securities and money
market securities.2 Our starting premise is that government bonds are backed by future
tax revenues, whereas privately-issued safe assets are backed by the future repayment of
pools of defaultable private loans. Given this difference, we ask the following questions:
How does the supply of public debt interact with the supply of privately-issued safe assets?
How does public debt impact interest rates in the economy? And what drives the optimal
level of public and private liquidity?
    To answer these questions, we introduce privately-issued safe assets to a model of
public liquidity. We consider a heterogeneous agent economy with no aggregate risk in
which safe assets facilitate households’ smoothing of income shocks over time. Safe assets
come in two forms: government bonds backed by future tax revenues, and privately-issued
safe assets backed by pools of loans to other households. Savers are indifferent between
these assets since they provide the same safe deposit rate. Financial intermediaries,
however, require a premium to lend to potentially defaulting households versus to the
government which is committed to repaying its debt. A household defaults whenever the
exogenous cost of doing so is below the cost of repayment, and defaults are idiosyncratic
across households. Given the absence of aggregate shocks, there is no aggregate default
risk in the economy. This market structure implies the existence of a risk-free deposit
rate, equal to the interest rate faced by the government, and a borrowing rate at which
households can borrow anonymously. The spread between the borrowing and deposit
rates equals the aggregate default rate in the economy.
    A natural implication of this construction is that a high enough supply of public debt
fully crowds out privately-issued safe assets. In this case, the deposit rate and the borrow-
    1
     See Greenwood, Hanson, and Stein (2016) as an example of a policy proposal for expanding public
liquidity.
   2
     See for example evidence in Gorton, et al. (2012), Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2015), and
Carlsson et al. (2016)


                                                  1
ing rate—which equal each other—are sufficiently high that no household borrows, there
are no defaults, and all households hold positive levels of public debt. A version of Ricar-
dian Equivalence holds since local changes in public debt have no effect on consumption
allocations or interest rates. If public debt rises today, households experience lower taxes
today and anticipate higher taxes in the future, and they respond by increasing their
public debt holdings without changing consumption. The opposite occurs in response to
a decrease in public debt.
    The interesting role for public debt arises if public debt is sufficiently low. In this case,
privately-issued safe assets are no longer zero since borrowing rates are low enough that
some households borrow, there are defaults, and a positive interest spread exists between
the borrowing rate and the deposit rate. Moreover, Ricardian Equivalence ceases to hold.
A local increase in public debt crowds out privately-issued safe assets less than one for
one, increases the deposit rate, and reduces the spread between the borrowing and deposit
rate.
    To understand the logic for this channel, suppose that households were committed to
debt repayment. Since default risk would be zero in this case, the borrowing rate would
equal the deposit rate. In response to a public debt increase, a saving household’s deposits
would increase one for one by the same logic as in the case of full crowd out described
previously. By analogous reasoning, a borrowing household’s debt would decrease one for
one with public debt increases.
    In contrast to this hypothetical case, households in our environment cannot commit to
debt repayment. There is a spread between the borrowing rate and the deposit rate which
reflects default risk. Because the government borrows at a lower interest rate than house-
holds, a public debt increase cannot mechanically have a neutral impact on a borrower’s
consumption. Instead, a public debt increase causes a slackening of financial constraints
for borrowing households, and these households reduce their borrowing less than one for
one with government borrowing. The resultant net increase in total borrowing (household
plus government) in the economy puts upward pressure on the deposit rate. Moreover,
because each borrowing household borrows less, the probability of default declines, leading
to a reduction in the interest spread.
    The main result of our paper is that the optimal level of public debt does not fully
crowd out privately-issued safe assets. Full crowd out slackens financial constraints, re-
duces the interest spread to zero, and removes the prevalence of costly defaults. However,
by increasing the total supply of safe assets, full crowd out also increases the deposit
rate which increases inequality since wealthier households reap higher returns on their
savings. The optimal level of public debt trades off more efficient financial markets with

                                               2
less inequality. These dual considerations imply an optimal policy which admits some
financial market inefficiency, which is why optimal policy does not induce full crowd out.
    We prove these results analytically in a simple two-period example. Moreover, we verify
the robustness of these analytical results numerically in the stationary distribution of the
balanced growth path of an infinite horizon economy. This numerical exercise considers
the model of public debt of Aiyagari and McGrattan (1998) extended to allow for private
financial intermediation with default. We use this exercise to assess the quantitative
implications of our theoretical mechanism, and to examine how credit market frictions
impact the optimal level of public debt.
    Our main quantitative result is that the optimal level of public debt is well below the
full crowd out threshold. This level of public debt is between two benchmarks. First, it is
below the optimum in the absence of private liquidity. This is because, in our framework,
government debt does not relax liquidity constraints as significantly as in the absence of
any private financial intermediation. Second, optimal public debt is above the optimum
in the absence of default risk (but with private borrowing limits). The presence of default
risk increases the liquidity benefit of public debt for two reasons. First, relative to a
default-free environment, the fraction of households which directly benefit from more
public liquidity increases, since any borrowing household is subject to an interest rate
premium relative to the government. Second, the cost of higher public debt through
higher borrowing rates is mitigated, since higher public debt also reduces default risk
and the interest premium faced by borrowing households. In sum, our work shows that
introducing private credit market frictions plays an important role for the determination
of optimal public liquidity; the larger are these frictions, the higher is the optimal level
of public debt.
    Our paper builds on several literatures. First, we contribute to the literature on the
optimal supply of public debt in economies with limited private credit.3 Relative to
previous work, we focus on the optimal long-run level of public debt when public debt
competes with privately-issued safe assets backed by defaultable loans; this allows us to
consider the impact of government debt on interest spreads.4,5 Second, we contribute
   3
      In addition to the work already mentioned, see Woodford (1990), Holmstrom and Tirole (1998),
Azzimonti, de Francisco, and Quadrini (2014), and Angeletos, Collard, and Dellas (2016), among others.
Our result that the optimal level of public debt does not fully crowd out the private lending market is in
line with results in Yared (2013) and Azzimonti and Yared (2017).
    4
      Our work is complementary to the work of Carapella and Williamson (2015) who also study the
relationship between public debt and private debt. In their work, public debt is distinguished from
private debt because of its role as collateral. In our work, public debt is distinguished from private debt
because it is backed by tax revenue as opposed to defaultable private loans.
    5
      For related work on the effect of public debt on interest rates and asset prices, see Plosser (1982,


                                                    3
to the literature on optimal public debt management going back to the work of Barro
(1979) and Lucas and Stokey (1983).6 In contrast to this literature, we allow for lump
transfers, which removes the role of public debt for smoothing taxes and allows us to
focus on public debt’s role in providing liquidity. Finally, our paper contributes to the
literature on default and credit spreads in heterogeneous agent economies by considering
the implications of public debt on credit market conditions.7
    The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 illustrates our qualitative results in a two-
period example. Section 3 describes the equilibrium of an infinite horizon economy. Sec-
tion 4 summarizes the results from the quantitative analysis of the infinite horizon econ-
omy. Section 5 concludes and the Appendix includes additional results not in the main
text.


2       Two-Period Example
We present a simple two-period example which describes the main results of our paper.
We show that an increase in the supply of government bonds crowds out privately-issued
safe assets less than one for one and reduces the spread between the borrowing rate and
the deposit rate. Moreover, we characterize the optimal policy, and we show that the
government faces a tradeoff between reducing financial frictions and reducing inequality.
In resolving this tradeoff, the optimal supply of government debt does not fully crowd out
privately-issued safe assets.


2.1     Environment
2.1.1    Households

There is a continuum of two types of households indexed by i = {P, R} , each of size 1/2.
Each household’s welfare is
                                        X
                                      E     log cit                                   (1)
                                                 t=0,1

1987), Laubach (2003), Engen and Hubbard (2004), and Gomes, Michaelides Polkovnichenko (2013),
among others.
    6
      See also Aiyagari, Marcet, Sargent, and Seppala (2002), Werning (2007), and Bhandari, Evans,
Golosov, and Sargent (2016), among others.
    7
      See for example Athreya (2002), Livshits, MacGee, and Tertilt (2007), and Chatterjee, Corbae, Naka-
jima, and Rı́os-Rull (2007), among others. Elenev, Landvoigt, and Van Nieuwerburgh (2018) introduce
fiscal policy into a model of corporate default, though their focus is on the role of financial regulation in
an economy with aggregate shocks.




                                                     4
where cit represents the consumption of household of type i at date t. Households have
an endowment yti , where we let y0P = 1 − ∆ and y0R = 1 + ∆ for ∆ ∈ (0, 1), and we let
y1P = y1R = 1. We therefore refer to R-type households as “rich” households and P -type
households as “poor” households.
    The resource constraint of the economy is

                                          cPt + cR    P    R
                                                 t ≤ yt + yt = 1                                         (2)

for t = 0, 1 so that the aggregate endowment in the economy is constant.
    The government levies a lump sum tax Tt R 0 uniformly across the population at
both dates. At date 0, a household i chooses a quantity of safe deposits ai ≥ 0 to buy
at price q a , and these assets pay off ai with certainty at date 1. In addition, at date 0 a
household can sell defaultable bonds li ≥ 0 at price q l . At date 1, a household receives
an idiosyncratic cost of default shock κ ≥ 0 and can decide whether or not to default on
these bonds by choosing di = {0, 1}. If di = 0, the household repays li , and if di = 1,
the household does not repay debt li , loses assets ai , and suffers an additive cost to
its endowment of size κ. We let κ be determined after decisions are taken at date 0 and
before decisions are taken at date 1. The distribution of the shock κ is idiosyncratic across
the population of households and is determined according to an exponential probability
distribution f (κ) = exp−κ with an associated c.d.f. F (κ).8
    Each household faces the following budget constraints at t = 0 and t = 1, respectively:

                             ci0 = y0i − T0 − q a ai + q l li , and                                      (3)
                             ci1 = y1i − T1 + 1 − di ai − li − di κ,
                                                                   
                                                                                                         (4)

where κ is heterogeneous across the population and stochastically determined.
   Clearly, given a default cost κ, the household at date 1 defaults if κ < li − ai and it
repays its debt li if κ > li − ai . This implies that
                                     (
                                             y1i − T1 − κ     if κ ≤ li − ai
                             ci1 =                                           .                           (5)
                                         y1i − T1 + ai − li   if κ ≥ li − ai

The household’s problem is to choose ci0 , ci1 , ai , and li which maximize (1) given (3) and
(5). After substitution of (3) and (5) into the household’s welfare (1), this means that
   8
    This distributional function assumption is for simplicity. It guarantees that expected total repayment
(taking into account default risk) rises with the size of a loan and that the household’s problem is concave.




                                                      5
the household’s maximization problem can be written as:

                        log y0i − T0 − q a ai + q l li +Eκ log y1i − T1 − min κ, li − ai
                                                                                     
         i
           max
             i
                                                                                            .    (6)
        a ≥0,l ≥0


   In this economy, we refer to 1/q a as the deposit rate and 1/q l as the borrowing rate
and the interest spread as corresponding to 1 − q l /q a . Moreover, the total supply of safe
assets can be represented by
                                           X 1
                                      A=          ai ,                                    (7)
                                          i=P,R
                                                2

and the total supply of private borrowing can be represented by

                                                    X 1
                                              L=           li .                                  (8)
                                                   i=P,R
                                                         2

2.1.2    Government

The government chooses taxes T0 and T1 and government debt B ≥ 0 to satisfy its
dynamic budget constraint at dates 0 and 1:

                                           0 = T0 + q g B and                                    (9)
                                           0 = T1 − B                                           (10)

where q g is the price of government bonds. Note that in contrast to households, the
government is committed to always repaying its debt.

2.1.3    Financial Intermediation

There is a set of perfectly competitive financial intermediaries in the economy who trade
with households and the government anonymously. These financial intermediaries sell safe
assets to households at price q a , and they buy non-defaultable bonds from the government
at price q g and defaultable bonds from the private sector at price q l . The bonds purchased
from the private sector are all pooled together, independently of how much each individual
household borrows, which is why all households sell their private bonds at the same price
q l .9 Competition in financial intermediation thus requires that

                                                 qg = qa                                        (11)
  9
    We have considered an economy where households buy government bonds through financial inter-
mediaries. All of our results are unchanged if households instead buy these bonds directly from the
government.

                                                     6
since the interest rate for riskless lending from intermediaries to the government must
equal the interest rate for riskless lending from households to financial intermediaries.
Furthermore, no arbitrage requires that

                                      q l = q a (1 − D)                                               (12)
                                                          i     i i
                                            P
                                                i=P,R F (l − a ) l
                                where D =          P          i
                                                                    .
                                                      i=P,R l


1 − D represents an aggregate recovery rate. This equation states that an intermediary
can achieve the same expected return—taking default risk into account—by buying non-
defaultable government bonds versus buying defaultable private bonds.10 Note that the
probability of being repaid by a household with net borrowing li − ai is 1 − F (li − ai ),
since default occurs if the default cost κ is below li − ai , where we define F (li − ai ) = 0
if li − ai < 0. Equation (12) implies that q l < q a if li − ai > 0 for some i and q l → q a as
li → 0 for i = P, R.11 As such, if lP = lR = 0, we write that q l = q a .
     Total lending in the economy must equal total borrowing. Therefore, it follows that
A defined in (7) satisfies
                                                 ql
                                      A = B + a L.12                                      (13)
                                                q
In other words, safe assets are backed by government bonds and pooled risky loans to
households. We refer to the sum of pooled risky loans to households as privately-issued
safe assets.


2.2     Competitive Equilibrium
2.2.1    Definition of Competitive Equilibrium

Given a government policy {B, T0 , T1 }, a competitive equilibrium corresponds to a set
          
of prices q a , q l and a level of deposits and borrowing {ai , li }i=P,R which satisfy the
following conditions:

   1. {ai , li }i=P,R maximize (6) for i = P, R given T0 , T1 , q a , and q l ,
  10
      All households face the same bond price since they borrow and lend anonymously. An alternative
formulation would allow for non-anonymous non-linear pricing for deposits and loans such as in Livshits,
MacGee, and Tertilt (2007). Given our focus on interest spreads in the economy, we focus on this simpler
formulation for our analysis.
   11
      Formally, if lP =  and lR = % for some , % > 0, one can consider the value of (12) as  approaches
0. From L’Hopital’s rule and our assumption of an exponential distribution for F (·), we find that the
right hand side of (12) approaches q a as  approaches 0.
   12
      This equation can be derived directly by combining the resource constraint (2)—which binds at date
0—with the household’s budget constraint (3) and the government’s budget constraint (9).

                                                    7
   2. {B, T0 , T1 } satisfy the government budget constraints (9) − (10) given (11),
                         
   3. {ai , li }i=P,R and q a , q l satisfy the no arbitrage condition (12), and
                         
   4. {ai , li }i=P,R and q a , q l satisfy the market clearing condition (13).

2.2.2    Characterization of Competitive Equilibrium

In considering the household’s problem in (6), note that if q l < q a it is suboptimal for any
household to choose ai > 0 and li > 0 simultaneously. Any such choice is dominated by
choosing instead ai −  and li −  for  > 0 arbitrarily small which strictly increases date
0 consumption while keeping date 1 consumption fixed. It follows then that li > 0 only if
ai = 0, which implies that default only occurs if li > κ.13
    In considering the household’s optimal decision, there are two cases to consider. In the
first case, ai ≥ 0 and li = 0. Maximization of (6) implies:

                                                      1              1
                                  qa                          ≥ i                                      (14)
                                       y0i   −   qa     i
                                                      (a − B)  y1 + (ai − B)

which holds with equality if ai > 0. Note that we have substituted in for T0 and T1 in (14)
using (9)−(11). The government finances a tax break in the initial period by borrowing at
the same deposit rate at which households save. This means that the ensuing allocation
is equivalent to one in which each individual household faces taxes equal to zero and
decides to deposit ai − B. In other words, by choosing B, the government is borrowing
on behalf of all households at the deposit rate. As we will see, this observation is useful
for understanding how public debt affects households’ decisions.
    In the second case, ai = 0 and li ≥ 0, and default at date 1 occurs if κ < li . Maxi-
mization of (6)—where again we substitute in for T0 and T1 using (9) − (11)—implies

                                       1                             1
                           ql                              i
                                                             
                                 i    a     l  i
                                                 ≤ 1 − F l       i
                                                                                                       (15)
                                y0 + q B + q l                  y1 − B − l i
which holds with equality if li > 0. Equation (15) shows that the allocation in this case
is equivalent to one in which each individual household faces taxes equal to zero, borrows
an amount B at a bond price q a , and borrows an additional amount li at a bond price q l .
This amount li is repaid with probability 1 − F (li ) at date 1.
  13
    If instead q a = q l , one can show that the equilibrium consumption and the values of ai − li for each
household are uniquely determined. However, the values of ai and li are not uniqely determined. In this
case, we select ai > 0 and li = 0 so as to be consistent with the q a > q l case, and this is without loss of
generality for our main results.



                                                            8
    It is clear in this economy that the rich save more than the poor because of a consump-
tion smoothing incentive. Moreover, because the economy is closed, it is not possible for
both the rich and the poor to be borrowing. Therefore, only the poor potentially borrow,
and it follows that (12) reduces to

                                   q l = q a 1 − F lP
                                                        
                                                             .                         (16)

The below lemma states this formally.

Lemma 1 In a competitive equilibrium, aR > 0 and lR = 0. Moreover, if lP > 0 then
aP = 0.

   There are two cases to consider when describing a competitive equilibrium conditional
on government policy B.

High Debt Case We first consider the equilibrium when public debt is very high and
completely crowds out privately-issued safe assets.

Lemma 2 (High Public Debt) Suppose that B ≥ B ∗ = ∆/2. Then A = B (full crowd
out), q a = q l = 1 (zero interest spread), and consumption is unresponsive to local changes
in B for B > B ∗ (local Ricardian equivalence).

   If government debt is sufficiently high, then all deposits are backed by government
bonds, and privately-issued safe assets are zero. Both rich and poor households hold
positive deposits and do not borrow because the borrowing rate is too high. Given that
there is no borrowing, there are no defaults, and the interest spread between the borrowing
and deposit rate is zero. Furthermore, Ricardian Equivalence holds locally. An increase
in government debt B by  > 0 causes a reduction in taxes in the initial date by q a 
and an increase in future taxes by . In response to such a debt increase, both rich and
poor households increase deposits by q a  without altering consumption. An analogous
reasoning holds with respect to a reduction in B starting from B > B ∗ .

Low Debt Case Local Ricardian Equivalence does not hold once government debt
becomes sufficiently low. If B = B ∗ , it is the case aP = 0, meaning poor households
hold zero deposits, and they cannot reduce deposits in response to a reduction in B. The
below proposition describes the equilibrium for B < B ∗ .



                                             9
Proposition 1 (Low Public Debt) Suppose that B < B ∗ . Then A > B (no full crowd
out), q a > q l (positive interest spread), and consumption responds to local changes in B.
A local increase in B results in:

  1. A reduction in q a and q l (higher deposit and borrowing rates),

  2. An increase in q l /q a (lower interest spread), and

  3. A decrease in q l lP by less than the increase in q a B (partial crowd out).

    Proposition 1 provides the first main result of this paper. For low levels of public debt,
government debt does not fully crowd out private debt. The borrowing rate is low enough
that there is a positive level of private borrowing, there are defaults in equilibrium, and
there is a positive interest spread between the borrowing and deposit rate. Moreover,
consumption changes in response to changes in fiscal policy. More specifically, an increase
in government debt causes an increase in the deposit and borrowing rates (reduction in
q a and q l ), a decrease in the interest spread (increase in q l /q a ), and partial crowd out of
private borrowing by the poor.
    The intuition is that an increase in government debt increases the demand for overall
borrowing in the economy (by the government and households), which puts upward pres-
sure on the deposit rate. A rise in the deposit rate puts upward pressure on the borrowing
rate which reduces private borrowing and reduces defaults in the overall economy, which
is reflected in a lower interest spread.
    The mechanism behind this result comes from the fact that the rise in borrowing
by the government partially crowds out private borrowing. To understand the logic for
this channel, suppose that households were committed to debt repayment. Since default
risk would be zero in this case, the borrowing rate would equal the deposit rate. What
happens if public debt rises by  in this case? A rich household’s deposits increase by 
by the same logic as in the case of full crowd out described previously. Analogously, a
borrowing household’s debt decreases by . All households anticipate higher taxes in the
future to finance the public debt increase and would therefore utilize the tax reduction
today to either increase deposits or reduce borrowing without impacting consumption.
    In contrast to this hypothetical case, households in our environment cannot commit to
debt repayment. There is a spread between the borrowing rate and the deposit rate which
reflects default risk. Because the government borrows at a lower interest rate than house-
holds, a public debt increase cannot mechanically have a neutral impact on a borrower’s
consumption. If private borrowing were reduced one for one with public borrowing, a


                                               10
borrowing household would maintain the same consumption today but increase its con-
sumption tomorrow. Formally, prior to the change in B, a poor borrowing household’s
Euler equation (15) (which binds) after using (16) to substitute in for q l becomes

                                                     1                            1
                                  qa                                  =                  .
                                       y0P   +   qaB     +   q l lP       y1P   − B − lP

Now suppose that government debt increases by  and suppose that crowding out of
private borrowing were one for one so that q l lP declines by q a . If that were the case, the
poor household’s Euler equation would become

                                     1                         1
                     qa                          >
                          y0P   + q a B + q l lP    P
                                                   y1 − B − lP +  (q a /q l − 1)

which could never hold as an equality. Therefore, a public debt increase causes a slacken-
ing of financial constraints for borrowing households, and these households reduce their
borrowing less than one for one with government borrowing. The resultant increase in
total borrowing (household plus government) in the economy puts upward pressure on the
deposit rate. Moreover, because each borrowing household borrows less, the probability
of default declines, leading to a reduction in the interest spread.

2.2.3   Optimal Policy

Let us now consider the problem of a utilitarian government optimally choosing govern-
ment debt, taking into account its effects on taxes, the deposit rate, and the borrowing
rate. Without loss of generality, we can focus our attention on levels of debt B ≤ B ∗ ,
since the choice of debt B ≥ B ∗ entails full crowd out and a consumption allocation which
is invariant to debt by Lemma 2.
    Using Lemma 1, Proposition 1, and (16), we can write social welfare (up to a multi-
plicative constant) as:
                                                                                         
                     log        y0R   −q     a
                                   a − B + log   R
                                                    + a −B                      y1R    R
                                                                                                  (17)
                                          
         + log y0P + q a [B + 1 − F lP lP ] + Eκ log y1P − B − min κ, lP
                                                                     


where the first line corresponds to the welfare of the rich and the second line corresponds
to the welfare of the poor. Note that q a , aR , and lP are all implicit functions of B, where




                                                                11
these necessarily satisfy the market clearing condition (13) which can be rewritten as

                               1 R                 1 P
                                 a = B + 1 − F lP      l ,                              (18)
                               2                     2

and the Euler equations of the rich (14) and the poor (15) which bind with q a and q l satis-
fying (16). The optimal choice of B to maximize (17) taking into account market clearing
and the Euler equations yields the following first order conditions to the government’s
program:

   ∂q a R
                  a
                          ∂lP a
                                                          
             1   ∂q  R             P
                                       P 1       a 1     1
 −      a −B R +     a −B −    q f l l         + q P − Eκ P ≥ 0 (19)
   ∂B         c0  ∂B        ∂B             cP0     c0    c1

which holds with equality unless B = B ∗ .
    The three terms in this first order condition provide some insight regarding the forces
determining the government’s optimal choice of debt. The first term captures the fact
that a higher level of debt increases the deposit rate, and this increases the welfare of
savers. More specifically, since the rich lend (aR − B > 0), an increase in government
debt increases the deposit rate (∂q a /∂B < 0) which benefits the them. The second term
captures the fact that a higher level of debt harms borrowers by increasing the deposit
and borrowing rates. More specifically, the increase in deposit rate—holding the interest
                                                       ∂q a R
                                                              a − B c1P < 0. This effect
                                                                    
spread fixed—reduces the welfare of borrowers by
                                                       ∂B             0
however is mitigated by the reduction in the premium paid by borrowers due to a lower
                                           ∂lP a       1
interest spread, and this is captured by −      q f lP lP P ≥ 0, which is strictly positive
                                           ∂B              c0
            P
whenever l > 0. The last term captures the fact that higher government debt directly
relaxes the borrowing constraint of the poor. The poor would like to borrow at the same
low rate as the government but are unable to. If the government increases public debt,
it is equivalent to the government borrowing more on the behalf of the poor, and this
relaxation of borrowing constraints increases social welfare. As such, the third term in
(19) which captures the marginal gain from relaxing the poor’s borrowing constraint is
positive.
    The optimal policy thus equalizes the marginal benefit of additional debt to its marginal
cost.

Proposition 2 (optimal policy) The optimal policy which maximizes (17) admits B <
B ∗ (partial crowd out).

   Proposition 2 states that the optimal policy involves an interior level of public debt
with partial crowd out of privately-issued safe assets. To understand this result, note that

                                             12
if B = B ∗ , the marginal benefit of a lower interest premium for borrowers in the second
term in (19) is zero. This is because borrowers are not engaging in any private borrowing.
Moreover, the third term in (19) is zero; the marginal benefit of additional liquidity for
borrowers is zero since they can borrow at the same interest rate as the government. As
such, (19) reduces to
                                  ∂q a R
                                                          
                                                1       1
                                −       a −B          − P
                                  ∂B              cR
                                                   0    c0
which is negative since cR    P
                         0 > c0 . Because borrowers have a higher marginal utility than
savers, higher government debt negatively affects social welfare on the margin. Therefore,
the optimal policy involves partial crowd out of privately-issued safe assets, with some
private borrowing, some defaults, and a spread between the borrowing and deposit rate.


3       Infinite Horizon Model
We now build on the insights of the two-period model by analyzing the stationary distri-
bution along the balanced growth path of an infinite horizon economy. In this section,
we introduce the infinite horizon environment, and in the next section, we describe our
numerical strategy for evaluating model and our quantitative results. This numerical exer-
cise allows us to check the robustness of the theoretical results from the two-period model.
It also allows us to determine the quantitative implications of our theoretical mechanism,
and to examine how credit market frictions impact the optimal level of public debt.


3.1     Environment
Our environment builds on the economy of Aiyagari and McGrattan (1998) by introducing
private financial intermediation with household default. We first describe the environment
and then focus our analysis on a balanced growth path of this economy in which there
are fluctuations in an individual household’s consumption, income, and wealth, but per
household variables are growing at a constant rate, with a cross-sectional distribution
which is constant over time (relative to aggregate income).

3.1.1    Technology

There is a continuum of infinitely lived households of mass 1 who receive idiosyncratic
shocks to their labor productivities and supply labor inelastically. Let et denote an house-
hold’s labor productivity, and suppose that this productivity is i.i.d. across households
and follows a Markov process over time. There are no aggregate shocks.

                                            13
   Output at date t is produced with a Cobb-Douglas technology, Yt = Ktα (zt Nt )1−α ,
where Kt is the capital stock, Nt is the aggregate labor input, and zt is a measure of an
aggregate labor-augmenting, exogenous technical efficiency in period t. We assume that
zt = (1 + φ)t where φ > 0 is the rate of technical progress. Capital depreciates at the
constant rate δ. There are competitive product and factor markets with wage rate wt and
rental rate of capital rt given by

                                                  Yt           Yt
                               wt = (1 − α)          and rt = α .                          (20)
                                                  Nt           Kt

3.1.2   Households

A household has preferences
                                       ∞
                                       X
                                   E         β t U (ct ) , β ∈ (0, 1)                      (21)
                                       t=0


                 c1−γ −1
where U (ct ) = t1−γ for γ > 0. A household with labor income wt et at date t faces
lump sum taxes Tt and a linear labor income tax τtn ; holds deposits at and owes debt lt ;
and chooses future deposits at+1 and future debt lt+1 . If a household defaults, it pays a
default cost κYt > 0, where κ is i.i.d. across the population distributed with c.d.f. F (κ).
This formalization captures the fact that aggregate default costs are constant as a share
of GDP along the balanced growth path.
     As in the two-period economy, given a default cost κYt , a household defaults (dt = 1)
if lt − at > κYt , and it does not default (dt = 0) if lt − at < κYt . The household’s budget
constraint at date t is:

              ct = wt et (1 − τtn ) − Tt − min {κYt , lt − at )} − qta at+1 + qtl lt+1 ,   (22)

where qta represents the price of a deposit and qtl represents the price of a bond issued by
the household at date t. Note that qta and qtl are deterministic from the perspective of the
household since there are no aggregate shocks.

3.1.3   Government

The government finances expenditures Gt and outstanding debt Bt by borrowing Bt+1
and by levying lump sum taxes Tt , labor income taxes τtn , and capital income taxes τtk
(levied on the return to capital net of depreciation). The government budget constraint



                                                   14
at date t satisfies

                      Gt + Bt = Tt + τtn wt Nt + τtk (rt − δ) Kt + qtg Bt+1 ,          (23)

where qtg is the price of a government bond. We assume that spending Gt equals a fixed
fraction of per-capita GDP, with G = Gt /Yt .

3.1.4   Financial Intermediation

As in the two-period model, there is a set of perfectly competitive financial intermediaries
who trade with households and the government anonymously. Moreover, they own the
capital stock Kt , rent it out to firms at a rental rate rt , and pay capital income taxes
τtk (rt − δ) Kt .
     As in the two-period model, competition in financial markets requires that the deposit
rate equals the interest rate for government borrowing so that intermediaries make zero
profit:
                                          qtg = qta .                                  (24)

   The deposit rate must equal the after tax return on capital:

                                1                          k
                                                             
                                    = 1 + (rt+1 − δ) 1 − τt+1 ,                        (25)
                                qta

and this follows from the fact that intermediaries must be indifferent between holding
capital and holding government bonds.
   Moreover,
                                  qtl = qta (1 − Dt+1 ) ,                         (26)

where 1 − Dt+1 is the aggregate recovery rate at date t + 1 from private lending in the
economy given the distribution of private borrowing lt+1 and future default decisions
dt+1 . This condition guarantees that intermediaries are indifferent between lending to the
government and lending to households.
   All of the newly issued assets at date t must be backed by newly issued government
bonds, newly installed capital, and new loans to households. Formally,

                                                1           qtl
                               At+1 = Bt+1 +        K t+1 +     Lt+1 ,                 (27)
                                                qta         qta

where At+1 corresponds to the sum of at+1 across the population and Lt+1 corresponds
to the sum of lt+1 across the population. Moreover, all of the outstanding assets at date


                                                15
t are backed by government bonds, the non-depreciated capital stock and the after-tax
income which it generates, and the recovered private loans:

                      At = Bt + 1 + (rt − δ) 1 − τtk Kt + (1 − Dt ) Lt .
                                                   
                                                                                            (28)


3.2    Equilibrium along the Balanced Growth Path
Along the balanced growth path, wt , Yt , and Kt all grow at the rate φ, whereas the interest
rate is constant with rt = r ∀t. Since capital grows at the same rate of output, we let
K = Kt /Yt . Aggregate labor is constant and equal to Nt = E (et ) since it is supplied
inelastically and there is no aggregate uncertainty.
    Bond prices are also constant, meaning qta = q a (and therefore qtg = q a ) and qtl = q l ∀t.
Government debt and lump sum taxes grow at the same rate as GDP with Bt /Yt = B and
Tt /Yt = T . Labor and capital income tax rates are constant with τtn = τ n and τtk = τ k .
Given (20), this means that the government budget constraint (23) can be represented in
terms of quantities normalized by aggregate income:

                  G + B = T + τ n (1 − α) + τ k (α − δK) + q a (1 + φ) B,                   (29)

    For a given household, we define normalized consumption e ct = ct /Yt . Since Yt grows
at a constant rate φ, household preferences (21) can be represented as
                                             ∞
                                      1−γ X       c1−γ
                 K   α/(1−α)
                               E (et )    E     β t , where βe = β (1 + φ)1−γ ,
                                                et e
                                                                                            (30)
                                            t=0
                                                  1−γ
                                                       α/(1−α)
                                                   K0
and we have taken into account that Y0 =           Y0
                                                       E (et ) in deriving household welfare
(30). Define normalized assets and debt eat = at /Yt and e
                                                         lt = lt /Yt . Substituting (20) and
(29) into (22), the household’s budget constraint can be rewritten in terms of normalized
quantities:
                        n                    o                                  
      ct = y (et ) − min κ + B, e
      e                               at − B) − (1 + φ) q a (e
                                lt − (e                      at+1 − B) − q le
                                                                            lt+1            (31)

for
            y (et ) = (1 − α) (1 − τ n ) et /E (et ) + τ n (1 − α) + τ k (α − δK) − G.      (32)

Note that for the purposes of our later discussion, we have incorporated the level of gov-
ernment debt B directly into the household’s budget constraint in its relation to household
assets e
       at .


                                                   16
    If we define the highest realized default cost κ as κ, it follows that a household’s choice
of normalized private debt e lt is bounded from above by some l = κ > 0, since any debt in
excess of this amount would never be repaid. As such, we can write a household’s problem
at any date t recursively in terms of normalized quantities:


                                                        c1−γ
                                                               h                 i
                                                                       0  0   0   0
                                                                         l , e , κ , |e
                                                        e
              V ea, l, e, κ =
                    e                max                     + βE
                                                               e V e  a ,e                   (33)
                                        l0 ∈[0,l]
                                  a0 ≥0,e
                                c,e
                                e                       1−γ
                                           s.t.
                           n                    o                            
            c = y (e) − min κ + B, e
            e                      l − (e                     a0 − B) − q le
                                        a − B) − (1 + φ) q a (e            l0                (34)

    Note that since q a > q l , a household never chooses e  a0 > 0 and el0 > 0 by analogous
logic as in the two-period economy.                                                         e0
                                      Therefore, default tomorrow occurs whenever κ < l ,
which occurs with probability F e                                       l0 .
                                      l0 , otherwise a household repays e
              n          o
    Let ω = e     l, e, κ ∈ Ω represent the state for a given household and let e
               a, e                                                                  a (ω) and
l (ω) denote the values of e
e                            a and e                             a∗ (ω) and e
                                    l associated with ω. Letting e           l∗ (ω) denote the
optimal choices of e  a0 and e
                             l0 which solve (33) − (34) given ω, we can define a probability
density function Γ (ω) in the population under the stationary equilibrium associated with
         a∗ (ω) and e
policies e          l∗ (ω). Given Γ, we can define the aggregate (normalized) assets A,e
                                          e and the aggregate recovery rate 1 − D with
the aggregate (normalized) private loans L,
                                           Z
                                A
                                e =                  a (ω) Γ (ω) dω,
                                                     e                                       (35)
                                           Zω∈Ω
                                L
                                e =                  l (ω) Γ (ω) dω, and
                                                     e                                       (36)
                                             ω∈Ω
                                            R
                                               ω∈Ω
                                                  l (ω) Iκ<el Γ (ω) dω
                                                  e
                                D =             R                      ,                     (37)
                                                     l (ω) Γ (ω) dω
                                                     e
                                                    ω∈Ω


where Iκ<el is an indicator function which equals one when the default shock is smaller than
outstanding debt, and otherwise Iκ<el equals zero. Given these aggregates, the no arbitrage
conditions in (24) − (26) can be written as independent of time along the balanced growth
path. Moreover, by analogous reasoning, market clearing conditions (27) and (28) can be
normalized by output and also written as independent of time.
                                                                              
   A competitive equilibrium along the balanced growth path n  given policies
                                                                        o       B, G, τ n , τ k , T
                                 a l
corresponds to a set of prices q , q , r , aggregate quantities K, A,
                                                                    eL e , an aggregate de-
fault rate D, and a joint stationary distribution Γ which satisfy the following conditions:


                                                          17
       a∗ (ω) and e
    1. e          l∗ (ω) solve the household’s optimization program in (33) − (34),

    2. Firms maximize profits given wages and rental rates so that (20) holds,

    3. The government budget constraint (29) is satisfied,

    4. There is no arbitrage in financial markets so that (24) − (26) hold, and

    5. The market clears so that (normalized) (27) − (28) hold.


4       Quantitative Exercise
In this section, we quantitatively assess the properties of the stationary distribution along
the balanced growth path. We begin by describing our parameter choices for this exercise.
We then move to assess the impact of government debt on privately-issued safe assets,
interest rates, and inequality. We conclude by characterizing the optimal level of public
debt which maximizes social welfare along the balanced growth path.


4.1     Parameters and Computation
We now describe our choice of parameters.

4.1.1    Technology

We choose standard parameters following Aiyagari and McGrattan (1998), with α = 0.3
for the capital share of income, δ = 0.075 for the capital depreciation rate, and φ = 0.0185
for the growth rate of labor-augmenting technical change.
    We model the process of idiosyncratic labor productivity following Guvenen, Ozkan,
and Song (2014):

                    ln et = ln νt + t , t ∼ N 0, σ2
                                                           

                    ln νt = ρ ln νt−1 + ηt , where
                            (
                                η1t ∼ N (µ1 , σ12 ) with probability 1 − p
                       ηt =                                                .
                                η2t ∼ N (µ2 , σ22 )   with probability p

We let σ2 = 0.186, ρ = 0.979, µ1 = 0.119, µ2 = −0.114, σ12 = 0.325, σ22 = 0.001, and
p = 0.49.14 The process for the persistent component of earnings, νt , is generated using a
  14
     This process comes from Model 1 in Table 1 for normal times in Guvenen, Ozkan, and Song (2014).
Given our discretization of the earnings process, µ2 is chosen to ensure that the mean of log et is zero in


                                                    18
four-point discretization as in Civale, Diez-Catalan, and Fazilet (2017). The idiosyncratic
component of earnings t is estimated with two equal probability shocks around 0.

4.1.2    Households

Following Aiyagari and McGrattan (1998), we set the CRRA parameter to γ = 1.5 and
the discount rate to β = 0.971 so that each time period corresponds to a year.15

4.1.3    Government

Following Aiyagari and McGrattan (1998), we choose the value of public debt to GDP
B = 0.67 and government spending to GDP, G = 0.20. Following Domeij and Heathcoate
(2004), we set the tax rate on labor income τ n = 0.27 and the tax rate on capital income
to τ k = 0.40. The value of lump sum taxes T is chosen so as to satisfy the government
budget constraint.

4.1.4    Financial Intermediation

We are left to choose the stochastic process for the default cost κ. We let κ take on
two possible values, {κ, κ}, where Pr{κ = κ} = χ. We choose κ, κ, and χ jointly so as
to target three empirical moments in the U.S. economy: the aggregate recovery rate of
private loans, 1 − D, which is 97.2 percent;16 the percentage of households with negative
net worth with at = 0, which is 17.6 percent;17 and the proportion of households in default
which is 0.20 percent.18

4.1.5    Balanced Growth Path

Table 1 summarizes the calibrated parameters together with targeted moments. Table 2
summarizes the parameters which are set exogenously (that is, outside the model).
the stationary distribution.
   15
      This corresponds to the parameterization in which Aiyagari and McGrattan (1998) focus on the
liquidity role of public debt by adjusting changes in public debt with changes in lump sum taxes (see p.
463).
   16
      This represents the average charge-off rate on consumer loans from 1995 to 2017. See CORCACBS
in FRED, https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/CORCACBS.
   17
      This is the fraction of households with negative net worth in 2013 according to the U.S. Census.
   18
      The fraction of households filing for bankruptcy is calculated for 2017 using the same method as
Chatterjee, et al (2007). See http://www.uscourts.gov/statistics-reports/caseload-statistics-data-tables.




                                                   19
                             Table 1. Calibrated Parameters
   Parameter              Value                    Target                  Model         Data
   Low default cost, κ     2.000     Recovery rate on private loans         0.972        0.972
   High default cost, κ    2.280     Fraction indebted households           0.179        0.176
   Pr {κ = κ}, χ           0.116    Percentage households in default        0.20%        0.20%



                             Table 2. Exogenous Parameters
         Parameter                                              Value


         Technology
         Capital share, α                                         0.30
         Depreciation rate, δ                                     0.075
         Growth rate of technology, φ                            0.0185
         Earnings process:
         Variance of temporary shock, σ2                         0.186
         Normal mixture, {µ1 , σ12 , µ2 , σ12 , p} {0.119, 0.325, −0.114, 0.001, 0.49}
         Autocorrelation, ρ                                       0.979

         Preferences
         CRRA coefficient, γ                                     1.5
         Discount factor, β                                     0.971

         Policy
         Public debt / GDP, B                                    0.67
         Government spending / GDP, G                            0.20
         Labor income tax rate, τ n                              0.27
         Capital income tax rate, τ k                            0.40

    We discuss the numerical method used to compute the stationary distribution in de-
tail in the Appendix. The computational algorithm—based on the discretization of the
state space—is standard, with the exception that relative to the baseline Aiyagari and
McGrattan (1998) model, there are two assets e
                                             a and el and two prices q a and q l , instead


                                              20
of one asset and one price. To simplify the problem, we appeal to the fact that a house-
hold never chooses
                 n to   o simultaneously borrow and lend. This allows us to reduce the two
state variables e a, e l in (33) into a single state variable. Our procedure is based on first
guessing q a and q l , solving for the household’s problem, and then updating our guesses of
q a and q l based on how well the implied equilibrium satisfies the no arbitrage condition
(26) and the market clearing condition (27).
    Table 3 summarizes the moments from the balanced growth path.

                         Table 3. Moments from Balanced Growth Path
                         Variable                                       Value
                         Capital / GDP, K                               2.01
                         Deposit rate, 1/q a − 1                        4.4%
                         Borrowing rate, 1/q l − 1                      7.2%
                         Privately-issued safe assets / GDP, L
                                                             e          0.161

    The distribution of after-tax income, wt et (1 − τtn ) − Tt , along the balanced growth
path and its comparison to the U.S. data is summarized in Table 4.19 Our cross-sectional
distribution of income is very close to that in the data.

                         Table 4. Income Distribution in Model vs Data
                               Variable     Data (PSID) Model
                               Q1 share           4.5            5.7
                               Q2 share           9.9            12.0
                               Q3 share           15.3           13.2
                               Q4 share           22.8           26.7
                               Q5 share           47.5           42.4
                               Gini               0.42           0.37

                                  a −e
    The distribution of net worth e   l, along the balanced growth path and its comparison
to the U.S. data is summarized in Table 5.20 Our cross-sectional distribution of wealth is
close to the difference between the bottom 40 percent and the top 60 percent of the wealth
distribution. We note that as is common in heterogeneous agent economies, our model
misses the concentration of wealth in the top quintile (see De Nardi, Fella, and Pardo,
2016). In the Appendix, we extend the environment to allow for shocks to household net
 19
      The distribution from PSID is from Kruger, Mitman, and Perri (2016) Table 1.
 20
      The distribution from SCF is from Krueger, Mitman, and Perri (2016) Table 1.


                                                  21
worth following Hubmer, Krusell, and Smith (2017). We show that such an extension
allows us to better match the empirical concentration at the top and does not change the
qualitative predictions of our numerical model.



                     Table 5. Wealth Distribution in Model vs Data
                            Variable    Data (SCF) Model
                            Q1 share         −0.2         −5.6
                            Q2 share         1.2          6.1
                            Q3 share         4.6          16.6
                            Q4 share         11.9         29.3
                            Q5 share         82.5         53.7
                            Gini             0.78         0.60

4.2    Effect of Changing Public Debt
We now explore the effect of changing the level of public debt B. Starting from our
computed stationary distribution, we change B, keeping all other exogenous parameters
fixed and accommodating changes in B with changes in lump sum taxes T , as in the
two-period model of Section 2. In principle, given the government budget constraint (29),
higher public debt can be associated with increases in any combination of the labor income
tax rate, capital income tax rate, or lump sum tax. Our formulation which focuses on
adjusting the lump sum tax T allows us to consider the role of public debt as a substitute
for private liquidity without confusing this role with that of redistributive taxation which
affects the income process y (et ).
    More formally, the household’s problem in (33) − (34) is equivalent to letting the
household issue some non-defaultable debt B − e    a0 ≤ B at price q a and defaultable debt
l0 ≤ l at price q l < q a given an income process y (et ). Since households clearly prefer to
e
issue non-defaultable debt, an increase in government debt B is equivalent to relaxing
financing constraints on households by allowing them to issue more non-defaultable debt.
In this sense, public liquidity here serves as a substitute for private liquidity, and an
increase in government debt relaxes household’s borrowing constraints without directly
affecting the distribution of income.




                                             22
4.2.1    Crowd Out of Privately-Issued Safe Assets

Figure 1 illustrates the impact of changing public debt B on total assets A    e and on the
                                                           l
capital stock plus privately-issued safe assets, q1a K + qqa L.
                                                             e As in the two-period economy
of Section 2, an increase in public debt increases total assets in the economy while simul-
taneously crowding out privately-issued safe assets. In this dynamic environment with
capital, higher public debt also crowds out capital, an effect not captured in our two-
period model. This crowding out effect reduces the level of output along the balanced
growth path.
    More specifically, an increase in government debt by 1 percent of GDP reduces privately-
issued safe assets by 0.051 percent of GDP and the capital stock by 0.076 percent of
GDP.21


                            4



                                                                                   Total Assets
                           3.5
              Assets/GDP




                            3




                           2.5
                                                                                    PSAs + Capital



                            2




                           1.5
                              ‐40%   ‐20%   0%    20%   40%    60%    80%   100%      120%    140%   160%   180%   200%
                                                          Public Debt/GDP



                                                 Figure 1: Public Debt and Assets

    As in the two-period economy, the crowd-out of privately-issued assets is partial. For
example, in the neighborhood of a public debt to GDP ratio of 67 percent, the average
borrowing household reduces its borrowing by 0.29 percent of GDP in response to an
increase in public debt to GDP by 1 percent. Recall from our discussion of the two-
  21
    The crowding out of privately-issued safe assets in the model is qualitatively consistent with the
empirical evidence of crowd out (e.g., Gorton, et al, 2012 and Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen,
2015). The magnitude of the coefficient in the model cannot be directly compared to the coefficient in
the data, however, since many privately-issued safe assets in the data are also backed by capital projects.


                                                                     23
period model that, under Ricardian Equivalence, an increase in public debt reduces private
borrowing one for one for every borrowing household. However, in the presence of financial
market frictions, this is no longer the case since the government is able to borrow at a
lower interest rate than households, so that an increase in public debt slackens borrowing
households’ financial constraints.22

4.2.2    Interest Rates and Default

Since an increase in public debt raises overall borrowing demand, this puts upward pres-
sure on the deposit rate. Figure 2 displays the positive relationship between public debt
and the deposit rate (1/q a − 1).

                              7.50%



                              7.00%
                                                                                                Borrowing Rate

                              6.50%



                              6.00%
             Interest Rates




                              5.50%



                              5.00%



                              4.50%
                                                                                                     Deposit Rate


                              4.00%



                              3.50%
                                   ‐40%   ‐20%     0%   20%   40%    60%    80%       100%   120%   140%   160%     180%   200%

                                                                    Public Debt/GDP




                                                 Figure 2: Public Debt and Interest Rates

   Our analysis suggests that an increase in government debt by 1 percent of GDP in-
creases the deposit rate by 0.003 percent. This effect is consistent with numerous empirical
studies which find that higher government debt increases interest rates.23
   22
      Note that in the presence of Ricardian Equivalence, measured crowd out of privately-issued safe assets
in the overall economy (not per borrower) is mechanically less that one for one and equal to the fraction
of households that are privately borrowing and are reducing their individuals loans one for one. Barro,
Fernández-Villaverde, Levintal, and Mollerus (2017) make a similar point in their model of safe assets
where Ricardian Equivalence holds.
   23
      The quantitative magnitude of this estimate is in the lower the range of the effect documented in the
literature. See Haugh, Ollivaud, and Turner (2009) Table 1 for a survey of these estimates.


                                                                           24
    Note that the impact of higher public debt on the borrowing rate (1/q l − 1) is non-
monotonic; it is positive for low debt and negative for high debt. The positive effect is due
to the higher deposit rate. The negative effect is due to the reduction in default risk in
the economy given the crowd out of private borrowing. Figure 3 shows that the fraction
of households in default declines as public debt rises.
                                                0.350%




                                                0.300%
             Households in Default/Population




                                                0.250%




                                                0.200%




                                                0.150%




                                                0.100%
                                                      ‐40%   ‐20%    0%   20%   40%    60%    80%   100%   120%   140%   160%   180%   200%

                                                                                 Public Debt/GDP



                                                                    Figure 3: Public Debt and Defaults

    Figure 4 displays the interest rate implications of this decline in defaults. As in the
two-period model, as public debt rises, the interest spread—measured here as 1/q l −1/q a —
falls. Since this spread is positively correlated with the number of aggregate defaults, it
falls as defaults fall. More specifically, an increase in government debt by 1 percent
of GDP reduces the interest spread by 0.0043 percent. The effect of public debt on
the interest spread is qualitatively consistent with the empirical evidence. For example,
Cortes (2003) and Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2012) document a negative
relationship between public debt and various measures of interest spreads, such as the
spread between the return on corporate bonds and the return on government debt.24
    In sum, Figures 2-4 depict how higher public debt reduces financial market inefficien-
cies by reducing interest spreads and reducing default. A government is able to reduce
these inefficiencies since it can commit to repaying debt and can consequently borrow at
a cheaper interest rate than the private sector.
  24
    We find similar patterns when analyzing net chargeoff rates on consumer bank loans, a proxy for
aggregate default. Details available upon request.

                                                                                         25
                                   3.40%



                                   3.20%



                                   3.00%
            Interest Rate Spread



                                   2.80%



                                   2.60%



                                   2.40%



                                   2.20%



                                   2.00%
                                        ‐40%   ‐20%   0%   20%   40%      60%     80%    100%   120%   140%   160%   180%   200%

                                                                       Public Debt/GDP



                                               Figure 4: Public Debt and the Interest Spread

4.2.3   Inequality

Figure 5 illustrates the distributional consequences of increasing public debt. The y-axis
in Figure 5 represents the average welfare for each quintile of the welfare distribution. We
have demeaned welfare for each group by the welfare under a government debt to GDP
ratio -40 percent, which is the minimum of the range in the figure. We represent the
change in welfare relative to this baseline in consumption equivalent terms.
    Changes in public debt have very different consequences for different segments of the
population. For illustration, an increase in public debt from -40 to 100 percent of GDP
reduces the welfare of the bottom quintile by 0.72 percent in consumption equivalent
terms and increases the welfare of top quintile by 1.17 percent in consumption equivalent
terms.
    These observation are consistent with our results in the two-period example, and the
intuition is similar. As public debt rises, interest rates rise, and this benefits the wealthy
who save and harms the poor who borrow. Therefore, the rich in the top quintiles are
made strictly better off as public debt rises, while the poor in the bottom quintile are
made strictly worse off. Therefore, even though an increase in public debt makes financial
markets more efficient by relaxing financial constraints, it also increases inequality.




                                                                                26
                                                      2.00%

                                                                                                                                   Q5
                                                      1.50%



                                                      1.00%                                                                         Q4

               Welfare by Quintile (CE, normalized)
                                                      0.50%                                                                         Q3



                                                      0.00%                                                                        Q2


                                                      ‐0.50%


                                                                                                                              Q1
                                                      ‐1.00%



                                                      ‐1.50%



                                                      ‐2.00%
                                                            ‐40%    ‐20%   0%   20%   40%    60%     80%      100%   120%   140%    160%   180%   200%

                                                                                            Public Debt/GDP



                                                                   Figure 5: Public Debt and Welfare Inequality

4.3     Optimal Public Debt
We now consider the optimal level of public debt which maximizes social welfare along
the balanced growth path.25 We then describe how this value depends on financial market
frictions.

4.3.1   Optimal Public Debt in Benchmark Model

Figure 6 depicts aggregate welfare as a function of public debt (in consumption equivalent
terms and demeaned by the welfare under a government debt to GDP ratio -40 percent).
For low values of public debt, welfare rises in public debt since the benefit of reducing
financial market inefficiencies outweighs the cost of rising inequality and a lower capital
stock. For high values of public debt, the marginal benefit of reducing financial frictions
declines by more than the marginal cost of rising inequality and a lower capital stock. For
this reason overall welfare declines.
    We find that the optimal value of public debt is 145 percent of GDP. Relative to
our starting point with a value of debt equal to 67 percent of GDP, the interest spread
now is 2.4 percent versus 2.8 percent and the fraction of indebted households is 14.4
percent versus 17.9 percent. The optimal value of public debt does not fully crowd out
  25
   Social welfare along the balanced growth path corresponds to the expectation of (30) across the
population.

                                                                                                27
                                         1.6%
                                                                                                               B*=145%

                                         1.4%



                                         1.2%
              Welfare (CE, normalized)


                                         1.0%



                                         0.8%



                                         0.6%



                                         0.4%



                                         0.2%



                                         0.0%
                                             ‐40%   ‐20%   0%   20%   40%    60%    80%   100%   120%   140%   160%      180%   200%
                                                                       Public Debt/GDP




                                                            Figure 6: Public Debt and Welfare

privately-issued safe assets which are equal to 13 percent of GDP. A partial equilibrium
calculation suggests that the value of public debt required for such full crowd out would
be significantly larger at 393 percent of GDP. Our quantitative result is thus consistent
with the qualitative results in the two-period model in Proposition 2.26,27

4.3.2    Role of Financial Frictions

Table 6 considers the effect of different levels of financial frictions on the economy. Column
1 describes the benchmark environment under the optimal public debt policy. Column
2 considers the optimal policy in an economy without private borrowing with l = 0, in
which case the optimal value of public debt is 198 percent of GDP.28 Column 3 considers
the optimal policy in an economy with private borrowing l > 0, but without default with
  26
      The analog of Proposition 2 holds in our two-period environment if we incorporate a capital stock
since the marginal cost of reducing the capital stock starting from full crowd out is zero.
   27
      Given the difficulty in calculating the stationary distribution in the absence of borrowing constraints
(see Krebs, 2004), we cannot explicitly calculate the value of government debt associated with full crowd
out. Our partial equilibrium calculation holds the deposit rate fixed and the distribution of income y (et )
fixed and determines the value of debt needed to relax the borrowing limit of all households.
   28
      For comparison, the optimal value of public debt in the model of Aiyagari and McGrattan (1998)
when changes in public debt are accommodated with lump sum taxes is 140 percent (p. 463). We achieve
a different result here since we consider a different process for income, have different levels of capital and
labor income taxes, and have an exogenous labor supply.


                                                                                   28
Pr {κ = κ} = 1 (so that default is too costly for everyone). In this case, the optimal value
of public debt is -30 percent of GDP.29 By construction, since there are no defaults in
either environments, the interest spread is zero, and the main role played by government
debt is in its ability to relax the borrowing constraint imposed by the private borrowing
limit l.



                               Table 6. Role of Financial Frictions
                                                                       No               No
       Variable                                 Benchmark
                                                                    Borrowing          Default
       Public debt / GDP                               1.45             1.98            −0.30
       Capital / GDP                                   1.96             1.99            1.99
       Deposit rate                                    4.7%             4.6%            4.6%
       Borrowing rate                                  7.1%             4.6%            4.6%
       Privately-issued safe assets / GDP              0.13               0             0.43
       Fraction indebted households                    0.144              0             0.346

    Our optimal value of public debt to GDP of 145 percent is between these two scenarios.
It is below the optimal value of debt in the absence of private borrowing since government
debt is not as important for relaxing liquidity constraints in our setup. It is also above
the optimal value of debt in the absence of default.30 This suggests that credit market
frictions play an important role in determining the optimal level of public debt. The
presence of default risk in our environment increases the liquidity benefit of public debt
for two reasons.
    First, relative to a default-free environment with borrowing, the fraction of households
which directly benefit from public liquidity increases in our framework, since any borrow-
ing household is subject to an interest rate premium relative to the government. To see
this intuitively, turn to the optimality condition (19) for public debt in the two-period
economy. Note that the third term in (19) applies to any borrowing household in our
environment. In contrast, in an environment without default, the analog of the third
term in (19) only applies to households at the borrowing limit l, since these are the only
credit constrained households.
  29
     This result is consistent with that of Röhrs and Winter (2017) who find that the optimal level of
public debt is negative in an economy in which there is private borrowing but no default.
  30
     Note that by construction, the no borrowing and the no default scenarios are equivalent in terms of
steady state allocations. However, the optimal value of public debt differs in the two scenarios because
of the presence of a private borrowing limit l which normalizes this optimal value.


                                                  29
   To illustrate this points, Figure 7 compares the welfare effect of higher public debt
in our benchmark environment relative to a default-free environment. The welfare of
the bottom quintile and the welfare of the top quintile are represented in consumption
equivalent terms, normalized at their value at a public debt to GDP ratio of -40 percent.
The figure shows that as public debt rises, the relative decline in welfare for the lowest
quintile is significantly mitigated in our environment relative to an environment without
default. As a comparison, this difference is not as apparent for the highest quintile, for
which the change in welfare is closer across the two environments.

                                            2.00%                                                                            Benchmark ‐
                                                                                                                             Top 80%

                                            1.50%


                                            1.00%
                                                                                                     No Private Default
                                            0.50%                                                    ‐ Top 80%
           Welfare Gains (CE, normalized)




                                            0.00%


                                            ‐0.50%

                                                                                                                             Benchmark ‐
                                            ‐1.00%
                                                                                                                             Bottom 20%

                                            ‐1.50%


                                            ‐2.00%
                                                                                                      No Private Default ‐
                                                                                                      Bottom 20%
                                            ‐2.50%


                                            ‐3.00%
                                                  ‐40%   ‐20%   0%   20%   40%   60%   80%    100%      120%    140%      160%    180%     200%
                                                                                  Public Debt/GDP




                                              Figure 7: Welfare Gain in Benchmark vs No Private Default

    The second reason why the presence of default risk increases the liquidity benefit
of public debt is that the cost of higher public debt through higher borrowing rates is
mitigated in our framework, since higher public debt also reduces default risk and the
interest premium faced by borrowing households. To see this intuitively, turn again to
the optimality condition (19) for public debt in the two-period economy. The second
term in (19) which captures the cost of higher borrowing costs for borrowing households
includes the mitigating effect of a lower interest spreads resulting from higher public debt.
The analog of this term in an environment without default does not include such an effect.
Figure 8 illustrates this point by showing that in our environment, the borrowing rate
is not very responsive to increasing public debt since the increase in the deposit rate is

                                                                                       30
                                            9%
                                                                                                              No Private Default


                                            7%




                                            5%
              Borrowing Rate (normalized)


                                            3%




                                            1%

                                                                                                                     Benchmark
                                            ‐1%




                                            ‐3%




                                            ‐5%
                                               ‐40%   ‐20%   0%   20%   40%      60%     80%    100%   120%   140%   160%    180%   200%

                                                                              Public Debt/GDP



 Figure 8: Borrowing Rate Effect of Public Debt in Benchmark vs No Private Default

mitigated by the reduction in the interest spread. In contrast, in an environment without
default, there is a much larger increase in the borrowing rate which hurts borrowers.


5    Conclusion
We have presented a theory of the optimal long-run supply of public and private liquidity
in an environment in which government debt competes with privately-issued safe assets.
According to our model, an increase in public debt crowds out privately-issued safe assets
less than one to one, decreases interest spreads, and increases deposit rates. These results
are qualitatively consistent with the empirical evidence. Our main result is that while
an increase in public liquidity does reduce financial market frictions, it also comes at a
cost of higher inequality. As such, the goal of optimal policy should not be to induce full
crowd out of privately-issued safe assets since this would increase inequality. We find that
the optimal level of public debt is rising in the level of financial market frictions.
    Our analysis leaves several important avenues for further study. First, we have ab-
stracted away from privately-issued safe assets backed by capital projects, and a natural
question for future analysis concerns the extent to which public debt may serve to crowd-
in capital by facilitating borrowing for the purpose of investment. Second, and relatedly,
there is typically a maturity mismatch between privately-issued safe assets which are

                                                                                    31
short-term securities and the pools of loans backing them which are long-term. This
mismatch may impact the relative efficiency of private versus public liquidity and may
also inform the government’s choice of optimal government debt maturity. Finally, we
have ignored the interaction between fiscal policy and monetary policy in the provision
of public liquidity.31 A better understanding of how these interact in the provision of
liquidity, both theoretically and empirically, is an important area for further research.
  31
   In related work, for example, Kocherlakota (2003) explores the interaction between money, liquid
bonds, and illiquid bonds in a heterogeneous agent economy.




                                                32
6    Bibliography
Aiyagari, S. Rao and Ellen McGrattan (1998) “The Optimum Quantity of Debt,”
Journal of Monetary Economics, 42, 447–469.
     Aiyagari, S. Rao, Albert Marcent, Thomas Sargent, and Juha Seppala
(2002) ”Optimal Taxation without State-Contingent Debt,” Journal of Political Econo-
my, 110, 1220-1254.
     Angeletos, George-Marios, Fabrice Collard, and Harris Dellas (2016) ”Pub-
lic Debt as Private Liquidity: Optimal Policy,” Working paper.
     Athreya, Kartik B. (2002) ”Welfare Implications of the Bankruptcy Reform Act
of 1999,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 49, 1567-1595.
     Azzimonti, Marina, Eva de Francisco, and Vincenzo Quadrini (2014) ”Finan-
cial Globalization, Inequality, and the Rising Public Debt,” American Economic Review,
104, 2267-2302.
     Azzimonti, Marina and Pierre Yared (2017) ”A Note on Optimal Fiscal Policy
under Private Borrowing Limits,” Economics Letters, 151, 62-65.
     Barro, Robert J. (1979) “On the Determination of Public Debt,” Journal of Po-
litical Economy, 87, 940–971.
     Barro, Robert J., Jesús Fernández-Villaverde, Oren Levintal, and Andrew
Mollerus (2014) ”Safe Assets,” Working Paper.
     Bhandari, Anmol, David Evans, Mikhail Golosov, and Thomas Sargen-
t (2016) ”Fiscal Policy and Debt Management with Incomplete Markets,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, forthcoming.
     Carapella, Francesca and Stephen D. Williamson (2015) ”Credit Markets,
Limited Commitment, and Government Debt,” Review of Economic Studies, 82, 963-990.
     Carlson, Mark, Burcu Duygan-Bump, Fabio Natalucci, Bill Nelson, Marce-
lo Ochoa, Jeremy Stein, and Skander Van den Heuvel (2016) “The Demand for
Short-Term, Safe Assets and Financial Stability: Some Evidence and Implications for
Central Bank Policies,” International Journal of Central Banking 12, 307-333.
     Chatterjee, Satyajit, Dean Corbae, Makoto Nakajima, and José-Vı́ctor
Rı́os-Rull (2007) ”A Quantitative Theory of Unsecured Consumer Credit with Risk
of Default,” Econometrica, 75, 1525-1589.
     Civale, Simone, Luis Diez-Catalan, and Fatih Fazilet (2017) ”Discretizing a
Process with Non-zero Skewness and High Kurtosis,” Working Paper.
     Cortes, Fabio (2003) “Understanding and Modelling Swap Spreads,” Bank of Eng-
land Quarterly Bulletin, 43 , 407–16


                                         33
    De Nardi, Mariacristina, Giulio Fell, and Gonzalo Paz Pardo (2016) ”The
Implications of Richer Earnings Dynamics for Consumption and Wealth,” Working Paper.
    Domeij, David and Jonathan Heathcoate (2004) ”On the Distributional Effects
of Reducing Capital Taxes,” International Economic Review, 45, 523-554.
    Elenev, Vadim, Tim Landvoigt, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh (2018) ”A
Macroeconomic Model with Financially Constrained Producers and Intermediaries,” Work-
ing Paper.
    Engen, Eric M. and R. Glenn Hubbard (2005) “Government Debt and Interest
Rates”, in M. Gertler and K. Rogoff, NBER Macroeconomics Annual.
    2004, Cambridge: MIT Press, 2005.
    Gomes, Francisco, Alex Michaelides, and Valery Polkovnichenko (2013)
”Fiscal Policy and Asset Prices with Incomplete Markets,” Review of Financial Studies,
26, 531-566.
    Gorton, Gary, Stefan Lewellen, and Andrew Metrick (2012) ”The Safe-Asset
Share,” American Economic Review, 102, 101-106.
    Greenwood, Robin, Samuel G. Hanson, and Jeremy C. Stein (2016) ”The
Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet as a Financial Stability Tool,” Federal Reserve of Bank
of Kansas City Economic Policy Symposium, Jackson Hole, WY.
    Guvenen, Fatih, Serdar Ozkan, and Jae Song (2014) ”The Nature of Counter-
cyclical Income Risk,” Journal of Political Economy, 122, 621-660.
    Haugh, David, Patrice Ollivaud, and David Turner (2009) ”What Drive
Sovereign Risk Premiums?” OECD Economics Department Working Paper.
    Holmstrom, Bengt and Jean Tirole (1998) ”Private and Public Supply of Liq-
uidity,” Journal of Political Economy, 106, 1-40.
    Hubmer, Joachim, Per Krusell, and Anthony A. Smith, Jr. (2017) ”The
Historical Evolution of the Wealth Distribution: A Quantitative-Theoretic Investigation”,
Working Paper.
    Kocherlakota, Narayana R. (2003) ”Societal Benefits of Illiquid Bonds,” Journal
of Economic Theory, 108, 179-193.
    Krebs, Tom (2004) ”Non-existence of Recursive Equilibria on Compact States S-
paces When Markets Are Incomplete,” Journal of Economic Theory, 115, 134-150.
    Krishnamurthy, Arvind, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen (2012) ”The Aggre-
gate Demand for Treasury Debt,” Journal of Political Economy, 120, 233-267.
    Krishnamurthy, Arvind, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen (2015) ”The Impact
of Treasury Supply on Financial Sector Lending and Stability,” Journal of Financial
Economics, 118, 571-600.

                                           34
    Krueger, Dirk, Kurt Mitman, and Fabrizio Perri (2016) ”Macroeconomics
and Household Heterogeneity,” Handbook of Macroeconomics, 2, 843-921.
    Laubach, Thomas (2003) “New Evidence on the Interest Rate Effects of Budget
Deficits and Debt”, Federal Reserve Board Finance and Economics Discussion Series, 12.
    Livshits, Igor, James MacGee, and Michèle Tertilt (2007) ”Consumer Bankrupt-
cy: A Fresh Start,” American Economic Review, 97, 402-418.
    Lucas, Robert E., Jr. and Nancy L. Stokey (1983) “Optimal Fiscal and Mone-
tary Policy in an Economy without Capital,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 12, 55–93.
    Plosser, Charles I. (1982) ”Government Financing Decisions and Asset Returns,”
Journal of Monetary Economics, 9, 325-352.
    Plosser, Charles I. (1987) ”Fiscal Policy and the Term Structure,” Journal of
Monetary Economics, 20, 343-367.
    Röhrs, Sigrid, and Christoph Winter (2017) ”Reducing Government Debt in
the Presence of Inequality,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 82, 1-20.
    Werning, Iván (2007) ”Optimal Fiscal Policy with Redistribution,” Quarterly Jour-
nal of Economics, 122, 925-967.
    Woodford, Michael (1990) ”Public Debt as Private Liquidity,” American Economic
Review, 80, 383-88.
    Yared, Pierre (2013) ”Public Debt under Limited Private Credit,” Journal of the
European Economic Association, 11, 229-245.




                                         35
7     Appendix
7.1    Proof of Theoretical Results
Proof of Lemma 1. We first establish that aR > 0 which implies from the discussion
in the text that lR = 0. Suppose by contradiction that a aR = 0. Since B > 0, from (13)
and the fact that optimality requires of lP > 0 only if aP = 0, it follows that aP > 0 so
that (14) binds for i = P and lP = 0. There are two cases to consider. In the first case,
consider if lR = 0. (14) for i = R requires

                                          1       1
                                  qa        a
                                               ≥     .                                (38)
                                       1+∆+q B   1−B

but this contradicts (14) which binds for i = P . In the second case, consider if instead
lR > 0, then (15) binds for i = R, and and substitution of (12) into (15) implies

                                   1               1
                          qa        a   l  R
                                             =            .                           (39)
                               1+∆+q B+q l     1 − B − lR

Equations (13), (14) for i = P (which binds), and (39) all imply that

                                     1             1
                                            <            ,
                                 1 − B − lR   1 − B + aP

which is a contradiction since aP > −lR . Therefore, aR > 0 and lR = 0. The discussion
in the text implies the second part of the lemma.

   Proof of Lemma 2. Suppose that B ≥ B ∗ . Let us assume and later establish that
the constraint that ai ≥ 0 does not bind. This means that lP = lR = 0. Therefore, q a = q l
from (16) and there is no default so that (2) binds. (14) becomes

                              1             1         1
                               a   R
                                          = a                  and                    (40)
                     1 + ∆ − q (a − B)      q 1 + (aR − B)
                              1             1         1
                                          =                  ,                        (41)
                     1 − ∆ − q a (aP − B)   q a 1 + (aP − B)

and the summation of these two first order conditions taking into account (13) implies
that q a = 1. Substitution of q a = 1 into (40) and (41) implies that aR = B + ∆/2 and
aP = B −∆/2. Therefore, cP0 = cP1 = 1−∆/2 and cR         R
                                                    0 = c1 = 1+∆/2 so that consumption
is unresponsive to local changes in B.
    We are left to establish that the constraint that aP ≥ 0 does not bind. Suppose that


                                            36
it did bind. From (13), this implies that aR ≥ 2B ≥ ∆ and (40)—which must continue
to hold—implies that q a ≤ 1. There are two cases to consider. Suppose first that lP = 0.
In this case, aP = 0 and aR = 2B from (13). The fact that aP ≥ 0 is a binding constraint
implies from (14) that
                                      1         1 1
                                          a
                                             > a        ,
                               1−∆+q B         q 1−B
but this implies that q a > 1, which is a contradiction. If instead lP > 0, then (15) taking
into account (16) implies

                                  1                1       1
                                                 =                ,
                          1 − ∆ + q a B + q l lP   q a 1 − B − lP

but since lP > 0, this also implies that q a > 1, which is a contradiction. This establishes
that the constraint that aP ≥ 0 cannot be binding.

    Proof of Proposition 1. Suppose that B < B ∗ . From the proof of Lemma 2, it
cannot be the case that the constraint that aP ≥ 0 is not binding since in that situation,
q a = 1, aR = B + ∆/2 and aP = B − ∆/2, but this violates the constraint that aP ≥ 0.
Therefore, aP = 0. As such the economy is characterized by (40) and (15) for i = P . We
can rewrite (15) for i = P as

                                      1                   1    1
                                                        ≤ a           ,                (42)
                    1−∆+     qa                 P    P
                                  (B + (1 − F (l )) l )  q 1 − B − lP

where we have taken into account (16).
   Equation (42) binds whenever lP > 0. We first establish that (42) must bind. If it
does not bind, then lP = 0 which means that (42) becomes

                                     1      1 1
                                       a
                                          < a    .                                     (43)
                                  1−∆+q B  q 1−B

Since B < B ∗ , (43) implies q a < 1. Moreover, (13) implies that aR = 2B. Substitution
into (40) given B < B ∗ implies q a > 1, which is a contradiction. Therefore, (42) holds
with equality. (13) taking into account (16) can be rewritten as


                               1 R                 1 P
                                 a = B + 1 − F lP      l .                             (44)
                               2                     2

(40), (42) which binds, and (44) provides a system of three equations and three unknowns
 a R P
 q ,a ,l    for a given B. (40) implies that aR − B rises as q a declines. Substitution of


                                             37
(44) into (40) and (42) which binds implies that

                                                            1
                                         qa =           1                                          (45)
                                                1−      2
                                                          F  (lP ) lP
                                                                                         
which means that lP declines when q a declines. Now consider (44). Note that 1 − F lP lP =
     P
exp−l lP is rising in lP as long as lP < 1, which must hold to guarantee cP1 > 0. Therefore,
                                                  
by our above reasoning, − aR − B + 1 − F lP lP declines as q a declines, which from
(44) means that B must rise as q a declines. Finally, consider the value of q l , given the
representation in (45):

                                                           P
                                                             
                                                1 −  F   l
                                         ql =                   .
                                              1 − 21 F (lP ) lP
It follows that the derivative of this term with respect to lP given the functional form for
F takes the same sign as                                  
                                      1    lP      P
                                                      1
                                 −      exp 1 − l +                                     (46)
                                      2                  2
which is negative since lP < 1. Therefore, q l declines as lP declines.
    These observations imply that as B rises, q a declines. Since lP declines, q l declines
from (46) and q l /q a rises given (16).
    From (40) it follows that as B rises and q a falls, cR
                                                         0 falls. From (2), this means that
cP0 rises. This last observation implies the last result that q l lP declines by less than the
increase in q a B.
    Proof of Proposition 2. By Proposition 1, lP ≥ 0 is strictly decreasing in B, and
there is no loss maximizing welfare with respect to lP .32 Consider the analog of (19) with
respect to lP :

          ∂q a
                                                                                 
                                 1   1                           1 ∂B     a 1     1
         − P aR − B                                 P       a P
                                                       
                                 R
                                   − P       −f l           q l P + P    q P − Eκ P ≤ 0            (47)
          ∂l                    c0  c0                          c0 ∂l      c0    c1
which holds with equality whenever lP > 0. Suppose that B = B ∗ with lP = 0 is optimal
                             ∂q a
and consider (47). Note that P can be derived from (45) and is finite and negative at
                             ∂l
lP = 0. Furthermore, (42) which holds with equality together with (45) define B as a
function of lP :
                          1
                            ∆ − lP 2 − F lP (1 + (1 − ∆) /2) .
                                                            
                    B=
                          2
  32
    The same analysis holds by taking the derivative with respect to B; we pursue this route to simplify
the steps.




                                                    38
                                           ∂B
Differentiation of this equation implies that  is finite at lP = 0. Using this information,
                                           ∂lP
substitution into (47) given lP = 0 and B = B ∗ implies
                                                                    
                                         R
                                                            1   1
                                    − a −B                   R
                                                               − P       ≤ 0.
                                                            c0  c0

From (44), aR −B > 0, which means that this first order condition can only hold if cR    P
                                                                                    0 ≤ c0 .
However, this contradicts the fact that if B = B ∗ , then cR               P
                                                           0 = 1 + ∆/2 > c0 = 1 − ∆/2.



7.2     Algorithm for Quantitative Exercise
To solve the model, we take into account that (33) can be rewritten as a function of a
                                                                                a0 > 0 only
single state variable since an optimal decision for the household requires that e
   l0 = 0 and e
if e          l0 > 0 only if e
                             a0 = 0. Define

                                                                 ql e
                                          m = −e
                                               a+B+                 l.
                                                                 qa

It follows then that (33) can be rewritten as:


                                                    c1−γ
                                                                                
                                                                   0 0     0
                                                         + βE [V (m , e , κ ) |e]
                                                    e
                        V (m, e, κ) = max0                 e
                                         c,m        1−γ
                                                        s.t.
                                                0      ql
                                               m ≤ B + a l,
                                                      q
                           c = y (e) − m
                           e            e (m) + (1 + φ) q a m0 , and
                             
                              m
                                                  if m ≤ B                       
                                     qa                                         ql
                     m
                     e (m) =   B + ql (m − B) if m ∈ B, B +                     qa
                                                                                   κ   .
                                                                  l
                               B+κ                 if m > B + qqa κ
                             

         
For any B, q a , q l , we compute the solution to this problem using standard discretization
methods. In particular, we discretize m using a fine grid and compute policy rules given
the state space ω = {m, e, κ}. These rules are subsequently used to compute the stationary
distribution Γ (ω).33                                        h             i
                                                          a
    To solve the equilibrium prices given B, we guess q ∈ β/ (1 + φ) , 1 .
                                                               e

  33
     The capital to labor ratio K in this case which enters additively in y (e) is pinned down by the choice
of q a given equations (20) and (25).


                                                        39
                       h               i
  1. Given any q a ∈ β/  e (1 + φ) , 1 , we solve for a value of q l such that under the
     implied distribution Γ (ω), the no arbitrage condition (26) is satisfied. This is done
                                
     by solving for Γ (ω) given q a , q l , then choosing a new guess for q l which satisfies
     (26) under Γ (ω), and repeating the process until the new guess equals the old guess.

  2. We perform a bisection method iteration to solve for q a (and the implied q l from
     step 1). This bisection method builds on the fact that satisfaction of the market
     clearing condition in (27) which relates total assets to government debt, capital, and
                                                         
     total private borrowing. Therefore, if a guess for q a , q l implies that assets exceed
     borrowing, the new guess for q a increases, whereas the oppositve occurs if borrowing
     exceeds assets. This iteration stops once (27) is satisfied.


7.3    Economy with Net Worth Shocks
In this section, we consider an extension of our model which introduces exogenous shocks
to household net worth. This extension allows us to better match the empirical concentra-
tion of wealth at the top. We describe the extension and show that our main result—that
the optimal level of public debt does not induce full crowd out—is robust.
    Following Hubmer, Krusell, and Smith (2017), households are subject to i.i.d. shocks
to their net worth in every period. More specifically, a household exiting period t − 1 with
net worth at − lt , enters period t with net worth ξ(at − lt ), where ξ ≥ 0 is distributed with
c.d.f. H (ξ), where the expected value of ξ is 1. These net worth shocks are a reduced
form representation of differences in returns across households due to factors such as
imperfect diversification and transaction costs. As has been shown in the literature,
incorporating such shocks allows a heterogeneous agent model to better quantitatively
match the empirical concentration of wealth at the top. We follow Hubmer, Krusell, and
Smith (2017) by abstracting from the microfoundations for these shocks. This means that
the distribution of net worth shocks is invariant to the level of public debt.
    As in the two-period economy, given a default cost κYt , a household defaults (dt = 1)
if ξ(lt − at ) > κYt , and it does not default (dt = 0) if ξ(lt − at ) < κYt . The household’s
budget constraint at date t is:

             ct = wt et (1 − τtn ) − Tt − min {κYt , ξ(lt − at )} − qta at+1 + qtl lt+1 .

Given this structure, it is still the case that a household only chooses lt > 0 if at = 0 and
vice versa, which simplifies the analysis.
    Note that the net worth shock ξ is i.i.d. and independent of at+1 and lt+1 . Therefore,

                                                 40
the sum of at+1 and lt+1 equals the sum of ξat+1 and ξlt+1 across the population, respec-
tively. As such, the aggregate market clearing constraints (27) − (28) are not affected by
the existence of the net worth shocks. Note further that given the highest realized default
cost κ as κ and the highest realized net worth shock ξ, it follows that a household’s choice
of normalized private debt e lt is bounded from above by some l = κ/ξ > 0, since any debt
in excess of this amount (conditional on ξ) would never be repaid.
    The definition of the equilibrium under this extension is isomorphic to the environment
in the main text with the exception that the state ω now incorporates the shock ξ, and
(37) is replaced by:
                                     R
                                          ξe
                                           l (ω) Iκ<ξel Γ (ω) dω
                                D = ω∈Ω R                        .
                                              l (ω) Γ (ω) dω
                                              e
                                            ω∈Ω

    For our computation, we choose the same parameters as in the model without net
worth shocks with a few exceptions. We choose the discount rate β such that at our
benchmark level of a public debt to GDP ratio of 67 percent, the deposit rate equals
4.4 percent, as in the model without net worth shocks.34 Such an adjustment allows
us to more appropriately contrast the conclusions of an analysis with and without net
worth shocks. This adjustment yields a choice of β = 0.982. In addition, we choose
the stochastic process for the default cost κ and the stochastic process for the net worth
shock ξ jointly. As in the main text, we let κ take on two possible values, {κ, κ}, where
Pr{κ = κ} = χ. We also let ξ take on two possible values {ξ, ξ}, where the probability
of each shock is chosen to ensure that the expected value of ξ is 1. These parameters are
chosen to target the same moments as in the main text plus one additional moment: the
share of wealth held by the top 60 percent of households, which is 99 percent.35,36
    The values of the net worth shocks imply that with a 96 percent probability, household
net worth increases by 4 percent in absolute value, and with a 4 percent probability,
household net worth decreases by 96 percent in absolute value. This feature allows us
to match the concentration of wealth in the top 60 percent of the wealth distribution by
inducing more precautionary savings by positive net worth households.
    The third column in Table 7 describes the distribution of wealth in our extended envi-
ronment relative to a model without net worth shocks, and it illustrates the importance
of this shock for better matching this concentration of wealth at the top, particularly for
the top quintile.
  34
     An analogous adjustment to the discount factor is performed across experiments in the related work
of Aiyagari and McGrattan (1998).
  35
     The share of wealth held by the top 60 percent of households is from Krueger, Mitman, and Perri
(2016), Table 1, using the SCF.
  36
     Our exercise yields parameters {κ, κ, χ} = {0.567, 0.678, 0.109}.

                                                  41
                     Table 7. Wealth Distribution in Model vs Data
                                                             Model with
                                           Benchmark
              Variable    Data (SCF)                         Net Worth
                                             Model
                                                               Shocks
              Q1 share        −0.2               −5.6             −1.6
              Q2 share        1.2                 6.1             2.6
              Q3 share        4.6                16.6             10.1
              Q4 share        11.9               29.3             24.1
              Q5 share        82.5               53.7             64.9
              Gini            0.78               0.60             0.63

    The effect of changes in public debt on the economy is similar in this extended model
as under our benchmark and can be described by analogous figures to Figures 1-5. We
find that introducing net worth shocks lowers the optimal level of public debt to -15
percent of GDP. Higher public debt is more costly in this extended framework since the
ensuing higher interest rates exacerbate the degree of wealth inequality. Moreover, net
worth shocks also reduce the liquidity benefit of public debt. This is because a net worth
shock can occasionally wipe out a poor household’s private debt, but it does not change
the poor household’s lump sum tax burden which finances the interest on public debt.
    Despite this difference in the level of optimal public debt, we find that the role of
financial frictions is similar in this extended model. More specifically, the optimal value
of public debt is below the optimum in the absence of private liquidity—which is -5
percent of GDP—and above the optimum in the absence of default risk—which is -25
percent of GDP. Table 8, which is analogous to Table 6, summarizes the effect of financial
frictions in an environment with net worth shocks. The first column describes the baseline
environment with private borrowing and default under the optimal policy. The second
column describes the optimal policy without private borrowing and third column describes
the optimal policy with private borrowing in the absence of default.




                                            42
                  Table 8. Role of Financial Frictions with Net Worth Shocks
                                                                         No                No
       Variable                                   Benchmark
                                                                      Borrowing           Default
       Public debt / GDP                               −0.15              −0.05             −0.25
       Capital / GDP                                   2.16               2.20              2.12
       Deposit rate                                    3.8%               3.7%              4.0%
       Borrowing rate                                  7.2%               3.7%              4.0%
       Privately-issued safe assets / GDP              0.06                 0               0.08
       Fraction indebted households                    0.202                0               0.256

    To check robustness, we have also explored another approach which sets the discount
factor β to 0.991, as in the benchmark model of Aiyagari and McGrattan (1998).37 The
effect of changes in public debt on the economy is qualitatively similar in this exercise,
and we find that the optimal level of public debt is now positive and equal to 12 percent
of GDP. The optimal value of public debt is below the optimum in the absence of private
liquidity—which is 30 percent of GDP—and above the optimum in the absence of default
risk—which is 0 percent of GDP.38
    In sum, our introduction of net worth shocks—which increases wealth inequality—
does not impact our conclusion regarding the importance of credit frictions for increasing
the optimal level of public debt. Note that while net worth shocks significantly reduce
the optimal level of public debt in our experiment, we conjecture that the introduction
of other factors which increase wealth inequality could also increase the optimal level of
public debt. For example, as is noted in Hubmer, Krusell, and Smith (2017), allowing
for heterogeneous discount factors would allow us to better match this concentration
of wealth at the top. Such an extension would also cause a utilitarian planner to care
more about more patient and wealthier households in determining optimal policy, which
would presumably lead to a higher optimal level of public debt. Given the presence of
numerous potential factors underlying wealth inequality—which are beyond the scope of
this paper—we leave a full exploration of these various factors and their impact on the
optimal level of public debt to future work.


  37
     In this exercise, the parameters of the default cost shock and the net worth shock are chosen to target
the same empirical moments that we previously described.
  38
     As is noted in Aiyagari and McGrattan (1998) the optimal value of public debt in a heterogeneous
agent framework is very sensitive to the value of β.


                                                    43
