                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          SOCIAL CAPITAL, GOVERNMENT EXPENDITURES AND GROWTH

                                   Giacomo A.M. Ponzetto
                                        Ugo Troiano

                                     Working Paper 24533
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w24533


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    April 2018




We are grateful for their helpful comments to Jordi Gali, Jim Hines, Joel Slemrod and seminar
participants at ESSIM, the SED Annual Meetings, the CRENoS Workshop on Institutions,
Individual Behavior and Economic Outcomes, the University of Kentucky and the University of
Michigan. Ponzetto acknowledges financial support from the Spanish Ministry of Science and
Innovation (grant JCI-2010-08414), the Spanish Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness and
its Severo Ochoa Programme for Centres of Excellence in R&D (grants SEV-2011-0075,
RYC-2013-12838, ECO-2014-59805-P and SEV-2015-0563), the Government of Catalonia and
its CERCA Programme (grants 2009 SGR 1157 and 2014 SGR 830) and the BBVA Foundation
through its first grant for Researchers, Innovators and Cultural Creators. Troiano acknowledges
financial support from the University of Michigan, the Harvard Department of Economics, the
Harvard Multidisciplinary Program in Inequality and Social Policy and the Bank of Italy. We
thank Chiara Ferrero and Alex Wolfe for research assistance. The opinions expressed in this
project belong to the authors and the BBVA Foundation is not responsible for them, nor do they
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Giacomo A.M. Ponzetto and Ugo Troiano. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Social Capital, Government Expenditures and Growth
Giacomo A.M. Ponzetto and Ugo Troiano
NBER Working Paper No. 24533
April 2018
JEL No. D72,D83,H4,H52,I22,I25,O43,Z13

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper shows that social capital increases economic growth by raising government
investment in human capital. We present a model of stochastic endogenous growth with
imperfect political agency. Only some people correctly anticipate the future returns to current
spending on public education. Greater social diffusion of information makes this knowledge more
widespread among voters. As a result, we find it alleviates myopic political incentives to
underinvest in human capital, and it helps the selection of politicians that ensure high productivity
in public education. Through this mechanism, we show that social capital raises the equilibrium
growth rate of output and reduces its volatility. We provide evidence consistent with the
predictions of our model. Individuals with higher social capital are more informed about their
government. Countries with higher social capital spend a higher share of output on public
education.


Giacomo A.M. Ponzetto
CREI, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, and Barcelona GSE
C/ Ramon Trias Fargas, 25-27
08005 Barcelona
Spain
gponzetto@crei.cat

Ugo Troiano
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
611 Tappan Street, Lorch Hall 219
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER
troiano@umich.edu
1    Introduction
How does social capital contribute to economic growth? A growing body of evidence doc-
uments it does (Knack and Keefer 1997; Zak and Knack 2001; Tabellini 2009; Algan and
Cahuc 2010). However, the underlying causal mechanisms remain poorly understood. The
very concept of social capital popularized by Putnam (1993) and Fukuyama (1995) hinders a
precise study of these mechanisms because it is too broad and too vague (Solow 1995; Durlauf
and Fafchamps 2005; Jackson 2010; Guiso, Sapienza and Zingales 2011). If “social capital
refers to connections among individuals— social networks and the norms of reciprocity and
trustworthiness that arise from them” (Putnam 2000, p. 19), surely it must have bene…cial
economic consequences through uncountable channels. Nonetheless, a rigorous analysis of
particular transmission channels remains crucial to understanding the social determinants
of economic development.
    In this paper we propose and analyze one novel mechanism through which social capi-
tal causes economic growth. The greater social di¤usion of information about government
activity induces greater investment, as well as higher and less volatile productivity, in the
provision of public education. We formalize this insight in a tractable model of stochastic
endogenous growth with imperfect political agency. We then exploit survey evidence to show
that the distinctive theoretical predictions of our model …nd empirical support at both the
individual and the aggregate level. People with higher social capital are more informed about
their government. Countries with higher social capital spend a higher share of income on
public education.
    In our model, endogenous long-run growth is supported by investments in human and
physical capital. Capital accumulation cannot be undertaken by the private sector alone,
but requires an indispensable government investment in public education. Politicians with
heterogeneous skills set taxes and allocate spending between public education and other
public services, with an eye to re-election. Voters retain or dismiss the incumbent government
according to their inference of its skills, based on imperfect information. All voters observe
the provision of public services that immediately raise their utility. Instead, not everyone
correctly anticipates the returns to public education in terms of future economic growth.
Crucially, knowledge of the e¤ectiveness of government investment in human capital spreads
through social connections.
    Our precise operational de…nition of social capital is the rate of social di¤usion of in-
formation. When it is low, we …nd that political career concerns induce a myopic bias in
government spending. By oversupplying public services with immediate payo¤s, politicians
raise their appeal among all voters. By undersupplying public education, they lower their


                                              1
appeal only among a subset of more knowledgeable citizens. As a result, in equilibrium
the government invests too little in human capital. When social capital is higher, however,
knowledge spreads more widely across the electorate. Politicians are more likely to face
electoral punishment if they mismanage public education, so they raise education spending
towards the …rst best. Moreover, their equilibrium selection re‡ects more accurately their
skill at managing government investment in human capital. Both better political incentives
and better political selection raise the long-run growth rate of output. Better screening also
reduces its short-run volatility, which stems from the endogenous evolution of stochastic
government competence.
    Our theory accounts for several important facts, beyond our motivating evidence that so-
cial capital raises economic growth. First, social capital is also associated with lower volatility
of output growth (Sangnier 2013). Second, social capital improves both politicians’incen-
tives and their selection (Nannicini et al. 2013; Padró i Miquel et al. 2015). Third, frictions
in political agency induce underinvestment in public education, particularly in poorer coun-
tries. One reason for such insu¢ cient investment is that voters underestimate its returns
and thus have a distorted demand for education (Jensen 2010; Banerjee and Du‡o 2011;
Bursztyn 2016).1 Better voter information raises both the amount and the productivity of
government investment in human capital (Reinikka and Svensson 2004, 2005).
    In our empirical analysis, we also provide evidence in support of our two distinctive the-
oretical predictions that had not been brought to the data before. First, our model predicts
that social capital improves government accountability by raising voter information. We test
this prediction in survey data from the American National Election Studies, which include
standard proxies for both social capital and political knowledge. As predicted, respondents
reporting higher trust also score higher on all standard measures of information, like their
ability to name candidates and incumbents or their willingness to rate politicians’ideology.
We obtain analogous results if we proxy for social capital with the propensity to discuss
politics with family and friends— a less standard measure, but one particularly germane to
our focus on the social di¤usion of information.
    Turning from individual to aggregate outcomes, the key macroeconomic prediction of our
model is that social capital raises the long-run growth rate by increasing the share of output
devoted to public education. We test this prediction across countries, measuring social capital
with averages responses in the World Values Survey. As predicted, government spending
on education is a higher share of GDP in countries with higher social capital— whether
   1
    Bursztyn (2016) shows that poverty biases people against education spending, both as voters and as
parents. This bias can result both from credit constraints and from misperceptions caused by the cognitive
burden of poverty (Shah, Mullainathan and Sha…r 2012).



                                                    2
measured by trust or by the likelihood of obtaining information from friends and colleagues.
This relationship is robust to controlling for geographic and demographic characteristics,
as well as for the overall size of government. To alleviate endogeneity concerns, we follow
Tabellini’s (2008) instrumental-variable strategy. Social capital is signi…cantly predicted by
the grammatical structure of a country’s main language. The positive e¤ect of social capital
on public education spending is robust to the use of this instrument, which minimizes the
threat of reverse causation.
    Our analysis focuses on the e¤ect of social capital on economic growth through higher
public investment in education. The empirical importance of such an education channel is
borne out by the …ndings of Gennaioli et al. (2013). Using both cross-country and cross-
regional data at the subnational level, they show that social capital signi…cantly predicts
economic development in a univariate setting. However, they …nd that this association is no
longer statistically signi…cant when controlling for human capital. The notion that higher
investment in human capital is a key transmission channel for the causal e¤ect of social
capital on economic growth is also buttressed by the leading role of human capital as a
driver of economic growth in general, whether across countries (Barro 1991; Manuelli and
Seshandri 2014) or sub-national regions (Gennaioli et al. 2013; Islam, Minier and Ziliak
2015).
    Our work is connected to several strands of literature. Most closely, a few models formal-
ize how social capital can foster economic development by facilitating market transactions
among private agents. In Zak and Knack’s (2001) model, social capital alleviates agency
frictions in …nancial intermediation, consistent with its empirical association with …nancial
development (Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales 2004). However, long-run growth may require
a switch from transactions supported by social bonds to contracts supported by formal
enforcement institutions (Routledge and von Amsberg 2003; Kumar and Matsusaka 2009;
Lindner and Strulik 2015). This cautionary theoretical prediction is consistent with his-
torical evidence (Greif 2006). We propose a complementary mechanism operating through
frictions in political rather than corporate agency, and we show that social capital enables
higher long-run growth by improving voters’ ability to monitor their government.2 Thus,
our model vindicates Bowles and Gintis’s (2002) insight that social capital and government
intervention may be complements rather than substitutes.
    We also contribute to the broader literature in economics that provides de…nitions of
social capital consistent with rigorous formal modeling. Our precise, tractable de…nition is
closest to Glaeser, Laibson and Sacerdote (2002), who interpret social capital as the resources
   2
   Empirically, social capital correlates with higher e¢ ciency in all large organizations, whether private or
public (La Porta et al. 1997).



                                                      3
that individuals can draw upon thanks to their network of interpersonal relations— a view
that harks back to sociologists’original de…nition of social capital (Bourdieu 1986; Coleman
1988; Lin 2001). Our focus on information is justi…ed by the long-standing recognition that
it is among the main resources obtained through social connections (Granovetter 1973; Cole-
man 1988; Lin 2001; Durlauf and Fafchamps 2005). Another product of social connections
is trust, the standard empirical proxy for social capital (Glaeser et al. 2000; Valenzuela,
Park and Kee 2009).3 The concept of social capital becomes ambiguous when it con‡ates
social connections and shared beliefs, norms and values (Putnam 1993, 2000; Fukuyama
1995). Guiso, Sapienza and Zingales (2011) resolve this ambiguity by de…ning civic capital
as the shared beliefs and values that help solve the problem of collective action. Both theory
and empirical evidence con…rm that growth-promoting cultural traits help economic devel-
opment (Galor and Moav 2002; Doepke and Zilibotti 2008; Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales
2016; Gorodnichenko and Roland 2017). Our analysis suggests that civic culture and social
capital— speci…cally, the social di¤usion of information— are distinct and complementary
drivers of growth.
     Our model also speaks to the political economy of public …nance under imperfect infor-
mation. Democratic governments underprovide public goods that are shrouded from voters’
view (Eisensee and Strömberg 2007; Mani and Mukand 2007). More opaque expenditures
and taxes are also more exposed to capture by special interests (Coate and Morris 1995;
Ponzetto 2011; Glaeser and Ponzetto 2014). A growing body of empirical evidence shows
that policy outcomes improve when citizens are more informed because politicians become
more responsive to voters’ needs (Besley and Burgess 2002; Reinikka and Svensson 2005;
Snyder and Strömberg 2010). The literature has focused on the media as the main source
of variation in voter information. We are the …rst to highlight theoretically and document
empirically that social capital plays a similar role by acting as a knowledge multiplier.
     Furthermore, we incorporate political agency and the social di¤usion of information into
a full-‡edged model of endogenous stochastic growth. Thus, we contribute to the literature
on political business cycles. Electoral pressures induce politicians to choose policies that try
to deliver short-run bene…ts but end up imposing long-run costs (Rogo¤ and Sibert 1988;
Persson and Tabellini 1990; Rogo¤ 1990). Economic performance ‡uctuates as politicians
with heterogeneous competence win and lose elections (Alesina, Londregan, and Rosenthal
1993; Alesina and Rosenthal 1995; Alesina, Roubini, and Cohen 1997). Our analysis ab-
stracts from variation in political incentives over the electoral calendar and from di¤erences
   3
    Moreover, Castelfranchi, Falcone and Marzo (2006) argue that to reap bene…ts from social relations it is
insu¢ cient to be merely connected, but it is necessary to be both connected and trusted. Bourlès, Bramoullé
and Perez-Richet (2017) study formally the e¤ect of altruism in social networks.



                                                     4
in policy preferences across rival parties. On the other hand, we model for the …rst time so-
cial capital in this framework, and we show it can alleviate the impact of imperfect political
agency on aggregate volatility.
    The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 presents our theoretical model.
Section 3 presents its dynamic stochastic equilibrium and discusses how social capital and
frictions in political agency determine realistic deviations from social optimality. Section
4 presents the novel empirical evidence supporting our theoretical predictions. Section 5
concludes. The Appendix provides all mathematical derivations and proofs.


2         Theoretical Model
2.1         The Economic Environment
A closed economy is populated by a measure-one continuum of in…nitely lived households
who have identical preferences over private consumption ct and government-provided public
services gt :
                              X1
                                   t
                        Ut =         Et [(1   ) log ct+s + log gt+s ] ,              (1)
                                       s=0

where 2 (0; 1) is the discount factor and 2 (0; 1) the relative weight of public services
in the utility function. The representative household inelastically supplies one unit of labor,
and its dynamic budget constraint is:

                                        at+1 = Rt at + (1       t ) wt   ct ,                                 (2)

where at denotes the household’s assets, Rt their gross return, wt labor earnings, and t 2
(0; 1) the tax rate on labor income.4
    Firms have a Cobb-Douglas production technology and operate in perfectly competitive
product and factor markets. Thus, production is represented by the neoclassical aggregate
production function:
                                 yt = Ah1t kt for 2 (0; 1) ,                           (3)

where yt is output, A is a productivity shifter, ht is human capital and kt is physical capital.
Physical capital depreciates fully every period, so its return equals: Rt = yt =kt . Each
household is endowed with a homogeneous amount ht of human capital and thus earns labor
earnings: wt = (1     ) yt .
   Physical and human capital are accumulated through investment by both private agents
    4
        Since labor supply is perfectly inelastic, labor taxes coincide with non-distortive lump-sum taxes.


                                                         5
and the government. The two investments are imperfect substitutes, so aggregate output
has decreasing returns in each but constant returns in both together (Barro 1990). For
simplicity, we assume that human capital is produced by public investment in education,
while physical capital is produced by private investment.5 The physical capital stock then
coincides with household assets: at = kt for all t. Since capital is not durable, the dynamic
budget constraint of the private sector can be rewritten:

                                      kt+1 = [1         (1       )    t ] yt   ct .                   (4)

   The government levies a ‡at tax t on labor income and …nances two types of public
expenditures under a balanced-budget constraint:

                                          t   (1        ) yt = xgt + xht ,                            (5)

where xgt denotes expenditures on public services and xht expenditures on public investment in
education. The two expenditures translate into provision of public services and accumulation
of human capital according to the stochastic technology:

                             gt = xgt exp ( gt ) and ht+1 = xht exp                   h
                                                                                      t   .           (6)

   Public-sector productivity gt ; ht represents the stochastic competence of the ruling
government in providing each public good. Government competence is independent across
the two types of expenditure, and it follows a …rst-order moving average process:

                                  g
                                  t   = "gt + "gt   1   and      h
                                                                 t   = "ht + "ht 1 .                  (7)

The innovations "gt and "ht are independent over time, across policies, and across politicians.
They are drawn from common-knowledge invariant distributions that are symmetric around
their mean Et "gt = Et "ht = 0. These distributions have variances Var ("gt ) = 2g and Var "ht =
  2
  h , and …nite supports [ ^ "g ; ^"g ] and [ ^"h ; ^"h ] respectively.
     The dynamics of competence shocks can intuitively represent a political party that con-
sists of overlapping generations of politicians. In each period t, the government comprises a
cohort of senior party leaders who are approaching retirement, and a cohort of rising young
politicians who will take over the party leadership in the following period. The …rst cohort
has productivity "gt 1 ; "ht 1 and the second "gt ; "ht , so the aggregate productivity of the
   5
    Our results would be substantially unchanged if we assumed that future output is determined as a Cobb-
Douglas function of four investments: private investment in physical capital, private investment in human
capital, public investment in physical capital and public investment in human capital.


                                                             6
ruling party is gt ; ht .
    The structure of our economy follows the seminal model of endogenous growth with real
business cycles (King, Plosser, and Rebelo 1988).6 Our crucial innovation is that aggregate
‡uctuations are driven by government productivity, which is not an exogenous process as in
the classic real business cycle model. The stochastic productivity of public investment in
education ( ht ) re‡ects not only exogenous ability draws, but also the endogenous dynamics
of electoral success. We focus on the political frictions that a¤ect the selection of politicians
and their incentives to invest in human capital.7


2.2     Social Capital and the Political Process
Government policy-making is the outcome of an electoral process that motivates politicians
through career concerns. Politicians internalize the welfare of the representative household,
out of benevolence or simply because each politician belongs to a representative household.
In addition, however, a politician derives an ego rent z > 0 in every period in which he holds
o¢ ce. If an incumbent is defeated in an election, his probability of returning to power in the
future is nil. As a consequence, a ruling politician does not make policy decisions purely to
maximize social welfare. He also aims at delivering policy outcomes that signal his ability
and thereby increase his chances of re-election (Alesina and Tabellini 2008).
    In the standard model of political career concerns, all voters perfectly observe all policy
outcomes, though none observes the politicians’ choices underpinning them. We assume
that information is even less complete, and that some voters reach the election with imper-
fect knowledge of policy outcomes (Strömberg 2004; Bo¤a, Piolatto, and Ponzetto 2016).
Crucially, the two types of government activity have di¤erent visibility. Public services (gt )
generate immediate utility bene…ts which are directly perceived by all citizens. In contrast,
public investments in human capital bear their fruits (ht+1 ) only with a lag. These returns
can be correctly anticipated by some voters. The remainder remain unaware of the social
returns to public education until they are realized. At the time of the election they cast
their ballot based on rational expectations (Et ht+1 ) rather than actual observation of policy
outcomes (ht+1 ).
   6
      In particular, we follow the canonical speci…cation of a logarithmic utility function, a Cobb-Douglas
production function, and non-durable capital. These assumptions are necessary for a stochastic growth
model to have an exact analytical solution (Long and Plosser 1983).
    7
      Aside from its endogeneity, stochastic investment productivity ( ht ) is isomorphic to a stochastic produc-
tivity of private production (ln At ). Cobb-Douglas technology implies that all productivity shocks are Hicks
neutral, while full depreciation implies that lagged shocks to capital accumulation are indistinguishable from
current shocks to aggregate productivity. Thus, we abstain from considering stochastic shocks to private-
sector productivity, which could be added without loss of tractability but would not yield any additional
insight.


                                                       7
    Recent …ndings in the education literature support the view that the return to public
investment in education is high, but more delayed and less visible than other government
expenditures. This observation is particularly consistent with the …nding that returns are
highest for early-childhood interventions, whose fruits are the most delayed in time (Cunha
and Heckman 2008; Chetty et al. 2011); and with the …nding that voters pay little heed to
education policies (Bursztyn 2016). Evidence from developing countries suggests that broad
misperception of the returns to education is a key determinant of educational failure (Jensen
2010; Banerjee and Du‡o 2011).
    The role of social capital in alleviating such misperception is the focus of our analysis. We
model the social di¤usion of information among voters according to the classic Bass (1969)
model. Each citizen can independently learn the true returns to human-capital investment
from sources such as campaigning politicians and the media. This external information
acquisition takes place at a constant rate p over continuous time. In addition, citizens also
acquire information through social interactions with other agents. Such interactions take
place at a constant rate q and match random pairs of citizens. If one of them is already
informed, knowledge then spreads socially to the other.
    As a result, the share of informed voters evolves over time according to the di¤erential
equation:
                                        0
                                          = (p + q ) (1   ).                                   (8)

Integrating Equation (8), after a unit amount of time the share of informed agents rises from
zero to an eventual level:
                                               1 e p q
                                   (p; q) =                 .                              (9)
                                            1 + (q=p) e p q
Voter knowledge is intuitively increasing in both exogenous information acquisition (@ =@p >
0) and social connectedness (@ =@q > 0).
    The rate of social information di¤usion q provides our formal measure of social capital.
It captures analytically sociologists’original de…nition of social capital as the resources that
individuals can draw upon thanks to their network of interpersonal relations (Bourdieu 1986;
Coleman 1988). It also re‡ects the long-standing recognition that information is among the
main resources obtained from social interactions (Granovetter 1973; Lin 2001; Durlauf and
Fafchamps 2005). In particular, social interactions play a key role in the acquisition of
political information (Cialdini 1984; Zaller 1992; Beck et al. 2002).8
   8
    Empirical evidence is consistent with the view that social capital raises voter awareness of all government
activity. In our model, all voters are perfectly informed of the quality of current public services gt , regardless
of their level of social capital. This simplifying assumption does not materially a¤ect our results. Our key
assumption is that government investment in human capital is a relatively more opaque dimension of public
spending. Even if voters were imperfectly informed about all dimensions of government activity, greater


                                                        8
   Within each period t, events unfold according to the following timeline.

   1. All agents observe the stocks of physical capital kt and human capital ht , output yt ,
      factor rewards Rt and wt , as well as the government’s past competence shocks "gt 1 and
      "ht 1 .

   2. The government sets the tax rate       t,   which all citizens observe.

   3. Citizens choose consumption ct and investment in physical capital kt+1 . Simultane-
      ously, the government chooses expenditures xgt and xht . No citizen can observe directly
      either expenditure, though all observe their sum.

   4. The government’s competence shocks "gt and "ht are realized, but they are not directly
      observable until the following period t + 1. The provision of public services gt and
      the accumulation of human capital ht+1 are determined as a consequence. All citizens
      observe the provision of public services gt .

   5. Over an amount of time normalized to unity, each citizen independently observes ht+1
      with a learning rate p > 0. Over the same period, information-sharing encounters
      between random pairs of citizens take place with a meeting rate q > 0. When an
      uninformed citizen has such a meeting with an informed citizen, he endogenously learns
      ht+1 .

   6. An election is held, pitting the incumbent against a single challenger, randomly drawn
      from a continuum of potential o¢ ce-holders whose ability is independently realized
      from the same distribution.

    The electoral aggregation of voters’preferences and information re‡ects an intensive mar-
gin of political support, following the probabilistic voting approach (Lindbeck and Weibull
1987; Persson and Tabellini 2000). Each voter’s preferences consist of two independent el-
ements. First, citizens have preferences over future policy outcomes. On the basis of all
information available to him, voter i has rational expectations that his future utility from
private consumption and public services will be Eit (Ut+1 jIt ) if the incumbent wins re-election,
or Eit (Ut+1 jCt ) if the challenger defeats him. In addition, voters are swayed by individual
responsiveness iI;t and iC;t to the candidates’non-policy characteristics, such as their per-
sonal likability or the long-standing ideology of their party. Voter i casts his ballot for the
incumbent if and only if Eit (Ut+1 jIt ) + iI;t Eit (Ut+1 jCt ) + iC;t .
social capital would make them disproportionately more knowledgeable about the more shrouded dimension
(Glaeser and Ponzetto 2014).


                                                    9
    Policy preferences can be summarized by the di¤erence it Eit (Ut+1 jIt ) Eit (Ut+1 jCt ).
Non-policy preferences can be disaggregated into two independent components, a common
and an idiosyncratic one: iC;t      i
                                    I;t
                                                 i
                                           t + t . Then i supports the incumbent if and only
                i
if it      t + t : The common shock      t is a measure of the incumbent’s overall popularity,

and it accounts for aggregate uncertainty in the electoral outcome. The idiosyncratic shock
  i
  t accounts for imperfect predictability of each agent’s voting decision. It is i.i.d. across
voters and over time. Both shocks are symmetric around zero, so non-policy preferences do
not induce a systematic pro- or anti-incumbent bias. Moreover, the support of the voters’
preference shocks t and it is su¢ ciently wide, and that of the politicians’ competence
shocks "gt and "ht su¢ ciently narrow, that neither the outcome of the election nor any single
voter’s ballot is perfectly predictable on the basis of policy outcomes gt and ht+1 alone.
Finally, we assume that both t and it are uniformly distributed, and denote by the
uniform density of t .


2.3    Solving for the Dynamic Equilibrium
The solution of our model describes the dynamic stochastic general equilibrium of the econ-
omy in terms of a welfare function and policy rule for private households. The additional
political structure of our model entails that the solution also includes a value function for
the ruling politician and the policy rule according to which he sets taxes and chooses public
investment in education.
    These political-economy functions are shaped by career concerns, as voters infer govern-
ment competence from the provision of public services and the returns to human-capital
investment. Given that ability follows a …rst-order moving average process, the incumbent’s
performance during his latest term in o¢ ce contains all available information about his future
competence. We will disregard the possibility of politicians developing a reputation for ignor-
ing career concerns, and restrict our analysis to Markov perfect equilibria. The requirement
of Markov perfection is not restrictive for economic decisions in our environment.
    According to the sequence of events outlined above, agents make choices and inferences
as follows.

  1. The initial state of the economy is described by the vector:

                                      st    kt ; ht ; "gt 1 ; "ht   1   ,                 (10)

      which includes the capital stocks and the known inherited components of government



                                              10
  competence. Output is determined according to the aggregate production function:

                                        yt = y (kt ; ht )       Ah1t         kt .                              (11)

  In equilibrium, the welfare of the representative household is de…ned by the function
  V (st ).

2. The government sets taxes according to the equilibrium rule:

                                                    t   = T (st ) .                                            (12)


3. Citizens observe the tax rate t and choose private investment in physical capital
   according to the equilibrium rule:

                                             kt+1 = K (st ;           t) .                                     (13)

  Consumption is jointly determined by the private-sector budget constraint (Equation
  4). At the same time, the government chooses public investment in education according
  to the equilibrium rule:
                                    xht = H (st ; t ) .                            (14)

  Expenditure on public services is jointly determined by the public-sector budget con-
  straint (Equation 5).

4. Public-good provision is realized according to its production technology (Equation 6)
   and the evolution of government competence (Equation 7).

5. The observation of the state st , taxes t and public services gt , jointly with rational
   expectations of the strategy H (st ; t ), allows all voters to infer with certainty the
   incumbent’s competence at providing public services:

             "g (st ;   t ; gt )   log gt   log [   t   (1     ) y (kt ; ht )       H (st ;   t )]   "gt 1 .   (15)

  A fraction (p; q) of informed voters also learn the true value ht+1 , and can likewise
  infer with certainty the incumbent’s competence at providing public investment in
  education:
                     "h (st ; t ; ht+1 ) log ht+1 log H (st ; t ) "ht 1 .           (16)

  The remaining fraction 1     (p; q) of uninformed voters do not learn ht+1 , and there-
  fore from their point of view "ht remains an unknown realization from the common-

                                                    11
      knowledge distribution of ability.

   6. The future capital stocks kt+1 and ht+1 are determined before the election and do not
      depend on its outcome. Policy preferences hinge on the comparison between the ability
      of the incumbent "gt ; "ht and that of the challenger, which we denote by ! gt ; ! ht . The
      challenger has no track record in o¢ ce, so the only information about his competence
      is that it is an independent draw from the common distribution of ability.
      Informed voters have policy preferences:


          1   (st ;   t ; kt+1 ; gt ; ht+1 )         V kt+1 ; ht+1 ; "g (st ;         t ; gt ) ; "
                                                                                                  h
                                                                                                      (st ;       t ; ht+1 )

                                                                                                  Et V kt+1 ; ht+1 ; ! gt ; ! ht ; (17)

      while uninformed voters have policy preferences:

                                                               h       h
          0   (st ;   t ; kt+1 ; gt )   Et V kt+1 ; e"t            1 +"t   H ( t ; st ) ; "g (st ;                  h
                                                                                                        t ; gt ) ; "t

                                                                                                 h        h
                                                                             Et V kt+1 ; e"t          1 +"t   H ( t ; st ) ; ! gt ; ! ht . (18)

      Given the independent realizations of the uniform idiosyncratic shocks it , the incum-
      bent is re-elected if and only if the realization of the aggregate popularity shock t is
      such that:

                      t       (p; q)     1   (st ;    t ; kt+1 ; gt ; ht+1 )   + [1         (p; q)]           0   (st ;   t ; kt+1 ; gt ) .   (19)


   To simplify the exposition, we give here a simpli…ed intuitive description of the dynamic
equilibrium. The complete formal de…nition is provided in the Appendix.

De…nition 1 A Markov-perfect dynamic equilibrium consists of a welfare function V (st ), an
additional value Z (st ) of holding political o¢ ce, a tax-setting rule T (st ), a public investment
rule H (st ; t ), and a private investment rule K (st ; t ) such that:

  1. The social welfare function V is de…ned recursively, given the policy rules T , K and
     H, and the equilibrium probability of the incumbent’s re-election.

  2. The additional value of political incumbency Z is de…ned recursively, given the equilib-
     rium probability of the incumbent’s re-election.

  3. Labor-income taxes T and expenditure on public education H are chosen by the govern-
     ment to maximize its objective function V + Z, which includes both social welfare and

                                                                     12
     the private value of re-election Z. The government rationally anticipates the private
     investment choice K as well as the probability of re-election.

  4. Private investment K is chosen by the representative household to maximize welfare
     V . The household rationally anticipates the government investment choice H as well
     as the incumbent’s probability of re-election.

    The …rst component of the dynamic equilibrium is the social welfare function, which is
de…ned recursively taking into account the equilibrium policy rule. It is not simply de…ned by
a Bellman equation because citizens choose their investment in physical capital to maximize
their utility— which coincides with social welfare— but politicians instead choose taxation
and investment in human capital with an eye to re-election. The outcome of the election
enters the welfare function because it determines whether in period t + 1 the government has
the competence of the period-t incumbent ("gt ; "ht ) or the challenger’s (! gt ; ! ht ).
    The second equilibrium component is the additional value of political incumbency that
distorts politicians’choices away from social welfare maximization. Its recursive de…nition is
simple because all the variation is coming from the probability of re-election, which responds
to equilibrium policy choices and to the realization of competence shocks.
    The government’s policy choices take into consideration both politicians’ concern for
welfare and their personal desire for re-election. The government …rst sets a tax rate, which
determines the budget constraints of both the private and the public sector. This choice
incorporates rational expectations of the investments, both public and private, that it will
induce. Then the government allocates public spending taking into account the tax rate t
and the ensuing public-sector budget constraint.
    At the same time, households choose consumption and savings to maximize welfare.
At the time of this choice, agents observe the tax rate t that determines the private-
sector budget constraint. Both the politicians and the representative household have rational
expectations over each other’s simultaneous investment choice and over electoral outcomes.
    Economic decisions are made by private agents and by the government based on the
same information. When the household budget and the government budget are allocated,
everybody knows the predetermined component of government productivity "gt 1 ; "ht 1 , but
nobody knows the period-t innovation "gt ; "ht . As a result, the government has no pri-
vate information to signal and its policy rule depends only on public information (st ). Yet,
policy-making crucially re‡ects the government’s incentives to manipulate voters’informa-
tion by “signal-jamming.” If the government raised expenditure on one public good above
the expected equilibrium amount, voters who observe the respective policy outcome would
be surprised and mistakenly infer an ability innovation above its true level.

                                             13
3       Political Agency and Equilibrium Dynamics
3.1     The E¢ cient Benchmark
We begin by characterizing the equilibrium in the absence of political-economy frictions.
The solution to the welfare-maximizing social planner’s problem provides a benchmark of
…rst-best optimality to which the equilibrium dynamics of the decentralized economy can be
compared.
    The benevolent planner controls both private and public spending, as well as political
turnover. His choices occur with the same timing as those of the decentralized economy. He
chooses ct , kt+1 , xgt and xht on the basis of st alone, before the competence shocks "gt and "ht
are realized. After the realization of the shocks, the planner chooses political turnover to
maximize social welfare.
    Again, we give here an intuitive description of the social optimum, whose formal de…nition
is provided in the Appendix.

De…nition 2 The solution to the planner’s problem consists of a welfare function V (st ), a
private investment rule K (st ), public spending rules G (st ) and H (st ), and a re-election
rule such that:

    1. The social welfare function V satis…es the Bellman equation for the welfare maximiza-
       tion problem, and the allocation of output (K ; G ; H ) is the associated optimal policy
       rule.

    2. The incumbent politician is re-elected if and only if

                             h       h                                               h       h
            V K (st ) ; e"t      1 +"t   H (st ) ; "gt ; "ht        Et V K (st ) ; e"t   1 +"t   H (st ) ; ! gt ; ! ht .


    Unlike the dynamic equilibrium of the decentralized economy characterized in De…nition
1, the planner’s problem is de…ned by a simple Bellman equation. All distortions arise
from imperfections in political agency. The politician’s objective does not coincide with the
voters’and the benevolent planner’s because he also cares for his own re-election (z > 0).
This private concern is irrelevant for welfare maximization, both because the incumbent is
a measure-zero atomistic agent, and because in any case there is a ruling politician enjoying
the value of o¢ ce z. His identity is irrelevant for a utilitarian social welfare function.9
    9
    Moreover, our de…nition of the social optimum treats as mere ‡ukes of electoral campaigning the non-
policy factors that randomly sway voters towards or against the incumbent ( t and it ). We assume that
voters are in‡uenced by transitory popularity shocks that do not truly translate into post-election welfare
gains. Thus, electoral aggregation of preferences is another source of political frictions. Even fully informed


                                                               14
    The planner’s problem admits a closed-form analytical solution.

Proposition 1 The solution to the planner’s problem is characterized by:

   1. The social welfare function:
                             8                                                            9
                             >
                             > (1   ) (1     ) log [(1     ) (1     )] +     log (    )   >
                                                                                          >
                             >
                             >                                                            >
                                                                                          >
                         1   < + (1    ) log [(1       ) ] + (1       ) log [(1       ) ] =
         V (st ) =
                     1       >
                             >          + log A + log kt + (1          ) log ht           >
                                                                                          >
                             >
                             >                                                            >
                                                                                          >
                             :                       + (1         g
                                                               ) "t 1 + (1         ) "t 1 ;
                                                                                       h


                                                                     + Et         "gt +           (1    ) "ht   0 .
                                                                                          1

   2. The allocation of output:

                    K (st )               G (st )                             H (st )
                                =    ,                = (1         ) , and                = (1         ) .
                   y (kt ; ht )          y (kt ; ht )                        y (kt ; ht )

   3. Re-election of the incumbent politician if and only if:

                                             "gt +            (1     ) "ht    0.
                                                     1

    The model is solved by the educated guess of the tractable separable form:

                         V (st ) = v0 + vk log kt + vh log ht + v"g "gt       1   + v"h "ht 1 .                  (20)

The invariant optimal allocation of output is a standard feature of analytically tractable
real business cycle models. With Cobb-Douglas technology and preferences, all types of
consumption and investment have constant budget shares. Consumption is optimized when
the ratio of expenditure on private consumption and public services equals the ratio of
their shares in the household utility function (ct =xgt = = (1       )). Investment is opti-
mized when the ratio of investments in private capital formation and public education equals
the ratio of the shares of physical and human capital in the aggregate production function
(kt+1 =xht = = (1    )). With full capital depreciation every period, the allocation of output
voters fail to follow the welfare planner’s optimal rule for the selection of politicians, which is based on
inferred competence only. Alternatively, we could assume that the voters’taste shocks re‡ect a meaningful
component of their welfare after the election. Then the outcome of the election would be welfare-maximizing
if and only if voters are fully informed ( (p; q) = 1). Our results would be qualitatively una¤ected, and the
only quantitative di¤erence would be in the distribution of the government’s optimal competence t .



                                                         15
between consumption and investment is optimized when their ratio equals the ratio of the
discounted weights of the current period and the in…nite future in the social welfare function
((ct + xgt ) = kt+1 + xht = (1        ) = ). All in all, output is optimally allocated to constant
shares c = (1       ) (1    ) for private consumption, xg = (1          ) for government expendi-
ture on public services, k =        for private investment in physical capital, and xh = (1          )
for public investment in education.
     While stochastic productivity is exogenous in the classic real business cycle model, the
political dimension of our economy makes it endogenous to government turnover. The benev-
olent planner can optimally replace under-performing politicians and retain successful ones.
This decision is independent of the initial state of the economy st , and determined exclu-
sively by the realized competence innovations "gt and "ht . The weights on the two orthogonal
shocks in the welfare-maximizing re-election rule are shaped by the same consideration out-
lined above for the allocation of output. Government productivity in the provision of public
services matters for the utility ‡ow next period, and in proportion to the share of public
services in the utility function . Government productivity in education investments mat-
ters for capital accumulation next period, and through it for output for the in…nite future
starting one period ahead (with a present value = (1              )), in proportion to the share of
human capital in the production function (1            ).
     Intuitively, the same weights appear also in the social welfare function that solves the
planner’s Bellman equation. Since the production technology gives rise to an AK model of
endogenous growth, both exogenous productivity A and the capital stock have fully persistent
e¤ects, weighted by 1= (1        ). The relative weights of the two types of capital are naturally
their shares in the production function, for physical capital and 1                   for human capital.
The predetermined shock to the productivity of government expenditure on public services
"gt 1 has a purely transient impact whose weight equals the utility share of public services
  . The predetermined shock to the productivity of government investment in education "ht 1
has a delayed but fully predictable e¤ect on the future stock of human capital, whose impact
on social welfare is fully persistent.
     The …nal component of the value function highlights the welfare bene…ts of optimal
political turnover. The benevolent planner anticipates the revelation of the competence
innovations "gt and "ht by the end of the period. If they prove to be low, it is optimal to replace
the incumbent with a fresh challenger whose ability is a random draw with mean zero on both
dimensions. However, if the incumbent is endowed with persistent high ability, welfare is
maximized by retaining him and thereby ensuring that the following period’s predetermined
productivity is above average ((1         ) "gt + (1      ) "ht 0,        st ; "gt ; "ht = 1). The value
of this optimal selection rule is given precisely by the partial expectation of the combined


                                                  16
welfare e¤ect of the two skills when their aggregate is positive.10
   We can complete the description of the …rst best by characterizing the growth path of
the economy under the planner’s solution.

Corollary 1 The solution to the planner’s problem de…nes a stochastic balanced growth path.
The growth rate is:

           log yt+1          log yt =     log      + (1         ) log (1      ) + log A + log           + (1           )   t,


where the optimal competence of the ruling politician is:

                     t   =      "gt 1 ; "ht   1   "ht   1   + "ht + 1          "gt 1 ; "ht   1   ! ht   1   + ! ht ,

such that Et     t       > 0.

    For any initial level of output y0 > 0, the economy reaches immediately a stochastic
balanced growth path. The average growth rate naturally re‡ects total factor productivity A
and patience , which raises the saving rate. In addition, government e¢ ciency in providing
public investment ( t ) is the stochastic process driving randomness in growth. Optimal
re-election implies, as we have just seen, a …ltering of persistent productivity shocks that
endogenously increases trend growth (Et t > 0).


3.2       The Equilibrium Growth Path
Our main focus is on how social capital shapes distortions in public investment when political
agency is imperfect. The crucial friction is that voters lack awareness of the returns to gov-
ernment investment in education. The lower the level of social capital, the less visible these
delayed payo¤s are relative to the immediate bene…ts of public services. As a consequence
of this asymmetry, the electoral process is biased against human-capital investment.
    The ensuing political-economy distortions complicate the structure of the dynamic equi-
librium, as presented in De…nition 1. Nonetheless, the model retains a tractable analytical
solution.

Proposition 2 The equilibrium e¤ect of social capital q on the amount of public investment
in education and government expenditure on public services is summarized by a monotone
decreasing function (q) such that (1   ) > (0) > limq!1 (q) = 0.
    The unique Markov-perfect dynamic equilibrium is characterized by:
 10
                                                                       R1
      We denote the partial expectation by Et [X                0]      0
                                                                            XdF (X).



                                                                  17
1. The social welfare function:
                         8                                                                                                      9
                         >
                         > (1   ) (1   ) log [(1   ) (1    )] +     log ( )                                                     >
                                                                                                                                >
                         >
                         >                                                                                                      >
                                                                                                                                >
                     1   < + (1    ) log [(1     ) + ] + (1      ) log [(1     )         ]                                      =
     V (st ) =
                 1       >
                         >             + log A + log kt + (1      ) log ht                                                      >
                                                                                                                                >
                         >
                         >                                                                                                      >
                                                                                                                                >
                         :                            + (1     ) "gt 1 + (1       ) "ht 1                                       ;
                                                           (                                                                    )
                                                                                                                                2
                                                                           (1    )
                                                      +       ( g )2 +                  h                                           ,
                                                                             1

   which is monotone increasing in social capital (@V =@q > 0).

2. The additional value of political incumbency:

                                                                         2
                                                    Z (st ) =                     z.
                                                                     2

3. The policy rule for taxation:

                                                           (1        ) + (1                 )
                                         T (st ) =                                              .
                                                                      1

4. The policy rule for public investment in human capital

                                                  (1     )
                         H (st ;    t)   =                                         (1           )       ty   (kt ; ht ) ,
                                             (1        ) + (1                )

   such that the output shares of public investment in human capital and government
   expenditure on public services are:

                               xht                                   xgt
                                   =         (1        )         and     = (1                   ) + .
                               yt                                    yt

5. The households’rule for private investment in physical capital:

                     K (st ;   t)   =                                        [1        (1           )    t] y    (kt ; ht ) ,
                                             + (1           ) (1         )

   such that the output shares of private investment in physical capital and private con-
   sumption are:
                           kt+1             ct
                                =      and     = (1    ) (1   ).
                             yt             yt

Like the …rst best, the dynamic equilibrium can be characterized by guessing that the

                                                                18
value function has the form given by Equation (20). The impact of political-economy distor-
tions is re‡ected in the coe¢ cients of the welfare function, but it does not alter the overall
functional form.
      A second educated guess concerns the value of incumbency in the political equilibrium,
which is a constant independent of the state of the economy st . This is an intuitive property
of the model of political career concerns, which follows from the symmetry of the ruling
politician’s and the voters’information when policy choices are made. The incumbent has
no private information to signal, and he cannot fool rational voters in equilibrium. His re-
election then depends exclusively on the realizations of the shocks "gt , "ht , and t . Since their
distribution is invariant, so is the probability of re-election and hence the value of holding
o¢ ce.
      The exact solution for the value of incumbency Z (st ) highlights the absence of any
incumbency bias. In equilibrium, each candidate has an equal ex-ante likelihood of winning
each election. Thus, the expected net present value of o¢ ce-holding is discounted both for
a pure time preference and for a constant hazard rate 1=2 of losing re-election and thus
terminating the otherwise in…nite stream of bene…ts z.
      The di¤erences between the equilibrium welfare function V (st ) from Proposition 2 and
the …rst-best welfare function V (st ) from Proposition 1 re‡ect the two distortions that arise
from the asymmetric visibility of immediate public-service provision and delayed returns to
human-capital investment. Voters cannot reward public investment in education if they have
failed to learn of its delayed returns. This entails both a distortion in politicians’incentives
to invest in human capital or to provide public services, and a distortion in the selection of
politicians based on their skill at providing either public good.
      The …rst distortion translates into a suboptimal allocation of output, which in turn
permanently shifts down welfare as shown in the second line of the exact solution for V (st ).
In equilibrium as in the …rst best, the GDP shares of private consumption, private investment
in physical capital, public investment in human capital, and government expenditure on
public services are all constant and independent of the state of the economy. However,
politicians’incentives are skewed towards the provision of the more observable public services
and against the less visible public investment in education.
      Intuitively, if the government deviated from equilibrium policy by lowering expenditure
on education and raising expenditure on public services, its popularity among voters would
increase. All voters would observe surprisingly high provision of public services (gt ) and
would accordingly be fooled into inferring greater than actual competence at providing them
("gt ). Conversely, only a subset of voters would also observe surprisingly low provision of
human-capital investment (ht+1 ) and accordingly infer lower than actual education-speci…c


                                                19
competence ("ht ). In a rational expectations equilibrium, the temptation to surprise the
voters is eliminated only because government education spending is permanently too low
a share of output (xht =yt < (1         )). Populist expenditure on current public services is
instead too high (xgt =yt > (1     ) ).
    Higher social capital alleviates this distortion by improving the social di¤usion of in-
formation about education policy. As a result, more citizens learn about the returns to
human-capital investment before the election. The visibility of government services and ed-
ucation investment becomes less asymmetric. Therefore, political incentives are less skewed
towards the provision of crowd-pleasing public services. In response, public investment xht
rises while spending on immediate public consumption xgt falls (@ =@q < 0). The political
equilibrium moves closer to the optimum. However, it can never reach the optimum for any
…nite level of social capital. Only in the limit does the social di¤usion of information become
perfect, so all citizens learn in advance about the returns to public investment, the govern-
ment’s policy choices become undistorted by political career concerns and the allocation of
output becomes optimal (limq!1 (q) = 0).
    Our model thus accounts for the empirical evidence that social capital was a key driver of
the rapid rise of the public high school in the United Stated between 1910 and 1940 (Goldin
and Katz 1999). Moreover, our theoretical mechanism is supported by recent …ndings on the
political economy of education expenditure in developing countries. A growing consensus
in the literature recognizes that underinvestment in public education stems not only from
supply-side problems such as government inability to fund and sta¤ e¤ective schools, but
also from demand-side failures. Citizens routinely misunderstand what education can and
should achieve. They misperceive the returns to schooling and signally underestimate the
returns to primary education. Such misperception induces costly distortions in their demand
for education (Jensen 2010; Banerjee and Du‡o 2011; Bursztyn 2016).
    Better information helps rectify these distortions at the individual level (Jensen 2010).
In the aggregate, Reinikka and Svensson (2004, 2005) …nd that more informed voters hold
local governments more accountable and ensure that education expenditure is higher and
more e¤ective. Conversely, where voters are uninformed, their evidence from Africa shows
that central-government grants earmarked for primary schooling is overwhelmingly diverted
to other uses by local o¢ cials.11 Reinikka and Svensson (2004) show that under-provision
   11
      Empirically, it is unclear if the captured transfers are reallocated to other government spending programs
that local politicians …nd more popular. It may be more likely that bureaucrats and politicians illegitimately
appropriate them. Theoretically, it would be straightforward to extend our model to include a third category
of government spending that only incumbent politicians bene…t from. Then better monitoring by voters with
higher social capital would also reduce political rent extraction, implying an even higher e¤ect on public
investment in education and on economic growth.



                                                      20
of public investment in education is mitigated in areas with a higher socioeconomic status,
which is broadly consistent with the role of social capital established in our model.
    Reinikka and Svensson (2005) focus instead on newspaper readership as a source of
voters’information. The role of the media in increasing accountability and improving policy
outcomes is also well documented beyond education policy, for government interventions that
range from disaster relief (Besley and Burgess 2002; Eisensee and Strömberg 2007) to trade
policy (Ponzetto 2011), as well as for politicians’ individual e¤ort (Snyder and Strömberg
2010).
    Our theoretical framework explicitly accounts for these empirical …ndings: exogenous
individual information acquisition from outside the social network raises education spending
(@ =@p < 0). However, our model crucially highlights that social capital is always another
determinant of political accountability and human-capital investment. For any rate of exter-
nal information acquisition, higher social di¤usion of information improves voter knowledge
and the allocation of public expenditure (@ =@q > 0 > @ =@q for all p < 1).12
    Unlike the expenditure decisions, the politician’s choice of a tax rate is not directly
a¤ected by political-agency considerations. In our model, politicians do not have ideological
preferences for raising or lowering taxes, nor do they intrinsically prefer overseeing a larger
or smaller budget. Their only motivations are welfare maximization and career concerns.
To improve his prospects of re-election, the incumbent tries to demonstrate his skill. The
tax rate is una¤ected by these incentives because it does not signal competence, nor does it
change the inference of competence from the observed realization of public-good provision,
conditional on the taxes that all voters pay and thus correctly perceive.
    In the equilibrium described by Proposition 2, the misallocation of government expendi-
ture also generates no indirect e¤ects on taxation. Both the tax rate , the total government
budget xgt + xht =yt , and the output shares of private consumption ct =yt and private invest-
ment in physical capital kt+1 =yt are invariant at their …rst-best levels described by Proposition
1. The political-economy distortion to the amount of public investment does not propagate
to private-sector decisions because of the log-linear structure of preferences and technology,
which implies unit elasticity of substitution between private and public investment.13
  12
     Moreover, Putnam (1993) argues that newspaper readership is itself a proxy for social capital, on the
grounds that social capital promotes civic engagement and leads individuals to pay closer attention to events
in their community, and to politics in particular.
  13
     Assuming an elasticity of substitution above unity could be more realistic. Besley and Persson’s (2011)
analysis of the origins of state capacity shows that …scal capacity goes hand in hand with cohesive political
institutions that promote the common interest. This …nding suggests that equilibrium demand for the public
sector is e¤ectively elastic: the size of government expands when the government more e¢ ciently pursues
public welfare. Qualitatively, this alternative assumption would strengthen our result that the share of
output devoted to public investment rises with social capital. Quantitatively, however, it would preclude an
analytical solution of the model, as is well known from the real business cycle literature.


                                                     21
    In addition to distorting the size of government investment in education, lower visibility of
the returns to public education expenditure reduces its productivity by distorting the selec-
tion of politicians. In principle, voters are keen on re-electing incumbents whose competence
at providing all types of public goods is high. In practice, they cannot reward productivity
in managing public investment if they have failed to notice it. Rational expectations allow
citizens to anticipate exactly the equilibrium allocation of government expenditure. Thus,
the direct observation of public-service provision gt enables all voters to infer with certainty
the true realization of the innovation "gt . Analogously, knowledge of the returns to public
investment ht+1 yields perfect inference about the realization of "ht . However, this knowledge
belongs only to a subset of the electorate, the larger the higher social capital.
    In equilibrium, as in the …rst best, the incumbent’s re-election t is independent of
the initial state of the economy st and determined exclusively by the realized competence
innovations "gt and "ht . However, the importance of the latter is sub-optimally weighted by
its visibility (p; q), so that re-election ( t = 1) occurs if and only if

                                                     (1    )
                                        t    "gt +             "ht .                                (21)
                                                       1

In a sense, lack of information makes citizens more cynical about politicians’ competence
at providing public education. Uninformed voters are rationally disillusioned about the
di¤erences between rival candidates, whose competence in managing public education they
perceive as identical. Thus, their voting decision is swayed instead by random popularity
shocks that are pure noise.
    Higher social capital enables citizens to share more e¤ectively their knowledge of govern-
ment competence. As a consequence, elections become a more e¤ective screening mechanism.
This theoretical result is consistent with empirical evidence that social capital raises voters’
propensity to dismiss politicians who perform poorly or misbehave in o¢ ce (Nannicini et al.
2013). The value of social capital as a driver of the selection of better politicians is captured
by the last term of the welfare function V (st ). Intuitively, screening for high ability in the
provision of public investment is more valuable the more heterogeneous the skill distribution
(@V =@ 2h > 0). In turn, this raises the welfare bene…ts of social capital (@ 2 V =@q@ 2h > 0).14
    The same two distortions that drive a wedge between equilibrium welfare V (st ) in Propo-
sition 2 and the …rst best V (st ) in Proposition 1 also entail a di¤erent growth path for the
economy in the dynamic equilibrium with imperfect political agency.
  14
    Comparing V (st ) and V (st ) also shows that …rst-best electoral screening is not attained even with
perfectly informed voters (q ! 1). Voters remain subject to random shocks t such that even the worst
incumbent stands a chance of winning the election and the best of losing it on a wave of unpredictable
popularity, independent of competence.


                                                     22
Proposition 3 The economy follows a stochastic balanced growth path. The growth rate is:

     log yt+1   log yt =   log     + (1           ) log 1          + log A + log         + (1   ) ^ht ,

where the equilibrium competence of the ruling politician is:

                       ^ht =     t 1   "ht   1   + "ht + 1   t 1   ! ht   1   + ! ht ,

such that Et ^ht > 0.
    Higher social capital q increases the growth rate of output in the sense of …rst-order
stochastic dominance. It also reduces the variance of the output growth rate.

    In equilibrium, as in the …rst best, the economy reaches immediately a stochastic balanced
growth path. However, a comparison with Corollary 1 establishes that the growth rate lags
systematically behind the …rst best, and is the farther from it the lower the level of social
capital. As we discussed in Proposition 2, voters’lack of information distorts both politicians’
incentives and their selection. It reduces below their optimal levels both the amount of public
investment in human capital and the equilibrium productivity of government spending on
education. The greater social di¤usion of information that results from higher social capital
improves both the allocation of output and electoral screening. Each of these channels
induces an upward shift in trend growth. Thus, our model provides a theoretical explanation
for Algan and Cahuc’s (2010) …nding that social capital had a signi…cant causal impact on
worldwide growth during the twentieth century.
    Proposition 3 concludes by establishing an intuitive e¤ect of better electoral screening on
the volatility of output. When more voters are aware of the returns to public investment,
politicians who are less e¤ective at providing it are more likely to be replaced. This selection
essentially acts as a truncation of the left tail of the distribution of ability. As a consequence,
the variance of the growth rate, which coincides with the variance of the government’s invest-
ment productivity shock, tends to decline unless the distribution of innovation is strongly
positively skewed. A positive skew tends to counteract the decline in variance, because
higher social capital induces greater retention of incumbents with ability in the right tail.
However, the negative e¤ect prevails even for a modest positive skew, and a fortiori for our
baseline assumption of a symmetric distribution of innovations. Therefore, we should expect
higher levels of social capital and the ensuing better monitoring of politicians to lower the
volatility of output growth as well as increasing its average. This theoretical prediction of
our model is supported by the empirical …nding of a negative correlation between trust and
the standard deviation of the growth rate of real GDP per capita (Sangnier 2013).


                                                       23
4     Empirical Evidence
4.1    Social Capital and Voter Knowledge
One of the contributions of our model is to show theoretically how social capital improves
government accountability by facilitating the social di¤usion of political information. The
predicted aggregate relationship between higher social capital and better political selection
and incentives is con…rmed by empirical evidence. In electoral districts with high social cap-
ital the electoral punishment of misbehaving politicians is considerably larger, and political
misbehavior is accordingly less frequent (Nannicini et al. 2013; Padró i Miquel et al. 2015).
In this section, we provide evidence of our theoretical prediction that higher social capital
causes greater voter knowledge at the individual level, using data from the American Na-
tional Election Studies (ANES, 1948–2012). This dataset contains well established measures
of both social capital and voter information.
    The …rst two ANES variables that we consider are the ability to name the candidates in
a U.S. House race and the ability to recognize the incumbent from a list of candidates. The
…rst is a dummy variable, Name Recall, which equals 1 if the respondent could recall the
name of any candidates for the U.S. House race. The second variable, Name Recognition, is
a dummy variable equal to 1 if the respondent could identify the incumbent from a list of the
major party candidates for the U.S. House in their district. Additionally, we consider whether
social capital is correlated with the respondents’ willingness to describe or rate their U.S.
House representative. Snyder and Strömberg (2010) interpret the ability to rate a politician
as a proxy for both voter information and accountability, because knowing where a politician
stands is a necessary condition to hold that politician accountable. ANES respondents were
asked to place their House representative on a seven-point ideological scale. We code the
dummy variable Ideological Rating to equal 1 if the respondent provided a rating, and zero
if they answered they “don’t know”or “don’t recognize”the incumbent. Respondents were
also asked to rate their feelings towards the incumbent on a scale from 0 to 100. The
dummy variable Thermometer Provided equals to 1 if such a rating was provided, and 0
if the respondent answered they “don’t know where to rate” or “can’t judge,” or couldn’t
recognize the incumbent’s name. Finally, following Snyder and Strömberg (2010), we code
the dummy variable Preferences Provided as equal to 1 if the respondent mentioned at least
one thing they liked or disliked about the incumbent House representative in their district,
and zero if they said that they did not know anything about this candidate.
    We focus on two measures of social capital. The …rst is trust in strangers, by far the
most commonly used measure of social capital. Consistent with the coding in other surveys,
Trust is a dummy variable that equals 1 if the respondent believes that “most people can

                                             24
be trusted.” Our second measure is a variable that is much less standard but arguably
captures more directly the social di¤usion of information, as depicted by our theoretical
model. Talking with People is a dummy variable that equals 1 if the respondent reported
discussing politics with family and friends.
    We summarize our ANES variables in Table 1. The last two variables are dummies for
the respondent’s educational attainment, with high-school graduates without a BA degree
as the omitted category. Tables 2 and 3 present our results. All the correlations presented in
the tables control for survey year …xed e¤ects and for the following pre-determined variables:
gender, race and ethnicity, and age deciles.15 We present the coe¢ cient of each correlation
both when we do not control for education, and conditional on controls for educational at-
tainment. Education may not be pre-determined to social capital, and, hence, the coe¢ cients
may be biased— typically downward.
    As we can see from Tables 2 and 3, social capital is positively correlated with all measures
of information and willingness to describe or rate politicians. The correlation is equally strong
when proxying for social capital with the more standard measure, or with the one more
closely related to our theoretical model. The coe¢ cients are also economically signi…cant.
For instance, an increase in trust by one standard deviation increases the probability of
recognizing the incumbent representative by about 0.14 standard deviations. Consistent
with our theory, these results suggest a relationship between social capital, the interpersonal
di¤usion of political information, and citizens’knowledge about their government.


4.2     Social Capital and Public Education Spending
The main contribution of our model is to show theoretically how social capital raises the
long-run output growth rate and reduces its volatility by improving political screening and
incentives for investment in public education. The positive e¤ect of social capital on economic
growth has been extensively documented (Knack and Keefer 1997; Zak and Knack 2001;
Tabellini 2009; Algan and Cahuc 2010; Gennaioli et al. 2013). Empirical evidence also
supports our theoretical prediction of a negative correlation between social capital and the
standard deviation of the growth rate of real GDP per capita (Sangnier 2013). In this section,
we provide macroeconomic evidence of the speci…c channel predicted by our theory: across
countries, government expenditure on education is increasing in social capital.
    We measure social capital by the country-level average of the responses to questions in
the World Values Survey Integrated Questionnaire 1981–2014. As in our individual-level
analysis, we consider …rst the standard question asking respondents if “most people can be
  15
     The results when we do not control for any pre-determined variable are virtually unchanged, and still
statistically signi…cant at the 1 percent level.


                                                   25
trusted”or instead “you can’t be too careful with people.”In addition, we also use a second
measure based on whether respondents reported that one of the “sources to learn what is
going on in their country and the world” they used in the previous week was “talking with
friends or colleagues.”This measure reduces our number of observations because it has been
included in the survey less frequently. On the other hand, it may be closer to capturing our
theoretical de…nition of social capital as the potential for the social di¤usion of information.
    Across countries, public spending on education is indeed positively correlated with both
measures of social capital, as predicted by our model. Figure 1 shows the correlation with
trust in strangers and Figure 2 with the share of people who acquire information by talking
to others.16 These correlations are robust to controlling for plausibly exogenous demographic
and geographic characteristics: population, ethnic fractionalization, average distance to the
nearest coast, and temperature.17 They are also robust to controlling for aggregate gov-
ernment spending as a share of GDP, which is independent of social capital in our model,
although its exogeneity may be more questionable empirically.18
    We summarize our macroeconomic variables in Table 4. Table 5 presents our multivari-
ate regression results. The empirical relationship between social capital and government
investment in human capital is highly signi…cant, both statistically and economically. In
the speci…cation with controls, an increase in social capital by one standard deviation is
associated with an increase in public spending on education by approximately 0.34 stan-
dard deviations if we measure social capital by trust, and by 0.37 standard deviations if we
measure it by information acquisition via talking to people.
    Evidence supporting the theoretical predictions of our model is robust across di¤erent
proxies of social capital. Yet, these consistent correlations do not su¢ ce to establish a causal
link between social capital and public spending on education. To alleviate endogeneity
concerns, we need an instrumental variable that is correlated with social capital and a¤ects
government expenditure on education only through social capital.
    Research in linguistics suggest that systematic patterns in languages may o¤er a window
into their speakers’dispositions. Some components of language may have had an indepen-
dent e¤ect on speci…c cultural dimensions (Boroditsky 2000; Ozgen and Davies 2002; Zhou
et al. 2010). In particular, languages that forbid dropping the subject personal pronouns are
  16
     In unreported results, we …nd that public spending of education is also positively correlated with other
measures of people’s information, such as acquiring information from newspapers or media reports. These
correlations support our ancillary theoretical prediction of a positive e¤ect of external information supply
(p). They may also support the view that social capital promotes public education spending by inducing
higher individual demand for information (Putnam 1993).
  17
     The choice of these controls follows Gennaioli et al. (2013).
  18
     We are unable to control for broader political and economic outcomes because of our limited number of
observations and the lack of good instruments for such variables, which are endogenous to social capital.



                                                     26
associated with cultures that give more emphasis to the individual relative to the social con-
text (Kashima and Kashima 1998). Licht, Goldschmidt and Schwartz (2007) and Tabellini
(2008) use variation in this linguistic dimension as an instrument for social capital.
    More broadly, the causal impact of language on economic outcomes is receiving growing
attention. Givati and Troiano (2012) exploit gender-di¤erentiated personal pronouns as a
pre-determined instrument for attitudes toward women. Chen (2013) …nds that di¤eren-
tiation of verbal forms for the present and the future in‡uences savings behavior through
a discount-rate framing mechanism. The strongest reading of these …ndings is through
the lens of linguistic relativity, which holds that language causally a¤ects people’s thought
patterns. This theory, also known as the Sapir–Whorf hypothesis, is highly controversial
among linguists and remains the object of an unresolved debate in linguistics and psychol-
ogy (Masharov and Fischer 2006). However, the validity of language instruments does not
hinge on a strict relativist interpretation. Even if language does not directly cause cultural
attitudes, at least it re‡ects persistent cultural traits that have coevolved with language in
the long run— typically over several centuries. As a consequence, linguistic patterns provide
an e¤ective instrument to address reverse causation and short-run confounds.
    Following Tabellini (2008), we exploit grammatical rules on pronoun dropping to alleviate
some of the causality concerns with our cross-country analysis. We instrument social capital
with the grammar of the language most widely spoken in each country.19 This instrumental
strategy satis…es the orthogonality restriction if pronoun dropping and the distant cultural
forces that were responsible for its evolution are uncorrelated with unobserved determinants
of public spending on education today.
    Table 6 presents the results of this robustness check. Columns (1), (3) and (5) show the
…rst stage equations. In the speci…cations with controls, grammar is a weak instrument for
information acquisition via talking to people, with a …rst-stage F -statistic below 10. Since
the 2SLS estimator performs poorly with weak instruments, in this case we implement our
instrumental-variable speci…cation by limited information maximum likelihood estimation.
In column (2) we con…rm the strong, statistically signi…cant positive correlation between
social capital, now instrumented with our linguistic instrument, and public spending on
education. In column (4) we con…rm that the result continues to hold with geographic and
demographic controls. Column (6) shows that the result is also robust to controlling for the
overall size of government.
  19
    We adopt Tabellini’s (2008) weighting strategy for multilingual countries. Thus, the instrument coincides
with the share of speakers of languages that allow omission of the subject pronoun, relative to the total
number of speakers of all languages whose grammatical rules are coded by Kashima and Kashima (1998).




                                                     27
5     Conclusion
Social capital promotes economic development. This robust empirical connection and its
causal nature are well established. However, the precise channels that underpin it remain
underexplored. In this paper, we have provided a novel theory and new evidence of one
important mechanism. Social capital raises economic growth by inducing greater and more
productive public investment in human capital.
    Our model de…ned social capital as the ability to acquire information through interper-
sonal relationships. We have shown that when the social di¤usion of information is greater
more people learn about government e¤ectiveness at providing public education, even though
its delayed returns make it relatively hard to assess. As a result, greater social capital makes
politicians less likely to win re-election when their skills and their spending are suboptimally
skewed towards more visible short-run public services. In the dynamic stochastic general
equilibrium, social capital raises the endogenous average growth rate because it mitigates
the myopic populist temptation to underinvest in public education. Moreover, it lowers
the endogenous volatility of output growth because it ensures that politicians whose poor
competence would harm human-capital accumulation are more reliably removed from o¢ ce.
    Our empirical analysis has shown that the distinctive predictions of our theory are sup-
ported by evidence at both the individual and the aggregate level. Individuals with greater
social capital have higher interest in and better knowledge of politics. Countries with greater
social capital allocate a higher share of GDP to public investment in education. These cor-
relations are robust to alternative proxies for social capital, including grammatical charac-
teristics of a country’s language that provide a strongly predictive instrument and plausibly
alleviate endogeneity concerns.
    Evidence both across countries and across regions suggests that the mechanism we have
proposed can account for a substantial fraction of the e¤ect of social capital on growth
(Gennaioli et al. 2013). Nonetheless, this paper is undoubtedly closer to a …rst step than
a …nal word in the study of the transmission mechanisms that connect social capital to
economic development. We conclude by pointing out three directions for future work that
seem particularly interesting in light of our analysis.
    First, our model has shown that the social di¤usion of information improves political in-
centives and political selection by making citizens better at monitoring their government. We
have focused on the ensuing increase in public education spending because underinvestment
in human capital is one of the fundamental problems in the political economy of develop-
ment. However, our analysis suggests that social capital may also induce other pro-growth
policies, such as better protection of property rights, or better regulation of entry or of …nan-


                                               28
cial markets. Social capital may even induce more inclusive institutions by helping people to
work together for democracy, like human capital does (Glaeser, Ponzetto and Shleifer 2007).
    At the same time, we should be mindful of the demonstrated potential for social capital to
induce instead welfare-decreasing outcomes (Acemoglu, Reed and Robinson 2014; Satyanath,
Voigtländer and Voth 2017). Our model has not captured this dark side of social capital
because we have abstracted from any heterogeneity. It is unambiguously bene…cial for the
representative citizen to have greater social connectedness. In our framework, however, if
some citizens had greater social capital than everyone else they would gain disproportionate
in‡uence over the government. Inequality in the social di¤usion of information would then
induce detrimental policy distortions, like inequality in voter information does more broadly
(Majumdar, Mani and Mukhand 2004; Glaeser and Ponzetto 2014). Our cross-country data
provide some support for this intuition. If we regress spending on education not only on a
country’s average social di¤usion of information, but also on its standard deviation across
regions within the country, we obtain the following results:

       Education Spending = 2:96            Talk with People        6:13      (Talk with People)
                                   (1:75)                           (3:32)


Both coe¢ cients are signi…cant at the 10% level.20 While no more than suggestive, this evi-
dence is consistent with sociologists’long-standing concerns about the negative consequences
of inequality in social capital (Bourdieu 1986; Lin 2001).
    Finally, in this paper we have modeled a one-way impact of social capital on human-
capital accumulation. This perspective is consistent with the typical view of social capital as
a highly persistent, largely inherited cultural characteristic (Putnam 1993; Algan and Cahuc
2010). Yet, there is some empirical evidence of a reverse e¤ect of education on social capital
(Goldin and Katz 1999; Algan, Cahuc and Shleifer 2013). Such two-way causation would
imply the potential for a growth trap with mutually reinforcing low levels of both social and
human capital. Most important, it would suggest that a su¢ ciently large positive education
shock could break an unfavorable legacy of poor culture and poor institutions, and set a
country on a virtuous cycle of self-sustaining improvements in social connectedness, political
quality and economic development (Glaeser et al. 2004).

  20
     The regression has 45 observations and an R2 of .430. The dependent variable is the same as in Table
5, and the controls are those of its column (3): government spending, population (log), number of ethnic
groups (log), inverse distance to the coast, temperature. On the right-hand side, Talk with People is a
dummy variable that equals 1 if a WVS respondent (1981–2008) reported that one of the “sources to learn
what is going on in their country and the world”they used in the previous week was “talking with friends or
colleagues.”We compute its variance across regions because the variance across individuals is not separately
de…ned from the mean for a dummy variable. Using the same procedure for Trust, we do not …nd a signi…cant
e¤ect of its cross-region variance, but the positive e¤ect of its countrywide average remains robust.


                                                    29
References
 [1] Acemoglu, Daron, Tristan Reed and James Robinson. 2014. “Chiefs: Economic Devel-
     opment and Elite Control of Civil Society in Sierra Leone.”Journal of Political Economy
     122(2): 319–368.

 [2] Alesina, Alberto, and Guido Tabellini. 2008. “Bureaucrats or Politicians? Part II: Mul-
     tiple Policy Tasks.”Journal of Public Economics 92(3–4): 426–447.

 [3] Alesina, Alberto, Arnaud Devleeschauwer, William Easterly, Sergio Kurlat and Romain
     Wacziarg. 2003. “Fractionalization.”Journal of Economic Growth 8(2): 155–194.

 [4] Alesina Alberto, John Londregan and Howard Rosenthal. 1993. “A Model of the Political
     Economy of the United States.”American Political Science Review 87(1): 12–33.

 [5] Alesina, Alberto, and Howard Rosenthal. 1995. Partisan Politics, Divided Government,
     and the Economy. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

 [6] Alesina, Alberto, Nouriel Roubini and Gerald D. Cohen. 1997. Political Cycles and the
     Macroeconomy. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

 [7] Algan, Yann, and Pierre Cahuc. 2010. “Inherited Trust and Growth.” American Eco-
     nomic Review 100(5): 2060–2092.

 [8] Algan, Yann, Pierre Cahuc and Andrei Shleifer. 2013. “Teaching Practices and Social
     Capital.”American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 5(3): 189–210.

 [9] Banerjee, Abhijit V., and Esther Du‡o. 2011. Poor Economics: A Radical Rethinking
     of the Way to Fight Global Poverty. New York, NY: Public A¤airs.

[10] Barro, Robert. 1990. “Government Spending in a Simple Model of Endogenous Growth.”
     Journal of Political Economy 98(5): S103–S125.

[11] Barro, Robert. 1991. “Economic Growth in a Cross-Section of Countries.” Quarterly
     Journal of Economics 106(2): 407–443.

[12] Bass, Frank M. 1969. “A New Product Growth Model for Consumer Durables.” Man-
     agement Science 15(5): 215–227.

[13] Beck, Paul A., Russell J. Dalton, Steven Greene and Robert Huckfeldt. 2002. “The
     Social Calculus of Voting: Interpersonal, Media, and Organizational In‡uences on Pres-
     idential Choices.”American Political Science Review 96(1): 57–73.



                                            30
[14] Besley, Timothy, and Robin Burgess. 2002. “The Political Economy of Government
     Responsiveness: Theory and Evidence from India.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
     117(4): 1415–1451.

[15] Besley, Timothy, and Torsten Persson. 2011. Pillars of Prosperity: The Political Eco-
     nomics of Development Clusters. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

[16] Bo¤a, Federico, Amedeo Piolatto and Giacomo A. M. Ponzetto. 2016. “Political Cen-
     tralization and Government Accountability.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 131(1):
     381–422.

[17] Boroditsky, Lera. 2000. “Metaphoric Structuring: Understanding Time Through Spatial
     Metaphors.”Cognition 75(1): 1–28.

[18] Bourdieu, Pierre. 1986. “The Forms of Capital.” in Handbook of Theory and Research
     for the Sociology of Education, edited by John G. Richardon. Westport, CT: Greenwood
     Press.

[19] Bourlès, Renaud, Yann Bramoullé and Eduardo Perez-Richet. 2017. “Altruism in Net-
     works.”Econometrica 85(2): 675–689.

[20] Bowles Samuel and Herbert Gintis. 2002. “Social Capital and Community Governance.”
     Economic Journal 112(483): F419–F436.

[21] Bursztyn, Leonardo. 2016. “Poverty and the Political Economy of Public Spending:
     Evidence from Brazil.” Journal of the European Economic Association 14(5): 1101–
     1128.

[22] Castelfranchi, Cristiano, Rino Falcone and Francesca Marzo. 2006. “Being Trusted in
     a Social Network: Trust as Relational Capital.”In Trust Management, edited by Ketil
     Stølen, William H. Winsborough, Fabio Martinelli and Fabio Massacci. Berlin: Springer.

[23] Chen, Keith. 2013. “The E¤ect of Language on Economic Behavior: Evidence from
     Savings Rates, Health Behaviors, and Retirement Assets.”American Economic Review
     103(2): 690–731.

[24] Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, Nathaniel Hilger, Emmanuel Saez, Diane Schanzen-
     bach and Danny Yagan. 2011. “How Does Your Kindergarten Classroom A¤ect Your
     Earnings? Evidence from Project STAR.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 126(4):
     1593–1660.

[25] Cialdini, Robert. 1984. In‡uence: The Psychology of Persuasion. New York, NY: Quill.


                                            31
[26] Coate, Steven T., and Stephen E. Morris. 1995. “On the Form of Transfers to Special
     Interests.”Journal of Political Economy 103(6): 1210–1235.

[27] Coleman, James S. 1988. “Social Capital in the Creation of Human Capital ”American
     Journal of Sociology 94(Supplement): S95–S120.

[28] Cunha, Flavio, and James J. Heckman. 2008. “Formulating, Identifying and Estimating
     the Technology of Cognitive and Noncognitive Skill Formation.” Journal of Human
     Resources 43(4): 738–782.

[29] Doepke, Matthias, and Fabrizio Zilibotti. 2008. “Occupational Choice and the Spirit of
     Capitalism.”Quarterly Journal of Economics 123(2): 747–793.

[30] Durlauf, Steven N., and Marcel Fafchamps. 2005. “Social Capital.” In Handbook of
     Economic Growth, Volume 1B, edited by Philippe Aghion and Steven N. Durlauf Am-
     sterdam: Elsevier.

[31] Eisensee, Thomas, and David Strömberg. 2007. “News Droughts, News Floods and U.S.
     Disaster Relief.”Quarterly Journal of Economics 122(2): 693–728.

[32] Fukuyama, Francis. 1995. Trust: Social Virtues and the Creation of Prosperity. London:
     Hamish Hamilton.

[33] Gallup, John Luke, Je¤rey D. Sachs and Andrew D. Mellinger. 1999. “Geography and
     Economic Development.”International Regional Science Review 22(2): 179–232.

[34] Galor, Oded, and Omer Moav. 2002. “Natural Selection and the Origin of Economic
     Growth.”Quarterly Journal of Economics 117(4): 1133–1191.

[35] Gennaioli, Nicola, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes and Andrei Shleifer.
     2013. “Human Capital and Regional Development.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
     128(1): 105–164.

[36] Givati, Yehonatan, and Ugo Troiano. 2012. “Law, Economics and Culture: Theory of
     Mandated Bene…ts and Evidence from Maternity Leave Policies.” Journal of Law and
     Economics 55(2): 339–364.

[37] Glaeser, Edward L., David I. Laibson and Bruce Sacerdote. 2002. “An Economic Ap-
     proach to Social Capital.”Economic Journal 112(483): 437–458.

[38] Glaeser, Edward L., David I. Laibson, José A. Scheinkman and Christine L. Soutter.
     2000. “Measuring Trust.”Quarterly Journal of Economics 115(3): 811–846.


                                            32
[39] Glaeser, Edward L., Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes and Andrei Shleifer.
     2004. “Do Institutions Cause Growth?”Journal of Economic Growth 9(3): 271–303.

[40] Glaeser, Edward L., and Giacomo A. M. Ponzetto. 2014. “Shrouded Costs of Govern-
     ment: The Political Economy of State and Local Public Pensions.” Journal of Public
     Economics 116: 89–105.

[41] Glaeser, Edward L., Giacomo A. M. Ponzetto and Andrei Shleifer. 2007. “Why Does
     Democracy Need Education?”Journal of Economic Growth 12(1): 77–99.

[42] Goldin, Claudia, and Lawrence F. Katz. 1999. “Human Capital and Social Capital: The
     Rise of Secondary Schooling in America, 1910 to 1940.” Journal of Interdisciplinary
     History 29(4): 683–723.

[43] Gorodnichenko, Yuriy, and Gerard Roland. 2017. “Culture, Institutions and the Wealth
     of Nations.”Review of Economics and Statistics 99(3): 402–416.

[44] Granovetter, Mark. 1973. “The Strength of Weak Ties.”American Journal of Sociology
     78(6): 1360–1380.

[45] Greif, Avner. 2006. Institutions and the Path to the Modern Economy: Lessons from
     Medieval Trade. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

[46] Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza and Luigi Zingales. 2004. “The Role of Social Capital in
     Financial Development.”American Economic Review 94(3): 526-56.

[47] — — . 2011. “Civic Capital as the Missing Link.”In Handbook of Social Economics, Vol-
     ume 1A, edited by Jess Benhabib, Alberto Bisin and Matthew O. Jackson. Amsterdam:
     Elsevier.

[48] — — . 2016. “Long Term Persistence.” Journal of the European Economic Association
     14(6): 1401–1436.

[49] Islam, T. M. Tonmoy, Jenny Minier and James P. Ziliak. 2015. “On Persistent Poverty
     in a Rich Country.”Southern Economic Journal 81(3): 653–678.

[50] Jackson, Matthew O. 2010. Social and Economics Networks. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
     University Press.

[51] Jensen, Robert. 2010. “The (Perceived) Returns to Education and the Demand for
     Schooling.”Quarterly Journal of Economics 125(2): 515–548.




                                           33
[52] Kashima, Emiko S., and Yoshihisa Kashima. 1998. “Culture and Language: The Case of
     Cultural Dimensions and Personal Pronoun Use.”Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology
     29(3): 461–486.

[53] King, Robert G., Charles I. Plosser and Sergio T. Rebelo. 1988. “Production, Growth
     and Business Cycles: II. New Directions.” Journal of Monetary Economics 21(2–3):
     309–341.

[54] Knack, Stephen, and Philip Keefer. 1997. “Does Social Capital Have an Economic Pay-
     o¤? A Cross-Country Investigation.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 112(4): 1251–
     1288.

[55] Kumar, Krishna B., and John G. Matsusaka. 2009. “From Families to Formal Contracts:
     An Approach to Development.”Journal of Development Economics 90(1): 106–119.

[56] La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer and Robert W. Vishny.
     1997. “Trust in Large Organizations.”American Economic Review 87(2): 333–338.

[57] Licht, Amir N., Chanan Goldschmidt and Shalom H. Schwartz. 2007. “Culture Rules:
     The Foundations of the Rule of Law and Other Norms of Governance. ” Journal of
     Comparative Economics 35(4): 659–688.

[58] Lin, Nan. 2001. Social Capital: A Theory of Structure and Action. Cambridge: Cam-
     bridge University Press.

[59] Lindbeck, Assar, and Jörgen W. Weibull. 1987. “Balanced-Budget Redistribution as the
     Outcome of Political Competition.”Public Choice 52(3): 273–297.

[60] Lindner, Ines and Holger Strulik. 2015. “From Tradition to Modernity: Economic
     Growth in a Small World.”Journal of Development Economics 109: 17–29.

[61] Long, John B., and Charles I. Plosser. 1983. “Real Business Cycles.”Journal of Political
     Economy 91(1): 36–69.

[62] Majumdar, Sumon, Anandi Mani and Sharun Mukand. 2004. “Politics, Information and
     the Urban Bias.”Journal of Development Economics 75(1): 137–165.

[63] Mani, Anandi, and Sharun Mukand. 2007. “Democracy, Visibility and Public Good
     Provision.”Journal of Development Economics 83(2): 506–529.

[64] Manuelli, Rodolfo E., and Ananth Seshandri. 2014. “Human Capital and the Wealth of
     Nations.”American Economic Review 104(9): 2736–2762.


                                             34
[65] Masharov, Mikhail, and Martin H. Fischer. 2006. “Linguistic Relativity: Does Language
     Help or Hinder Perception?”Current Biology 16(8): 289–291.

[66] Nannicini, Tommaso, Andrea Stella, Guido Tabellini and Ugo Troiano. 2013. “Social
     Capital and Political Accountability.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy
     5(2): 222–250.

[67] Ozgen, Emre, and Ian R. L. Davies. 2002. “Acquisition of Categorical Color Perception:
     A Perceptual Learning Approach to the Linguistic Relativity Hypothesis.” Journal of
     Experimental Psychology 131(4): 477–493.

[68] Padró i Miquel, Gerard, Nancy Qian, Yiqing Xu and Yang Yao. 2015. “Making Democ-
     racy Work: Culture, Social Capital and Elections in China.”NBER Working Paper No.
     21058.

[69] Persson, Torsten, and Guido Tabellini. 1990. Macroeconomic Policy, Credibility and
     Politics. Chur: Harwood Academic Publishers.

[70] — — . 2000. Political Economics: Explaining Economic Policy. Cambridge, MA: MIT
     Press.

[71] Ponzetto, Giacomo A. M. 2011. “Heterogeneous Information and Trade Policy.”CEPR
     Discussion Paper No. 8726.

[72] Putnam, Robert D. 1993. Making Democracy Work: Civic Traditions in Modern Italy.
     Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

[73] — — . 2000. Bowling Alone: The Collapse and Revival of American Community. New
     York, NY: Simon and Schuster.

[74] Reinikka, Ritva, and Jakob Svensson. 2004. “Local Capture: Evidence from a Central
     Government Transfer Program in Uganda.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 119(2):
     679–706.

[75] — — . 2005. “Fighting Corruption to Improve Schooling: Evidence from a Newspaper
     Campaign in Uganda.”Journal of the European Economic Association 3(2–3): 259–267.

[76] Rogo¤, Kenneth. 1990. “Equilibrium Political Budget Cycles.”American Economic Re-
     view 80(1): 21–36.

[77] Rogo¤, Kenneth, and Anne Sibert. 1988. “Elections and Macroeconomic Policy Cycles.”
     Review of Economic Studies 55(1): 1–16.


                                            35
[78] Routledge, Bryan R., and Joachim von Amsberg. 2003. “Social Capital and Growth.”
     Journal of Monetary Economics 50(1): 167–193.

[79] Sangnier, Marc. 2013. “Does Trust Favor Macroeconomic Stability? ”Journal of Com-
     parative Economics 41(3): 653–668.

[80] Satyanath, Shanker, Nico Voigtländer and Hans-Joachim Voth. 2017. “Bowling for Fas-
     cism: Social Capital and the Rise of the Nazi Party.” Journal of Political Economy
     125(2): 478–526.

[81] Shah, Anuj K., Sendhil Mullainathan and Eldar Sha…r. 2012. “Some Consequences of
     Having Too Little.”Science 338(6107): 682–685.

[82] Snyder, James M., and David Strömberg. 2010. “Press Coverage and Political Account-
     ability.”Journal of Political Economy 118(2): 335–408.

[83] Solow, Robert M. 1995. “But Verify – Trust: The Social Virtues and the Creation of
     Prosperity by Francis Fukuyama.”The New Republic 213(11): 36–39.

[84] Strömberg, David. 2004. “Radio’s Impact on Public Spending.” Quarterly Journal of
     Economics 99: 189–221.

[85] Tabellini, Guido. 2008. “Institutions and Culture.” Journal of the European Economic
     Association 6(2–3): 255–294.

[86] — — . 2009. “Culture and Institutions: Economic Development in the Regions of Eu-
     rope.”Journal of the European Economic Association 8(4): 677–716.

[87] Valenzuela, Sebastian, Namsu Park and Kerk Kee. 2009. “Is There Social Capital in a
     Social Network Site? Facebook Use and College students’Life Satisfaction, Trust and
     Participation.”Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication 14(4): 875–901.

[88] Zak, Paul J., and Stephen Knack. 2001. “Trust and Growth. ” Economic Journal
     111(470): 295–321.

[89] Zaller, John. 1992. The Nature and Origins of Mass Opinion. Cambridge: Cambridge
     University Press.

[90] Zhou, Ke, Lei Mo, Paul Kay, Veronica P. Y. Kwok, Ti¤any N. M. Ip and Li Hai Tan.
     2010. “Newly Trained Lexical Categories Produce Lateralized Categorical Perception of
     Color.”Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 107(22): 9974–9978.




                                           36
                                     Figure 1: Public Spending on Education and Trust

             4



                                               MDA                                                              NOR
                                                                                                         SWE
                                             TUN
                      2




                                                                                      NZL
                                      CYP                                                FIN
                                  GHA                 ISR
   Education Spending




                                    MYS                  UKR
                                             FRA
                                            SVN         BLR
                                                          KWT
                                          MAR LTU POL
                                                ZAF LVA HUN  EST USA
                                                          GBR        CAN CHEAUS
                                                                             VNM                 NLD
                                                 MEX
                                BRA                ETH            DEU
                                        BFA ARG
                                        DZA              ITA
                                                       ESP
                                                      EGY
            0




                                    COL                       IRN
                                                            KOR
                                                    HRV
                                                     SVK CZE       THA
                                             CHL     BGR RUS
                                         ROU    QAT            IND    JPN
                                    MKD    MLI
                            TTO         SLV   AZE    ALB
                                PER TUR GTMARM
                              PHL                                         IDN
                                                                    KAZ
                                         GEO URY
                                    LBN               PAK
             -2




                                 ZWE             BGD DOM
                                     ZMB
             -4




                            -.2                         0                       .2                      .4
                                                                      Trust
                          coef = 3.4493313, (robust) se = .96664654, t = 3.57

Notes: Partial correlation plot of government expenditure on education as a percentage of GDP ( average 2000–2010, from
the World Development Indicators) and the fraction of World Values Survey respondents (1981–2014) who agree with the
statement: “Most people can be trusted.”
                          Figure 2: Public Spending on Education and Talking with Other People


                                                                                              MDA
                                                                                                          NOR
                                                                                                                 SWE
             2



                                                                                       CYP                 FIN
                                                                                      GHA
                                                                                UKR   MYS
                                                                               FRA
                      1




                                                                              SVN
                                                                                          USA
   Education Spending




                                                                            MAR
                                                                          HUN
                                                                          ZAF                      POL CHE
                                                                          VNM           CAN NLD       AUS
                                                       MEX                                 GBR
                                                                        ETH                    BRA
                                                                                                 DEU
              0




                                    ESP   ARG               BFA EGY                              ITA
                                                                            IRN
                                                COL                       KOR
                                                                        THA
                                                            CHL          BGR
                                                                                              RUS
     -1




                                          ROU
                                          IND                     JPN                   MLI
                                                                                                          TTO
                                    TUR                PER                                      IDN
                                                                                                    GEO
             -2




                             URY



                                                                           ZMB
             -3




                              -.2                     -.1                    0                  .1                     .2
                                                                  Talking with People
                           coef = 5.2134999, (robust) se = 1.3919673, t = 3.75

Notes: Partial correlation plot of government expenditure on education as a percentage of GDP (average 2000–2010, from
the World Development Indicators) and the fraction of World Values Survey respondents (1981–2014) who report that one
of the “sources to learn what is going on in their country and the world” they used in the previous week was “talking with
friends or colleagues.”
               Table 1: Summary Statistics –Micro Data



                                       Mean      Std. Dev.       Obs.      Min.     Max.
Name Recall                             .316         .465       14,024       0        1
Name Recognition                        .620         .485       17,777       0        1
Ideological Rating                      .689         .463         9,484      0        1
Thermometer Provided                    .821         .383       19,211       0        1
Preferences Provided                    .475         .499       12,262       0        1
Trust                                   .477         .499       13,262       0        1
Talking with People                     .754         .430       20,522       0        1
Less than High School Degree            .197         .398       25,015       0        1
College Degree or More                  .235         .424       25,015       0        1

Notes: Data from the American National Election Studies, 1948–2012. Name Recall is
a dummy variable equal to 1 if the respondent could recall the name of any candidate
running for the U.S. House in their district. Name Recognition is a dummy variable
equal to 1 if the respondent could identify the incumbent from a list of the major party
candidates for the U.S. House in their district. Ideological Rating is a dummy variable
equal to 1 if the respondent placed their U.S. House representative on a seven-point
ideological scale, and 0 if they answered they “don’t know” or “don’t recognize” the
incumbent. Thermometer Provided is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the respondent
rated their feelings towards the incumbent on a scale from 0 to 100, and 0 if they answered
they “don’t know where to rate,” or “can’t judge,” or couldn’t recognize the incumbent’s
name. Preferences Provided is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the respondent mentioned
at least one thing they liked or disliked about the incumbent U.S. House representative
in their district, and 0 if they reported that they did not know anything about this
candidate. Trust is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the respondent agreed with the
statement: “Most people can be trusted.” Talking with People is a dummy variable equal
to 1 if the respondent reported discussing politics with family and friends. Less than
High School Degree and College Degree or More are dummy variables for educational
attainment.
                         Table 2: Voter Information and Social Capital


Panel A
                               Name Recall       Name Recall        Name Recognition          Name Recognition
Trust                               .129***           .076***                .137***                  .095***
                                   (.012)            (.012)                 (.010)                   (.010)
Less than High School                                –.148***                                        –.167***
                                                     (.015)                                          (.012)
College or More                                       .196***                                         .096***
                                                     (.014)                                          (.011)
R2                                  .117              .164                   .092                     .119
Observations                       6,258              6,258                10,082                    10,082
Panel B
                               Name Recall       Name Recall        Name Recognition          Name Recognition
Talking with People                 .192***           .140***                .219***                  .173***
                                   (.008)            (.008)                 (.010)                   (.010)
Less than High School                                –.136***                                        –.166***
                                                     (.009)                                          (.011)
College or More                                       .176***                                         .105***
                                                     (.010)                                          (.009)
R2                                  .119              .159                   .114                     .140
Observations                      14,024             14,024                13,881                    13,881

Notes: * p 0:1; **p 0:05; ***p 0:01. Standard errors are corrected for White heteroskedasticity. Data from
the American National Election Studies, 1948–2012. Name Recall is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the respondent
could recall the name of any candidate running for the U.S. House in their district. Name Recognition is a dummy
variable equal to 1 if the respondent could identify the incumbent from a list of the major party candidates for
the U.S. House in their district.Trust is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the respondent agreed with the statement:
“Most people can be trusted.” Talking with People is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the respondent reported
discussing politics with family and friends. Less than High School Degree and College Degree or More are dummy
variables for educational attainment. All regressions include …xed e¤ects for gender, race/ethnicity, age deciles and
survey year.
                                Table 3: Political Opinions and Social Capital
Panel A
                             Ideological      Ideological     Thermometer        Thermometer         Preferences      Preferences
                               Rating           Rating          Provided           Provided           Provided         Provided
Trust                            .084***          .054***           .059***            .035***           .115***          .077***
                                (.014)           (.014)            (.008)             (.008)            (.014)           (.014)
Less than High School                           –.162***                              –.151***                           –.143***
                                                (.024)                                (.016)                             (.020)
College or More                                   .091***                              .050***                            .124***
                                                 (.015)                               (.008)                             (.015)
R2                              .049              .070             .051               .073                .110            .133
Observations                    4,751            4,751             8,305              8,305              5,339           5,339
Panel B
                             Ideological      Ideological     Thermometer        Thermometer         Preferences      Preferences
                               Rating           Rating          Provided           Provided           Provided         Provided
Talking with People              .157***          .131***           .108***            .084***           .223***          .187***
                                (.012)           (.013)            (.007)             (.007)            (.010)           (.010)
Less than High School                           –.085***                              –.118***                           –.106***
                                                (.015)                                (.010)                             (.012)
College or More                                   .076***                              .044***                            .111***
                                                 (.011)                               (.006)                             (.011)
R2                              .053              .063            .0357                .071              .112             .135
Observations                    9,327            9,327            18,770              18,770            12,262           12,262

 Notes: * p 0:1; **p 0:05; ***p 0:01. Standard errors are corrected for White heteroskedasticity. Data from the American
 National Election Studies, 1948–2012. Ideological Rating is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the respondent placed their U.S.
 House representative on a seven-point ideological scale, and 0 if they answered they “don’t know” or “don’t recognize” the
 incumbent. Thermometer Provided is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the respondent rated their feelings towards the incumbent
 on a scale from 0 to 100, and 0 if they answered they “don’t know where to rate,” or “can’t judge,” or couldn’t recognize the
 incumbent’s name. Preferences Provided is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the respondent mentioned at least one thing they
 liked or disliked about the incumbent U.S. House representative in their district, and 0 if they reported that they did not know
 anything about this candidate. Trust is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the respondent agreed with the statement: “Most people
 can be trusted.” Talking with People is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the respondent reported discussing politics with family
 and friends. Less than High School Degree and College Degree or More are dummy variables for educational attainment. All
 regressions include …xed e¤ects for gender, race/ethnicity, age deciles and survey year.
              Table 4: Summary Statistics –Macro Data



                                         Mean     Std. Dev.      Obs.     Min.     Max.
Education Spending                       4.29         1.29        74      1.67      6.99
Trust                                    .257         .139        74      .035      .695
Talking with People                      .762         .102        48      .547      .925
Pronoun Drop                             .676        .471         49        0        1
Government Spending                      25.10       10.24        74      2.07     55.42
Population (log)                         16.68        1.52        74      13.83    20.86
Number of Ethnic Groups (log)            1.57         0.40        74      0.69      2.30
Inverse Distance to Coast                .011         .020        74      .000      .128
Temperature                              14.66        8.61        74      –7.14    28.30

Notes: Education Spending is government expenditure on education as a percentage of
GDP, average 2000–2010, from the World Development Indicators. Trust is the share
of World Values Survey respondents (1981–2014) who agree with the statement: “Most
people can be trusted.” Talking with People is the share of WVS respondents who report
that one of the “sources to learn what is going on in their country and the world” they
used in the previous week was “talking with friends or colleagues.” Pronoun Drop is
the population share of languages that allow the speaker to omit the subject personal
pronoun in a sentence, from Tabellini (2008). Government Spending is total government
expense as a percentage of GDP, average 2000–2010, from the WDI. Population (log)
is the logarithm of the average number of residents, 2000–2010, from the WDI. Number
of Ethnic Groups (log) is from Alesina et al. (2003). Inverse Distance to Coast is the
inverse of the mean distance in km from the nearest ice-free coastline, from Gallup, Sachs
and Mellinger (1999). Temperature is the annual mean temperature in degrees Celsius,
1961–1999, from the World Bank Climate Change Knowledge Portal.
   Table 5: Public Spending on Education and Social Capital


 Panel A

 Trust                                    3.449***           3.120***           3.125***
                                         (0.967)            (0.985)            (0.886)
 Government Spending                                                            .057***
                                                                               (.014)
 Population (log)                                           –.117              –.067
                                                            (.096)             (.094)
 No. of Ethnic Groups (log)                                  .133               .207
                                                            (.331)             (.309)
 Inverse Distance to Coast                                   0.280            –6.227
                                                            (8.279)           (5.116)
 Temperature                                                –.017               .006
                                                            (.017)             (.016)
 R2                                        .138               .177               .342
 Observations                               74                 74                 74
 Panel B

 Talking with People                      5.214***           5.193***           4.655***
                                         (1.392)            (1.463)            (1.619)
 Government Spending                                                            .052***
                                                                               (.014)
 Population (log)                                           –.120              –.049
                                                            (.142)             (.135)
 No. of Ethnic Groups (log)                                 –.283              –.104
                                                            (.323)             (.300)
 Inverse Distance to Coast                                  –9.595           –14.261**
                                                           (10.422)           (6.376)
 Temperature                                                –.013               .006
                                                            (.019)             (.018)
 R2                                        .202               .257               .388
 Observations                               48                 48                 48

Notes: * p      0:1; **p     0:05; ***p    0:01. Standard errors are corrected for White
heteroskedasticity. The dependent variable is government expenditure on education as a
percentage of GDP, average 2000–2010, from the World Development Indicators. Trust is
the share of World Values Survey respondents (1981–2014) who agree with the statement:
“Most people can be trusted.” Talking with People is the share of WVS respondents who
report that one of the “sources to learn what is going on in their country and the world”
they used in the previous week was “talking with friends or colleagues.” Government
Spending is total government expense as a percentage of GDP, average 2000–2010, from
the WDI. Population (log) is the logarithm of the average number of residents, 2000–2010,
from the WDI. Number of Ethnic Groups (log) is from Alesina et al. (2003). Inverse Dis-
tance to Coast is the inverse of the mean distance in km from the nearest ice-free coastline,
from Gallup, Sachs and Mellinger (1999). Temperature is the annual mean temperature
in degrees Celsius, 1961–1999, from the World Bank Climate Change Knowledge Portal.
            Table 6: Public Spending on Education and Social Capital –IV Estimation
Panel A
                                                   Education                         Education                        Education
                                     Trust         Spending            Trust         Spending           Trust         Spending
                                  (1st Stage)       (2SLS)          (1st Stage)       (2SLS)         (1st Stage)       (2SLS)
Trust                                                 8.805***                         10.518***                         8.743***
                                                     (2.130)                           (3.092)                          (2.557)
Pronoun Drop                        –.179***                          –.153***                         –.165***
                                     (.047)                            (.048)                           (.048)
Government Spending                                                                                     –.002             .046***
                                                                                                        (.002)           (.017)
Population (log)                                                        .004           –.127             .000            –.033
                                                                       (.013)          (.162)           (.013)           (.131)
No. of Ethnic Groups (log)                                            –.067              .509           –.071             .482
                                                                      (.050)            (.454)          (.050)           (.402)
Inverse Distance to Coast                                              0.846          –10.155            1.097         –14.200
                                                                      (2.431)         (21.682)          (2.580)        (18.878)
Temperature                                                           –.006**            .061           –.006**           .060
                                                                      (.002)            (.039)          (.002)           (.037)
F stat. of excl. instruments         15.12                             12.82                             14.55
Observations                          49                49              49                49              49               49
Clusters (Languages)                  33                33              33                33              33               33
Panel B
                                    Talking        Education          Talking        Education          Talking       Education
                                  w/ People        Spending         w/ People        Spending         w/ People       Spending
                                  (1st stage)       (2SLS)          (1st stage)       (LIML)          (1st stage)      (LIML)
Talking with People                                  11.827***                         15.020***                        14.756***
                                                     (3.076)                           (4.362)                          (4.647)
Pronoun Drop                        –.132***                          –.108***                          –.106**
                                     (.027)                            (.035)                           (.044)
Government Spending                                                                                      .000             .004
                                                                                                        (.002)           (.025)
Population (log)                                                        .004           –.085             .004            –.082
                                                                       (.012)          (.140)           (.012)           (.146)
No. of Ethnic Groups (log)                                             0.054           –1.082           0.056           –1.052
                                                                       (.039)          (0.700)          (.039)          (0.713)
Inverse Distance to Coast                                              3.875          –61.706            3.870         –60.765
                                                                      (2.794)         (38.802)          (2.829)        (38.759)
Temperature                                                            –.002             .027           –.002             .028
                                                                       (.002)           (.026)          (.002)           (.026)
F stat. of excl. instruments         13.97                              9.33                             6.45
Observations                          39                39               39               39              39               39
Clusters (Languages)                  28                28               28               28              28               28

  Notes: * p      0:1; **p    0:05; ***p     0:01. Standard errors are corrected for White heteroskedasticity and clustered by
  language. Education Spending is government expenditure on education as a percentage of GDP, average 2000–2010, from
  the World Development Indicators. Trust is the share of World Values Survey respondents (1981–2014) who agree with the
  statement: “Most people can be trusted.” Talking with People is the share of WVS respondents who report that one of the
  “sources to learn what is going on in their country and the world” they used in the previous week was “talking with friends or
  colleagues.” Pronoun Drop is the population share of languages that allow the speaker to omit the subject personal pronoun
  in a sentence, from Tabellini (2008). Government Spending is total government expense as a percentage of GDP, average
  2000–2010, from the WDI. Population (log) is the logarithm of the average number of residents, 2000–2010, from the WDI.
  Number of Ethnic Groups (log) is from Alesina et al. (2003). Inverse Distance to Coast is the inverse of the mean distance in
  km from the nearest ice-free coastline, from Gallup, Sachs and Mellinger (1999). Temperature is the annual mean temperature
  in degrees Celsius, 1961–1999, from the World Bank Climate Change Knowledge Portal.
A      Appendix [for Online Publication]
A.1     De…nitions of the Equilibrium and of the Social Optimum
Let the random variable (st ;                    t ; kt+1 ; gt ; ht+1 )   be an indicator for the event of re-election
described by the condition:

              t         (p; q)       1   (st ;   t ; kt+1 ; gt ; ht+1 )   + [1       (p; q)]   0   (st ;   t ; kt+1 ; gt ) .   (A1)

The dynamic equilibrium has the following de…nition.

De…nition A1 A Markov-perfect dynamic equilibrium consists of a welfare function V (st ),
an additional value Z (st ) of holding political o¢ ce, a tax-setting rule T (st ), a private in-
vestment rule K (st ; t ), and a public investment rule H (st ; t ) such that:

  1. The social welfare function satis…es the recursive de…nition:

        V (st ) = (1            ) log f[1         (1        ) T (st )] y (kt ; ht )      K (st ; T (st ))g
                       + log [(1        ) T (st ) y (kt ; ht ) H (st ; T (st ))] + "gt 1 + Et "gt
                        h                                                                             i
                                  g h                            "h   +"h                     g h
                   + Et     st ; "t ; "t V K (st ; T (st )) ; e   t 1   t H (st ; T (st )) ; "t ; "t
                      n                                                  h     h
                                                                                                               o
                  + Et 1          st ; "gt ; "ht V K (st ; T (st )) ; e"t 1 +"t H (st ; T (st )) ; ! gt ; ! ht   ,

      where for ease of notation:
                              0                                                                                 1
                                               st ; T (st ) ; K (st ; T (st )) ;
                                                  g     g
                    st ; "gt ; "ht           @ e"t 1 +"t [(1       ) T (st ) y (kt ; ht ) H (st ; T (st ))] ; A .
                                                                                       h     h
                                                                                     e"t 1 +"t H (st ; T (st ))

  2. The additional value of political incumbency satis…es the recursive de…nition:
                         h                                          h     h
                                                                                                         i
        Z (st ) = z + Et      st ; "gt ; "ht Z K (st ; T (st )) ; e"t 1 +"t H (st ; T (st )) ; "gt ; "ht ,

      with the same simpli…ed notation for                            st ; "gt ; "ht .

  3. Labor-income taxes are chosen by o¢ ce-seeking politicians:

       T (st ) =
               8                                                                                                               9
               >
               > (1  ) log f[1 (1              ) T ] y (kt ; ht ) K (st ; T )g                                                 >
                                                                                                                               >
               >
               >                                                                                                               >
                                                                                                                               >
               >
               >     8              + log 2   [(1       ) T y (kt ; ht ) H (st ; T )]                   39                     >
                                                                                                                               >
               >
               <                                                                                                               >
                                                                                                                               =
                     <                             V   K   (s t ; T ) ; e"h      h
                                                                                       t
                                                                                                g
                                                                          t 1 +"t H (s ; T ) ; " ; "h
                                                                                                t   t
                                                                                                         =
      arg max + Et         s   ; T; "g h 4
                                       ; "                                                              5                          ,
           T > >             t       t    t                                                                                    >
                                                                                                                               >
               >     :                                                      h      h
                                                   +Z K (st ; T ) ; e"t 1 +"t H (st ; T ) ; "gt ; "ht    ;                     >
               >
               >     n                                                                                    o                    >
                                                                                                                               >
               >
               >                                                                                                               >
                                                                                                                               >
               : + Et 1                                                        h     h
                                   st ; T; "gt ; "ht V K (st ; T ) ; e"t 1 +"t H (st ; T ) ; ! gt ; ! ht                       ;


                                                                    1
     where for ease of notation:

          st ; T; "gt ; "ht
                                                   g        g                                                                        h       h
                  st ; T; K (st ; T ) ; e"t             1 +"t      [(1       ) T y (kt ; ht )                  H (st ; T )] ; e"t        1 +"t   H (st ; T ) .

  4. Expenditure on public investment is chosen by o¢ ce-seeking politicians:

       H (st ;  =t)
                8                                                                                                                                              9
                >
                >  log [(1
                        8    ) t y (kt ; ht ) 2    H]                                            39                                                            >
                                                                                                                                                               >
                >
                >                                                                                                                                              >
                                                                                                                                                               >
                >
                <       <                              V K (s t ; t ) ; e"h      h     g
                                                                          t 1 +"t H; " ; "h
                                                                                       t
                                                                                                  =                                                            >
                                                                                                                                                               =
                                          g h 4                                           t
                  +  E     s   ;   ; H; "   ; "                                                  5
        arg max       t
                        :
                             t   t        t    t                            h      h
                                                                                                  ;                                                                .
             H >>                                      +Z K (st ; t ) ; e"t 1 +"t H; "gt ; "ht                                                                 >
                                                                                                                                                               >
                >
                >        n                                                                         o                                                           >
                                                                                                                                                               >
                >
                : + Et 1                                                       h     h                                                                         >
                                                                                                                                                               ;
                                   st ; t ; H; "gt ; "ht V K (st ; t ) ; e"t 1 +"t H; ! gt ; ! ht

     where for ease of notation:
                         g h
          st ;   t ; H; "t ; "t
                                                                                 g       g                                                        h       h
                          st ; T (st ) ; K (st ; T (st )) ; e"t                      1 +"t   [(1           )    ty   (kt ; ht )        H] ; e"t       1 +"t   H .

  5. Private investment is chosen by utility-maximizing households:

       K (st ;   t)   =
                      8                                                                                                                                        9
                      >
                      > (1            ) loghf[1               (1         )  t] y      (kt ; ht )       Kg                                             i        >
                                                                                                                                                               >
                      <                                                 g h                            h       h                         g h
                                                                                                                                                               =
                     + Et                              st ;     t ; K; "t ; "t         V K; e"t            1 +"t     H (st ;      t ) ; "t ; "t
         arg max
              K >      n                                                                                                                                   o >.
                 >
                 : + Et 1                                                  g h                             "h        h
                                                                                                                 1 +"t
                                                                                                                                             g    h          >
                                                                                                                                                             ;
                                                         st ;      t ; K; "t ; "t            V K; e         t            H (st ;       t) ; !t ; !t


     where for ease of notation:
                         g h
          st ;   t ; K; "t ; "t
                                             "gt           g
                                                       1 +"t                                                                      "h         h
                                                                                                                                         1 +"t
                              st ;   t ; K; e                   [(1          )       ty   (kt ; ht )       H (st ;        t )] ; e
                                                                                                                                   t             H (st ;      t)   .


    Let the binary function  st ; "gt ; "ht equal one if the incumbent is retained and zero if
he is replaced by a new random draw from the ability pool. The social optimum has the
following characterization.

De…nition A2 The solution to the planner’s problem consists of a welfare function V (st ),
a private investment rule K (st ), public spending rules G (st ) and H (st ), and a re-election
rule     st ; "gt ; "ht such that:




                                                                             2
  1. The social welfare function satis…es the recursive de…nition:

         V (st ) = (1      ) log [y (kt ; ht )        K (st )         G (st )       H (st )]
                                             +      log G (st ) +      "gt 1   + Et "gt
                                 h                               h  h
                                                                                          i
                        + Et     st ; "gt ; "ht V K (st ) ; e"t 1 +"t H (st ) ; "gt ; "ht
                                n                                            h     h
                                                                                                           o
                            + Et 1              st ; "gt ; "ht V K (st ) ; e"t 1 +"t H (st ) ; ! gt ; ! ht   .

  2. The allocation of output K (st ), G (st ), H                     (st ) solves:
                     8                                                                                                9
                     >
                     >  (1    ) logh[y (kt ; ht ) K                     G       H] + log G                    i       >
                                                                                                                      >
                     <                                                          h       h                             =
                            + Et         st ; "gt ; "ht V               K; e"t      1 +"t   H; "gt ; "ht
               max
               K;G;H >        n                                                                                    o >.
                     >
                     : + Et 1                                                       "h       h                       >
                                                                                                                     ;
                                            st ; "gt ; "h         t    V K; e        t   1 +"t    H; ! gt ; ! ht


  3. The re-election rule is               st ; "gt ; "ht = 1 if and only if:
                            h       h                                                         h        h
           V K (st ) ; e"t      1 +"t   H (st ) ; "gt ; "ht       Et V K (st ) ; e"t               1 +"t   H (st ) ; ! gt ; ! ht .

A.2      Proof of Proposition 1 and Corollary 1
To solve the planner’s problem, we make an educated guess for the form of the social welfare
function:
                    V (st ) = v0 + vk log kt + vh log ht + v"g "gt 1 + v"h "ht 1 .     (A2)
Then the allocation of output solves:

      max f(1    ) log [y (kt ; ht )       K      G      H] + log G + ([vk log K + vh log H])g ,                                     (A3)
   K;G;H


which implies constant output shares:

                                            K (st )            vk
                                                        =                ,                                                           (A4)
                                           y (kt ; ht )   1 + (vk + vh )

                                            G (st )
                                                        =                ,                                                           (A5)
                                           y (kt ; ht )   1 + (vk + vh )
and
                                            H (st )            vh
                                                        =                ;                                                           (A6)
                                           y (kt ; ht )   1 + (vk + vh )
the re-election rule is         st ; "gt ; "ht = 1 if and only if:

                                                  v"g "gt + v"h "ht     0;                                                           (A7)




                                                              3
and social welfare is:

                                             1
  V (st ) = (1               ) log                      y (kt ; ht )
                                         1 + (vk + vh )

                                         +       y (kt ; ht ) + "gt 1
                                                   log
                                  1 + (vk + vh )
                                            vk
                            + vk log                   y (kt ; ht )
                                      1 + (vk + vh )
                                         vh
                       + vh log                   y (kt ; ht ) + "ht 1
                                   1 + (vk + vh )
                                                                + E v"g "gt + v"h "ht                                                          0 , (A8)
                                               R1
where E [X 0] denotes the partial expectation 0 XdF (X).
   Thus the guess is correct for:

              vk =        [1 + (vk + vh )] , vh = (1                         ) [1 + (vk + vh )] , v"g = , v"h = vh ,                               (A9)

and

                           1                                                  vk
  v0 = (1            ) log           + log                   + vk log
                      1 + (vk + vh )         1 + (vk + vh )           1 + (vk + vh )
                             vh
               + vh log                + [1 + (vk + vh )] log A + E v"g "gt + v"h "ht 0 . (A10)
                        1 + (vk + vh )

Solving for the coe¢ cients and plugging them into the expressions above yields the exact
solution to the planner’s problem.
    The growth rate of output is:

          log yt+1     log yt = (1                 ) log (1           )+         log         + log      + log A + (1                  )   t,      (A11)

where the optimal competence of the ruling politician is:

                                     t    =      t 1     "ht   1   + "ht + 1                 t 1     ! ht   1   + ! ht ,                          (A12)

such that:
                                         Z   1
                          h                                             (1           )
  E   t   =E         t 1 "t 1    =                 1       Fg                            "     "dFh (") =
                                             1                        (1         )
                  Z   1                                                                                                     Z   1
                                                             (1        )
              =              Fg (0)           Fg                         "       "dFh (") + [1                  Fg (0)]             "dFh (")
                       1                                   (1        )                                                          1
                                                            Z 1
                                                                                                     (1             )
                                                       =             Fg (0)          Fg                                 "   " dFh (")          0. (A13)
                                                                1                                  (1           )




                                                                             4
A.3         Proof of Proposition 2
To solve for the equilibrium, we make educated guesses for the functional forms of social
welfare:
                    V (st ) = v0 + vk log kt + vh log ht + v"g "gt 1 + v"h "ht 1 , (A14)
and of the value of incumbency:
                                                                 Z (st ) = Z.                                                                    (A15)
   The guess (A14) for the welfare function su¢ ces to establish that private savings are:

  K (st ;     t)   = arg max f(1           ) log f[1             (1           )   t] y   (kt ; ht )       Kg + vk log Kg
                          K
                                                                                         vk
                                                                        =                     [1              (1         )     t] y   (kt ; ht ) . (A16)
                                                                              1          + vk

    Recalling that E! gt = E! ht = E"ht = 0, (A14) also implies that voters’policy preferences
are:
                                                     g g                   h h
                   1 (st ; t ; kt+1 ; gt ; ht+1 ) = v" " (st ; t ; gt ) + v" " (st ; t ; ht+1 ) (A17)
for the share (p; q) of citizens who have observed ht+1 , and:

                                            0   (st ;       t ; kt+1 ; gt )   = v"g "g (st ;       t ; gt )                                      (A18)

the remainder 1      (p; q) of voters who have not observed ht+1 . Then                                                          (st ) as de…ned in
De…nition (1) is an indicator for:

      t    v"g "g st ; T (st ) ; [(1       ) T (st ) y (kt ; ht )                 H (st ; T (st ))] exp "gt              1   + "gt
                                          + (p; q) v"h "h st ; T (st ) ; H (st ; T (st )) exp "ht                                1    + "ht   . (A19)

   In equilibrium, regardless of the form of the welfare function, voters’inference is correct.
Equations (15) and (16) imply that:

          "g st ; T (st ) ; [(1        ) T (st ) y (kt ; ht )            H (st ; T (st ))] exp "gt                 1   + "gt      = "gt          (A20)

and
                               "h st ; T (st ) ; H (st ; T (st )) exp "ht                     1   + "ht       = "ht .                            (A21)
As a consequence,             (st ) is an indicator for:

                                                        t      v"g "gt + (p; q) v"h "ht ,                                                        (A22)

whose distribution is independent of st .
   We assume that the support of all shocks is such that neither the aggregate outcome of
the election nor any single voter’s ballot is perfectly predictable on the basis of gt and ht+1
alone. Formally:
                                      1 1               iid
                            t s U       ;      and it s U        ; ,                     (A23)
                                     2 2


                                                                         5
such that:

              1 1                                     (1              )
  max          ;                              ^"g +                         ^"h <
             2 2                                        1
                                                                                    (1       )                            1                1
                                                                          ^"g +                      ^"h      min           ;                       . (A24)
                                                                                      1                                  2                2

   Then the uniform distribution of                         t   implies that:
                                                                         1
                                                                E (st ) = .                                                                             (A25)
                                                                         2
The guess (A15) for the value of holding political o¢ ce is then correct for a constant:
                                                                               2z
                                                                Z=                   ,                                                                  (A26)
                                                                           2

conditional on the guess (A14) for the welfare function being correct.
   Given (A14) and the ensuing value of o¢ ce Z, expenditure on public investment is then:

                                                      log [(1                  ) t y (kt ; ht ) H] + vh log H
                 H (st ;   t)   = arg max                                                                                                  ,            (A27)
                                         H               + E                   v"g "gt + v"h "ht + Z (st ; t ; H)

recalling that (st ; t ; H) is independent of the unobservable challenger shocks ! gt and ! ht .
Moreover, the simpli…cation for 1 and 0 found above and the inferences (15) and (16)
imply that (st ; t ; H) is an indicator for:

    t    v"g f"gt + log [(1         )    ty   (kt ; ht )         H]            log [(1           )    ty   (kt ; ht )     H (st ;         t )]g

                                                                      +        (p; q) v"h     "ht    + log H             log H (st ;           t)   , (A28)

such that:
                     1
  E (st ;    t ; H)   =
                     2
            + v"g flog [(1           )   ty    (kt ; ht )        H]            log [(1           )     ty   (kt ; ht )     H (st ;         t )]g

                                                                                +         (p; q) v"h [log H              log H (st ;           t )] ,   (A29)

while
                  E ["gt (st ;    t ; H)]    = v"g     2
                                                       g        and E "ht (st ;              t ; H)         =       (p; q) v"h       2
                                                                                                                                     h.                 (A30)
Plugging these in:

  H (st ;   t)   =
        arg max ( + Z v"g ) log [(1                        )     ty   (kt ; ht )          H] +             vh + Z         (p; q) v"h log H
             H
                                                      vh + Z (p; q) v"h
                                         =                                       (1                                        )    ty   (kt ; ht ) . (A31)
                                                  + fvh + Z [v"g + (p; q) v"h ]g

                                                                           6
   Given the guess (A14)           and the ensuing value of o¢ ce Z, labor-income taxes are:
                        8                                                                      9
                        >
                        >          (1    ) log f[1 (1          ) T ] y (kt ; ht ) K (st ; T )g >
                                                                                               >
                        <                                                                      =
                                   + log [(1      ) T y (kt ; ht ) H (st ; T )]
      T (st ) = arg max                                                                          , (A32)
                     T >>          + [vk log K (st ; T ) + vh log H (st ; T )]                 >
                                                                                               >
                        :                                                                      ;
                                   + E v"g "gt + v"h "ht + Z (st ; T )

where     (st ; T ) is an indicator for:

                                                  t       v"g "gt + (p; q) v"h "ht ,                                                    (A33)

such that:
                     1
        E (st ; T ) = , E ["gt (st ; T )] = v"g                 2
                                                                g    and E "ht (st ; T ) =                         (p; q) v"h   2
                                                                                                                                h.      (A34)
                     2
Hence, considering the solutions for K (st ;                        t ),   and H (st ;      t ),    taxes are:

  T (st ) = arg max f(1             + vk ) log [1               (1          ) T ] + ( + vh ) log T g
                  T
                                                                                                        1          + vh
                                                                                             =                                . (A35)
                                                                                                    1          1 + (vk + vh )

   Finally, using the guess (A14) on the right-hand side of the recursive de…nition of the
social welfare function itself:

  V (st ) = (1         ) log f[1     (1         ) T (st )] y (kt ; ht )          K (st ; T (st ))g
                        +       log [(1         ) T (st ) y (kt ; ht )           H (st ; T (st ))] + "gt                1
                        +       vk log K (st ; T (st )) + vh log H (st ; T (st )) + "ht                             1
                               + E    v"g "gt   +     v"h "ht        (st ) + E           v"g ! gt   +   v"h ! ht     [1         (st )] . (A36)

The distribution of            (st ) and the solutions for K (st ;                   t ),   H (st ;         t ),   and T (st ) then imply
that:

                                 1
  V (st ) = (1         ) log                y (kt ; ht )
                             1 + (vk + vh )
                             + Z v"g                      + vh
          +      log                                         g              h
                                                                              y (kt ; ht ) + "gt 1
                         1 + (vk + vh ) + vh + Z [v" + (p; q) v" ]
                                                         vk
                                 + vk log                      y (kt ; ht )
                                             1 + (vk + vh )
                         vh + Z (p; q) v"h                  + vh
     + vh log                                                                     y (kt ; ht ) + "ht 1
                           1 + (vk + vh )    + vh + Z [v"g + (p; q) v"h ]
                                                                 h                               2
                                                                                                   i
                                                                      g     2                h
                                                            +      (v" g ) + (p; q) v" h             . (A37)

Recalling the Cobb-Douglas production function (11), our educated guess (A14) is correct

                                                                      7
for:

        vk =    [1 + (vk + vh )] , vh = (1                  ) [1 + (vk + vh )] , v"g = , v"h = vh ,                           (A38)

and

                        1                          vk
  v0 = (1       ) log             + vk log
                   1 + (vk + vh )          1 + (vk + vh )
                                     g
                              + Z v"                  + vh
                   + log
                          1 + (vk + vh ) + vh + Z [v"g + (p; q) v"h ]
                           vh + Z (p; q) v"h              + vh
                 + vh log
                            1 + (vk + vh )     + vh + Z [v"g + (p; q) v"h ]
                                                      h                                                             2
                                                                                                                        i
                          + [1 + (vk + vh )] log A +    (v"g g )2 + (p; q) v"h                                 h            . (A39)

Solving out:
                                                        1                       (1     )
                                vk =           , vh =         , v"g = , v"h =                  ,                              (A40)
                                         1              1                         1
and

  (1      ) v0 = (1    ) (1    ) log [(1   ) (1 )] +                      log ( )
                  + (1      ) log [(1    ) + ] + (1                      ) log [(1         )               ]
                                                                           2                                        2
                                        + log A +            [(1     )   g]    + (p; q) [(1                )   h]           , (A41)
                                                    1
for:
                                              (1   ) 2 (1  ) Z [1    (p; q)]
                                                                                ,                                             (A42)
                                    (1       ) (1 + Z ) + (1   ) [1 + Z (p; q)]
such that:
                                    2
         @           (1         )     (1   ) [(1   ) + (1    ) ] (1 + Z ) Z @
            =                                                                 < 0.                                            (A43)
         @q               f(1        ) (1 + Z ) + (1   ) [1 + Z (p; q)]g2 @q

   We can collect the results above in an exact solution for all equilibrium functions. The
social welfare function depends on social capital according to:
                                                                                                       2
       @V                  [(1           ) + (1       ) ]       @               (1    )                    @
          =                                                        +                               h          > 0.            (A44)
       @q       (1         ) [(1          )     ] [(1     ) + ] @q                1                        @q

A.4      Proof of Proposition 3
The electoral process implies that the competence of the ruling politician evolves according
to:
                       ^t = t 1 ("t 1 + "t ) + 1   t 1 (! t 1 + ! t ) ,                (A45)



                                                              8
where     t 1    is an indicator for:

                                                                             (1      )
                                                    t 1        "gt   1   +                          (p; q) "ht 1 .                            (A46)
                                                                               1

   The cumulative distribution function of ^ht is:

  Pr ^ht                 = Pr          t 1    "ht   1   + "ht + 1              t 1           ! ht   1   + ! ht
                     = Pr                = 1 ^ "ht 1 + "ht
                                       t 1                        + Pr t 1 = 0 ^ ! ht 1 + ! ht
                                           (1     )                                     1
      = Pr        t 1              "gt 1 +             (p; q) "ht 1 ^ "ht 1 + "ht     + Pr ! ht 1 + ! ht
                                             1                                          2
                                                    Z 1
                                                                 (1     )
                                                =          1+                (p; q) " Fh (    ") fh (") d", (A47)
                                                      1            1

where Fh (") is the cumulative distribution function of "ht and fh (") its probability density
function. An increase in q induces an increase in ^ht in the sense of …rst-order stochastic
dominance because:
       Z 1
           "Fh (     ") fh (") d" = E "ht Fh   "ht < E"ht E Fh         "ht = 0.         (A48)
             1

   The growth rate of output is:

      log yt+1       log yt = log A + (1                       ) log [ (1                )           ]+      log (       ) + (1     ) ^ht .   (A49)

The equilibrium distribution of ^ht has raw moments:

                                                                                   (1           )
                                             E^ht = E              h
                                                              t 1 "t 1       =                            (p; q)     2
                                                                                                                     h                        (A50)
                                                                                     1
and
                     h         2
                                   i            h                            i                       h                                  i
                                                                         h 2                                                        2
                 E       ^ht            = E             t 1  "ht  1 +  " t     +  E   1       t 1  E    ! ht                    h
                                                                                                                           1 + !t
                                                h                   2
                                                                      i              h         i
                                                               h                           h 2
                                        = E             t 1  " t 1      +  E   t 1 E     " t
                                                                     n h            2
                                                                                      i        h       io
                                                                                h                  h 2
                                          +E             1      t 1     E     ! t 1     +    E   ! t
                                            h                       2
                                                                      i    3 2
                                                               h
                                        = E             t 1 "t 1        +
                                                                           2 h
                                               (1          )                 h        3
                                                                                        i
                                        =                        (p; q) E "ht 1           + 2 2h ,                                            (A51)
                                                 1




                                                                              9
so the variance of the output growth rate is:

 V ar (log yt+1      log yt ) = (1         )2 V ar ^ht
                       (                                                                                                 )
                         (1      )                 h          3
                                                                  i                  (1        )
                                                                                                                     2
       = (1         )2                    (p; q) E "ht   1            +2      2
                                                                              h                     (p; q)       2
                                                                                                                 h
                            1                                                          1
                                                                  (                                                  )
                                                                                                                 2
                                                                                    (1     )
                                                 = (1        )2       2   2
                                                                          h                        (p; q)    2
                                                                                                             h           , (A52)
                                                                                      1
               h             i
                         3
given that E       "ht 1         = 0 since the distribution of "ht            1   is symmetric around E"ht           1   = 0.




                                                        10
