                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     INEQUALITY OF EDUCATIONAL OPPORTUNITY? SCHOOLS AS MEDIATORS
           OF THE INTERGENERATIONAL TRANSMISSION OF INCOME

                                        Jesse Rothstein

                                      Working Paper 24537
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24537


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2018




I thank Audrey Tiew, Leah Shiferaw, Julien Lafortune, and Rachel Young for excellent research
assistance as well as Charlie Brown, David Card, Avi Feller, Pat Kline, and conference and
seminar participants at NBER, NYU, SOLE, UC Irvine, UC Riverside, UCSB, UCSD, UQAM,
and the Trans-Pacific Labor Seminar for helpful discussions and comments. I am grateful to the
Russell Sage Foundation for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the author
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Jesse Rothstein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Inequality of Educational Opportunity? Schools as Mediators of the Intergenerational Transmission
of Income
Jesse Rothstein
NBER Working Paper No. 24537
April 2018
JEL No. I24,I3,J12,J24

                                         ABSTRACT

Chetty et al. (2014b) show that children from low-income families achieve higher adult incomes,
relative to those from higher income families, in some commuting zones (CZs) than in others. I
investigate whether children’s educational outcomes help to explain the between-CZ differences.
I find little evidence that the quality of schools is a key mechanism driving variation in
intergenerational mobility. While CZs with stronger intergenerational income transmission have
somewhat stronger transmission of parental income to children’s educational attainment and
achievement, on average, neither can explain a large share of the between-CZ variation. Marriage
patterns explain two-fifths of the variation in income transmission, human capital accumulation
and returns to human capital each explain only one-ninth, and the remainder of the variation
(about one-third) reflects differences in earnings between children from high- and low-income
families that are not mediated by human capital. This points to job networks and the structure of
local labor and marriage markets, rather than the education system, as likely factors influencing
intergenerational economic mobility.


Jesse Rothstein
Goldman School of Public Policy and
 Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
2607 Hearst Avenue #7320
Berkeley, CA 94720-7320
and NBER
rothstein@berkeley.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w24537
1    Introduction

Chetty et al. (2014a, hereafter "CHKS") use data on the universe of U.S. tax filers to measure

intergenerational income transmission – the strength of the association between parents’ and

children’s incomes – at the fine geographic level, and reveal massive heterogeneity across

space: The gap in adult earnings between children from high- vs. low-income families is

nearly twice as large for children who grow up in Cincinnati as for those who grow up in

Los Angeles. Little is known, however, about the mechanisms driving this variation.

    There are many potential channels for intergenerational transmission, including diﬀer-

ences in parenting practices between high- and low-income families, diﬀerences in explicit

investments in children’s education, diﬀerences in access to educational or other public in-

stitutions, and labor market institutions (such as insider hiring or spatial mismatch) that

advantage children from high-income families regardless of their skills. These suggest quite

diﬀerent directions to look for potential policy interventions aimed at reducing transmission.

    CHKS find that income transmission is negatively correlated with average test scores,

high school completion, and school expenditures, and uncorrelated to average class size.

This is suggestive, but these aggregate correlations are of limited value to understanding

the mechanisms driving the variation across CZs. Income transmission is about diﬀerential

outcomes of children from high- and low-income families, so to understand the mechanisms

driving the between-area variation we need to understand how areas vary in the relative

inputs received by and outcomes obtained by children from families with diﬀerent incomes.

    I investigate this directly, focusing on human capital accumulation as a potential medi-

ator of intergenerational income transmission. If variation in school quality, or in parenting

practices related to learning, is an important factor driving the variation in income trans-

mission, we would expect that high income transmission areas would also be areas where the

gap in educational outcomes between children from high- and low-income families is large.

On the other hand, if parental income primarily helps children by, for example, buying them

access to better labor market networks, then areas where poor children have good adult

outcomes will not, in general, be areas where they do relatively well in school.

    To measure children’s educational outcomes, I rely primarily on the Education Longi-


                                              2
tudinal Survey (ELS). This is a representative national sample that includes information

about parental income, children’s achievement (test scores) near the end of high school,

and educational attainment and early adult earnings and income. The ELS data can be

geocoded to commuting zones (CZs), the unit of geography considered by CHKS.

    The ELS contains only about 15,000 respondents, far too few to produce reliable income-

achievement transmission measures for each of the 700 CZs in the United States. I show

that this is not necessary in order to accomplish the more limited goal of measuring the

across-CZ association between income-income transmission and income-achievement trans-

mission. That association is identified even with small numbers of observations from each

CZ – information can be pooled from many CZs with similar income-income transmission

to identify the average income-achievement transmission among them, even when the lat-

ter is not reliably estimated for any individual CZ. I develop an estimator for the slope

of the CZ-level regression of intergenerational income transmission on income-achievement

transmission, or for the correlation between the two, based on a mixed (random coeﬃcients)

model for the relationship between children’s achievement and their parents’ incomes.

    I find that CZs vary substantially in the strength of transmission from parental income

to children’s 12th grade math scores (which I call “test score transmission”), but that this

is only weakly correlated across CZs with income transmission. Income transmission is

more strongly correlated to the strength of transmission from parental income to children’s

educational attainment,1 though the magnitude of the variation in the latter is not large

enough to account for a large share of the former. These results suggest that diﬀerential

inequities in access to good schools are not an important mechanism driving the across-CZ

variation in income transmission; what role education does play seems to reflect access to

higher education more than the quality of elementary and secondary schools.

    This motivates me to consider other channels for intergenerational income transmission

that may vary across CZs. One is the labor market return to skill. In every CZ, children

from low-income families obtain less human capital than do children from higher income
   1
     This reproduces a CHKS result for college enrollment, discussed below. Another similar result comes
from Kearney and Levine (2016), who find that high school dropout gaps by family status are stronger in
more unequal states (which tend to have stronger income transmission). Kearney and Levine (2014) find
that non-marital childbearing is more common among low-SES women in these states as well.



                                                   3
families. As a result, diﬀerences in the return to human capital could drive diﬀerences

in income transmission even if the skill acquisition technology were the same everywhere.

Indeed, I find that the return to education varies substantially across CZs, and explains as

much of the variation in income transmission as do achievement and attainment gradients

together. This points to labor market institutions as a potentially important factor.

   I develop a decomposition that allows me to apportion the variation in CZ-level income

transmission into four components: Accumulation of human capital, the earnings returns

to human capital, the residual component of earnings that is explained by parental income

conditional on the child’s measured human capital, and non-earnings components of the

child’s family income (including spousal earnings and any non-labor income). I find that

the final component, spousal and unearned income, accounts for two-fifths of the relative

advantage of children from high-income families in high-transmission CZs. This reflects

diﬀerences in the likelihood of marriage or in the age of marriage rather than assortative

matching or inheritances. Another one-third operates through children’s residual earnings.

Skill accumulation and the return to skill each represents only one-ninth of the total.

   My analysis is purely observational; my estimates of the association between CZ-level

income transmission and CZ-level transmission of parental income to children’s test scores

and other outcomes could be confounded by other CZ-level characteristics that are corre-

lated with both. Keeping this caveat in mind, my results indicate that human capital plays

a relatively small role in the geographic variation in the intergenerational transmission of

income. Much of this variation appears to reflect diﬀerences in adult earnings of children

with similar skills, perhaps due to labor market institutions (e.g., unions, or other deter-

minants of residual income inequality) or diﬀerences in access to good jobs (due, perhaps,

to labor market networks or socially stratified labor markets). An even larger component

is due to the use of family income-based (rather than individual earnings-based) measures

of income transmission. This may be spurious, as diﬀerences in the likelihood of having

spousal earnings, across income levels and across CZs, may simply reflect variation in age at

marriage rather than true diﬀerences in opportunity across CZs, and may not be indicative

of children’s economic success.

   My results on the mechanisms driving the existing variation in income transmission do

                                             4
not translate directly into policy implications. It may be possible to increase opportunity

through educational interventions even though education is not a primary channel explain-

ing diﬀerences in current opportunity. Nevertheless, my results suggest that the space of

policies worthy of consideration should be broader than this. Policies related to labor market

opportunity and outcomes may be more important, and merit at least as much attention.



2     Data

My analysis combines two sources of information: Measured income transmission at the CZ

level, from CHKS’s analysis of tax data, and survey data with information about parental

income and children’s human capital attainment. I discuss these in turn.


2.1   Intergenerational income transmission

CHKS discuss several ways of defining intergenerational mobility. I focus on what they call

“relative mobility,” the advantage that a child from a high-income family has, relative to

a child from a low-income family in the same CZ, in achieving a high income as an adult.

CHKS study children born between 1980 and 1982 and measure the income of child i in CZ

c, yic , as the average family income, including any spousal earnings and non-labor income,

in 2011 and 2012, when the child is between 29 and 32. Children are linked to parents

who claimed them as dependents in their late teens, and CHKS define pic as the average

parental family income – measured as the adjusted gross income plus tax-exempt interest

and non-taxable Social Security benefits – for the parent(s) of child i in 1996 through 2000.

Both children’s and parents’ incomes are scaled as national percentile ranks in the relevant

distributions, without adjustment for family size or the number of earners. Children are

assigned to the CZ where their parents filed taxes in 1996, when the children were 14 to 16

years old.

    CHKS define relative mobility in CZ c as the coeﬃcient ✓c from a bivariate regression:


                                   yic = ↵c + pic ✓c + eic .                              (1)




                                              5
Higher values of ✓c correspond to less mobility across generations, and I refer hereafter to ✓c

as the strength of income transmission in the CZ. Universe tax data allows CHKS to estimate

✓c extremely precisely at the CZ level. They find that ✓c = 0.43 in Cincinnati, meaning that

a one percentile diﬀerence in parental income is associated with a 0.43 percentile diﬀerence

in children’s eventual income, on average, in that city, and that in Los Angeles ✓c = 0.23,

implying a relationship between parent and child income that is only a bit more than half

as strong as in Cincinnati.

   Table 1 presents unweighted summary statistics for ✓c , extracted from CHKS’s online

data tables. The average of 0.33 indicates that in the average CZ, each one percentile

increase in parental income is associated with one-third of a percentile increase in children’s

income. But the standard deviation of ✓c across CZs is 0.065. In 71 CZs, ✓c is less than

0.24, indicating parent income-child income relationships about one-quarter weaker than the

average, while another 78 CZs have ✓c > 0.40, about one-quarter larger than average. Among

the 100 largest CZs, Santa Barbara has the weakest income transmission, and Cincinnati

the strongest.


2.2   Survey data

To measure the transmission of parental income to children’s human capital accumulation,

I use the Educational Longitudinal Study (ELS; Ingels et al., 2014a). This is a nationally

representative, longitudinal sample of just over 19,000 10th graders in 2002, corresponding

roughly to the 1985-1986 birth cohorts. Respondents were followed through 2012, when they

were roughly 26. Math and reading scores are available in 10th grade, and math scores in

12th grade. I also construct children’s adult income, yic , as their self-reported 2011 family

income (including spousal earnings and non-labor income), when they were 25 or 26 years

old. I assign students to CZs based on their residential zip codes in the base year survey,

using information from subsequent surveys when this is missing.

   I supplement the ELS with two similar panels. The Early Childhood Longitudinal Study,

Kindergarten Cohort (ECLS-K; Tourangeau et al., 2009) sampled kindergarteners in 1998-9

and followed them through 8th grade in 2007. Students are assigned to CZs based on their



                                              6
8th grade residences.2 The High School Longitudinal Study (HSLS; Ingels et al., 2014b)

provides high school test scores for children born in roughly 1994-1995. I assign them to the

CZs they lived in during high school.

    There are three major limitations of these samples for my purposes. Most importantly,

sample sizes are well under 100 per CZ. Moreover, the surveys each use multi-stage sampling

designs, with schools as one stage and then relatively large samples of students within each

school.3 This means that within-CZ heterogeneity is even more limited than the small

sample sizes imply. A consequence is that it is necessary to pool information across CZs

in order to obtain any precision at all about the relationship between parental income and

later outcomes (Gelman and Hill, 2006).

    Second, none of the samples covers CHKS’s 1980-82 birth cohorts. If income or test

score transmission changed across cohorts, between-cohort comparisons may understate the

relationship between the two. I explore sensitivity to this misalignment in two ways. First,

I compare across the NCES samples, which diﬀer in their distance from CHKS’s cohorts.

Results are quite similar, suggesting that between-cohort changes are not particularly im-

portant for my analysis.4 Second, the appendix presents results that use two alternative

measures of income transmission, one from CHKS for the 1983-85 birth cohorts – very close

to the ELS cohorts – and one from Chetty and Hendren’s (forthcoming) mobility-based

estimate based on children born between 1980 and 1991. None of the results presented here

diﬀer meaningfully when either alternative is used.

    A final important limitation is that, while all three studies included parental surveys, the

parental income measures are extremely limited. The ELS collects only total family income,

and only in the base year. The measure is categorical, with 13 bins (e.g., one corresponds

to incomes between $25,000 and $35,000). The HSLS collected family income twice, and

reports it continuously. The ECLS data include a continuous measure in Kindergarten and
   2
     Where 8th grade residences are unavailable, I use the location of the 8th grade school, then the 5th
grade residence and school, then 3rd grade, and so on.
   3
     The regressions below account for CZ-level (or within-CZ) clustering, but do not otherwise adjust for the
survey designs. Most of my estimates are unweighted, but results are generally robust to using student-level
sampling weights when specifications permit it.
   4
     Chetty et al. (2014b) find that national aggregate relative mobility has been quite stable across a range
of birth cohorts (born 1971-1993), but CZ-level measures might in principle vary across cohorts with little
variation in the national aggregate. See also Aaronson and Mazumder (2008).



                                                      7
categorical measures in 1st and 3rd grades.5

    I also present an analysis of returns to education in American Community Survey (ACS)

data. For maximum comparability with CHKS’s measures, I use the 2010, 2011, and 2012

one-year public use microdata samples, and focus on the 253,852 individuals in these samples

born between 1980 and 1982. I convert annual family incomes to percentiles within the ACS

sample distribution. I do not have information about where respondents lived as children,

so I assign them to the CZ where they live at the time of the survey.

    Summary statistics for the four microdata samples are reported in Table 2.6 Following

CHKS, my primary analysis converts incomes, earnings, and test scores to percentiles within

the relevant samples; these have mean 50.0 and standard deviation 28.9 by construction. For

parental income, I assign ELS categories to the midpoints of the national percentile range

they span; in the HSLS and ECLS, I average incomes across the available waves, using bin

midpoints as necessary, and construct percentiles of the distribution of averages. There is

surely non-classical measurement error in each of the measures when scaled as percentiles.7

There is no reason to expect the resulting bias to diﬀer across CZs or across dependent vari-

ables, however. Appendix Figure A1 shows that percentile-percentile relationships between

parental income and various children’s outcomes are roughly linear in the ELS sample. Ap-

pendix Table A7 presents results that use alternative scales for parental income and child

test scores.

    Table 2 shows that 84% of ELS respondents report ever having attended a postsecondary

educational institution by the age-26 survey. This is much higher than the 53% reporting

some college or more in the ACS sample. In CHKS’s tax data, 60% of children are recorded

as attending college between 18 and 21. Only half of the college attenders in the ELS sample
    5
      I can assess the reliability of individual binned measures by comparing the same family’s income across
the three ECLS waves. As discussed below, I scale incomes as percentiles of the sample distribution.
Percentiles constructed from the 1st and 3rd grade wave bin midpoints are correlated 0.84; the Kindergarten
percentile is correlated 0.86 and 0.80 with the 1st and 3rd grade measures, respectively. A percentile
constructed from the average of the three is correlated 0.94-0.95 with the individual measures.
    6
      Mean parental incomes vary across samples. This in part reflects inflation (I report nominal values) and
life cycle considerations (ECLS parents are on average younger when their incomes are collected than ELS
or HSLS parents).
    7
      The ELS test scores – in math and reading in 10th grade, and in math in 12th grade – are point estimates
of student proficiency from an Item Response Theory (IRT) model. Measurement error does not bias student
performance on the original IRT scale, but will tend to compress gaps between groups on the percentile scale
(Jacob and Rothstein, 2016). This likely attenuates my estimates of income-to-achievement transmission,
but should not bias the between-CZ comparisons that are my primary interest.


                                                      8
earned a college degree; in the ACS, the share without a degree is under 30%. It appears

that the ELS is counting some respondents with weak postsecondary attachment as having

attended college who would not be so counted in other data sets. I discuss this further

below.



3     Conceptual framework and empirical strategy

Subsection 3.1 lays out a simple model in which human capital mediates the relationship

between parent and child income. Subsection 3.2 develops a methodology for estimating

the key elements of the model – and in particular how they vary across CZs – with the

limited available data. Subsection 3.3 describes a decomposition of the across-CZ variation

in income transmission into various component mechanisms.


3.1        Children’s human capital as a mediator of intergenerational income
           transmission

Let sic be a potential mediator of the relationship between parental income pic and children’s

income yic , such as the child’s educational attainment or achievement. Its importance as a

mediator depends on the strength of its relationship to pic , and on the extent to which it

accounts to the relationship between pic and yic . Assuming linear and additive relationships,

we have a simple system:

                                    sic = ↵ + pic ⇡ + uic                                      (2)

and

                                 yic =  + sic + pic µ + vic .                                 (3)

These equations represent reduced-form transmission and are statistical projections, not

causal models. The system is illustrated in Figure 1. The coeﬃcient ⇡ represents the

importance of parental income as a determinant of sic .          is the return to sic in children’s

incomes, while µ is the “direct” eﬀect of parental income on children’s income, not mediated

by sic .




                                              9
    Plugging (2) into (3) and rearranging, we obtain:


                            yic = ( + ↵ ) + pic (⇡ + µ) + (uic + vic ) .                     (4)


Thus, the reduced-form transmission of parental income to child’s income studied by CHKS

is, in this framework, the sum of a component operating through the potential mediator and

the direct eﬀect:

                                             ✓ ⌘ ⇡ + µ.                                       (5)

    Each of the coeﬃcients in (2) and (3) may vary across CZs, and all may depend in

important ways on local institutions and policies. For example, when sic is a human capital

measure, a CZ with a bad system of public education, in which only those who can aﬀord

private school tuition (or, perhaps, a house in one of the few excellent public school districts)

can obtain good schools for their children, would have a high ⇡. A very unequal CZ labor

market, with high wages for those with high human capital but few opportunities for those

with little, would yield a high . Finally, a labor market in which strong family networks are

needed to access good job opportunities would imply high µ. Thus, understanding which of

these accounts – even descriptively – for the between-CZ variation in ✓ would inform further

investigation of the determinants of intergenerational transmission.


3.2    Estimating the importance of test score transmission as a mediator
       using across-CZ variation

A barrier to estimating equations (2) and (3) is that few data sets contain all of the neces-

sary measures. Tax data provide pic and yic for enormous samples, but only one potential

mediator, whether the child enrolls in college by age 21. Using this as sic , CHKS estimate

⇡c for each CZ and find that it is highly correlated with ✓c (⇢ = 0.68). However, as I discuss

below, for plausible       the variation in ⇡c is too small to account for more than a small share

of the variation in ✓c .

    The ELS provides richer measures of human capital, but for a sample that is far too small

to permit reliable estimation of ⇡c for each CZ. In lieu of this, I develop a methodology for



                                                  10
estimating the across-CZ bivariate regression of ✓c on ⇡c , even when CZ-level samples are

too small to permit estimation of ⇡c directly.8 The slope of this regression can be interpreted

as an (observational) estimate of . The R2 provides an initial estimate of the share of the

variance of ✓c that is attributable to the mediating role of human capital accumulation. In

subsection 3.3, I develop a more careful decomposition.

       My approach is built from the “reverse” projection of ⇡c onto ✓c :


                                                      ⇡c =        + ✓c + ⌘ c ,                                              (6)


where       =   cov(✓c ,⇡c )/   2
                                ✓   is the across-CZ linear projection coeﬃcient and ⌘c is orthogonal to

✓c by construction. If the terms of (6), including the residual variance                                     ⌘,
                                                                                                             2    were known it

would be straightforward to obtain the forward regression of ✓c on ⇡c ,

                                                                           2                     2
                                    cov (✓c , ⇡c )       cov (✓c , ⇡c )
                                           2
                                                     =            2
                                                                           ✓
                                                                           2
                                                                               =          2 2
                                                                                                 ✓
                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                         ,                  (7)
                                           ⇡                      ✓        ⇡              ✓      +   ⌘


the R2 (which is the same for the forward and reverse regressions),

                                                              2                  2
                                               R2 =       2   ✓
                                                              2
                                                                  =    2
                                                                           2 2
                                                                                 ✓
                                                                                         2
                                                                                             ,                              (8)
                                                              ⇡            ✓     +       ⌘

                                                                                     p
and the correlation between ✓c and ⇡c , corr (✓c , ⇡c ) =                                R2 . Note that ✓c and therefore      2
                                                                                                                              ✓

are observed directly, in CHKS’s computations from population data.

       To estimate (6), I return to equation (2), making explicit the variation in the coeﬃcients

across CZs:



                                                     sic = ↵c + pic ⇡c + uic                                                (9)

Substituting (6) into (9), we obtain


                                          sic = ↵c + pic ( + ✓c + ⌘c ) + uic                                               (10)
   8
    I model sic as a mediator of yic , and thus ⇡c as a mediator of ✓c . However, reverse causality from income
transmission, ✓c , to human capital transmission, ⇡c , is possible. For example, it may be easier to attract
high-ability college graduates into teaching in CZs with more equal labor markets, creating a causal path
from economic mobility to gaps in children’s outcomes.



                                                                  11
Equation (10) is the basis of my analysis. It leads to four types of specifications. First, a

simple national regression of sic on pic restricts          = 0 and      2
                                                                         ⌘    = 0.

    Second, I divide the nation into deciles of the distribution of ✓c and regress sic on pic

separately in each decile d. By regressing the coeﬃcients ˆd from these regressions on average

income transmission in each decile, ✓¯d , I can test whether             = 0.9

    Third, returning to pooled data, I can add to the national regression an interaction of

pic with ✓c . This interaction coeﬃcient estimates            in one step:


                                    sic = ↵c + pic + (pic ✓c )      + eic .                               (11)


The error term here is eic ⌘ pic ⌘c + uic ; because both (9) and (6) are linear projections,

it is orthogonal to pic and pic ✓c by construction. To ensure that                    and     are identified

from within-CZ variation, I divide pic into its between- and within-CZ components, and

include main eﬀects and ✓c interactions for each. I also remove the grand mean of ✓c to

permit comparisons of         to the simpler specification, and include a main eﬀect for ✓c                ✓¯ .

Defining p̃ic ⌘ pic     p̄c , and ✓˜c ⌘ ✓c    ¯ the regression is:
                                              ✓,


                                 sic = ↵c + p̃ic + p̃ic ✓˜c + Xc ⌦ + eic ,                                (12)


where Xc includes p̄c , p̄c ✓c       ✓¯ , and ✓c      ✓¯ . This is equivalent to simply controlling for

Xc in (10). I explore OLS, (correlated) random eﬀects, and fixed eﬀects specifications for

↵c , in each case reporting standard errors that are clustered at the CZ level to handle the

dependence of eic .

    Finally, my primary estimates are based on the full model (10), without restrictions.

It can be seen as a random coeﬃcients model, also known as a mixed model, with fixed

coeﬃcients      and      and random coeﬃcients ↵c and ⌘c . If we assume that (↵c , ⌘c ) and uic

are each normally distributed and i.i.d., it can be estimated by maximum likelihood.10 This
   9
     With more data, one could use smaller cells. In the limit, with the first-stage regression estimated in
each CZ separately, it estimates ⇡c , and the second-stage regression of ⇡
                                                                         ˆc on ✓c is equation (6) and estimates
 . I present this analysis in the appendix, but it is poorly behaved in the small ELS sample.
  10
     Gelman and Hill (2006) discuss the estimation of models like (10), which are referred to variously
as mixed, hierarchical, random coeﬃcient, or multi-level models. There is no fully satisfactory way to
handle sampling weights in these models. Accordingly, I estimate them without weights. In simpler models,



                                                      12
yields an estimate not just of         but also of        ⌘,
                                                          2     so can be used to compute the forward regres-

sion (7). As in the fixed-coeﬃcient specification, I separate p̄c from pic                   p̄c , to ensure that

only within-CZ variation identifies the coeﬃcients of interest.11 The identifying assumption

(beyond normality) is that ⌘c is orthogonal to ✓c . Recalling that ⌘c is the residual in (6),

this simply means that the mixed model identifies only the observational regression of ⇡c on

✓c (and vice versa), and does not solve the causal inference problem.

    One way to validate this strategy is to use the child’s income as the skill measure – that

is, let sic ⌘ yic . This makes transmission to skill, ⇡c , identical to transmission to child’s

income, ✓c , thus ensuring that             = 1 and         2
                                                            ⌘   = 0 in (6). I implement a version of this in

Appendix Table A2. Results are encouraging, though not perfect. The estimate of                                2
                                                                                                               ⌘   is

nearly identically zero – a result that does not occur for any of the other outcomes I examine

below. The estimated            coeﬃcient, however, is attenuated by about one-third from what

was expected. I attribute this to the fact that this exercise mixes two diﬀerent data sets –

✓c is measured in tax data, while I measure yic and pic in the ELS. As discussed above, the

ELS measure of pic is of lower quality than the tax measure, while the ELS yic is measured

at a younger age.

    A diﬀerent mixed model can be used to estimate the relationship between ✓c and the

return to skill in the local labor market, defined as the coeﬃcient of a regression of incomes

on human capital:

                                                yic = ̃c + sic ˜c + ṽic .                                   (13)

The standard omitted variables formula can be used to relate this reduced-form coeﬃcient

to the transmission coeﬃcients from the path diagram in Figure 1:

                                                                                2
                               ˜c =             cov (sic , pic )                p
                                        c   +                    µc =   c   +     ⇡µ.
                                                                                2 c c
                                                                                                              (14)
                                                   V (sic )                     s

estimates are very similar with and without weights, so this is not likely to dramatically aﬀect my results. In
economics, it is common to estimate models like (10) in two stages, as in footnote 9. This does not require a
normality assumption on (↵c , ⌘c ), but estimation of ⌘2 requires distinguishing what portion of the across-CZ
variation in ⇡ˆc is due to sampling error. As noted above, this is poorly behaved in the ELS sample. The
mixed model approach can achieve better precision by pooling information across CZs.
   11
      The random coeﬃcient is specified to apply only to pic p̄c , so the random intercept is ↵  ˜ c = ↵c + p̄c ⌘c .
I do not restrict the correlation between ↵˜ c and ⌘c . In most specifications, the estimated correlation is quite
close to 1, suggesting that ↵  2
                                 is small.




                                                            13
                                                                                                          ˜
As above, my starting point is the hypothetical reverse regression of ˜ c on ✓c : ˜ c =                       +
     ˜      ˜
✓c       + ⌘c . Substituting this into (13) yields a mixed model similar to (10):

                                                  ⇣                             ⌘
                                                      ˜              ˜      ˜
                                yic = ̃c + sic           + ✓c           + ⌘c       + ṽic .              (15)


The parameters of this model can again be used to compute the regression of ✓c on ˜ c .12


3.3       Decomposing the across-CZ variation in income transmission

The mixed models yield separate estimates of the relationships between ✓c and ⇡c and

between ✓c and ˜ c . Also of interest is the decomposition of the across-CZ variation in ✓c

into its component parts. In this subsection I outline a strategy to decompose the separate

contributions of variation in ⇡c ,       c,   and µc .

     My starting point is the “structural” equation (3), allowing for CZ-level heterogeneity in

the coeﬃcients:

                                     yic = c + sic       c    + pic µc + vic .                           (16)

The gradient of this with respect to parent income in CZ c is:

                                          dyic      dsic
                                               |c =      |c          c   + µc                             (17)
                                          dpic      dpic

Given the definitions of ✓c and ⇡c , this is simply the decomposition defined earlier:


                                                ✓c = ⇡c       c   + µc .                                  (18)


The across-CZ gradient of (17) with respect to ✓c is:

                                d2 yic     d2 sic                  dsic d c dµc
                                        =                 c   +        |c   +                             (19)
                               dpic d✓c   dpic d✓c                 dpic d✓c   d✓c
   12
      In principle, one could estimate the relationships of ✓c with c and µc via a version of this strategy, by
including a control for pic in (13), with its own fixed and random coeﬃcients. I have explored this model, but
it is quite poorly behaved. I do use a fixed-coeﬃcient version of this model in the decomposition discussed
in subsection 3.3.




                                                          14
or, using (18),
                                                  d⇡c              d c dµc
                                        1=              c   + ⇡c       +     .                                         (20)
                                                  d✓c              d✓c   d✓c

Each of the terms on the right side of (20) is interpretable as reflecting a distinct component

of income transmission. The first term represents diﬀerences between high- and low-✓c CZs

in human capital accumulation gaps between high- and low-income families, scaled by the

return to human capital. But for scaling by                    c,   this term is identified by the           coeﬃcient

of the “reverse” regression (6) discussed above in subsection 3.2. It would be large if high-✓c

CZs oﬀer less equal school quality to children from diﬀerent family backgrounds.

   The second term reflects covariance of the CZ-level return to skill with CZ-level income
                                      dsic
transmission, scaled by ⇡c ⌘          dpic |c .   This term would be large if high-✓c CZs have higher

returns to skill, producing better outcomes for children from high-income families who tend

to obtain higher skill. The third term reflects diﬀerences in the transmission of parental

income to children’s incomes holding skills constant. This might be large if high-✓c CZs

have segmented labor markets or employment networks that allow high-income parents to

ensure good outcomes for their children regardless of the children’s skills.

   To decompose the variation across cities, I use fixed values ¯ and ⇡
                                                                      ¯ to scale the first and

second terms:



                                    d2 yic     d2 sic         d c dµc
                                            =          c + ⇡c     +                                                    (21)
                                   dpic d✓c   dpic d✓c        d✓c   d✓c
                                                2
                                               d sic ¯      d c dµc
                                            ⇡           +⇡¯     +      ,                                               (22)
                                              dpic d✓c      d✓c    d✓c

This leads to a three-step method for the decomposition. First, I estimate ¯ and ⇡
                                                                                 ¯ via pooled
                                                                                                   d2 sic        d⇡c
regressions of yic on sic and of sic on pic , respectively. Second, I estimate                    dpic d✓c   =   d✓c   =

via a regression of sic on pic , ✓c , and their interaction as in (11), above. Third, I regress

yic on sic , pic , ✓c , and the two interactions sic ⇤ ✓c and pic ⇤ ✓c . The interaction coeﬃcients
           d c         dµc
estimate   d✓c   and   d✓c ,   respectively. As earlier, I include in each step the CZ means of the

individual-level variables, as well as CZ random eﬀects.
                                                                          dyic
   Next, consider the left side of (22). In principle,                    dpic |c   is identically equal to ✓c , and


                                                             15
its derivative with respect to ✓c is therefore 1. In practice, I rely on CHKS’s estimates of

✓c from tax data and measures of yic and pic from the ELS. In this blended data set, the

regression of yic on pic , ✓c , and pic ✓c has an interaction coeﬃcient well below one. This

reflects measurement diﬀerences between the ELS sample and the tax data. I take the

empirical interaction coeﬃcient as the target of my decomposition.

    A final issue is that CHKS define yic as family income, including any spousal earnings

and non-labor income. There are thus two channels for each of the elements of the decom-

position. The return to human capital in the second term, for example, includes both labor

market and spousal market returns. These point to diﬀerent structural factors of the CZ

as explanations. Moreover, spousal market components of transmission may be artifacts

of the fact that I measure children’s income at a single point in time, when children are

around 25: CZs where children from high-income families typically marry young will have

higher measured income transmission than do CZs where these children typically marry

later, but may not meaningfully diﬀer in the extent of available opportunity. Therefore,

I separate children’s incomes into their own earnings wic and the remaining component,

reflecting spousal earnings and non-labor income: yic = wic + (yic     wic ). I apply the above

decomposition only to the children’s earnings, and consider the reduced-form transmission

of parental income to children’s spousal and non-labor income as a separate mechanism.



4    Results

I present results in four parts. First, to lay the groundwork, I present national estimates of

the path diagram in Figure 1, using the ELS sample. Second, I use the variation in these

estimates across CZs to identify the relationship between income transmission ✓c and human

capital transmission ⇡c . Third, I use ELS and ACS data to examine variation in the reduced-

form return to skill ˜ c across CZs, again relating it to CZ-level income transmission. Finally,

I implement the decomposition described in subsection 3.3, attributing variation across CZs

in income transmission to marriage market factors, skill accumulation, returns to skill, and

direct transmission of parental income to children’s earnings.




                                              16
4.1      National estimates

Table 3 presents estimates of the national relationships between parental income, children’s

human capital, and children’s incomes, using the ELS sample. All specifications are weighted

and include CZ fixed eﬀects.

       Columns 1 and 2 show the reduced-form relationships between parental income and chil-

dren’s 12th grade math scores and educational attainment, respectively. Each percentile of

parental income is associated with 0.35 percentiles of children’s achievement, and with 0.019

years of education.13 Column 3 presents an analysis of reduced-form income transmission.

Each percentile of parental income is associated with 0.16 percentiles of children’s adult

incomes.

       Columns 4-6 show regressions of the child’s adult family income on the two human capital

measures, first separately and then together. Each math score percentile is associated with

0.24 percentiles in additional income, while each year of education is associated with 3.6

percentiles. Each coeﬃcient falls, as expected, when both measures are included together.

Finally, column 7 includes both parental income and child human capital controls. Here, the

parental income coeﬃcient represents µ in the path diagram. This is 0.07, less than half of

what it was without human capital controls in Column 3, but nevertheless highly significant.

The test score and education coeﬃcients, representing                , are only slightly reduced from

column 6. The role of human capital as a mediating factor can be computed by multiplying

these coeﬃcients by the corresponding ⇡ coeﬃcients in columns 1 and 2. This yields 0.35 ⇤

0.18 + 0.019 ⇤ 1.76 = 0.098, or roughly 60% of the total transmission in column 3.

       The national analysis thus indicates that human capital is an important mediating factor

in intergenerational income transmission. As we will see, human capital plays a much smaller

role in explaining the across-CZ variation.
  13
    Bradbury et al. (2015) find that the parental income coeﬃcient is largely invariant to the age at which
children’s test scores are measured. I look across a larger range and find that it grows somewhat with age –
see Appendix Table A1. Bradbury et al. (2015) also compare results across four English-speaking countries.
This exercise is similar in spirit to my comparison across commuting zones.




                                                    17
4.2      Transmission from parental income to children’s human capital across
         CZs

In this subsection, I examine variation across CZs in the transmission of parental income to

children’s human capital. I examine test scores first, then educational attainment.


4.2.1      12th grade math scores in the ELS

As a first eﬀort to explore across-CZ variation, I divide CZs into ten deciles based on ✓c .

For each decile, I estimate a separate regression of children’s test scores on parental income,

with CZ fixed eﬀects. Figure 2 plots the parental income coeﬃcients and confidence intervals

against the mean of ✓c in the decile. The slope of the best-fit line to this scatterplot, which

corresponds to      in (10), is 0.25, indicating that parental income is more strongly associated

with children’s test scores in high income transmission than in low income transmission CZs.

The implied diﬀerence between the 3rd and the 8th deciles – corresponding roughly to the

interquartile range of ✓c – is a 0.021 increase in the slope shown in column 1 of Table 3.

However, the figure also indicates substantial variation around the best-fit line, likely more

than could be explained by sampling error.

       Table 4 presents parametric estimates of the interacted specifications (11) and (10). I

begin with a specification that does not allow for a ✓c interaction, as in Table 3, but show

both within- and between-CZ coeﬃcients.14

       Columns 2-4 include interactions between parental income and CZ income transmission

✓c . Column 2 is an OLS specification without CZ-level variation in the intercept (but with

a ✓c main eﬀect); column 3 is a Generalized Least Squares model with CZ random eﬀects;

and column 4 includes CZ fixed eﬀects. The interaction coeﬃcient from each specification

estimates the coeﬃcient        in (11); it measures the extent to which CZs with strong trans-

mission from parent income to child income also exhibit strong transmission from parent

income to children’s test scores. This coeﬃcient is 0.32 in the OLS and FE specifications
  14
    The ELS is a multi-stage sample in which schools are sampled and students are sampled within schools.
When I decompose pic p̄c into the deviation from the school mean and the diﬀerence between school and CZ
means, the across-CZ and within-CZ, across-school coeﬃcients are indistinguishable, and the within-school
coeﬃcient is much smaller. This is exactly what one would expect based on measurement error in pic , but
could also derive from sorting into schools based on unobservables or school-based peer eﬀects.




                                                   18
and 0.37 in the RE specification; the diﬀerence reflects the use of sampling weights in the

OLS and FE specifications but not in the RE specification. Each is a fair amount larger

than the 0.25 estimate of       from Figure 2 and is comparable in magnitude to the within-CZ

parental income main eﬀect. While income-achievement transmission is (in column 3) 0.34

in the average CZ, it is 0.32 in a CZ at the 25th percentile of the ✓c distribution and 0.36 in

a CZ at the 75th percentile. As in Figure 2, these estimates are consistent with test scores

being a meaningful, though not overwhelming, mediator of the between-CZ diﬀerence in the

transmission of income across generations.

    Column 5 presents the mixed model (10), allowing                2
                                                                    ⌘   > 0. This allows for variation

across CZs in income-achievement transmission that is not predicted by the CZ’s income-

income transmission. I estimate           ⌘   = 0.07. The hypothesis that           2
                                                                                    ⌘   = 0 is decisively

rejected.15 The lower portion of the table shows various summaries of the joint distribution

of ✓c and ⇡c that is implied by the mixed model coeﬃcients. The standard deviation of

⇡c is 0.072, much larger than in previous columns. A CZ at the 25th percentile of the

⇡c distribution has income-test score transmission coeﬃcient 0.28, while one at the 75th

percentile has coeﬃcient 0.38. Most of this variation comes from the ⌘c component that is

orthogonal to ✓c , however: The correlation between ✓c and ⇡c is only 0.32.

    The slope of ✓c with respect to ⇡c is a statistically significant 0.26 (S.E. 0.12): On

average, in CZs in which the test score advantage of children from rich families is 1 percentile

larger than average, the adult income advantage is about 0.26 percentiles larger than in the

average CZ. This is relatively small, but consistent with the national evidence. Table 3,

column 1 indicates that students whose test scores are one percentile above average tend to

have adult incomes 0.24 percentiles above average. Here, we find that CZs where the test

score gap between high-income and low-income students is one percentile greater than in

the average CZ have adult income gaps between those students that are, on average, 0.26

percentiles larger than in the average CZ. These are strikingly similar, and appear to point

to a meaningful role for student achievement as a mediator of income transmission.
  15
     The null hypothesis that ⌘ = 0 is on the boundary of the parameter space for the mixed model likelihood
function. The test is a likelihood ratio test based on the comparison of column 5 to the specification in
column 3, estimating the latter by maximum likelihood rather than by GLS. Note that the null hypothesis
that ⌘2 = 0 corresponds to a perfect correlation between ✓c and ⇡c , and to an R2 of 1 in the regression of
the former on the latter.


                                                    19
   However, it is worth considering the magnitude of the across-CZ variation in test score

transmission. I estimate that the standard deviation of ⇡c is 0.072. Take 0.24 as the return

to a one percentile increase in test scores. Thus, each standard deviation of ⇡c drives an

increase of ✓c of 0.072 ⇤ 0.24 = 0.018. But the standard deviation of ✓c is 0.057, over

three times as large. In other words, there is much more variability in CZ income-income

transmission than can be operating through the test score channel: Only 11% of the across-

CZ variation in the former is explained by the latter. There are evidently other channels

that account for the bulk of the geographic variation in income transmission; test scores,

and the knowledge and skills that they represent, are a mechanism, but not the dominant

one.


4.2.2   Test scores across grades and subjects

By estimating the models in Table 4 for test scores measured at diﬀerent ages, I can explore

whether the relative advantage of high-income children in high-transmission CZs appears

to grow with age, as might be expected if schools play a role in income transmission. This

analysis is likely sensitive to scaling decisions (Bond and Lang, 2013, forthcoming). I scale

scores at each age in national percentiles, but a one percentile advantage in kindergarten

may not mean the same thing as a one percentile advantage in 12th grade. Setting this issue

aside, Table 5 presents mixed model estimates for each of the available test scores from the

ECLS, ELS, and HSLS. The           coeﬃcients in column 2 are similar in magnitude across most

of the specifications, though imprecisely estimated. The random component of the parental

income coeﬃcient (   ⌘,   in column 3) is meaningful in each row, and column 6 indicates that

the null hypothesis that    ⌘   = 0 is rejected in all but one case. The slope of ✓c with respect

to ⇡c (column 4) is modest and generally larger for reading than for math. It appears to

grow somewhat with age, though this is not entirely consistent. Correlations between ✓c and

⇡c (column 5) are quite low across grades and subjects, but again larger in later grades.

   The pattern of results has several implications. First, there is some indication that the

relative importance of parental income to student test scores in high-income-transmission

CZs grows between kindergarten and high school, consistent with the hypothesis that dif-

ferential access to school quality (rather than, say, parenting practices) is a mechanism

                                                 20
contributing to diﬀerential income transmission. Second, there is substantial heterogene-

ity across CZs in the transmission of parental income to children’s test scores that is not

associated with CZ-level income transmission, indicating that the institutions or other CZ

characteristics that contribute to test score transmission diﬀer from those determining in-

come transmission. Put somewhat diﬀerently, there is only a modest correlation across CZs

between income-income and income-test score transmission, even in later grades, so diﬀer-

ent influences must be at work. Finally, results are quite similar for the HSLS as for the

ELS, though the latter is much closer to the cohorts for which ✓c is computed, suggesting

that cohort diﬀerences are unable to explain the weak relationship of income-income and

income-test score transmission in the HSLS and ECLS.


4.2.3   Educational attainment

I have thus far used test scores as a summary of children’s human capital. An alternative

is to focus on educational attainment. I consider two summaries of attainment as of the

last ELS survey, around age 26: an indicator for a four-year degree and the number of years

of education. As discussed above, the ELS counts a surprisingly large share of students as

having attended some college, and results for this outcome (presented in the appendix) are

highly discrepant, and appear to be driven by over-measurement of college attendance in

the ELS. The other two attainment summaries are closer to expectations (Table 2).

   Columns 1 and 3 of Table 6 present estimates of the interacted specification (11), with CZ

random eﬀects, for the two measures. (I report only the coeﬃcients pertaining to within-CZ

variation in parental income, though CZ means and an income transmission main eﬀect are

included as before.) Not surprisingly, parental income is strongly related to both measures

of children’s attainment. The interaction coeﬃcient     is large and statistically significant

for each outcome.

   Columns 2 and 4 present the mixed model specifications. Likelihood ratio tests do not

reject the restrictions that the parental income random coeﬃcients are zero (i.e.,       ⌘   =

0). Coeﬃcients of regressions of income transmission on income-attainment transmission

yield modest coeﬃcients: CZs where students from high-income families are 1 percentage

point more likely to graduate from college (relative to students from low-income families)

                                            21
have adult income gaps between children from high- and low-income families that are 0.32

percentiles larger, and CZs where the high-income children earn one more year of education

have adult income gaps that are 12 percentiles larger. Neither of these is significantly

diﬀerent from zero.

      The correlation between income transmission and attainment transmission is stronger

than for test scores, around 0.5. However, this is still quite far from 1; three-quarters of

the variance in income transmission across CZs is unexplained by diﬀerences in transmission

from parental income to children’s higher education attainment. As in the earlier analysis

of test scores, the evidence points to a role for educational attainment as a mechanism

driving variation in intergenerational income transmission, but does not indicate that it is

an overwhelming factor.

      The R2 statistics in the lower portion of Table 6 provide one way to measure the im-

portance of the attainment channel. Variation across CZs in the transmission of parental

income to educational attainment in years explains about one-quarter of the variability in

CZ-level income transmission. As with test scores, another way to understand this is to use

an estimate of the return to education to measure the importance of educational attainment

as a mediator of income transmission. I begin with CHKS’s measure of transmission from

parental income to college enrollment. They find that the standard deviation of ⇡c , across

CZs, is 0.11 percentage point of college enrollment per percentile of family income, very

similar to my estimate in column 2 of Table 6. In a regression of family income percentiles

on an indicator for some college in the ACS sample, with CZ fixed eﬀects, I find that those

with some college or more have family incomes about 19.2 percentiles higher than those

without college, on average. This implies that a one standard deviation increase in ⇡c would

drive only a 19.2⇤0.11 = 0.02 increase in ✓c , or less than one-third of a standard deviation of

that variable. I obtain even smaller magnitudes when I use my estimates of transmission of

parental income to other attainment measures. For example, column 4 of Table 6 indicates

that a one standard deviation of ⇡c is 0.0025 years of education per percentile of parental

income. Column 5 of Table 3 indicates that each year of education is associated with 3.6

additional percentiles of children’s income.16 Thus, a one-standard deviation increase in ⇡c
 16
      I obtain slightly larger estimates when I use the ACS sample – 4.1 using the full sample, or 5.9 when


                                                     22
drives an increase of ✓c of 0.0025 ⇤ 3.6 = 0.01, or about one-sixth of a standard deviation.

Although the transmission of parental income to children’s income is correlated across CZs

with transmission of parental income to children’s educational attainment, the latter again

appears not to be a primary mechanism for the former.


4.2.4    Robustness and additional results

The results above indicate that CZs with stronger-than-average transmission of parental in-

come to children’s income tend also to have stronger-than-average transmission of parental

income to children’s test scores and educational attainment, but the relationships are not

large enough to account for a large share of the variation in intergenerational income trans-

mission. This basic conclusion is robust to a variety of diﬀerent specification and measure-

ment choices, explored in the appendix.

    First, Appendix Table A5 explores the sensitivity of these results to the choice of income

transmission measure. Results are robust to using CHKS’s measure computed for the 1983-

85 birth cohorts, which more closely corresponds to the ELS sample, or to using the more

plausibly causal measure from Chetty and Hendren (forthcoming).

    Second, I show that the results are not driven by associations between parental income

and children’s race. CHKS document that ✓c is quite strongly correlated with the fraction

black in the CZ, though they also find that an alternative measure computed solely from

zip codes with very few black residents is quite similar. Appendix Table A6 augments the

main mixed model specifications with controls for the child’s own race and gender, as well

as interactions of race and gender with ✓c . This has little eﬀect.

    Third, I explore alternative scalings of parental income and children’s test scores, in Ap-

pendix Table A7. The basic result of a weak relationship between CZ-level income transmis-

sion and CZ-level transmission from parental income to children’s achievement is unchanged

when I measure children’s test scores as z-scores or as predicted adult earnings (Bond and

Lang, forthcoming), or when I measure parental income in logs or as predicted children’s

test scores.
very high and very low levels of attainment are trimmed. These would not change the qualitative conclusion
I draw here.




                                                   23
   Overall, the basic results on achievement, attainment, and income transmission appear

quite robust. They are suggestive that learning in school is not a key channel determining

the across-CZ variation in income transmission, but that access to higher education may be

more important.

   One possibility not yet considered is that math and reading test scores do not fully

capture the impacts of better childhood environments. A growing literature in recent years

has documented the importance of non-cognitive skills as a component of human capital.

Both the ECLS and the ELS contain batteries of questions aimed at identifying children’s

non-cognitive skills, and I use these to assess whether high-income-transmission CZs tend to

be CZs with large gaps in non-cognitive skills between children from high- and low-income

families (Appendix Table A8). Results are mixed. The       coeﬃcient on the parental income

- CZ income transmission interaction is generally small and not statistically significant, and

frequently has the wrong sign. For about half of the available measures, there is statistically

significant variation across CZs in the return to parental income (i.e.,     ⌘   6= 0). Overall,

there is little indication that non-cognitive skills are important mediators of income-to-

income transmission. One set of results, however, tells a somewhat diﬀerent story. In the

ECLS, non-cognitive skill measures are constructed both from children’s survey responses

and from teacher surveys. The measures based on teacher surveys do tend to yield strong

associations with income transmission. It is not clear how to account for the discrepancy

between teacher surveys and student self-reports – even when the concepts overlap (e.g., for

externalizing problem behaviors), results are quite diﬀerent. This may indicate that high-

transmission CZs tend to be CZs in which teachers are more biased in their assessments of

low-income children, but this is quite speculative.


4.3   Returns to human capital across CZs

The above results have concerned the role of skills – achievement, attainment, and non-

cognitive skills – as mediators of the intergenerational transmission of income. In terms of

Figure 1, the results suggest that ⇡c is not a primary mechanism influencing variation in

reduced-form transmission ✓c . This in turn implies that much of the variation in income

transmission must be due to diﬀerences in the returns to human capital (i.e., in        c)   or to

                                              24
direct eﬀects of parental income on children’s income not operating through human capital

(i.e., to µc ).

    As an initial exploration of this, I examine variation in the return to skill across CZs. As

before, I estimate mixed models, in this case allowing the return to human capital to vary

both with the CHKS income transmission measure and independently across CZs. These

models do not isolate the relationship between income transmission and                     c   from Figure 1,

as to do that I would need to examine the return to skill controlling for parental income.
                                                                            2
I simply examine the reduced-form return to skill, ˜ c =            c   +   p
                                                                            2   ⇡c µc . If I find that this is
                                                                            s

strongly associated with ✓c , that could indicate either that           c   is a major component of the

across-CZ variation in ✓c or that µc is.

    Table 7, Panel A presents results for a sample of 28-32 year olds surveyed in 2010-

2012 by the American Community Survey (ACS), and assigned to their current CZs.17

Column 1 shows that each year of education, relative to the CZ mean, is associated with 5.3

percentiles of adult earnings. Columns 2-4 present models that include interactions between

the individual’s education and CZ-level income transmission. The interaction coeﬃcient is

positive and highly significant, indicating that the (reduced-form) return to education is

larger in high-income-transmission CZs. Column 5 presents the mixed model, allowing for

unexplained heterogeneity across CZs in the return to education. This heterogeneity term is

substantial. The correlation between the CZ-level return to education and CZ-level income

transmission is about 0.5, comparable to the attainment transmission results earlier and

much larger than that for achievement transmission. The overall variability in returns to

education across CZs (i.e., in ˜ c ) is substantial, with a standard deviation of 0.7 (compared

to the mean of 5.3),. Only about 30% of this attributable to ✓c .

    The lower panel of Table 7 presents a parallel analysis of returns to skill in the ELS

data. Here, I combine my two human capital measures, constructing a skill index as the

fitted value from a regression of children’s earnings on their 12th grade math scores and

indicators for each possible attainment, with CZ fixed eﬀects. This skill index is strongly
  17
     I censor years of education at 9 and 17. Values outside this range are unusual. The earnings-education
relationship is approximately linear within this range, but not outside it. Table 7 shows results for the
individual earnings percentile as the dependent variable, but results are similar when the family income
percentile is used instead.



                                                    25
related to earnings, as expected.18 It is much more strongly related in high-transmission

CZs, with interaction coeﬃcients that are notably larger than the main eﬀects. Column

5 indicates, however, that there is a great deal of variation in the returns to skill that is

orthogonal to income transmission, and the correlation between the two is only 0.3.



5         Decomposing the across-CZ variation in income transmis-

          sion

The results thus far indicate that intergenerational income transmission is positively cor-

related across CZs with transmission from parental income to children’s test scores and

educational attainment, and with the reduced-form labor market returns to human capital.

Some preliminary calculations indicate that neither the achievement nor the attainment rela-

tionship is large enough, on its own, to be a primary channel in overall income transmission,

but I have not yet considered them together or quantified the contribution of the return-

to-skill eﬀects. Moreover, the returns to skill estimates are reduced-form, and combine true

returns to skill with any eﬀect of parental income on children’s income not operating through

education (i.e., with µc ). In this section, I explore decompositions of the across-CZ variation

in income transmission that address these shortcomings.

         As a preliminary, I explore income-income transmission, ✓c , in the ELS data. Mea-

surement diﬀerences between the ELS and the tax data used by CHKS mean that the ✓c s

implied by the ELS data diﬀer somewhat from the tax-data-based ✓c s reported by CHKS

– though they are nearly perfectly correlated. I also show that marriage patterns and la-

bor force participation are quantitatively important channels for intergenerational income

transmission. This motivates me to extend the three-component path diagram from Figure

1 by considering transmission into children’s own earnings and into the other components

of family income (spousal earnings and non-labor income) separately. I decompose the

transmission of parental income to children’s earnings into the three components from the
    18
    In constructing the skill index, I measure children’s earnings as a percentile of the adult income dis-
tribution, for use in my decomposition below. Thus, a child with median earnings ($22,000 in the ELS
sample) is assigned a percentile of 38, as $22,000 is the 38th percentile of the family income distribution.
The dependent variable in Table 7 is the percentile of the child earnings distribution, in which the same
child would be assigned a percentile of 50. This explains why the coeﬃcient is larger than one in column 1.


                                                    26
path diagram in Figure 1 and equation (22): (a) children’s skill accumulation by the end of

school; (b) returns to skills; and (c) direct eﬀects of parental income on children’s earnings

not operating through observed human capital. I then separately estimate the contribution

from transmission of parental income into spousal earnings and non-labor income. Figure 3

illustrates the expanded diagram.


5.1      Income transmission in the ELS sample

Table 8 presents mixed models, akin to those used earlier to examine transmission from

parental income to children’s achievement, where here the dependent variables are diﬀerent

components of ELS children’s incomes.

       In column 1, the dependent variable is the child’s total family income, as a percentile

of the national distribution.19 This is very nearly the same measure used by CHKS to

construct their income transmission measures. Thus, we expect the ⇡c in this specification,

the CZ-level transmission of parental income to children’s income in the ELS sample, to

be identical to CHKS’s ✓c , but for diﬀerences in measurement between the ELS and the

tax data. Indeed, I estimate a correlation of 0.99, and             2
                                                                    ⌘   ⇡ 0. However, the scales are

somewhat diﬀerent: Where one would expect an interaction coeﬃcient                      = 1, I instead

estimate ˆ = 0.64 (SE 0.16). The implied regression of ✓c on ⇡c , has coeﬃcient 1.52, though

here the expected 1 is within the confidence interval. These results might reflect the lower

quality of the ELS parental income measure, relative to the tax data,20 or the fact that the

ELS child income is measured at age 25, where in the tax data it is measured around age

30.21

       Columns 2-4 replace the dependent variable with indicators (scored as 0 or 100) for

positive own earnings, for being married, and for having positive spousal earnings. In each

case, the interaction coeﬃcient between parental income and CZ-level income transmission

is positive and significant: In high-transmission CZs, children from high-income families are
  19
     Appendix Table A2 presents fixed-coeﬃcient versions of this specification.
  20
     I have explored specifications that instrument for parental income with parental education. Although
the exclusion restriction is dubious, this does raise the coeﬃcient to around 1, consistent with bias from
measurement error in parental income.
  21
     CHKS find that average income transmission is lower when children’s income is measured at younger
ages, but do not present evidence regarding cross-CZ variation.



                                                   27
relatively more likely than children from low-income families to work, to be married, and to

have a working spouse. In each case, the across-CZ correlation between income transmission

and transmission of parental income to the outcome is around 0.5. Evidently, an important

part of the variation in income transmission reflects labor force participation rather than

solely diﬀerences in earnings conditional on participation; another important part relates to

marital patterns.

   Further light is shed by the gender breakdown in Panel B. CZ-level income transmission

is almost perfectly correlated with the CZ-level association between parental income and

daughters’ labor force participation, though there is little variation across CZs in the latter.

   In Column 5, I use the child’s earnings as the dependent variable. Earnings are scaled

here as a percentile of the family income distribution, to permit a direct comparison to

column 1 (see footnote 18). The pic -✓c interaction coeﬃcient is here only 0.38 (S.E. 0.14),

reduced by nearly half from column 1. Evidently, a large part of the variation in measured

income transmission, using CHKS’s definitions, derives from components other than the

child’s own earnings – either spousal earnings, or non-labor income. This is particularly true

for men. Column 6 adds non-labor income (for both the child and the spouse, if present)

into the income measure. Results are similar to those in column 5. The key interaction

coeﬃcient remains much lower than in column 1, especially for sons.

   Spousal earnings, the only component of family income included in column 1 but not

column 6, are clearly an important factor. This could reflect variation across CZs in the

relative likelihood that children from high- and low-income families have working spouses,

as seen in column 4, but it could also reflect diﬀerences in spousal earnings distributions

conditional on work, as would occur if CZs vary in the degree of assortative mating. To

assess the role of the latter, I shut oﬀ any assortative matching by assigning all working

spouses the same earnings. I compute the average earnings across the entire sample for

working spouses, by gender – $27,000 for women and $41,000 for men – and use these for

every working spouse in the sample, assigning 0 for those who are unmarried or have non-

working spouses. I then construct a family income as the sum of the child’s actual earnings,

any non-labor income, and imputed spousal earnings. As before, this sum is converted to a

percentile of the actual child family income distribution. Insofar as an important part of the

                                              28
variation in income transmission reflects diﬀerences in assortative mating, we would expect

the     coeﬃcient in column 7 to more closely resemble that in column 6 than that in column

1. This is not what I find. ˆ here is even larger than in column 1. Evidently, diﬀerences in

assortative mating are not contributing meaningfully to the across-CZ variation in family

income transmission.

      I interpret the results in Table 8 as pointing to the importance of marriage as a mechanism

driving between-CZ variation in measured income transmission. Nearly one-third of the

across-CZ variation in income transmission is explained by diﬀerences in within-CZ gradients

of marriage (at the time of the age-26 ELS follow-up survey) with respect to parent income.

This may represent a spurious component of the variation in ✓c . It is not clear whether a

two-earner couple should be seen as as successful as a single person with the same family

income. Moreover, the median age of marriage for the ELS cohorts is around 26 (U.S.

Bureau of the Census, 2004), so it is quite possible that many people who are not married

at age 26 or even at 30 will be later, and will eventually be able to pool their earnings with

their spouses to achieve much higher family incomes than I see in the age-26 survey.

      Whether transmission operating through marriage is spurious or not, the interpretation

of income-marriage transmission is quite diﬀerent than that of income-earnings transmission,

even though both may be statistically mediated by the child’s human capital. Going forward,

I separate children’s family incomes into the child’s own earnings and a second component

combining spousal earnings and non-labor income, and I focus on the mediating role of

human capital for the former.


5.2      Decomposition of income transmission

Table 9 presents my analysis of the decomposition of across-CZ variation in income trans-

mission into the four components indicated in Figure 3: Skill accumulation, as moderated by

the average own-earnings return to skill; returns to skill, moderated by the average parental

income gradient in skill accumulation; “direct” transmission of parental income to children’s

earnings conditional on human capital; and spousal and non-labor income.

      Column 1 presents the baseline income transmission analysis, using the family income

percentile as the dependent variable. This specification is the same as in column 1 of Table 8,

                                                29
but omits the random coeﬃcient on parental income. Of interest is the interaction between

pic     p̄c and ✓c . This coeﬃcient would be identically 1 if I used the same sample and income

measures as were used by CHKS in their calculation of ✓c . My estimate is just over two-thirds

of that.

       Next, I decompose children’s family incomes into the child’s earnings and the remainder,

reflecting spousal earnings and non-labor income. I scale children’s earnings as a percentile

of the family income distribution, as in Table 8, then scale the remaining component as the

increment to the family’s income percentile that is obtained by adding spousal earnings and

non-labor income. Column 2 presents the analysis of children’s earnings, using the same

specification as in column 1. The interaction coeﬃcient falls by nearly half, to 0.37 – as

in Table 8, only a bit over half of the across-CZ variation in parental income-child income

transmission is attributable to variation in parental income-child earnings transmission.

       Columns 3-5 decompose the transmission into child earnings into three components, re-

flecting skill accumulation, returns to skills, and direct transmission, using the methods

introduced in subsection 3.3. In Column 3, I show the component reflecting skill accumu-

lation. I use the same skill index used in Table 7, combining 12th grade math scores and

years of completed education, and scaled as the predicted child earnings percentile. By

construction, the return to this index in child earnings, ¯ , is almost identically 1.22 I repeat

the random eﬀects regression from column 2, replacing the child’s actual earnings percentile

with the skill index. Not surprisingly given the earlier results, the interaction term, which

represents the first term of the decomposition (22), is small, and is not statistically signif-

icant. The point estimate of 0.08 implies that relative skill accumulation of children from

high- and low-income families, and the earnings gap that it generates, accounts for only 11%

(= 0.08/0.69) of the diﬀerences in ELS income transmission between cities with low and high

values of the CHKS transmission measure.

       Columns 4 and 5 explore the role of returns to skill and direct transmission, respec-

tively. These come from a single regression of the child’s actual earnings on her skill index

and parental income, each interacted with CZ income transmission. The skill-✓c interaction
  22
    The skill index is constructed based on a weighted regression, but I estimate ¯ without weights for
consistency with the unweighted random eﬀects models in Table 9. The resulting ˆ
                                                                               ¯ = 0.99.




                                                  30
                         @ c
coeﬃcient estimates      @✓c ;   the second term of the decomposition (22) can then be obtained

by multiplying it by the coeﬃcient of parental income in a pooled regression for children’s

skill, ⇡
       ¯ = 0.09. Thus, the second term, in column 4, is 0.84 ⇤ 0.09 = 0.07, indicating that

diﬀerences in returns to skill account for another 11% of the variation in income trans-

mission.23 The third component of the decomposition (22), in column 5, is estimated by

the parental income-✓c interaction, 0.23. This indicates that diﬀerences in the relationship

between parental income and child earnings, controlling for both the child’s human capital

and the CZ-level return to that human capital, account for one-third of the total variation

in income transmission across CZs.

    Finally, column 6 presents results for the portion of family income deriving from spousal

earnings and non-labor income. This is significantly more strongly related to parental income

in CZs that CHKS measure as high-transmission than in those measured as low-transmission,

and this accounts for 41% of the total variation in CZ-level income transmission. As Table

8 indicates, this largely reflects diﬀerences in the likelihood of being married at age 26, not

diﬀerences in assortative matching.

    The lower panel of Table 9 reports the decomposition separately for boys and girls.

CHKS’s income transmission measure better captures parent-daughter family income rela-

tionships than it does parent-son relationships. Transmission to the child’s own earnings is

similar for both, so represents a larger share of the total for sons. For them, returns to skills

are twice as important as skill accumulation. For daughters, the return to skill is actually

negatively associated with ✓c , and skill accumulation is only trivially positively associated.

All of the variation in transmission to earnings is operating through the direct component,

controlling for human capital. This in part reflects variation in the relationship between

parental income and daughters’ labor force participation, as documented in Table 8. The

contribution of spousal earnings to between-✓c diﬀerences in family income transmission is

about twice as large for girls as for boys. Table 8 indicates that this is largely due to a

stronger role of marital status for girls, not to greater assortative mating.
  23
     This component also captures diﬀerences in the accumulation of unobserved skills not measured by math
scores or educational attainment: These are an omitted variable that is correlated with observed skill, so if
some CZs have stronger gradients of unobserved skill with respect to parent income, they would appear to
have higher returns to observed skill.



                                                     31
    Overall, these results make clear that diﬀerences in skill accumulation – achievement

and attainment – account for only a small share of the variation across CZs in income

transmission. Marriage patterns are the largest single channel explaining family income

transmission. For sons, returns to skills also play a meaningful role, while for daughters

the transmission of parental income to children’s earnings not mediated by human capital

is more important.



6    Conclusion

Chetty et al.’s (2014a) pathbreaking work showed that there is dramatic variation in in-

tergenerational income mobility across geographic areas within the United States. This

raises the intriguing possibility that we can identify policies that account for this variation

and, by exporting these policies from high- to low-mobility areas, move closer to equality of

opportunity.

    CHKS presented suggestive correlations indicating that school quality might be an im-

portant contributing factor. This paper has investigated this suggestion by asking whether

high- and low-income children’s academic outcomes are more equal in areas where their adult

economic outcomes are more equal. I find that there is statistically significant variation

across commuting zones in the gradients of educational attainment, academic achievement,

and non-cognitive skills with respect to parental income. This variation is positively cor-

related with variation in income transmission across CZs, but the correlations are modest.

Moreover, while substantial, the variation in human capital transmission is not large enough

in magnitude to be a primary mechanism by which income is transmitted across generations.

    I find that only about one-ninth of the across-CZ variation in intergenerational income

mobility is attributable to diﬀerences in children’s earnings deriving from diﬀerences in the

accumulation of observed skills. A similar share is attributable to diﬀerences in the labor

market returns to children’s skills. About one-third is attributable to diﬀerences in the

labor market return to parental income holding skills (and the returns to skills) constant.

The remaining, largest portion derives from diﬀerences in spousal and non-labor income,

primarily reflecting diﬀerences in the likelihood of having a working spouse.


                                              32
   Together, these facts indicate that the education system makes only a modest contri-

bution to variation in intergenerational income transmission. The evidence points to other

factors as potentially more important, including cultural tendencies toward early marriage

and local labor market factors that influence the labor force participation rate and the abil-

ity of children from high-income families to match into high-earnings jobs conditional on

their education and skills.

   This is not to say that school quality is not important for other reasons, of course, or

even that it does not contribute to overall mobility in a way that is roughly constant across

CZs. Nevertheless, further investigation into determinants of local intergenerational mobility

should expand from a near-exclusive focus on education to other potential mechanisms.

One area for further attention is diﬀerences in the likelihood of marriage, either because

CZs vary in the likelihood that romantic partners will be formally married or because of

variation in partnership rates. In terms of earnings outcomes, other areas of interest include

local income inequality and labor market institutions that influence it (e.g., unions), and

factors influencing the strength of local labor market networks and the spatial and social

stratification of the local market.




                                             33
References
Aaronson, Daniel and Bhashkar Mazumder, “Intergenerational economic mobility in
 the United States, 1940 to 2000,” Journal of Human Resources, 2008, 43 (1), 139–172.

Bond, Timothy N. and Kevin Lang, “The evolution of the Black-White test score gap
 in Grades K–3: The fragility of results,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 2013, 95 (5),
 1468–1479.

   and   , “The black-white education-scaled test-score gap in grades K–7,” Journal of
  Human Resources, forthcoming. June 2017.

Bradbury, Bruce, Miles Corak, Jane Waldfogel, and Elizabeth Washbrook, Too
 many children left behind: The US achievement gap in comparative perspective, Russell
 Sage Foundation, 2015.

Chetty, Raj and Nathaniel Hendren, “The impacts of neighborhoods on intergenera-
 tional mobility II: County-level estimates,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming.
 December 2017.

  , , Patrick Kline, and Emmanuel Saez, “Where is the land of opportunity? The
  geography of intergenerational mobility in the United States,” The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 2014, 129 (4), 1553–1623.

  , , , , and Nicholas Turner, “Is the United States still a land of opportunity?
  Recent trends in intergenerational mobility,” The American Economic Review, 2014, 104
  (5), 141–147.

Gelman, Andrew and Jennifer Hill, Data analysis using regression and multi-
 level/hierarchical models, Cambridge University Press, 2006.

Ingels, Steven J., Daniel J. Pratt, Christopher P. Alexander, Donna M. Jewell,
  Erich Lauﬀ, Tiﬀany Mattox, and David Wilson, “Education Longitudinal Study of
  2002 Third Follow-up Data File Documentation,” Technical Report NCES 2014-364), Na-
  tional Center for Education Statistics, Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department
  of Education, Washington, DC 2014.

  ,    , Deborah R. Herget, Jill A. Dever, Laura Burns Fritch, James E. Ot-
  tem Randolph andRogers, Sami Kitmitto, and Steve Leinwand, “High School
  Longitudinal Study of 2009 (HSLS:09) Base Year to First Follow-Up Data File Docu-
  mentation,” Technical Report NCES 2014-361, National Center for Education Statistics,
  Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department of Education, Washington, DC 2014.

Jacob, Brian and Jesse Rothstein, “The measurement of student ability in modern
  assessment systems,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Summer 2016, 30 (3), 85–108.

Kearney, Melissa S and Phillip B Levine, “Income inequality and early nonmarital
 childbearing,” Journal of Human Resources, 2014, 49 (1), 1–31.

  and , “Income inequality, social mobility, and the decision to drop out of high school,”
  Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2016, p. 367.



                                            34
National Center for Education Statistics, “ELS:2012 Student Codebook,” Technical
 Report undated. Retrieved from http://nces.ed.gov/pubs2014/ELS2012_codebook_
 Student1.pdf on April 6, 2017.

Tourangeau, Karen, Christine Nord, Thanh Lê, Alberto G. Sorongon, and
  Michelle Najarian, “Early Childhood Longitudinal Study, Kindergarten Class of 1998–
  99 (ECLS-K), Combined User’s Manual for the ECLS-K Eighth-Grade and K–8 Full
  Sample Data Files and Electronic Codebooks,” Technical Report NCES 2009-004, Na-
  tional Center for Education Statistics, Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department
  of Education, Washington, DC 2009.

  , , , Judith M. Pollack, and Sally Atkins-Burnett, “Early Childhood Longi-
  tudinal Study, Kindergarten Class of 1998-99 (ECLS-K), Combined User’s Manual for
  the ECLS-K Fifth-Grade Data Files and Electronic Codebooks,” Technical Report NCES
  2006-032, National Center for Education Statistics, U.S. Department of Education, Wash-
  ington D.C. 2006.

U.S. Bureau of the Census, “Table MS-2. Estimated Median Age at First Marriage,
 by Sex: 1890 to Present. https://www.census.gov/population/socdemo/hh-fam/tabMS-
 2.pdf,” Technical Report September 15 2004.




                                           35
Figure 1. Path diagram of the transmission of parental income to child income, mediated by the
child’s human capital.



                                          Parental
                                          income
                                    π       (p)


                                                   µ
                 Child human
                   capital
                      (s)

                                λ
                                                                         Total transmission is
                                        Child income
                                             (y)
                                                                               θ = πλ+µ
Figure 2. Parental income – child test score transmission, by CZ income transmission (θ) decile


               .5
               .4
  d child test score /
   d parent income
           .3  .2




                                                                     Slope = 0.251
               .1




                         .2   .25           .3             .35              .4             .45
                                                 CHKS theta


Notes: CZs are divided into deciles based on CHKS’s income transmission (relative mobility)
measure. Figure plots coefficients and 95% confidence intervals for regressions of child test
score percentiles on parent income percentiles, estimated separately for each decile. Regressions
include CZ fixed effects and use ELS sampling weights. Dashed line shows an unweighted
regression of the decile coefficient on the decile mean income transmission; its slope is shown in
the lower right.
Figure 3. Path diagram with spousal earnings and non-labor income



                                         Parental
                                         income
                                   π       (p)

            Child human capital                  µ
                    (s)

                               λ                                     Child spousal
                                       Child earnings
                                                                    earnings & non-
                                            (w)
                                                                     labor income
                                                                          (y)


                                        Child income
                                             (y)
Table 1. Summary statistics for CZ-level relative mobility (income transmission)

                                              Full sample                  100 largest CZs
                                       (1)            (2)             (3)             (4)
 N                                     709                            100
 Mean                                 0.325                          0.338
 Standard deviation                   0.065                          0.054
 Minimum                              0.068   Linton, ND             0.215 Santa Barbara, CA
 10th percentile                      0.240   Hutchinson, MN         0.257 Bakersfield, CA
 25th percentile                      0.280   Carroll, IA            0.298 Manchester, NH
 50th percentile                      0.330   Eagle Butte, SD        0.348 Des Moines, IA
 75th percentile                      0.373   Roanoke, VA            0.382 Greenville, SC
 90th percentile                      0.404   Vicksburg, MS          0.398 Indianapolis, IN
 Maximum                              0.508   Lake Providence, LA    0.429 Cincinnati, OH
 Correlations
  (1) Relative mobility for 1983-85
      birth cohorts                   0.84                           0.98
  (2) Causal mobility measure from
      Chetty-Hendren                  0.85                           0.91
  (3) Relative mobility for college
      enrollment                      0.68                           0.70


Notes: Statistics are computed at the CZ level, without weights, and pertain to the preferred
“relative mobility” measure from Chetty et al. (2014). Correlation 1 is with the relative mobility
measure for the 1983-1985 birth cohorts, from Chetty et al. (2014). Correlation 2 is with the
causal mobility measure from Chetty and Hendren (forthcoming). Correlation 3 is with CZ-level
income-college enrollment transmission – the slope of college enrollment between 18 and 21
with respect to parental income percentile – for the 1980-1982 birth cohorts, from Chetty et al.
(2014).
Table 2. Summary statistics for individual-level samples

                                     Educational    Early Childhood   High School     American
                                     Longitudinal    Longitudinal     Longitudinal   Community
                                        Study            Study           Study         Survey
                                        (ELS)           (ECLS)          (HSLS)         (ACS)
                                          (1)             (2)              (3)          (4)
 Birth year                           1985-1986       1992-1993        1994-1995     1980-1982
 Number of observations                 15,240          19,940           21,440       330,366
 # of CZs                                 312            365              295           488
 Female                                  0.50            0.48             0.50         0.50
 Black                                   0.14            0.18             0.17         0.14
 Hispanic                                0.16            0.19             0.22         0.21
 Asian                                   0.04            0.03             0.03         0.06
 Other non-white                         0.05            0.02             0.08         0.09
 Parent income                          61,417          51,789           70,464
                                       (50,312)        (47,419)         (56,034)
 Test scores available for grades        10,12        K,1,2,3,5,8         9,11          n/a

 Post-high school outcomes              Age 26                                       Age 28-32
    Any college                          0.84                                           0.53
    College completion (BA degree)       0.33                                           0.22
    Years of education                   14.0                                           13.3
                                         (1.8)                                          (2.8)
    Marital status                       0.28                                           0.47
    Presence of working spouse           0.24                                           0.40
    Earnings                            25,451                                         29,508
                                       (24,672)                                       (32,477)
    Family income                       36,095                                         73,039
                                       (35,238)                                       (62,890)


Note: Sample sizes and demographics are computed for the base-year sample for each survey,
and use sampling weights. Sample sizes in columns 1-3 are rounded to the nearest 10. Standard
deviations in parentheses.
Table 3. Income transmission mediation analysis at the national level (ELS)

 Dependent variable:                  12th grade math      Years of
                                                                            Family income (percentile)
                                      score (percentile)   education
                                              (1)              (2)       (3)    (4)    (5)     (6)   (7)
 Parents' income (percentile)                0.35            0.019      0.16                        0.07
                                            (0.01)          (0.001)    (0.01)                      (0.01)
 12th grade math score (percentile)                                            0.24          0.18   0.17
                                                                              (0.01)        (0.02) (0.02)
 Years of education                                                                   3.59   1.76   1.61
                                                                                     (0.19) (0.24) (0.24)
 N                                         13,650           13,250     11,510 9,980 11,510 9,980 9,980
 R2                                         0.19             0.15       0.08   0.11   0.10   0.12   0.12


Notes: Parental income, child family income, and 12th grade math scores are measured in
percentiles of the national distribution and range from 0 to 100. All regressions use ELS sample
weights (for the wave-1 survey in column 1, and for the wage-3 survey in columns 2-7) and
include CZ fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the CZ level. Sample sizes are rounded
to the nearest 10.
Table 4. Transmission of parental income to children’s 12th grade math achievement (ELS)

                                                        (1)      (2)       (3)     (4)      (5)
Parental income - CZ mean                              0.35     0.35      0.34    0.35     0.33
                                                      (0.01)   (0.01)   (0.01)   (0.01)   (0.01)
CZ mean parental income                                0.69     0.69      0.70             0.70
                                                      (0.04)   (0.04)   (0.04)            (0.04)
CZ income transmission (θ)                                      -97.0    -74.4             -72.6
                                                               (26.4)   (28.1)            (27.8)
(Parental income - CZ mean)                                     0.32      0.37    0.32     0.41
   * CZ income transmission (θ)                                (0.21)   (0.15)   (0.21)   (0.17)
CZ mean parental income                                         1.75      1.23             1.20
   * CZ income transmission (θ)                                (0.53)   (0.57)            (0.56)
SD of parental income random coefficient (h)                                               0.07
                                                                                          (0.02)
CZ effects                                            None     None      RE       FE        RE
Across-CZ distribution:
  SD of CZ income transmission (θ)                             0.057    0.057    0.057    0.057
  SD of parental income-test score transmission (p)            0.018    0.021    0.018    0.072
  Coefficient of between-CZ regression of θ on p                                           0.26
                                                                                          (0.12)
   R2                                                                                      0.11
   Corr(θ, p)                                                    1        1        1       0.32
   p-value, SD(h) = 0 / corr(θ, π) = 1 (LR test)                                          <0.01

Notes: Dependent variable in each column is the 12th grade math score, in national percentile
units (0-100). Parental income is also measured in percentiles (0-100). CZ income transmission
is the relative mobility measure for the 1980-82 birth cohorts from Chetty et al. (2014),
demeaned across CZs. Specifications labeled “RE” and “FE” include CZ random effects and
fixed effects, respectively. RE specification in column 3 is estimated via GLS; mixed model in
column 5 is estimated by maximum likelihood. Specifications in columns 1, 2, and 4 are
weighted using ELS sampling weights; columns 3 and 5 are unweighted. Standard errors are
clustered at the CZ level. p-value in column 5 is for a likelihood ratio test of the mixed model
against a random effects model with fixed coefficients (as in column 3, though estimated by
maximum likelihood rather than GLS). Number of observations (rounded to the nearest 10) =
13,650.
Table 5. Parental income-child achievement transmission across grades, cohorts, and subjects
                                                                    Coefficient of
                                     Parental
                                                 SD of parental regression of income                 p-value,
                       Parental   income * CZ
                                                income random transmission (θ) on      Corr(θ, p)   LR test of
                       income         income
                                                 coefficient (h)      test score                    SD(h) = 0
                                   transmission
                                                                  transmission (p)
                         (1)            (2)            (3)                (4)             (5)          (6)
Panel A: Math scores
ECLS K (spring)         0.35          0.33           0.08               0.17             0.24         <0.01
                       (0.01)        (0.25)         (0.01)             (0.13)
ECLS G1 (spring)        0.35          0.08           0.06               0.09             0.08         <0.01
                       (0.01)        (0.24)         (0.01)             (0.29)
ECLS G3                 0.42          0.13           0.08               0.08             0.10         <0.01
                       (0.01)        (0.23)         (0.01)             (0.14)
ECLS G5                 0.39          0.31           0.09               0.13             0.20         <0.01
                       (0.01)        (0.26)         (0.01)             (0.11)
ECLS G8                 0.41          0.22           0.07               0.16             0.19         0.01
                       (0.01)        (0.22)         (0.02)             (0.17)
HSLS G9                 0.30          0.30           0.05               0.33             0.32         0.02
                       (0.01)        (0.17)         (0.01)             (0.19)
HSLS G11                0.28          0.60           0.07               0.30             0.43         <0.01
                       (0.01)        (0.18)         (0.01)             (0.09)
ELS G10                 0.31          0.37           0.06               0.29             0.33         <0.01
                       (0.01)        (0.16)         (0.01)             (0.13)
ELS G12                 0.33          0.41           0.07               0.26             0.32         <0.01
                       (0.01)        (0.17)         (0.02)             (0.12)
Panel B: Reading scores
ECLS K (spring)         0.38          0.16           0.08               0.09             0.12         <0.01
                       (0.01)        (0.23)         (0.01)             (0.14)
ECLS G1 (spring)        0.38          0.23           0.06               0.21             0.22         <0.01
                       (0.01)        (0.22)         (0.01)             (0.20)
ECLS G3                 0.40          0.41           0.06               0.33             0.37         <0.01
                       (0.01)        (0.21)         (0.02)             (0.19)
ECLS G5                 0.39          0.48           0.06               0.37             0.42         <0.01
                       (0.01)        (0.21)         (0.01)             (0.15)
ECLS G8                 0.39          0.33           0.05               0.48             0.40         0.21
                       (0.01)        (0.21)         (0.02)             (0.35)
ELS G10                 0.30          0.25           0.07               0.15             0.19         <0.01
                       (0.01)        (0.18)         (0.01)             (0.11)
Notes: Each row presents statistics from a single mixed model pertaining to a different test score
(for a given sample, grade, and subject), each scaled as national percentile units (0-100). Parent
incomes in columns 1-3 are percentiles, deviated from the CZ mean. Specifications are as in
Table 4, column 5. See notes to Table 4 for details. Number of observations (rounded to the
nearest 10) ranges between 9,140 and 20,430.
Table 6. Parental income – child educational attainment transmission (ELS)

                                                           College           Years of
                                                          graduation      education at 26
                                                            (0/100)           (*100)
                                                          (1)      (2)      (3)      (4)
Parental income - CZ mean                                0.45     0.45     1.85     1.86
                                                        (0.02)   (0.02)   (0.06)   (0.06)
(Parental income - CZ mean)                              0.64     0.74     2.30     2.35
     * CZ income transmission (θ)                       (0.30)   (0.29)   (1.12)   (1.09)
SD of parental income random coefficient (h)                      0.08              0.22
                                                                 (0.03)            (0.13)
Across-CZ distribution:
    SD of CZ income transmission (θ)                    0.056    0.056    0.056    0.056
    SD of parental income-test score transmission (p)   0.036    0.086    0.130    0.254
    Coefficient of between-CZ regression of θ on p                0.32              0.12
                                                                 (0.19)            (0.11)
     R2                                                           0.24              0.27
     Corr(θ, p)                                           1       0.49      1       0.52
     p-value, SD(h) = 0 / corr(θ, π) = 1 (LR test)                0.15              0.33

Notes: Specifications in columns 1 and 3 are as in Table 4, column 3; those in columns 2 and 4
are as in Table 4, column 5. All columns include controls for CZ mean parental income, CZ
income transmission, and their interaction. See notes to Table 4 for details. Dependent variable
in columns 1-2 is scaled as 0 for failures and 100 for successes; in columns 3-4, dependent
variable is years of education multiplied by 100. Standard errors are clustered at the CZ level.
Number of observations (rounded to the nearest 10) = 13,250.
                           Table 7. Returns to education in the ACS and ELS samples
                                                                                      (1)      (2)                                                     (3)            (4)              (5)
                            Panel A: Returns to education in American Community Survey (ACS) data
                            Years of education - CZ mean                             5.34     5.35                                 5.18               5.53           5.35
                                                                                    (0.08)   (0.08)                               (0.05)             (0.07)         (0.08)
                            * CZ income transmission (θ)                                      3.97                                 6.95               4.58           3.97
                                                                                             (1.05)                               (0.94)             (1.04)         (1.05)
                            SD of education random coefficient (h)                                                                 0.62
                The standard omitted variables formula can be used to relate this reduced-form coeﬃcient                          (0.04)
                CZ                   The   standard     omitted    variables       formula   can     be  used    to relate  this reduced-form coeﬃcient
                to controls
                   the transmission coeﬃcients from the path diagram                 None in Figure
                                                                                               None 1: RE                FE         RE
                Across-CZ distribution:
                                     to the transmission coeﬃcients from the path diagram in Figure 1:
                   SD of CZ income transmission (θ)                                            0.056
                                                                                                  2           0.056    0.056      0.056
The standard omitted    variables    formula   can
                                                ˜     be  usedcov
                                                                to  (s ic , picthis
                                                                     relate     ) reduced-form    p       coeﬃcient
                   SD of return to education ( c) = c +                           µc = c + 0.222     ⇡ µ . 0.256
                                                                                                  2 c c
                                                                                                                       0.222
                                                                                                                        2            (13)
                                                                                                                                  0.728
                 The  standard     omitted    variables    formulaV (s˜can
                                                                         ic ) be used covto(srelate
                                                                                             ic , spic )this reduced-form
                                                                                                                        p      coeﬃcient
to the transmissionCoefficient
                    coeﬃcients  of between-CZ   regression
                                    from the path            of θ on
                                                       diagram           c = c 1:
                                                                   in Figure        +                    µc = c + 2 ⇡c µc . 0.04                   (13)
                                                                                         V (sic )                       s
                 to the transmission coeﬃcients from the path diagram in Figure 1: ˜                                              (0.00)
                                                                                                                                      ˜
                AsRabove,
                    2         our starting point is the hypothetical       2
                                                                                    reverse regression of c on ✓c : ˜ c =0.29 +
                           ˜ = c As     cov (sic ,our
                                                    pic )starting point    p is the hypothetical reverse regression of ˜ on ✓ : ˜ = ˜ +
                    ˜      ˜          + above,
                      + ⌘c .c) Substituting
                ✓c Corr(θ,                     this   intoµc(12)
                                                             = cyields
                                                                    + 2⇡        µc .     model 1psimilar          (13) 1
                                                                                                                1 (10):            0.53c   c   c
                                            V (s˜ic )          cov (sic ,s paiccmixed
                                                                                 )                 2           to
                   p-value, SD(h) =✓0 / corr(θ,
                                         ˜
                                           + ⌘c . c)Substituting
                                               ˜     ==1 (LR
                                                          c + test) this intoµ(12)  c = yields
                                                                                          c + 2a⇡mixed c µc .    model similar to     (13)
                                                                                                                                  <0.01
                                                                                                                                     (10):
                                      c                            V (sic )                        s
                Panel B: Returns to skills in Educational Longitudinal⇣       Survey   (ELS) data
                                                                                             ⌘
As above, our starting           point                                                                                       ˜of ˜ c˜ on ✓c : ˜ c = ˜ +
                                    - CZ is    the hypothetical         yic = ̃reverse                regression
                                                                                                            ˜
                   Skill index              mean                                        c + sic                 + ✓c 1.09        + ⌘c ⇣ +      1.09ṽic . 1.07 ⌘ 1.06                             1.08(14)
                                                                                                                                                                                                         ˜
                     As    above,       our    starting          point          is   the      hypothetical                 reverse          regression
                                                                                                                                                ˜              ˜  of    ˜˜   on    ✓    :   ˜    =          +
    ˜     ˜
✓c + ⌘c . Substituting this into (12) yields a mixed model similar                                         y  ic  =     ̃ (0.04)
                                                                                                                               +    s
                                                                                                                           c to (10):  ic     (0.04)
                                                                                                                                                   +    ✓ c     (0.04)
                                                                                                                                                                  +    ⌘ c
                                                                                                                                                                          c   (0.04)
                                                                                                                                                                              +    ṽ c
                                                                                                                                                                                      ic .    c  (0.04)                   (14)
                   *✓CZ income
                           ˜
                              + ⌘c . transmission
                                    ˜
                                         Substituting        (θ) this into (12) yields a mixed model                                           2.30similar1.28    to (10):2.30                    1.26
                      c                                                                                                                                                                          ˜ c .11
                    The parameters of this model can again be used to compute                                                                      the
                                                                                                                                              (0.67)        regression
                                                                                                                                                                (0.66) (0.68)   of    ✓ c  on    (0.73)
                                                                 ⇣                                     ⌘
                                                The       parameters    ˜             of ˜ this ˜model can again be used to compute the regression of ✓ on ˜ .11
                   SD of skill index         random
                                       yic = ̃c + sic     coefficient           (h)
                                                                             + ✓c + ⌘c ⇣+ ṽic .                                            ⌘                          (14)                       0.21            c     c
                     The standard omitted variables                                   formula
                                                                          y = ̃c + sic                 can  ˜ be used         ˜ to ˜relate this reduced-form coeﬃcient
                                                                                                                 + ✓c + ⌘c + ṽic .                                                              (0.07)(14)
                    3.3 Decomposing            The              the icacross-CZ
                                                         standard               omitted                  variation
                                                                                                  variables            formula      in can income  be     used transmission
                                                                                                                                                                   to     relate      this     reduced-form         coeﬃcient
                   CZto controls
                         the transmission                coeﬃcients                 from thethe         pathacross-CZ
                                                                                                                    diagram None in Figure    None 1: RE                          FE               RE
The parameters Across-CZ
                    of this model               3.3           Decomposing
                                            can again be used to compute the regression of ✓c on c .                                         variation           ˜   in11   income             transmission
                                    distribution:
                                               to the         transmission                  coeﬃcientsoffrom
                    The
                     The     mixed        models         yield        separate              estimates                    the the           path diagram
                                                                                                                                   relationships                betweenin Figure ✓c ✓and   1: ⇡˜c and  11
                        SD parameters
                              of CZ incomeof            this
                                                    transmission model       (θ)can again be used to compute                                  0.057
                                                                                                                                                  2
                                                                                                                                                    the regression
                                                                                                                                                                0.057            of
                                                                                                                                                                               0.057      c on 0.057c.
The standard omitted                            The
                                                 ˜ c . mixed                 models           yield
                                                                                             cov     (sicseparate
                                                                                                           , picthis            estimatesp of coeﬃcient
                                                                                                                     ) reduced-form                         the relationships between ✓c and ⇡c and
                        SD ofvariables
                    between         ✓c and
                                  return        formula
                                           to education    Also  (can
                                                                    ˜)of   = be     used
                                                                              interest + to     is relate
                                                                                                      the decompositionµc = c + 0.130          of2 ⇡the  µc .across-CZ
                                                                                                                                                                0.072           2 variation0.219
                                                                                                                                                                               0.130                 in(13)✓c
3.3 Decomposing      The         the across-CZ
                              standard        omitted               variation
                                                                       c
                                                                variables
                                                                                    c
                                                                                     ˜ formula  inV ˜income
                                                                                                         can
                                                                                                        (s ic ) be used      transmission
                                                                                                                               covto   (sicrelate
                                                                                                                                                       c
                                                                                                                                              , psic ) this reduced-form        p            coeﬃcient
to the transmission     Coefficient
                          coeﬃcients            between
                                          of between-CZ
                                              from       the path     c and
                                                                   ✓regression diagram  cof. θAlsoon
                                                                                                  in Figureof= interest + is the decomposition
                                                                                                                     c 1:                                µc = c + of              ⇡the µc . across-CZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.08                    (13)
                                                                                                                                                                                                               variation in ✓c
                     3.3
                    into    itsDecomposing
                                  component             parts.    the In this across-CZ subsection
                                                                                                         cvariation
                                                                                                               I outline            aVinstrategy
                                                                                                                                          (sincome
                                                                                                                                             ic )          to transmission
                                                                                                                                                                 decompose      2 cthe
                                                                                                                                                                                s              separate
                     to the      transmission             coeﬃcients                 from       the path             diagram             in Figure                                               (0.07)
The mixed models     As    yield      separate
                          2above, our starting  intoestimates
                                                          its point
                                                                component      of
                                                                                is    theparts.
                                                                                     the      relationships
                                                                                              hypotheticalIn this            between
                                                                                                                          subsection
                                                                                                                          reverse           regression  and1: ⇡ofc a˜and
                                                                                                                                                 ✓Ic outline             strategy
                                                                                                                                                                             on    ✓    :  to
                                                                                                                                                                                            ˜ c decompose
                                                                                                                                                                                                 =
                                                                                                                                                                                                        ˜        the separate
                    contributions
                        R                   of   variation            in     ⇡    ,       ,  and       µ   .                                                              c           c           0.10 +
                     The      mixed        models
                                               As      covyield
                                                              (s      ,separate
                                                                          p     c
                                                                                )       c    estimates   c  2      of     the       relationships                between
                                                                                                            p is the hypothetical reverse regression of ˜ c on ✓c : ˜ c = ˜ +     ✓       and    ⇡      and
                                                 + above,
                                                                  ic our     ic starting point                                                                                      c               c
between ✓c and ˜✓c Corr(θ,
                         . ˜ Also  ˜˜c)of=interest
                                      .  Substituting      is the
                                              c contributions      this    decomposition
                                                                                of
                                                                              into µvariation
                                                                                         = cyields
                                                                                      c (12)        + in   of  ⇡⇡theµ, c .across-CZ
                                                                                                                           c , and         µc . 1variation         1 in(13)✓c 1                   0.32
                              +  ⌘
                      c My starting c           point
                                                 ˜          Vis (s
                                                                 the      )“structural”      cov (s         , pacicc mixed
                                                                                                       equation
                                                                                                         ics2        ) (3),          model
                                                                                                                                    allowing      psimilar
                                                                                                                                                  2
                                                                                                                                                       for        to
                                                                                                                                                              CZ-level  (10):  heterogeneity               in
                     between
                        p-value, ✓SD(h)c and=  ✓
                                                       ˜. +Also
                                                  0c/ corr(θ,  ⌘
                                                                  ˜ ˜
                                                                    .
                                                                     ic   of==interest
                                                                                     c +test)is this
                                                                        )cSubstituting
                                                                               1 (LR                   the decomposition
                                                                                                               into     µ(12)
                                                                                                                           c = yields   c + of    a   the
                                                                                                                                                        c µc .across-CZ
                                                                                                                                                     ⇡mixed        model           variation
                                                                                                                                                                                 similar        to0.14in(13)
                                                                                                                                                                                                     (10):  ✓c
 nto its component parts. In this csubsection           My starting
                                                                 c          I outlinepoint aisVstrategythe     ) to decompose
                                                                                                        (sic“structural”                  equations the(3),
                                                                                                                                                  2            separate
                                                                                                                                                                     allowing for CZ-level heterogeneity in
                    the
                     intocoeﬃcients:
                  Notes:     In  Panel
                             itspoint      A, sample
                                   component            parts.consists  In thisof individuals
                                                                                         subsection     ⇣ born       1980-1982             ⌘in the ACS           2010-2012           one-year       public
As  above,    our starting                 is  the      hypothetical                  reverse                ˜ I outline
                                                                                                       regression             ˜of ˜ac ˜strategy
                                                                                                                                           on     ✓   :   ˜to   =decompose
                                                                                                                                                                        ˜
                                                                                                                                                                           +            the separate
contributions ofuse variation
                       microdata      insamples
                                          ⇡c , the c , (N=241,670).
                                                        and      µc . yic =Respondents
                                                        coeﬃcients:                   ̃c + sic              are+ assigned
                                                                                                                      ✓c + ⌘toc⇣their          + ṽCZ
                                                                                                                                                    c
                                                                                                                                                      ic . of current
                                                                                                                                                             c
                                                                                                                                                                           ⌘ residence.                (14)
                     As above,           ourofstarting           point          isy,icthe     hypothetical
                                                                                         =, percentile
                                                                                                c +µsic         c + preverse      c + vregression
                                                                                                                             ic µYears         ˜.              ˜ of ˜    ˜ c on ✓c : ˜ c = (15)          ˜
                                                                                                                                                                                                            +
    ˜     ˜       Dependent
                     contributions  variable     isvariation
                                                      the child's      in  earnings
                                                                              ⇡               and         y .    (0-100).
                                                                                                                 =     ̃     +    s         icof
                                                                                                                                                  + education
                                                                                                                                                       ✓         +    is
                                                                                                                                                                      ⌘    naturally
                                                                                                                                                                              +   ṽ    .  coded,      with               (14)
✓c My       .  Substituting
      + ⌘starting  point      is  this
                                  the     into    (12)
                                         “structural”        yields
                                                                equation    a   mixed
                                                                                 c       c modelc ic
                                                                                       (3),     allowing     similar
                                                                                                                   for
                                                                                                                          c to (10):
                                                                                                                           CZ-level
                                                                                                                                      ic                 c
                                                                                                                                               heterogeneity            c
                                                                                                                                                                           in
                                                                                                                                                                                     ic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (15)
          c       values˜below˜ 9 or above 17 set to missing. In Panel B, ysample                                      ic = cis+         ELSsic sample
                                                                                                                                                    c + pic(N=9,980).
                                                                                                                                                                  µc + vic . Skill index is the
                     ✓c value
                  fitted   My          . Substituting
                              + ⌘starting
                                    cfrom    a   point
                                               regression     is   this
                                                                  the
                                                                    of        into (12)
                                                                             “structural”
                                                                           children’s              yields
                                                                                               earnings equation a age
                                                                                                                at    mixed(3),
                                                                                                                              25,     model
                                                                                                                                      allowing
                                                                                                                                      scaled       similar
                                                                                                                                                  as   afor       to (10):
                                                                                                                                                               CZ-level
                                                                                                                                                          percentile         of heterogeneity
                                                                                                                                                                                 the    family   ˜ income
                                                                                                                                                                                                       11   in
                     The gradient
                    The      parameters          of this
                                            of this       with  model cantoagain                        be used toin             compute
                                                                                                                                      CZ c is:the regression of ✓c on c .
the coeﬃcients:distribution,           on their 12th grade      ⇣ respect
                                                                        math score
                                                                                              parent   ⌘ income
                                                                                               percentile         and dummies for years of schooling completed, with
                                               The
                                                The      parameters
                                                          gradient          +of✓cof  this  this  ⌘cmodel
                                                                                              with        + ṽiccan         again         be used          to compute             the regression of ✓c on ˜ c .11
                                                                                                        ⇣respect           to    parent     ⌘of income           in   CZ
                                                                                                                                                                       (14)c is:
                                                                       ˜                 ˜          ˜
                  CZ the
                       fixedcoeﬃcients:yic =Specifications
                                 effects.       ̃ c + sic                match        the  +corresponding           . columns                    Table      4.   Columns         2,   3, and 5 include
                                             yic = c + sic c + pic µc + vic . ˜                                               ˜          ˜                            (15)
                  controls for CZ mean years of education                 y      =     ̃  (panel
                                                                                          cdy+ ic ic A)
                                                                                                 s            or icskill
                                                                                                             ds  +    ✓  c index (panel
                                                                                                                                  +     ⌘       +   ṽB),
                                                                                                                                                       ic the CZ income transmission,
                                                                                                                                                          .                                             (14)
                     3.3 Decomposing the icacross-CZ                               y ic    =     c| +  = variation
                                                                                                          s ic    c   +
                                                                                                                      |   p   ic+µ  c in
                                                                                                                                      µ + c income
                                                                                                                                            v ic .              transmission                           (15)
                                                                                                                                                                                                      (16)
                  and their interaction; coefficients on CZ-level                          dpic the  covariates
                                                                                                     c
                                                                                                             dp
                                                                                                                        c arec
                                                                                                                              dynot      reported.
                                                                                                                                         c
                                                                                                                                                 dsic See notes             to Table 4 for details.
The parameters      of this
      gradient of this      withmodelrespect
                                               3.3
                                            can to   again
                                                             Decomposing
                                                         parent  be used  income     to in  compute
                                                                                                               across-CZ
                                                                                                                  ic
                                                                                                CZ c is:the regression
                                                                                                                                   ic
                                                                                                                                       |c = variation
                                                                                                                                               of   ✓    |on
                                                                                                                                                           c   c ˜+ in
                                                                                                                                                                     .µ11c income transmission                            (16)
                     The      mixed       models          yield        separate              estimates             of     the dpicrelationships dpicc              c
                                                                                                                                                                 between          ✓      and     ⇡      and
                                                                                                                                                                                                        11
                              parameters
                     The gradient                  of this
                                             of this       with   modelrespect    cantoagain   parent    be income
                                                                                                               used to in        compute
                                                                                                                                       CZ c is:the regression of ✓c on c .          c             ˜c
                    Using the definitions      The         of ✓c and
                                                          mixed            models  ⇡c , this yield  is simply
                                                                                                         separate        theestimates
                                                                                                                                  decomposition     of thedefined  relationshipsearlier: between ✓c and ⇡c and
                     between ✓c and ˜ cdy. icAlso of                      ds   interest is the decomposition of the across-CZ variation in ✓c
3.3 Decomposing the across-CZ                   Using |the        =variation
                                                                       definitions
                                                                               ic
                                                                                   |c˜ c.+Also inµc✓income
                                                                                                of      c and ⇡c , transmission
                                                                                                                              this is simply the decomposition         (16) of the across-CZ    defined earlier:
                                               between
                                                     dp
                                                               c ✓
                                                                    c dp  and          c dyic             ofds  interest           is the decomposition                                                        variation in ✓c
                     3.3 itsDecomposing
                     into          component parts.the    ic
                                                                       In thisacross-CZ
                                                                               ic
                                                                                        subsection  |c =variation
                                                                                                                   ic
                                                                                                                       |c c +ain
                                                                                                                I outline                 c income
                                                                                                                                       µstrategy            to transmission
                                                                                                                                                                 decompose the separate                (16)
The mixed models yield separate                intoestimates
                                                         its component        of theparts.
                                                                                            dpic✓c = ⇡dp
                                                                                              relationships
                                                                                                         In cthis  cic+subsection
                                                                                                                            µbetween
                                                                                                                                c.                     and ⇡ca and
                                                                                                                                                ✓Ic outline             strategy to decompose         (17)       the separate
Table 8. Transmission of parental income to children’s income, earnings, and marital status
                                    Child   Own Marital Working Child         Child   Child earnings +
                                   family earnings status  spouse earnings earnings + non-labor income
                                  income     >0    (0/100) (0/100)          nonlabor     + imputed
                                           (0/100)                           income   spousal earnings
                                    (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)      (5)       (6)       (7)
Panel A: Full sample
Parental income - CZ mean          0.17      0.15      0.00      0.01      0.15      0.18      0.15
                                  (0.01)    (0.01)    (0.01)    (0.01)    (0.01)    (0.01)    (0.01)
(Parental income - CZ mean)        0.64      0.47      0.61      0.61      0.38      0.45      0.76
  * CZ income transmission (θ)    (0.16)    (0.25)    (0.27)    (0.27)    (0.14)    (0.13)    (0.16)
SD of parental income random       0.006     0.045     0.052     0.060     0.020     0.023     0.015
  coefficient (h)                 (0.018)   (0.023)   (0.026)   (0.021)   (0.015)   (0.015)   (0.015)
Across-CZ distribution:
 SD of CHKS income-income
 transmission coefficient (θ)     0.057     0.057     0.056     0.056     0.057     0.057     0.057
 SD of ELS parental income-
 child outcome transmission       0.037     0.052     0.062     0.069     0.029     0.035     0.045
 Coefficient of regression of θ    1.52      0.55      0.50      0.40      1.41      1.21      1.18
 on ELS transmission              (0.37)    (0.42)    (0.34)    (0.23)    (0.98)    (0.68)    (0.27)
 R2                                0.97      0.26      0.31      0.24      0.53      0.55      0.90
 Correlation                       0.99      0.51      0.55      0.49      0.73      0.74      0.95
 p-value, SD(h) = 0 (LR test)      0.92      0.46      0.18      0.13      0.45      0.31      0.60
Panel B: By gender:
Men
 (Parental income - CZ mean)       0.53      0.49      0.48      0.66      0.19      0.27      0.52
   * CZ income transmission       (0.23)    (0.31)    (0.39)    (0.34)    (0.22)    (0.23)    (0.23)
 SD of ELS parental income-
 child outcome transmission       0.033     0.060     0.073     0.085     0.032     0.042     0.030
 Coefficient of regression of θ    1.61      0.43      0.29      0.29      0.61      0.48      1.85
 on ELS transmission              (0.77)    (0.51)    (0.49)    (0.30)    (0.95)    (0.55)    (0.81)
 R2                                0.85      0.21      0.14      0.19      0.12      0.13      0.96
 Corr(θ, ELS transmission)         0.92      0.46      0.37      0.44      0.34      0.36      0.98
Women
 (Parental income - CZ mean)       0.65      0.35      0.89      0.73      0.49      0.54      0.87
   * CZ income transmission       (0.25)    (0.31)    (0.38)    (0.39)    (0.19)    (0.17)    (0.24)
 SD of ELS parental income-
 child outcome transmission       0.038     0.020     0.086     0.096     0.038     0.037     0.051
 Coefficient of regression of θ    1.47      2.85      0.39      0.25      1.06      1.24      1.08
 on ELS transmission              (0.56)    (2.53)    (0.22)    (0.16)    (0.50)    (0.44)    (0.26)
  R2                               0.96      0.99      0.34      0.19      0.51      0.66      0.94
  Corr(θ, ELS transmission)        0.98      0.99      0.59      0.43      0.72      0.81      0.97
Notes: All specifications are as in Table 4, column 5. All columns include main effects for CZ mean
parental income and CZ income transmission and their interaction. See notes to Table 4 for details. In
columns 1 and 5-7, dependent variable is a measure of child income, scaled as a percentile (0-100) of the
child total family income distribution. In columns 2-4, dependent variable is an indicator, multiplied by
100. Number of observations (rounded to the nearest 10) ranges from 11,510 to 16,200 in Panel A.
Table 9. Decomposition of the variation in intergenerational transmission

Mechanism                       Family                   Own earnings                    Non-labor and
                                income                                                  spousal income
                                  Total          Total    Skills Return Residual             Total
                              transmission   transmission        to skills               transmission
Dependent variable            Child income     Child     Child    Child earnings        Family income
                                              earnings    skill                           less own
                                                         index                            earnings
                                   (1)           (2)       (3)     (4)            (5)         (6)
(Parental income - CZ mean)       0.69          0.37      0.08            0.23               0.28
  * CZ income transmission       (0.17)        (0.15)    (0.06)          (0.15)             (0.11)
(Skill index - CZ mean)                                                   0.84
  * CZ income transmission                                               (0.66)
Scale factor
  λ                                                       0.99
  π                                                               0.09
Scaled component                  0.69          0.37      0.08    0.07        0.23          0.28
Share of column 1                100%           54%       11%     11%         33%           41%
Panel B: By gender
Men
  Scaled component                0.50          0.31      0.08    0.16        0.09          0.21
  Share of column 1              100%           63%       16%     32%         18%           42%
Women
 Scaled component                 0.78          0.32      0.05    -0.03       0.30          0.43
 Share of column 1               100%           41%        7%      -4%        39%           55%

Notes: Each specification has controls for CZ mean parental income, the individual deviation
from that mean, income transmission, and an interaction between CZ mean income and CZ
income transmission. Columns 4 and 5 report a single specification, which also includes the CZ
mean of the skill index (see notes to Table 7 for details) and its interaction with income
transmission. See text for explanation of scale factors and scaling of dependent variables.
Appendices

A     Additional results

This appendix discusses additional specifications and results not included in the main tables.


A.1    Descriptive statistics

I begin with descriptive statistics for the samples used.

    Appendix Table A1 presents the national relationship between parental income and child

achievement, as in Table 3, column 1, for each of the achievement measures available in the

ECLS, HSLS, and ELS, as well as for several summaries of educational attainment from

the ELS. Parental income is less strongly related to children’s test scores in the HSLS and

ELS than in the ECLS, but it is not clear whether this reflects diﬀerences across grades

or diﬀerences among the surveys. There is no indication of an age gradient within any

individual survey.

    Appendix Figure A1 presents scatterplots of mean child outcomes for each of the 13

parental income categories reported in the ELS. Parental income is scaled as a percentile,

as in the main analysis, as are children’s test scores, earnings, and family incomes. One of

the parental income categories, zero income, is quite rare – only 0.2% of all observations –

so is indicated by hollow markers. For all four of the outcomes presented, the relationship

with parental income is reasonably linear in these percentile plots, supporting the scaling

choices adopted above. Appendix Table A7, discussed below, shows that my main results

are robust to the use of several alternative scales.


A.2    Additional analyses of primary specifications

Next, I present analyses using the same interacted specifications as in the main analysis.

    Appendix Figure A3 repeats the exercise from Figure 2 for other relationships. As in

Figure 2, CZs are divided into deciles by ✓c , and regressions are estimated separately for

each decile. In panel A, the within-decile regression is of children’s income on parental

income. This is a semi-parametric version of the model from Table 8, column 1. As there,



                                               i
the coeﬃcient across ✓ is quite high, and points are fairly tightly clustered around the best-fit

line. Panel B repeats Figure 2, using the child’s test score as the dependent variable. While

there is a positive slope here, it is much attenuated, and there is a great deal more variability

around the best-fit line. Panels C and D present coeﬃcients from child income regressions

that control for test scores and parental income simultaneously. The test score coeﬃcients,

in Panel C, estimate    c,   while the parental income coeﬃcients, in Panel D, estimate µc . We

see a steep slope in Panel C. In Panel D, the µc estimates are also more strongly correlated

with ✓c than are the ⇡c coeﬃcients in panel B. This supports the conclusion in the paper

that µc is a more important channel for explaining ✓c than is ⇡c .

   Appendix Table A2 presents interacted and mixed models for the relationship between

parental income and children’s income in the ELS. The mixed model in column 5 repeats

the results from Table 8, column 1; other columns here present simpler models without

random coeﬃcients. Across all the columns, the interaction coeﬃcients are around 0.65

or higher, and in the random eﬀects specifications the expected coeﬃcient of 1 is outside

of the confidence interval. CZs that CHKS estimate have higher parent-to-child income

transmission also have higher transmission in the ELS, but not by quite as much. In the

mixed model in column 5, the across-CZ standard deviation of income transmission is smaller

than in CHKS’s estimates, 0.037 vs. 0.057, but they are nearly perfectly correlated. This

high correlation is not surprising, of course, since ✓c is defined as the return to parental

income in children’s income, and the ⇡c obtained from the ELS sample diﬀers from this only

because the income measures and cohorts diﬀer slightly. Thus, the high correlation serves

to validate the use of the ELS sample for this exercise.

   However, the small coeﬃcient , 0.64 in Column 5 and similar in earlier columns, and the

correspondingly low estimated        ✓ ELS ,   remains a concern. If the ELS and tax measures were

perfectly comparable,        should equal one. The attenuated coeﬃcient must reflect diﬀerences

in the income concepts between the ELS and the tax data, either for parents or for children.

A likely suspect is that the ELS children’s income is measured at a younger age than in the

tax data, mid-20s vs. the early 30s. This may attenuate income transmission, as 25-year-olds

are often not yet settled in their careers or families. Another potential explanation is that

the ELS parental income measure is from only a single year and is reported in bins, so likely

                                                     ii
measures parents’ permanent income with error. However, when parents were asked their

incomes several times in diﬀerent ECLS waves, binned measures like those reported by the

ELS are correlated around 0.85 across waves, and around 0.95 with a measure constructed

from the three-wave average. Thus, pure measurement error relative to permanent income

does not fully account for the attenuation of . Nevertheless, it may somewhat attenuate

estimates of ✓ELS ; in this case, the ELS is also likely to yield attenuated estimates of ⇡c .

Any variation in the reliability of pic across CZs would tend to lead me to overstate the

association between ✓c and ⇡c .

   In Table 6, I showed that high-✓c CZs have stronger relationships, on average, between

parental income and children’s college graduation and years of education. But I omitted

from that table results for any college, the one mediator that CHKS are able to measure,

due to the evident diﬀerences between the ELS version of this variable (with a sample mean

of 0.84) and versions that can be constructed from CHKS’s tax data (mean = 0.60) or the

ACS sample (mean = 0.53). It appears that some students with weak attachment to higher

education – perhaps they enrolled briefly and dropped out, or signed up for a program at

a non-accredited institution – are reporting some postsecondary enrollment in the ELS but

are not captured in other surveys. Consistent with this, 70% of those with some college in

the ACS have at least an associates degree, but in the ELS this share is around half.

   Appendix Table A3 explores transmission to any college in the ELS, using successively

more restrictive definitions of college enrollment, in the basic random eﬀects and mixed

models. In columns 1-2, I use the ELS measure without adjustment. Column 2 indicates

that the transmission of parental income to child college-going is negatively correlated with

CZ income transmission. This is in stark contrast to CHKS’s results for income-enrollment

transmission using their measure of whether tuition was paid for a student between ages

18 and 21 at an institution that made an information report to the IRS, which indicated a

correlation of 0.68 with ✓c .

   Remaining columns tighten the definition of college enrollment. In columns 3-4, I count

students who attended postsecondary education but did not get any certificate, degree, or

other sort of credential as non-attendees; in columns 5-6 I include these students but exclude

those who received only certificates; and in columns 7-8 I turn instead to an indicator for

                                              iii
having an associates degree or more. Each of these specifications yields a positive (albeit

weak in some cases) correlation between ✓c and ⇡c , suggesting that the anomalous results

in columns 1-2 are driven by the students with the least meaningful connections to college.

In column 8, the correlation approaches that obtained by CKHS.


A.3    Alternative transmission measures

All of the results in the main paper and in Appendix A.1 use CHKS’s preferred relative

mobility measure. Here, I explore three alternative measures.

   Appendix Table A4 continues the exploration of transmission from parental income to

children’s educational attainment. Here, I repeat the mixed model specifications for each

of the attainment measures from Table 6 and Appendix Table A3, but in place of CHKS’s

preferred measure of income transmission, I use their analogous measure of the transmission

from parental income to children’s college enrollment in the CZ. That is, in this table ✓c

is the slope of an indicator for ever enrolling in college between 18 and 21 on the parents’

income percentile. Not surprisingly given the discussion above, this is only weakly correlated

with ⇡c in column 1, where the dependent variable is an indicator for any college by the

age-26 ELS survey. This is a further indication that the ELS measure may be over-broad.

Correlations and slopes of ✓c with respect to ⇡c are much higher in the subsequent columns.

Indeed, transmission from parent income to child’s educational attainment in years, or to

attainment of a two-year degree, is correlated 0.8 with CHKS’s ✓c measure. Appendix Table

A2 also indicated that college completion and years of education are more strongly related

to parental income, at a national level, than is the ELS college enrollment measure, further

indicating limitations of the latter.

   Appendix Table A5 returns to the income transmission concept for ✓c , but explores

two alternative measures. One, labeled “later,” is the measure computed by CHKS for the

younger, 1983-5 birth cohorts, with adult incomes measured at younger ages. The second,

“causal” measure is constructed by Chetty and Hendren (forthcoming) based on families that

move from one CZ to another. Three dependent variables are considered: Children’s adult

family income (in percentiles, 0-100), children’s 12th grade math scores (also in percentiles),

and the child’s years of completed education as of age 26 (multiplied by 100). Results

                                              iv
are generally similar across mobility measures; if anything, the alternative measures yield

weaker relationships with ELS transmission from parental income to children’s achievement

and attainment.


A.4    Robustness to scaling and additional controls

CHKS’s ✓c is strongly correlated with CZ-level racial composition, raising the possibility

that what appears to be variation in the transmission of parental income is in fact due to

diﬀerences in the omitted variable bias due to diﬀerences in the correlation of race with

parental income. Appendix Table A6 considers the same three outcomes considered earlier

along with the baseline CHKS mobility measure for the 1980-2 cohorts, but adds to this

base specification indicators for the child’s race and gender and, in columns 3, 6, and 9,

interactions of these with the income transmission measure. I do not present results for the

forward regression here, as with controls equation (7) is not valid. There is some evidence

here that race is an important factor – the standard deviation of income transmission implied

by the ELS data falls from 0.038 without controls to 0.023 when race is controlled and allowed

to interact with ✓c . However, the general conclusions that income transmission is positively

but weakly correlated with test score transmission, and somewhat more strongly correlated

with attainment transmission, are robust to the additional controls. There is no indication

that the omission of race leads me to substantially overstate the mediating role of human

capital.

   Appendix Table A7 explores the sensitivity of my main test score transmission results

to diﬀerent scaling choices. In column 2, I use the child’s test score in standard deviations,

rather than in percentiles. Column 3 rescales the test score in terms of the predicted earnings

associated with that score, as in Bond and Lang (forthcoming). Columns 4 and 5 return

to using the test score percentile but rescale parental income, using first the log of parental

income and then a predicted test score percentile given parental income. While the scale of

the coeﬃcients varies across these columns, the general pattern that ⇡c is correlated around

0.3 with ✓c is robust to each of the alternative scalings.




                                               v
A.5    Loosening the normality assumption

Most of my analysis is based on a mixed model, equation (12). I estimate this model by

maximum likelihood, under the assumption that ↵c and ⌘c are jointly normal, that ✏ic is also

normal and independent of the former two, and that all three are orthogonal to p̄c , pic                    p̄c ,

✓c , and the interactions p̄c ✓c and (pic            p̄c ) ✓c . The normality restrictions are unattractive,

however.

   In this appendix, I present an alternative, two-step estimator that does not rely on

normality. Unfortunately, it is very poorly behaved in the ELS sample.

   Specifically, I estimate separate regressions of children’s test scores on parental income in

each CZ. Samples are quite small – the median CZ has 85 observations, but 10% of CZs have

fewer than 20 observations. I discard CZs with 10 or fewer observations, the 1st percentile of

the sample. For all other CZs, I estimate ⇡
                                          ˆc and its associated standard error. In computing

the standard errors, I pool data from all CZs to estimate                  ✏,
                                                                           2    the residual variance; I do not

take account of the multi-stage nature of the sample, which almost certainly leads me to

understate the sampling error in ⇡
                                 ˆc .

   Appendix Figure A2 plots the ⇡
                                ˆc estimates and their confidence intervals against ✓c .

While there is a correlation, it is diﬃcult to see in the graph, as the individual ⇡
                                                                                   ˆc estimates

are extremely noisy. A regression of ⇡
                                     ˆc on ✓c yields coeﬃcient                        = 0.13, notably smaller

than seen earlier but highly significant. The residual from this regression is ⌘ˆc . It equals

⌘c plus a sampling error component, the distribution of which is estimated by the standard

error of ⇡
         ˆc . To estimate   ⌘,
                            2    then, I compute the variance across CZs of ⌘ˆc and subtract the

component implied by the estimated standard errors:

                                                     J
                                                     X              J
                                             1                    1X
                                 ˆ⌘2 =                     ⌘ˆc2       V̂ (ˆ
                                                                          ⇡c ) .                          (23)
                                         J       1                J
                                                     c=1            c=1


In practice, this is negative – the average of (conservatively estimated) sampling variances

is larger than the total variance of the coeﬃcients (after removing the component explained

by ✓c ). I interpret this as an indication that the available sample is too small to support

this sort of exercise – the noise in the estimated sampling variances is too large relative



                                                           vi
to the signal we are attempting to extract from the estimated coeﬃcients. The exercise

can perhaps be interpreted as evidence that normality assumptions are not leading me to

understate . However, for the full variance decomposition and estimation of the forward

regression (7), there is no alternative for my purposes to the normality assumption imposed

in the main text.


A.6    Non-cognitive skills

Finally, Appendix Table A8 presents an analysis of children’s non-cognitive skills. These

are drawn from batteries included in the the ELS 10th grade survey (panel A), the ECLS

5th grade student survey (panel B), and the ECLS 5th grade teacher survey (panel C). The

specific measures are:


ELS 10th grade survey. Each of the measures used is created by principal factor analysis
    from student responses to questions of the form “How often do these things apply to
    you?”, with response options “almost never,” “sometimes,” “often,” and “almost always.”
    Quotations are from National Center for Education Statistics (undated).



      Instrumental motivation. Intended to capture “motivation to perform well academ-
           ically in order to satisfy external goals like future job opportunities or financial
           security.” Based on three responses about whether the student studies in order
           to achieve long-run success.
      General eﬀort and persistence. Based on five questions characterizing eﬀort put
         into studying.
      General control beliefs. Intended to capture “expectations of success in academic
         learning.” Based on four responses characterizing the student’s self-perceived
         ability to achieve desired academic outcomes.
      Self eﬃcacy, math. Based on five responses characterizing the student’s self-perceived
           ability to succeed in math classes and his/her views about the importance of in-
           nate ability in math.
      Self eﬃcacy, reading. Based on five responses characterizing the student’s self-perceived
           ability to succeed in reading classes.



ECLS 5th grade student survey. Students rated 42 statements about their perceptions
   of themselves as “not at all true,” “a little bit true,” “mostly true,” and “very true.”
   These were averaged into several scales. Quotations are from Tourangeau et al. (2006).



                                              vii
     Perceived interest / competence in reading. Eight statements concerning “read-
         ing grades, the diﬃculty of reading work, and [the student’s] interest in and
         enjoyment of reading.”
     Perceived interest / competence in math. Eight statements concerning “math-
         ematics grades, the diﬃculty of mathematics work, and [the student’s] interest in
         and enjoyment of mathematics.”
     Perceived interest / competence in all school subjects. Six statements concern-
         ing “how well [the student] do[es] in ’all school subjects’ and [the student’s] en-
         joyment of ’all school subjects.” ’
     Perceived interest / competence in peer relations. Six statements concerning
         “how easily [the student] make[s] friends and get[s] along with children as well as
         their perception of their popularity.”
     Externalizing problem behaviors. Six statements concerning “externalizing prob-
         lem behaviors such as fighting and arguing ’with other kids,’ talking and disturb-
         ing others, and problems with distractibility.”
     Internalizing problem behaviors. Eight statements concerning “internalizing prob-
         lem behaviors such as feeling ’sad a lot of the time,’ feeling lonely, feeling ashamed
         of mistakes, feeling frustrated, and worrying about school and friendships."



ECLS 5th grade teacher survey. Teachers rated 26 statements about how often students
   exhibited certain social skills and behaviors as “never,” “sometimes,” “often,” and “very
   often.” These were averaged into several scales. Quotations are from Tourangeau et
   al. (2006).



     Approaches to learning. “Measures behaviors that aﬀect the ease with which chil-
        dren can benefit from the learning environment.” Based on seven items relating
        to “the child’s attentiveness, tax persistence, eagerness to learn, learning inde-
        pendence flexibility, [] organization ... [and] child follows classroom rules.”
     Self control. “Four items that indicate the child’s ability to control behavior by re-
          specting the property rights of others, controlling temper, accepting peer ideas
          for group activities, and responding appropriately to pressure from peers.”
     Interpersonal skills. “Five items that rate the child’s skill in forming and main-
         taining friendships; getting along with people who are diﬀerent; comforting or
         helping other children; expressing feelings, ideas, and opinions in positive ways;
         and showing sensitivity to the feelings of others.”
     Peer relations. This is a combination of the self-control and interpersonal scales.
     Externalizing problem behaviors. This scale “includes acting out behaviors”: six
         items “rate the frequency with which a child argues, fights, gets angry, acts im-
         pulsively, [] disturbs ongoing activities ... [and] talks during quiet study time.”
     Internalizing problem behaviors. Four items ask about “the apparent presence of
         anxiety, loneliness, low self-esteem, and sadness.”


                                             viii
For all of the non-cognitive items, I reverse-code so that higher values are better, then convert

to percentiles. I also present results for an overall non-cognitive skill index from each survey.

To form this, I convert each listed scale to a z-score, average them, then convert the average

to percentiles.

   Results are mixed. The       coeﬃcient on the parental income - CZ income transmission

interaction is generally small and not statistically significant, and frequently has the wrong

sign. For about half of the measures, there is statistically significant variation across CZs

in the return to parental income (i.e.,     ⌘   6= 0). Overall, there is little indication that

non-cognitive skills are important mediators of income-to-income transmission. The ECLS

teacher survey results, however, tell a diﬀerent story, with strong associations with income

transmission. This is not due to the use of diﬀerent measures in the child and teacher

surveys – even when the concepts overlap (e.g., for externalizing problem behaviors), results

are quite diﬀerent. It is not clear how to account for this discrepancy. It may indicate that

teachers in high-transmission CZs tend to be more biased in their assessments of low-income

children, but this is quite speculative.




                                                ix
Appendix Figure A1. Mean child outcomes by parental income, ELS

                                             A. Child family income percentile                                                                                  B. Child earnings percentile




                                                                                                                                                      50
                                                                                                   Child earnings (percentile from child family income)
                       60
        Child family income percentile
                                  55




                                                                                                                                          45
                         50




                                                                                                                            40
                45




                                                                                                               35
      40




                                                                                                   30
                       35




                                         0         20       40            60        80   100                                                               0        20      40            60        80   100
                                                         Parent income percentile                                                                                        Parent income percentile


                                             C. 12th grade math score percentile                                                                               D. Years of education at age 26


                                                                                                                      15.5
                  70
  12th grade math score percentile




                                                                                                                        15
                                                                                               Years of education at 26
                          60




                                                                                                           14.5
                50




                                                                                                14
      40




                                                                                                                      13.5
                  30




                                         0         20       40            60        80   100                                                               0        20      40            60        80   100
                                                         Parent income percentile                                                                                        Parent income percentile


Notes: Each point represents a single categorical response to the ELS parental income question,
assigned to the midpoint of the percentile range covered by that category. Y-axis plots means of
the indicated child outcome for each category. The hollow points represent the 0.2% of
observations reporting zero parental income. Child family incomes, earnings, and 12th grade
math scores are measured as percentiles of the national distributions.
Appendix Figure A2. CZ-level estimates of parental income – child test score transmission

               .5
   Test score transmission
             0 -.5




                             -.2           -.1                    0                    .1
                                                 Income transmission

                                   Estimated test score transmission            CI

Notes: Points represent individual CZs. The x-axis plots the CZ’s income transmission, as
measured by CHKS. The y-axis represents the coefficient of a regression of the child’s test score
percentile on the parents’ income percentile, estimated using data from a single CZ. Vertical
spikes show 95% confidence intervals. Dashed line represents a regression of the CZ test score
transmission coefficient on CZ income transmission, weighted by the inverse sampling variance
of the former.
Appendix Figure A3. Parental income to child outcome transmission, by CZ income
transmission (θ) decile

                                A. Income transmission                                                          B. Test score transmission
                .4




                                                                                                 .5
                .3




                                                                                                 .4
                                                                                    d child test score /
  d parent income




                                                                                     d parent income
  d child income /

            .2




                                                                                             .3
                .1




                                                                                                 .2
                                                              Slope = 0.644
                0




                                                                                                                                                Slope = 0.251




                                                                                                 .1
                           .2    .25     .3             .35        .4         .45                          .2      .25     .3             .35        .4         .45
                                              CHKS theta                                                                        CHKS theta




                 C. Children’s test scores and incomes                                                 D. Income transmission | test scores

                                                                                                  .3
                 .4




                                                                                                  .2
                      .3




                                                                                    ∂ parent income
   ∂ child test score




                                                                                    ∂ child income /
    ∂ child income /




                                                                                           .1
          .2




                                                                                                  0
                 .1




                                                              Slope = 0.733                                                                     Slope = 0.359
                                                                                                  -.1
                 0




                           .2     .25    .3             .35        .4         .45                          .2      .25     .3             .35        .4         .45
                                              CHKS theta                                                                        CHKS theta




Notes: CZs are divided into deciles based on CHKS’s income transmission (relative mobility)
measure. Figure plots coefficients and 95% confidence intervals for regressions estimated
separately for each decile. In Panel A, the regression is of the child’s income percentile (y) on the
parent’s income percentile (p). In Panel B, it is of the child’s test score percentile (s) on p, as in
Figure 2. In Panels C and D, y is regressed on s and p; Panel C shows the s coefficients and Panel
D shows the p coefficients. Each regression includes CZ fixed effects and uses ELS sampling
weights. Dashed lines show unweighted regressions of the decile coefficients on the decile mean
income transmission; their slopes are shown in the lower right of each panel.
 AppendixTable
Appendix    Table A1.
                  1. National relationship
                      Transmission         between income
                                     from parental parentaltoincome  and children's
                                                               children’s outcomes outcomes
                                                                                    at the national
 scores, by grade and subject
level, by sample, grade, and subject

                                     Math                     Reading                     Other
                             Coefficient       N       Coefficient       N        Coefficient       N
                                (1)           (2)         (3)           (4)          (5)           (6)
 ECLS-K
   K (spring)                    0.40       19,190         0.36      18,500
                                (0.01)                    (0.01)
    G1 (spring)                  0.41       16,370         0.37      16,080
                                (0.01)                    (0.01)
    G3                           0.42       14,180         0.43      14,090
                                (0.01)                    (0.01)
    G5                           0.43       11,140         0.43      11,130
                                (0.02)                    (0.02)
    G8                           0.42       9,210          0.44       9,150
                                (0.02)                    (0.02)
 HSLS
   G9                            0.32       20,170
                                (0.01)
    G11                          0.31       20,460
                                (0.01)
 ELS
   G10                           0.34       15,240         0.32      15,240
                                (0.01)                    (0.01)
    G12                          0.35       13,650
                                (0.01)
    Any college (*100)                                                               0.24         13,250
                                                                                    (0.01)
    College completion (*100)                                                        0.45         13,250
                                                                                    (0.02)
    Years of education (*100)                                                        1.87         13,250
                                                                                    (0.07)
    Income at 26                                                                     0.16         11,510
                                                                                    (0.01)

 Notes :Each
Notes:   Each entry
               entry represents
                      representsthethecoefficient from
                                        coefficient     a separate
                                                     from           weighted
                                                           a separate          least least
                                                                         weighted     squares regression
                                                                                           squares        of
                                                                                                    regression of
 the child's outcome   on family  income,   with commuting     zone  fixed effects.  Parental incomes,
the child's outcome on family income, with commuting zone fixed effects. Parental incomes, test         test
 scores, and
scores,  and child
              child incomes
                     incomesarearemeasured
                                    measured in percentile units,
                                                in percentile      scaled
                                                                units,    0-100.
                                                                        scaled     Any college
                                                                                 0-100.          and and
                                                                                         Any college
 college completion
college   completion are
                       arebinary,
                            binary,but
                                     butscaled as 0/100
                                          scaled         for readability;
                                                  as 0/100                yearsyears
                                                             for readability;     of education  is
                                                                                        of education  is
 multiplied by 100
multiplied      100forforthe
                          thesame
                              samereason.   Sample
                                      reason.  Samplesizes are rounded
                                                        sizes            to thetonearest
                                                                are rounded              10. 10.
                                                                                   the nearest
Appendix
Appendix Table 2.
               A2.  Income
                  Parent     transmission
                         income             in the
                                 - child income    ELS
                                                 relationships in the ELS

                                                                     (1)       (2)         (3)       (4)       (5)
 Parental income - CZ mean                                          0.16      0.16        0.17      0.16      0.17
                                                                   (0.01)    (0.01)     (0.01)     (0.01)    (0.01)
 CZ mean parental income                                            0.32      0.33        0.34                0.34
                                                                   (0.04)    (0.04)     (0.04)               (0.04)
 CZ income transmission (θ)                                                   -62.7      -65.2                -76.5
                                                                             (32.9)     (29.8)               (30.9)
 (Parental income - CZ mean)                                                  0.71        0.63      0.64      0.64
     * CZ income transmission (θ)                                            (0.20)     (0.16)     (0.20)    (0.16)
 CZ mean parental income                                                      1.08        1.27                1.34
     * CZ income transmission (θ)                                            (0.66)     (0.57)               (0.61)
 SD of parental income random coefficient (h)                                                                0.006
                                                                                                            (0.018)
 CZ effects                                                        None       None       RE         FE         RE
 Across-CZ distribution:
     SD of CHKS CZ income transmission (θCHKS)                                0.057     0.057      0.057     0.057
     SD of ELS income transmission (θELS)                                     0.040     0.036      0.036     0.037
     Coefficient of between-CZ regression of θCHKS on θELS                                                    1.52
                                                                                                             (0.37)
     R2                                                                                                       0.97
     Corr(θCHKS, θELS)                                                          1          1         1        0.99
     p-value, SD(h) = 0 / corr(θCHKS, θELS) = 1 (LR test)                                                     0.92

 Notes: Dependent
Notes:   Dependent variable
                     variable in in
                                 each column
                                    each  columnis theischild's familyfamily
                                                         the child's   incomeincome
                                                                               at age 26,
                                                                                        at inage
                                                                                               percentile units (0-
                                                                                                  26, in percentile
 100). Parental income  is also measured    in percentiles  (0-100).  Specifications labeled
units (0-100). Specifications are otherwise identical to those in Table 4; see notes to that    “RE”  and “FE”table for
 include Number
details. CZ random ofeffects  and fixed(rounded
                      observations       effects, respectively.
                                                    to the nearestSpecifications in columns 1, 2, and 4 are
                                                                      10) = 11,510.
 weighted using ELS sampling weights; columns 3 and 5 are unweighted. Standard errors are clustered at
 the CZ level. p-value in column 5 is for a likelihood ratio test of the mixed model against a random effects
 model with fixed coefficients (as in column 3, though estimated via maximum likelihood rather than
 generalized least squares). Number of observations (rounded to the nearest 10) = 11,510.
Appendix Table A3. Parental income and children’s educational attainment in the ELS
Appendix Table 3. Parental income and children's college enrollment in the ELS

                                                       Any college Exclude those         Exclude         2 year degree
                                                           (0/100)       with no        certificates        or more
                                                                      credentials at
                                                                           all
                                                         (1)     (2)   (3)      (4)      (5)      (6)      (7)      (8)
Parental income - CZ mean                              0.22 0.24 0.37 0.38              0.28     0.30     0.44     0.44
                                                      (0.01) (0.01) (0.02) (0.02)      (0.01)   (0.01)   (0.02)   (0.01)
CZ mean parental income                                0.49 0.48 0.78 0.79              0.69     0.70     0.98     0.99
                                                      (0.05) (0.04) (0.07) (0.07)      (0.06)   (0.05)   (0.07)   (0.06)
CZ income transmission (θ)                               -52    -51    -64      -67      -59      -59      -70      -68
                                                        (47) (41) (69)         (66)     (46)     (42)     (61)     (60)
(Parental income - CZ mean)                            -0.11 -0.20 0.37 0.32            0.12     0.08     0.60     0.56
     * CZ income transmission (θ)                     (0.20) (0.21) (0.29) (0.27)      (0.22)   (0.23)   (0.31)   (0.27)
CZ mean parental income                                0.97 0.93 1.42 1.42              1.02     1.01     1.42     1.41
     * CZ income transmission (θ)                     (0.91) (0.78) (1.37) (1.29)      (0.90)   (0.80)   (1.20)   (1.18)
SD of parental income random coefficient (h)                    0.10           0.07              0.09              0.05
                                                               (0.02)         (0.02)            (0.01)            (0.02)
Across-CZ distribution:
    SD of CZ income transmission (θ)                  0.06     0.06   0.06    0.06 0.06 0.06 0.06 0.06
    SD of p-attainment transmission (p)                <0      0.10   0.02    0.07 0.01 0.09 0.03 0.06
    Coefficient of regression of θ on p                       -0.06           0.22       0.04      0.51
                                                             (0.06)          (0.18)     (0.10)    (0.29)
      R2                                                       0.01           0.07       0.00      0.29
      Corr(θ, p)                                        1     -0.11     1     0.27   1   0.05  1   0.54
      p-value, SD(h) = 0 / corr(θ, π) = 1 (LR test)          <0.01           <0.01      <0.01      0.04

Notes : Specifications are as in Table 4, columns 3 (odd numbered columns here) and 5 (even numbered
Notes:  Specifications
 columns).                aretable
            See notes to that as infor
                                    Table   4, Dependent
                                       details. columns 3variables
                                                            (odd numbered
                                                                   are scaledcolumns     here) and
                                                                              as 0 for failures     5 (even
                                                                                                and 100  for
numbered     columns).   See  notes  to that  table for details. Dependent   variables    are scaled  as
 successes. Standard errors are clustered at the CZ level. Number of observations (rounded to the nearest 0 for
                                                                                                             10)
failures and
 = 13,250.    100  for  successes.   Columns     3-8 recode   some successes   from   columns    1-2 as   failures,
but are otherwise identical. Number of observations (rounded to the nearest 10) = 13,250.
Appendix Table A4. Models using CHKS’s measure of CZ-level transmission of parental
income to children’s college enrollment
 Appendix Table 4. CHKS education transmission measure and ELS educational attainment

                                                      Any   College Years of     Any    Any college            2 year
                                                    college graduate education college   exc. UG               degree
                                                    (0/100) (0/100)   (*100) credential certificates          or more
                                                                               (0/100)    (0/100)             (0/100)
                                                       (1)     (2)       (3)      (4)        (5)                 (6)
 Parental income - CZ mean                            0.23    0.45      1.85     0.38       0.29                0.44
                                                     (0.01)  (0.02)    (0.06)   (0.02)     (0.01)              (0.01)
 CZ mean parental income                              0.46    0.97      3.97     0.76       0.69                0.97
                                                     (0.04)  (0.06)    (0.25)   (0.06)     (0.05)              (0.06)
 CZ transmission of parental income to                 -71    -105      -461     -132        -52                -111
    children's college enrollment (θ)                 (28)    (39)     (146)     (32)       (34)                (35)
 (Parental income - CZ mean)                          0.29    0.66      2.84     0.57       0.36                0.63
    * CZ income-enrollment transmission (θ)          (0.13)  (0.18)    (0.70)   (0.18)     (0.14)              (0.17)
 CZ mean parental income                              1.10    2.09      9.13     2.35       0.81                2.05
    * CZ income-enrollment transmission (θ)          (0.53)  (0.79)    (2.93)   (0.64)     (0.65)              (0.70)
 SD of parental income random coefficient (h)         0.10    0.07      0.19     0.05       0.08                0.04
                                                     (0.01)  (0.03)    (0.12)   (0.02)     (0.01)              (0.02)
 Across-CZ distribution:
   SD of CHKS enrollment transmission (θ)            0.09      0.09        0.09        0.09         0.09        0.09
   SD of p-attainment transmission (p)               0.10      0.09        0.31        0.07         0.08        0.07
   Coefficient of regression of θ on p               0.22      0.59        0.22        0.80         0.38        1.02
                                                    (0.10)    (0.26)      (0.10)      (0.25)       (0.15)      (0.34)
    R2                                               0.06      0.39        0.63        0.45         0.14        0.64
    Corr(θ, p)                                       0.25      0.62        0.80        0.67         0.37        0.80
    p-value, SD(h) = 0 / corr(θ, π) = 1 (LR test)   <0.01      0.21        0.60        0.03        <0.01        0.10

 Notes : Specifications are as in Table 4, column 5. See notes to that table for details. Dependent variables in
Notes:
 columnsSpecifications     are asasin0Table
          1-2 and 4-6 are scaled              4, column
                                      for failures and 100 5,
                                                            forbut  use a different
                                                                successes; in column CZ-level   transmission
                                                                                     3, dependent  variable is years of
measure
 educationfor  θ. Seeby
           multiplied  notes
                         100. to  Tableerrors
                               Standard   4 forare
                                                 details.  Dependent
                                                    clustered            variables
                                                              at the CZ level.      in of
                                                                               Number  columns    1-2 and
                                                                                          observations       4-6 to
                                                                                                       (rounded   are
scaled  as  0 for failures
 the nearest 10) = 13,250.  and  100   for successes;    in  column    3, dependent   variable   is years  of
education multiplied by 100. Number of observations (rounded to the nearest 10) = 13,250.
Appendix
 Appendix Table A5.
          Table 5.    Alternative
                   Alternative     income transmission
                               transmission measures   measures

                                                                                                       Educational
                                           Child family income        12th grade math score
 Outcome                                                                                                attainment
                                               (percentile)                (percentile)
                                                                                                       (years*100)
 Transmission measure                       Base    Later    Causal    Base    Later Causal      Base Later Causal
                                             (1)      (2)      (3)      (4)      (5)    (6)        (7)      (8)     (9)
 Parental income - CZ mean                  0.17     0.17     0.17     0.33     0.33   0.33       1.86 1.86        1.87
                                           (0.01)   (0.01)   (0.01)   (0.01)   (0.01) (0.01)    (0.06) (0.06) (0.06)
 CZ mean parental income                    0.34     0.33     0.33     0.70     0.69   0.69       4.03 3.99        4.07
                                           (0.04)   (0.04)   (0.04)   (0.04)   (0.04) (0.04)    (0.26) (0.26) (0.25)
 CZ income transmission (θ)                  -76      -57      -77      -73      -66    -80      -410 -429 -351
                                            (31)     (28)     (29)     (28)     (24)   (25)      (237) (220) (251)
 (Parental income - CZ mean)                0.64     0.61     0.59     0.41     0.27   0.19       2.35 2.45        1.54
   * CZ income transmission (θ)            (0.16)   (0.16)   (0.18)   (0.17)   (0.16) (0.18)    (1.09) (1.07) (1.14)
 CZ mean parental income                    1.34     1.10     1.41     1.20     1.15   1.35       9.67 9.64        8.51
   * CZ income transmission (θ)            (0.61)   (0.56)   (0.55)   (0.56)   (0.49) (0.52)    (4.73) (4.44) (4.96)
 SD of parental income random               0.01     0.01     0.00     0.07     0.07   0.07       0.22 0.23        0.25
   coefficient (h)                         (0.02)   (0.02)   (0.01)   (0.02)   (0.02) (0.02)    (0.13) (0.13) (0.13)
 Across-CZ distribution:
   SD of CZ income transmission (θ)         0.06     0.06 0.05         0.06 0.06       0.05      0.06     0.06   0.05
   SD of p-outcome transmission (p)         0.04     0.04 0.03         0.07 0.07       0.07      0.25     0.27   0.27
   Coefficient of regression of θ on p      1.52     1.52 1.67         0.26 0.18       0.10      0.12     0.12   0.06
                                           (0.37)   (0.44) (0.49)     (0.12) (0.11)   (0.09)    (0.11)   (0.10) (0.06)
   R2                                       0.97     0.93 1.00         0.11 0.05       0.02      0.27     0.29   0.09
   Corr(θ, p)                               0.99     0.96 1.00         0.32 0.22       0.14      0.52     0.54   0.30
   p-value, SD(h) = 0 (LR test)             0.92     0.82 0.99         0.00 0.00       0.00      0.33     0.36   0.26

 Notes :Columns
Notes:   Specifications
                     1, 4,areand
                              as in Table 4, column
                                 7 correspond,        5; see that table
                                                    respectively,       for details.
                                                                     to Table        Columns1;1,Table
                                                                                8, column         4, and 4,
                                                                                                         7 use CHKS's
                                                                                                            column  5;
 preferred income   transmission    measure,  as in Table 4. Columns    2, 5, and 8  use
and Table 6, column 4. Columns 2, 5, and 8 use an alternative income transmission measurean alternative measure
 computed from
computed    fromthethe1983-5
                        1983-5 birth  cohorts.
                                    birth      Columns
                                          cohorts.       3,6, and3,6,
                                                     Columns       9 use Chetty
                                                                       and  9 useandChetty
                                                                                      Hendren's
                                                                                             and"causal"   measure based
                                                                                                   Hendren's
 on children who move across CZs.
(forthcoming) "causal" measure based on children who move across CZs.
Appendix  Table6.A6.
Appendix Table       Intergenerational
                 Parental income - child transmission  in the ELS,
                                         outcome relationships in thewith
                                                                     ELS,race andcontrols
                                                                          adding   genderforcontrols
                                                                                              race and gender

                                                    Child income           12th grade math      Years of education
                                                                                score               at 26 (*100)
                                                   (1)      (2)  (3)      (4)    (5)    (6)      (7)     (8)    (9)
Parental income - CZ mean                         0.17     0.15 0.15     0.33 0.28 0.28         1.86 1.73 1.74
                                                 (0.01)   (0.01)
                                                               (0.01)   (0.01) (0.01) (0.01)   (0.06) (0.06) (0.06)
CZ mean parental income                           0.34     0.28 0.27     0.70 0.57 0.56         4.03 3.66 3.67
                                                 (0.04)   (0.04)
                                                               (0.04)   (0.04) (0.04) (0.04)   (0.26) (0.28) (0.28)
CZ income transmission (θ)                         -76      -55  -42      -73    -56 -77        -410 -436 -476
                                                  (31)     (31) (35)     (28) (25) (34)        (237) (261) (277)
(Parental income - CZ mean)                       0.64     0.45 0.40     0.41 0.13 0.22         2.35 1.95 2.20
    * CZ income transmission (θ)                 (0.16)   (0.15)
                                                               (0.16)   (0.17) (0.16) (0.18)   (1.09) (0.96) (1.00)
CZ mean parental income                           1.34     1.07 0.89     1.20 0.95 1.22         9.67 9.86 10.79
    * CZ income transmission (θ)                 (0.61)   (0.60)
                                                               (0.63)   (0.56) (0.51) (0.62)   (4.73) (5.23) (5.44)
SD of parental income random coefficient (h)      0.01     0.00 0.00     0.07 0.06 0.06         0.22 0.17 0.17
                                                 (0.02)   (0.02)
                                                               (0.02)   (0.02) (0.02) (0.02)   (0.13) (0.15) (0.17)
Race and gender                                              X    X               X      X                X      X
Race and gender X income transmission                             X                      X                       X
p-value, SD(h) = 0 (LR test)                      0.92    0.96 0.96     <0.01 0.02 0.02         0.33 0.18 0.19

Notes : Columns 1, 4, and 7 correspond, respectively, to Table 8, column 1; Table 4, column 5; and Table 6,
Notes:
column Columns
         6. Columns1,2, 4,
                         5, and
                            and 87add
                                   correspond,    respectively,
                                      indicators for              to Table
                                                     black, Hispanic,        8, column
                                                                      and female;  columns1;3,Table
                                                                                               6, and 4,  column
                                                                                                      9 also add 5;
and  Table 6,
interactions  of column    4. Columns
                 these variables          2, 5, income
                                 with CZ-level  and 8 add    indicators
                                                        transmission.    for black,
                                                                      Standard  errorsHispanic,    and
                                                                                       are clustered     female;
                                                                                                     at the CZ level.
columns    3,  6, and  9  also add  interactions    of these  variables  with   CZ-level    income    transmission.
Number of observations (rounded to the nearest 10) = 11,510 for child income, 13,650 for 12th grade test scores,
Standard
and 13,250errors    areofclustered
             for years    education. at the CZ level. Number of observations (rounded to the nearest 10)
= 11,510 for child income, 13,650 for 12th grade test scores, and 13,250 for years of education.
Appendix
Appendix Table
         Table A7. Sensitivity
               7. Sensitivity of of test score
                                 parental      transmission
                                           income  - test scoretotransmission
                                                                  alternative scalings
                                                                               to alternative scalings

Scaling of parental income                                    %ile    %ile       %ile         Log   Predicted
                                                                                           (income) test score
                                                                                                      %ile
Scaling of child's test score                                 %ile       Z- Predicted        %ile        %ile
                                                                      score earnings
                                                                      (*10)   %ile
                                                               (1)      (2)    (3)             (4)        (5)
Parental income - CZ mean                                     0.33     0.11   0.08            2.28       0.85
                                                             (0.01)   (0.00) (0.00)         (0.08)      (0.03)
CZ mean parental income                                       0.70     0.24   0.16            5.26       1.79
                                                             (0.04)   (0.01) (0.01)         (0.27)      (0.09)
CZ income transmission (θ)                                    -72.6    -24.0  -18.0          -66.4      -152.8
                                                             (27.8)    (9.6)  (7.2)         (43.3)      (65.8)
    * (Parental income - CZ mean)                             0.41     0.15   0.10            2.30       0.99
                                                             (0.17)   (0.06) (0.04)         (1.25)      (0.42)
    * CZ mean parental income                                 1.20     0.39   0.30            6.03       2.81
                                                             (0.56)   (0.19) (0.14)         (4.06)      (1.34)
SD of parental income random coefficient (h)                  0.07     0.03   0.02            0.56       0.15
                                                             (0.02)   (0.01) (0.00)         (0.11)      (0.04)
Across-CZ distribution:
  SD of CZ income transmission (θ)                            0.06 0.06          0.06        0.06        0.06
  SD of parental income-test score transmission (p)           0.07 0.03          0.02        0.57        0.16
  Coefficient of between-CZ regression of θ on p              0.26 0.65          1.07        0.02        0.12
                                                             (0.12) (0.29)      (0.50)      (0.01)      (0.06)
    R2                                                        0.11 0.10          0.11        0.05        0.12
    Corr(θ, p)                                                0.32 0.31          0.33        0.23        0.34
    p-value, SD(h) = 0 / corr(θ, π) = 1 (LR test)            <0.01 <0.01        <0.01       <0.01        0.02

Notes:
 Notes Column
        : Column1 1isisfrom
                         fromTable
                                Table4,4,column
                                           column5.5.See  notes to Table
                                                       Subsequent         4 forvary
                                                                    columns      details. Subsequent
                                                                                    the scaling of thecolumns vary
                                                                                                       dependent
the  scaling of the dependent      variable  (the 12th  grade  math score)   or the parental income  measure.
 variable (the 12th grade math score) or the parental income measure. Standard errors are clustered at        Number
ofthe
    observations  (rounded
      CZ level. p-value        to therow
                           in final    nearest  10)aranges
                                          is from           fromratio
                                                     likelihood  13,590
                                                                      testtoof13,650.
                                                                               the mixed model against a random
 effects model with fixed coefficients. Number of observations (rounded to the nearest 10) ranges from
 13,590 to 13,650.
Appendix
 Appendix Table A8.
          Table 8.   Transmission
                   Parental         of parental
                            income and children'sincome  to children’s
                                                   non-cognitive skills innon-cognitive
                                                                           the ELS      skills

                                              Parental SD of parental              Coefficient
                                                                                                p-value,
                                   Parental income *       income                       of
                                                                        Corr(θ, p)             LR test of
                                   income CZ income        random                  regression
                                                                                               SD(h) = 0
                                           transmission coefficient (h)             of θ on p
                                     (1)        (2)           (3)          (4)         (5)        (6)
Panel A: ELS (10th grade)
Instrumental motivation             0.09        0.07          0.03         0.16       0.36        0.26
                                   (0.01)      (0.16)        (0.01)                  (0.74)
General effort and persistence      0.09        -0.05         0.06        -0.05       -0.05       0.02
                                   (0.01)      (0.21)        (0.02)                  (0.23)
General control beliefs             0.14        -0.23         0.05        -0.24       -0.25      <0.01
                                   (0.01)      (0.19)        (0.02)                  (0.28)
Self-efficacy - Math                0.11        0.16          0.03         0.31       0.61        0.21
                                   (0.01)      (0.14)        (0.01)                  (0.66)
Self-efficacy - Reading             0.14        -0.45         0.07        -0.37       -0.30       0.02
                                   (0.01)      (0.23)        (0.02)                  (0.25)
Index of five measures              0.14        -0.16         0.05        -0.19       -0.21      <0.01
                                   (0.01)      (0.18)        (0.02)                  (0.28)
Panel B: ECLS-K 5th grade student survey
Perceived interest / competence     0.05       -0.18          0.05        -0.21       -0.23      <0.01
 in reading                        (0.01)      (0.21)        (0.01)                  (0.28)
Perceived interest / competence     0.02        0.07          0.04         0.11       0.17        0.44
 in math                           (0.01)      (0.16)        (0.02)                  (0.45)
Perceived interest / competence     0.08        0.11          0.05         0.13       0.14        0.04
 in all school subjects            (0.01)      (0.21)        (0.01)                  (0.27)
Perceived interest / competence     0.07        -0.34         0.04        -0.45       -0.59       0.10
 in peer relations                 (0.01)      (0.17)        (0.02)                  (0.50)
Externalizing problem behaviors     0.19        0.03          0.01         0.19       1.41        0.85
                                   (0.01)      (0.12)        (0.01)                  (8.11)
Internalizing problem behaviors     0.18        -0.39         0.05        -0.41       -0.42      <0.01
                                   (0.01)      (0.17)        (0.01)                  (0.23)
Index of six measures               0.20        -0.26         0.03        -0.43       -0.72       0.17
                                   (0.01)      (0.17)        (0.02)                  (0.86)

 Table continued
Table  continued ononnext page
                       next page
Appendix  Table A8 (cont’d.)
Table A8 (continued)


                                                Parental SD of parental              Coefficient
                                                                                                  p-value,
                                     Parental income *       income                       of
                                                                          Corr(θ, p)             LR test of
                                     income CZ income        random                  regression
                                                                                                 SD(h) = 0
                                             transmission coefficient (h)             of θ on p
                                     (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)        (5)          (6)
 Panel C: ECLS-K 5th grade teacher survey
 Approaches to learning             0.19          0.58            0.06         0.51        0.44        0.02
                                   (0.01)        (0.18)          (0.02)                   (0.20)
 Self-control                       0.15          0.72            0.06         0.57        0.45        0.01
                                   (0.01)        (0.18)          (0.02)                   (0.20)
 Interpersonal skills               0.15          0.22            0.05         0.25        0.28        0.16
                                   (0.01)        (0.17)          (0.02)                   (0.21)
 Peer relations (self-control &     0.15          0.52            0.06         0.50        0.47        0.03
  interpersonal)                   (0.01)        (0.18)          (0.01)                   (0.20)
 Externalizing problem behaviors    0.11          0.48            0.03         0.70        1.03        0.05
                                   (0.01)        (0.12)          (0.02)                   (0.60)
 Internalizing problem behaviors    0.11          -0.02           0.07         -0.01       -0.01      <0.01
                                   (0.01)        (0.20)          (0.01)                   (0.16)
 Index of six measures              0.21          0.59            0.07         0.47        0.37        0.02
                                   (0.01)        (0.21)          (0.02)                   (0.15)

 Notes : Each
Notes:   Each row
               rowpresents
                    presentsa single mixed
                               a single     model
                                         mixed      regression,
                                                  model         estimated
                                                         regression,       without sampling
                                                                       estimated    without weights.
                                                                                            sampling  Dependent
                                                                                                        weights.
 variables are discrete responses, scaled so that higher numbers   are better and then converted
Dependent variables are discrete responses, scaled so that higher numbers are better and then    to percentiles
 between 0 and 100 (with discrete responses assigned to the midpoint of the relevant range). Indexes are
converted   to percentiles between 0 and 100 (with discrete responses assigned to the midpoint of
 constructed by reversing the original response scale as necessary, converting to z-scores, averaging across
the relevant range). Indexes are constructed by reversing the original response scale as necessary,
 responses and then converting to percentiles. Standard errors are clustered at the CZ level.
converting to z-scores, averaging across responses and then converting to percentiles. Parental
incomes in columns 1-3 are deviated from the CZ mean. Standard errors are clustered at the CZ
level.
