                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                GEOGRAPHY AND AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTIVITY:
            CROSS-COUNTRY EVIDENCE FROM MICRO PLOT-LEVEL DATA

                                       Tasso Adamopoulos
                                        Diego Restuccia

                                       Working Paper 24532
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w24532


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2018




We thank Yikalo Araya for valuable research assistance, and Rui Castro, Chaoran Chen, Andrew
Dickens, Dave Donaldson, Doug Gollin, B. Ravikumar, Todd Schoellman, and Dietrich Vollrath
for comments and suggestions. We have benefited from comments received at the Growth
Conference in Montreal, the Ethiopian Economic Association Meetings in Addis Ababa, the
European Economic Association Meetings in Mannheim, the International Monetary Fund, the
World Bank, SED in Edinburgh, MadMac Madrid, and EEA/ESEM Lisbon. Adamopoulos and
Restuccia gratefully acknowledge the support from the Social Sciences and Humanities Research
Council of Canada. Restuccia also thanks the support from the Canada Research Chairs program.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Tasso Adamopoulos and Diego Restuccia. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Geography and Agricultural Productivity: Cross-Country Evidence from Micro Plot-Level
Data
Tasso Adamopoulos and Diego Restuccia
NBER Working Paper No. 24532
April 2018
JEL No. O1,O11,O13,O14,O4

                                          ABSTRACT

Why is agricultural productivity so low in poor countries relative to the rest of the world? Is it
due to geography or constrained economic choices? We assess the quantitative role of geography
and land quality for agricultural productivity differences across countries using high-resolution
micro-geography data and a spatial accounting framework. Our rich spatial data provide in each
cell of land covering the entire globe actual yields of cultivated crops and potential yields for 18
crops, which measure the maximum attainable output for each crop given soil quality, climate
conditions, terrain topography, and a level of cultivation inputs. While there is considerable
heterogeneity in land quality across space, even within narrow geographic regions, we find that
low agricultural productivity in poor countries is not due to poor land endowments. If countries
produced current crops in each cell according to potential yields, the rich-poor agricultural yield
gap would virtually disappear, from more than 200 percent to less than 5 percent. We also find
evidence of additional productivity gains attainable through the spatial reallocation of production
and changes in crop choices.


Tasso Adamopoulos
York University
Canada
aadamo@yorku.ca

Diego Restuccia
Department of Economics
University of Toronto
150 St. George Street
Toronto, ON M5S 3G7
CANADA
and NBER
diego.restuccia@utoronto.ca
1       Introduction

Understanding the large differences in output per worker across rich and poor countries is a funda-
mental issue on the research agenda in economics. It is now well understood that the cross-country
differences in real agricultural output per worker are considerably larger than those at the aggregate
level, particularly when comparing rich to poor countries.1 Why is agricultural productivity so low
in poor countries? The answer to this question has important implications for poverty reduction,
welfare, structural transformation, and development.

There are two broad possible explanations for the rich-poor disparity in real agricultural productiv-
ity. First, due to varied institutions, constraints, frictions, or policies, poor countries make different
economic choices in agriculture than rich countries, affecting the level of inputs used, the technol-
ogy adopted, or the allocation of inputs across farmers. Second, due to unfortunate endowments,
featuring poor land quality, rugged geography, and arid lands, poor countries may have a natural
disadvantage in agriculture. Understanding which of these two broad explanations is the source
of low agricultural productivity in poor countries is essential and has dramatically different impli-
cations for policy. The vast majority of research has focused on the first set of explanations of
constrained economic decisions affecting agricultural productivity in poor countries.2 The role of
land quality and geography, while often presumed and invoked in public debates on development,
is largely unexplored on a systematic cross-country basis, perhaps due to lack of data availability.

In this paper, we systematically quantify the role of geography and land quality for agricultural
productivity differences across 162 countries, using the best currently available data. In particular,
we use high-resolution gridded micro-geography data, covering the entire globe, from the Global
Agro-Ecological Zones (GAEZ) project of the Food and Agricultural Organization (FAO). A cell
    1
     See, for instance, Gollin et al. (2002) and Restuccia et al. (2008).
    2
     Some of the explanations include: low intermediate input use Restuccia et al. (2008); poor transport infrastruc-
ture Adamopoulos (2011); misallocation of labor between agriculture and non-agriculture Restuccia et al. (2008),
selection Lagakos and Waugh (2013), misallocation of factors across farms within agriculture Adamopoulos and
Restuccia (2014), international transport frictions Tombe (2015), idiosyncratic risk Donovan (2016), among others.

                                                         2
of land in the gridded data is roughly a 10 by 10 kilometer plot, and should not be confused with
plots of land operated by individual farms, which in poor countries would typically be much smaller
than a cell plot. GAEZ provides land quality attributes, and actual yields (physical output per
unit of land) by crop on each cell of land in the world. Importantly, the data also reports for
each cell potential yields for all the main crops, including those crops not actually produced in the
cell. The data on potential yields by crop are generated by combining cell -specific land quality
attributes with established crop-specific agronomic models, for a given level of water supply and
cultivation inputs. We develop a simple spatial-accounting framework that allows us to aggregate
up from the cell-crop–level resolution to the country–level. The analysis imposes minimal structure,
using the detailed data through a series of relevant counterfactuals to determine to what extent low
land productivity in poor countries is the result of unfortunate geography or the result of deliberate
economic choices given their geography, in terms of what crops are produced, how efficiently they are
produced, and where they are produced within the country. While we find evidence of considerable
heterogeneity in land quality, even within narrow geographic regions, our main finding is that, at
the aggregate level, low agricultural productivity in poor countries is not due to poor land quality
and geography. If both rich and poor countries could produce according to their potential yields
given their internal distribution of land quality, the rich-poor agricultural yield gap would virtually
disappear, from more than 200 percent to less than 5 percent. Our evidence indicates that the yield
gap is primarily due to low efficiency at the cell level. Crop choices within cells and the location of
crop production within a country play an important but secondary role.

A distinctive feature of agriculture is that it is an activity that takes place across space, using
location-specific inputs such as soil quality, climate conditions, and terrain topography.3 These
inputs could matter not only for what yield a farmer gets for any crop cultivated, but also for what
crops are ultimately cultivated on each cell (see e.g. Holmes and Lee, 2012) and what cells are used
   3
    In contrast to agriculture, the quality of land is less of a factor for manufacturing plants or service-sector
establishments.




                                                        3
for agricultural production. Traditional measures of land quality in cross-country comparisons, such
as the percentage of agricultural land classified as arable or cropland, or the percentage of arable
land or cropland that is irrigated face two main problems. First, they can be affected by economic
decisions and hence are not exogenous. Second, they are average measures for the whole country
and may confound important within-country spatial variation in land quality. To the best of our
knowledge, our paper is the first systematic quantitative assessment of the role that differences
in geography and land quality play in understanding agricultural productivity differences across
countries using explicitly spatial micro-geography data.

Given the data from GAEZ, the measure of agricultural productivity that we focus on is real
agricultural output per unit of cultivated land, also known as land productivity or yield.4 While
cross-country differences in aggregate yields account only for a portion of agricultural labor produc-
tivity differences, yields encapsulate the role of land quality and geography.5 In fact, the measure
of potential yield we focus on should be understood as a measure of potential TFP, given a level
of inputs. Further, yields have implications for the other component of labor productivity, average
farm size. To put this into perspective, note that differences in agricultural TFP of a factor of
3-fold due to land endowments or efficiency in production would trigger a substantial process of
reallocation and structural change with much larger variations in average farm size and agricultural
labor productivity (see for instance Adamopoulos and Restuccia 2014).
   4
      We consider two types of yield measures. First, the average yield over groups of crops, measured as the total
value of crops—evaluated at a common set of international crop prices from the FAO—over the total amount of
cultivated land. Second, physical output in tonnes per unit of land for individual crops. Our data permit us to
construct the average and the individual crop yields both at the cell-level and at the country-level. The upside of
our first measure is that it allows us to construct summary measures of overall agricultural productivity across plots
and countries. The upside of our second measure is that it allows us to compare the same good across plots and
countries (“apples for apples”) without the need for aggregation using international prices. In a robustness section
we also value crops according to caloric content which has more relevance for poor countries.
    5
      The remaining differences in output per worker in agriculture are accounted for by the land to labor ratio, which
since most of the labor in agriculture reflects the family farm, the land to labor ratio is roughy proportional to farm
size,
                                              Output     Output     Land
                                                      =          ×        .
                                               Labor      Land      Labor




                                                          4
We develop a simple quantitative spatial-accounting framework to decompose the economy-wide
aggregate yield into the contributions of: (i) within cell-crop efficiency, and (ii) across cell-crop
efficiency. In particular, we consider a world in which each country consists of a given number of
cells of land. Each cell can produce any of a given number of crops. However, cells of land are
heterogeneous with respect to their inherent suitability in producing each crop. In the data we
capture a cell’s suitability in producing a given crop by its potential yield from GAEZ. We show
that a country’s aggregate yield—the ratio of the real value of its output to the total cultivated
land—can be expressed as a weighted average of the cell-crop yields valued at common prices, where
the weights are the cell-crop land shares. The economy-wide aggregate yield is obtained if actual
yields are used in this expression.

We use this simple expression for the aggregate yield—as a weighted average of cell-crop yields—to
construct counterfactual yields for each country. In our main counterfactual we assess the role of
production efficiency by keeping the cell-crop land shares fixed to the actual data but allowing the
corresponding crops in each cell to be produced according to their potential yields rather than their
actual yields. This counterfactual is relevant in assessing the role of geography and land quality
because potential yields summarize how detailed geographical attributes translate into productivity.
If the disparity in aggregate yields across countries is similar under potential yields than with actual
yields, then this counterfactual would tell us that most of the variation in actual aggregate yields
is due to geography and land quality differences. We find quite the opposite. We find that if
countries produced according to potential rather than actual in each cell-crop, the aggregate yield
disparity between the richest and poorest 10 percent of countries would drop from 214 percent to
5 percent. In other words, the productivity disparity would virtually disappear. Across our entire
sample of countries this counterfactual potential yield does not systematically vary with the level
of GDP per capita. We also show that this basic finding is robust to: weighing crops according
to their caloric content (rather than FAO international prices); using unconstrained agro-climatic
yields; using alternative (common) level of cultivation practices and inputs; and, using alternative


                                                   5
(common) water supply assumptions.

We also assess the productivity improvements that would result from the spatial reallocation of crop
production exploiting locations’ comparative advantages but holding the country-level land share
of each crop to its actual level. While we find that spatial reallocation would raise productivity in
both rich and poor countries, such a reallocation would not disproportionately affect poor countries.
Finally, we assess the effects of total efficiency, where each cell in each country is allowed to produce
the highest value yielding crop. We find that if countries produced in each cell the highest potential
yielding crops then the rich-poor aggregate yield disparity would drop further and turn to a gain
of 23 percent for poor countries (i.e., the rich to poor ratio falls to 0.77-fold). The implication of
this counterfactual is that poor countries produce systematically lower yielding crops given their
land quality. From the overall reduction from the 3.14-fold actual yield gap to the counterfactual
0.77-fold yield gap, 80 percent is accounted for by improved production efficiency within each crop-
cell. Our findings suggest that poor land quality is not the source of low agricultural productivity
in poor countries. Instead, it is the economic choices made by poor countries in terms of what is
produced, how it is produced, and where it is produced given their geography, that lies behind their
low productivity problem.

Our paper contributes to the growing literature studying real agricultural productivity differences
across countries. One branch of this literature, including Restuccia et al. (2008), Adamopoulos
(2011), Lagakos and Waugh (2013), Adamopoulos and Restuccia (2014), Tombe (2015), Donovan
(2016) among others, has used quantitative models to assess the contribution of particular factors
that can affect either the level of inputs used in agriculture or their allocation. Another branch of
this literature has focused on measuring sectoral agriculture to non-agriculture productivity gaps
across countries (Herrendorf and Schoellman 2015, Gollin et al. 2014b) or cross-country agricultural
productivity disparities (Prasada Rao 1993, Restuccia et al. 2008, Gollin et al. 2014a). While our
paper is also about measurement, we differ from the above literature in two important ways. First,



                                                   6
we focus on measuring the role of land quality and geography for real agricultural productivity gaps.
Second, we use spatially explicit micro-geography data to measure actual and potential agricultural
yield gaps across countries.

Importantly, our paper is also related to the literature that studies cross-country differences in
aggregate land quality indices and their effect on agricultural productivity. While traditional mea-
sures of land quality, such as the Peterson Index, were subject to the criticism that they included
components that were not exogenous, more recent efforts have focused on measures that are af-
fected less by economic decisions. For instance, Wiebe (2003) constructs a land quality index which
utilizes soil and climate properties to classify a country’s cropland (a much more narrow concept
of land, already used for agricultural production).6 We differ from this approach in two ways: (a)
we exploit the explicit spatial nature of the micro-geography data in GAEZ, and (b) we use an
accounting framework which allows us to assess the contributions of land quality in accounting for
real agricultural productivity.

We are not the first economists to use the GAEZ data. Nunn and Qian (2011) use an earlier version
of the GAEZ data to assess the suitability of Old World regions for the cultivation of the potato, in
order to estimate the effect of the potato on population and urbanization. Costinot et al. (2016) use
the GAEZ data to study the effects of projected climate change on aggregate output through the
evolution of comparative advantage and the accompanying adjustments in production and trade.
Costinot and Donaldson (2012) use the GAEZ data to test the Ricardian theory of comparative
advantage. Costinot and Donaldson (2016) use it to study the gains from economic integration
within the United States.7 To the best of our knowledge, our paper is the first to exploit the GAEZ
data to study the macro-level implications of land quality endowments for cross-country differences
   6
     Wiebe and Breneman (2000) use the same underlying data to construct a complementary measure of land quality:
the share of a country’s cropland that is not limited by major soil or climate constraints to agricultural production
(cropland in the highest three land quality classes). This measure is a fraction and ranges from 0 to 1. They include
this measure in a regression to study the effect of land quality on agricultural labor productivity.
   7
     Donaldson and Storeygard (2016) provide an excellent general survey on the use of high-resolution spatial data
in economics.



                                                         7
in real agricultural productivity, an issue that is paramount for understanding the foundation of
poverty across the world.

The paper proceeds as follows. The next section describes the GAEZ data in some detail and
provides some observations on land quality dispersion across countries. In Section 3 we outline
the spatial accounting framework, describe our counterfactuals, and present our main findings.
Section 4 performs robustness analysis of our main results with respect to using caloric content of
crops instead of international FAO prices in aggregation, using the agro-climatic yield instead of
the potential yield, and making different assumptions about the level of inputs and water supply
conditions in calculating potential yields across countries. We conclude in Section 5.




2     Data

We first describe the details of the data we use and then we characterize differences in individual
land quality characteristics across countries, based on this data.



2.1    Description


We use gridded micro-geography data from the Global Agro-Ecological Zones (GAEZ) project,
developed by the Food and Agricultural Organization (FAO) in collaboration with the International
Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA); and aggregate cross-country income data from the
Penn World Table (PWTv6.3). GAEZ is a standardized framework for the characterization of
climate, soil, and terrain conditions relevant for agricultural production. GAEZ combines state-of-
the-art established agronomic models by crop, that account for science-based biophysical growing
requirements for each crop, with high resolution spatial data on geographic attributes.




                                                  8
The information in GAEZ is available at the 5 arc-minute resolution. To picture it, imagine super-
imposing a grid of about 9 million cells or pixels covering the entire world. Figure 1 displays a
grid map of the Montreal and Toronto area in Canada, based on cells of different resolutions, where
the pink grid represents a 5-arc min; the blue grid a 30-arc min; and the black grid a 60-arc min.
While the size of each cell is constant at 5 arc-minutes in the data, it is not constant in terms of
squared kilometers or hectares, as the mapping from arc-minutes to square kilometers depends on
the distance from the equator (latitude). As a rough approximation the size of each cell can be
described as 10 × 10 kilometers.

                      Figure 1: Grid Resolution Example Montreal-Toronto Area




Notes: The pink grid represents a 5-arc min; the blue grid a 30-arc min; and the black grid a 60-arc min.


For each cell in the grid, GAEZ reports data on the following location-specific geographic attributes
that are important for agricultural production: (1) soil quality, which includes depth, fertility,
drainage, texture, chemical composition; (2) climate conditions, which include temperature, sun-
shine hours, precipitation, humidity, and wind speed; and (3) terrain and topography, which include

                                                        9
elevation and slope. In addition, for each crop GAEZ classifies each cell according to the extent of
its soil, terrain, climate constraints for the production of that crop. The same information is used to
construct a crop-specific suitability index, which summarizes biophysical limitations in producing
each crop. Most importantly for our purposes, GAEZ calculates a potential yield for each crop in
each cell, measured as the maximum possible output (in tonnes) per hectare that can be attained
in the cell given the crop’s production requirements, the cell’s characteristics, and assumptions
about water supply conditions and cultivation practices. Therefore, potential yields represent total
factor productivity estimates given quantity and quality of inputs. Potential yields are calculated
pixel-by-pixel for all major crops, including those not actually produced in a particular cell.

There are two key ingredients that go into the GAEZ estimation of potential yields for each crop in
each cell. First, the detailed micro-geography characteristics on soil quality, climate, and topography
outlined above for that particular cell. Second, crop-specific agronomic models that reflect each
crop’s biophysical requirements for growth. The parameters of the agronomic models capture how
a particular set of geographic conditions maps into any given crop’s yield. These parameters are
based on well tested field and lab experiments by agricultural research institutes, are established
in the agronomic literature, and are updated to reflect the latest state of scientific knowledge. We
stress that the agronomic model parameters are not based off a regression analysis of observed
choices on outputs and inputs across countries, regions, or farms, an analysis that would be subject
to serious endogeneity issues.

Potential yields are reported for alternative configurations of water supply conditions (irrigated,
rain-fed, and total which includes both rain fed and irrigated) and type of cultivation practices
(input intensity use and management).8 The idea is that the resulting yield for each crop on each
   8
    Low level of inputs (traditional management) assumes subsistence based farming, labor intensive techniques, no
application of nutrients, chemicals, and pesticides. Intermediate level of inputs (improved management) assumes
partly market oriented farming, improved varieties with hand tools and/or animal traction, some mechanization,
medium labor intensity, use of some fertilizer, chemicals, and pesticides. High level of inputs (advanced management)
assumes mainly market oriented farming, high yield variety seeds, fully mechanized with low labor intensity, optimum
application of nutrients, chemicals, and pesticides as well as disease and weed control.



                                                         10
plot would depend not only on the “endowment” of land quality and geography but also on the set
of complementary inputs applied by the farmer. For this reason, we control for water supply and
cultivation practices by keeping them constant across cells and countries. In our main results, we
assume total water supply conditions and mixed level of inputs, which assumes high inputs on the
best land, intermediate inputs on moderately suitable land, and low inputs on marginal land. This
allows for a consistent quantification of potential land productivity around the world. We then show
that as long as assumptions on complementary inputs are held constant across countries, choosing
alternative assumptions does not alter our main conclusions.

Potential yields in GAEZ are calculated for both average historical climate conditions (with the
baseline reference period being 1960-1990), individual historical years 1901-2009, as well as projected
future climate conditions based on a number of climate models. In our analysis, we use potential
yields based on the average historical climate conditions, as they iron-out year-to-year idiosyncratic
weather shocks.

The GAEZ database also provides at the 5 arc-minute resolution, for the year 2000, data on crop
choice, actual production, actual area cultivated, and actual yield, i.e., tonnes of production per
hectare of the crop actually planted. The actual production data for each cell are estimated us-
ing a flexible iterative rebalancing methodology that sequentially down-scales regional agricultural
production statistics. The actual production data at the cell level are available for all major crops.
In addition, the database contains land cover data that classify land in each cell in terms of urban,
cultivated, forest, grassland and woodland, water bodies, and other uses.

The data set we work with has global coverage, consisting of 162 countries. In 2000, the countries
in our sample account for 87 percent of the world production of cereal in terms of acreage and 81
percent of the value of crop production.9 The count of grid cells (pixels) per country varies widely,
from as low as 5 (Antigua and Barbuda) to as high as 421,168 (Russia). The median country in
  9
      Based on data from FAOSTAT, available through http://www.fao.org/faostat/en/#data.



                                                    11
our data set consists of 2,827 cells. A complete list of the countries in our data set, along with
their cell counts, and their GDP per capita (from the Penn World Table) are provided in Table A.1
in the Appendix. Our analysis focuses on 18 main crops and commodity groups, that cover the
majority of produced crops across the world.10 In 2000 these crops accounted for 83 percent of the
entire world production of crops in terms of acreage, and 60 percent in terms of value of production
(based on data from FAOSTAT).

GAEZ provides the information for each variable in raster (grid cell) files, which we work with in
ArcGIS. To aggregate cell-level information to administrative units, such as regions, provinces, and
countries, we use shape files from the World Borders data set of “Thematic Mapping.”11



2.2     Land Characteristics across the World


We use the micro-geography data from GAEZ to illustrate the diversity of some key land quality and
geography characteristics across the world. We first illustrate these characteristics in a series of maps
constructed using ArcGIS, and then summarize them across countries in Table 1. Figure 2 classifies
the entire earth’s soil at the 5 arc-minute resolution according to its nutrient availability, which
captures soil properties such as texture (e.g., clay, silt, sand), organic carbon content, acidity (pH),
and the sum of sodium, calcium, magnesium and potassium. Nutrient availability is an important
indicator of soil fertility, particularly in environments with low application of intermediate inputs.
The classification determines how constrained the soil in each cell is in terms of its nutrient content,
ranging from no/slightly constrained (index value of 1) to very severely constrained (index value of
4).

Figure 3 documents the median altitude within each cell for the whole world. Altitude is an
  10
     The crops in our data set are: wheat, rice, maize, sorghum, millet, other cereals (barley, rye, oat, and other
minor cereals), tubers (white potato, sweet potato), roots (cassava, yam and cocoyam), sugarcane, sugarbeets, pulses
(chickpea, cowpea, dry pea, grams, pigeon-pea), soybean, sunflower, rapeseed, groundnut, oilpalm, olive, cotton.
  11
     Available through http://thematicmapping.org/downloads/world_borders.php.


                                                        12
             Soil Fertility
             Constraints
                   No or slight
                   Moderate
                   Severe
                   Very severe           0    3,200   6,400          12,800 Kilometers
                   Mainly non-soil
                   Premafrost zone
                   Water bodies      Source: Soil Resources, Land Resources, GAEZ.


                                             Figure 2: Soil Fertility


important indicator of terrain suitability for agricultural production, as it affects solar radiation,
oxygen availability as well as temperatures and moisture. The altitude varies tremendously across
the world, with a high of 6500 meters to a low of -415.

Figures 4 and 5 document mean annual temperature (in degrees Celsius) and annual precipitation
(in mm) at the pixel-level. Temperature is an example of an indicator of thermal regimes, while
rainfall is an example of an indicator of moisture regimes. Both thermal and moisture regimes are
important measures of agro-climatic conditions and serve as key inputs into the GAEZ methodology
in constructing crop-specific potential yields by cell. Again, these maps illustrate the wide diversity
of agro-climatic conditions across the world.

It is not surprising that there is such wide variation in land quality characteristics across the world.
Even within narrow geographic regions some locations are naturally advantaged in terms of one
or more characteristics, while others are naturally disadvantaged. The importance of a naturally


                                                          13
             Median Altitude
                                      0     3,200   6,400         12,800 Kilometers
                   High : 6563

                   Low : -415
                                 Source: Terrain Resources, Land Resources, GAEZ.


                                          Figure 3: Median Altitide


advantageous geographic environment for agricultural production at the plot level is ubiquitous.
However, agricultural productivity differences between the developed and developing world are often
framed at the country level. As a result, we are interested in whether the land quality characteristics
vary systematically across rich and poor countries and whether the differences in land quality have
a substantial impact in accounting for the agricultural productivity differences we observe across
these countries.

In order to examine the cross-country variation in land quality attributes in Table 1 we summarize
mean soil, terrain, and climate conditions for rich and poor countries—ordered by their real GDP
per capita—as well as the countries at the top and bottom end of the distribution of that charac-
teristic across the world. For soil quality conditions we present “fertility,” which captures nutrient
availability (same indicator as in Figure 2) and is measured as an index from 1 (unconstrained) to
4 (constrained), and “depth,” which captures rooting conditions, and is also measured as a 1 to
4 index. The terrain conditions we report are “slope,” measured as an index between 0 and 100,

                                                        14
             Mean Annual
             Temperature
                                          0    3,200   6,400          12,800 Kilometers
                  High : 31.2

                  Low : -30.52
                                 Source: Thermal Regimes, Agro-Climatic Resources, GAEZ.


                                          Figure 4: Mean Temperature


and “altitude” which measures mean elevation in meters (same as in Figure 3). The slope of a plot
is important, as it can affect for example the farming practices employed (standard mechanization
can be difficult on steep irregular slopes) and the extent of topsoil erosion. The climatic conditions
we report are “temperature,” measured in degrees Celsius (as in Figure 4), and “precipitation,”
measured in mm (as in Figure 5). The first two columns report the averages of these attributes
across countries in the richest and poorest deciles of the 162 countries in our sample, while the
third column reports the rich-to-poor ratio of the attribute. The fourth and fifth columns report
the averages over the countries with the top and bottom deciles of the cross-country distribution of
each attribute, and the last column reports the top-to-bottom ratio.

The mean of each attribute differs around 10 to 15 percent in each case between rich and poor
countries, except altitude where rich countries have 42 percent the mean altitude of poor countries
and temperature with rich countries having about half the mean temperatures of poor countries. To
put things in perspective, compare the rich-poor ratio (column 3) to the top-bottom ratio (column

                                                            15
             Annual
             Precipitation
                                          0     3,200   6,400         12,800 Kilometers
                   High : 5440

                   Low : 0
                                 Source: Moisture Regimes, Agro-Climatic Resources, GAEZ.


                                         Figure 5: Annual Precipitation


6). The variation in mean attributes across rich and poor countries is considerably more compressed
compared to the variation across the world in each attribute regardless of income. For instance,
the average altitude, precipitation, and temperature between the countries at the top and bottom
deciles in each case is a factor difference of more than 10-fold, whereas fertility, depth and slope
a factor of more than 2.5-fold. As a result the unconditional cross-country variation dwarfs the
rich-poor variation in each of the attributes.

We also note that even though there is considerable dispersion of land quality and geographic
attributes across the globe, there is also considerable heterogeneity observed even within countries.
Interestingly though, the internal dispersion of land quality attributes within rich and poor countries
is also not systematically different. For example, the mean of the standard deviations of soil fertility
is 1.12 in rich countries whereas it is 1.02 in poor countries.

To summarize, we find some variation between rich and poor countries in terms of soil, terrain, and


                                                            16
                          Table 1: Differences in Mean Geographical Attributes


                                                               (country obs. = 164)

                                  Rich 10%      Poor 10%       Ratio    Top 10%       Bottom 10%      Ratio

     Soil Quality
       Fertility (1-4 index)         2.37          2.19         1.08       3.32          1.10          3.02
       Depth (1-4 index)             2.19          1.93         1.14       3.40          1.07          3.18

     Terrain Conditions
       Slope (0-100 index)           72.0          78.5         0.92      96.1           37.9         2.54
       Altitude (meters)            342.8         824.0         0.42     1799.4         53.97         33.34

     Climate Conditions
       Temperature (◦ C)             12.3          23.2         0.53      27.5           2.6          10.78
       Precipitation (mm)           899.6         1074.9        0.84     2515.8         123.4         20.4

Notes: Top and bottom 10% refer to the average of the highest and lowest attributes in the country distribution for
each attribute, whereas Rich and Poor 10% refer to the average attributes of the richest and poorest countries in
terms of real GDP per capita.


climate attributes, but the variation is very small when compared to the variation in each attribute
across the world. Nevertheless, what matters for aggregate agricultural productivity is how the
dispersion in geographical attributes translates into differences in productivity across countries.

We note that agricultural productivity is the result of all geographical conditions combined and
differences in a single attribute may not matter as much. For instance, it may be that substantial
variation in a given geographical attribute only translates into minor differences in productivity
across countries. We are interested in whether all these geographic attributes taken together con-
tribute to systematically different growing conditions across countries and whether these differences
account for a substantial portion of the observed productivity gaps. For this reason, in the next
section we work with potential yields by plot and crop, as a summary measure of how dispersion
in geographical attributes translates into productivity differences—a measure of TFP in this con-
text since potential yields control for the level of farm inputs such as water and farming practice

                                                          17
conditions.




3      Accounting Framework


3.1     The Primitives


We consider a world that comprises a fixed number of administrative units indexed by u ∈ U ≡
{1, 2, ..., U }. These units are countries in our analysis but in general could be lower administrative
units within a country such as provinces, states, or counties. Each administrative unit u comprises
a finite number Gu of grid cells (or pixels) of fixed size—in the GAEZ data the grid cell resolution
is 5 arc-minutes.12 We index grid cells by g ∈ Gu ≡ {1, 2, ..., Gu }. Cells can be aggregated up to
various levels of administrative units (regions, countries, states, counties etc.) using a mapping of
cells to administrative boundaries in ArcGIS. Each grid cell can produce any of C crops, indexed
by c ∈ C ≡ {1, 2, ..., C}.

Cells are heterogeneous with respect to their land characteristics and as a result differ in the
productivity of the land across crops. In particular, a key object reported in the GAEZ data is the
potential yield or land productivity (tonnes per hectare) of each cell if it were to produce crop c.
                                                                                  c
We denote the potential yield from producing crop c in grid cell g in unit u by ẑgu . Note that for
each cell g in unit u there are C such numbers, each of which reflects the inherent productivity of
that cell in producing crop c.

In practice, the land in each cell can be used for crop production or some other activity (could be
agricultural such as raising livestock or non-agricultural, or some other land cover category). If a
portion of the land in a cell is used for crop production, it may produce one or several specific crops
  12
    As discussed earlier, note that while the size of a cell in arc-minutes is constant, it is not constant in terms of
hectares as the mapping from arc-minutes to hectares depends on the distance of the cell from the equator.



                                                          18
which may differ from the crops in which the cell has the highest potential yield. We denote by
 c
ygu the real output (in tonnes) and by `cgu the amount of cultivated land in hectares of crop c, cell
                             c
g, and unit u. We denote by zgu the actual yield which is just the ratio of real output to land,
 c     c
zgu = ygu /`cgu . For the purpose of aggregation, in any unit u and cell g, we set the amount of output
and land used to zero if there is no production of a given crop c.

Similarly for the purpose of aggregation of different crops in a location we denote by pc the inter-
national price of each crop which we treat as common across space and countries. Note also that
the size of each vector is C × 1, corresponding to the total number of crops in the GAEZ project
which is 18 crops. In each cell g all the vectors have non-zero elements only for the crops actually
produced. The only vectors that have all non-zero elements for every crop are the potential yield
and the common international price. The potential yield vector is specific to each cell g and unit u.



3.2    Aggregate Variables


We denote with upper case letters aggregate variables. There are different levels of aggregation that
are of interest but for the purpose of illustration we focus on aggregating to the administrative unit
level (country). We denote by Lu the amount of land used in agricultural production, given by,

                                                 XX
                                          Lu =              `cgu .
                                                 c∈C g∈Gu


We denote by Yu the amount of real agricultural output produced, given by,

                                                XX
                                         Yu =              pc ygu
                                                               c
                                                                  ,
                                                c∈C g∈Gu




                                                  19
Given these aggregates, we define the actual aggregate yield Zu by the ratio of aggregate real output
to land used, that is,

                                                     pc zgu
                                                         c c
                                     P      P
                              Yu      c∈C   g∈Gu            `gu       XX              `c
                                                                                  c c gu
                         Zu =    =                                =              p zgu .           (1)
                              Lu                Lu                    c∈C g∈Gu
                                                                                      Lu


The aggregate yield is a weighted average of the yields in every crop and location in a given country.
Equation (1) is the key equation in our accounting analysis as it provides the basis for assessing the
key determinants of low agricultural productivity in poor countries, that is, whether the differences
                                                                                           c
in aggregate yields arise from low actual yields of each crop in each location (i.e., low zgu ), from
not producing in the highest yielding locations across space, or from the low yielding crop mix in
each location.



3.3    Counterfactuals


We construct a set of counterfactuals on aggregate potential yields for each administrative unit u
by exploiting the set of potential yields by crop at the cell level g and the spatial distribution of
production by crop across cells.



Production efficiency The main counterfactual is to assess the impact on the aggregate yield
gap between rich and poor countries of producing at the potential yield for each crop and each
location. This counterfactual can be understood in equation (1) by simply replacing the actual
       c                                                             c
yield zgu for each crop for each cell by its potential counterpart ẑgu —highest attainable TFP given
water and farming inputs. Hence, in this counterfactual only the yield changes, while the weights
represented by the share of cultivated land of a crop in each location are kept constant `cgu /Lu . The




                                                     20
aggregate yield in this counterfactual is defined as,

                                                    XX               `c
                                                                c c gu
                                         Zucf   =              p ẑgu .
                                                    c∈C g∈Gu
                                                                     Lu


If the cross-country differences in the actual yield are similar under the production efficiency coun-
terfactual, then production efficiency at the crop/location level is not an important determinant of
the actual yield differences. But if instead, the cross-country differences under production efficiency
are negligible then geography and land quality are not important determinants of actual yield gaps
across rich and poor countries.



Spatial efficiency We assess the extent to which reallocation of agricultural production of the
different crops to the most productive locations across space can raise aggregate output. This coun-
terfactual combines production efficiency with a reallocation of crops across space. In particular,
we re-allocate production so that each crop is produced in the cells where it realizes the highest
potential yields, keeping constant the amount of cultivated land for that crop in the country to
the actual level, i.e., Lcu = g∈Gu `cgu . This allocation problem is non-trivial. Some cells within a
                             P

country may exhibit higher potential productivity for all crops, while the amount of land that can
be allocated to a given crop is limited. How will crops be reallocated to cells? We reallocate the
production of crops to cells according to comparative advantage in potential yields of the different
crops, i.e., where the relative potential return for each crop is the highest. Formally, this involves
solving a large-scale linear programming problem for each country, given by,

                                                 XX
                                          max             pc ẑgu
                                                               c c
                                                                  `gu ,                            (2)
                                          { gu } c∈C g∈Gu
                                           ` c




subject to
                                   X
                                         `cgu ≤ Lgu ,        g = 1, 2, ...Gu ;                     (3)
                                   c∈C




                                                        21
                                     X
                                           `cgu ≤ Lcu ,    c = 1, 2, ...C;                          (4)
                                    g∈Gu

                              `cgu ≥ 0,    g = 1, 2, ...Gu ;     c = 1, 2, ...C.                    (5)

The objective is to maximize the total amount of output across all cells and crops, subject to three
sets of constraints. The first set of constraints restricts that land allocated to the production of the
different crops cannot exceed what is available in each cell. The second set of constraints indicates
that land allocated to crop c over all cells cannot exceed the total in the data. The third set of
constraints allows for the possibility that not all crops are produced in all cells.



Total efficiency The last counterfactual is to assess the extent to which countries may not be
producing the highest yielding mix of crops in each location given their land endowment character-
istics. This counterfactual involves computing the aggregate yield in each country by picking the
crop in each location that maximizes output. Formally, we solve for `gu in equation (2) subject
to only the first and third set of constraints, that is equations (3) and (5). This counterfactual
involves production efficiency, reallocation of crops across space, and changes in crop choices in
order to maximize aggregate output—the allocation that generates the maximum attainable out-
put in each country given the total amount of land. The difference between this counterfactual
and the production efficiency counterfactual represents the contribution to the aggregate yield of
crop-mix choices and the spatial reallocation of production, whereas the difference with the spatial
reallocation is the contribution of crop choice changes to the aggregate yield.



3.4    Results


Using cell-specific production and land use data by crop within countries we calculate for each coun-
try aggregate output per hectare (actual yield) using FAO international crop prices (Geary-Khamis
dollars per tonne) for the year 2000. In Figure 6 we plot for 162 countries the actual aggregate


                                                      22
yield against real GDP per capita, both in logs. The actual aggregate yield varies systematically
with the level of development, with the correlation in logs being 0.58. The richest decile countries
have an average yield that is 3.1 times higher than the average in the poorest decile countries in
our sample.
                                   8




                                                                                                                              NLD
              Actual Yield (log, Int.$ per Hectare)




                                                                                                                               BEL ARE
                                                                                                                                   KWT   LUX
                                                                                                 EGY                    GRC JPN IRL
                                                                                UZB
                                                                               SLB                                 MYSKOR     GER
                                                                                                                            GBR   CHE
                                                                                                          JAM            NZLFRA
                                             7




                                                                                                    FJI     TKM        MLT
                                                                                                                         ISR   DNK
                                                                                                             CRI         TWN
                                                                                       GUY     CHN    COLLBN                 ITAAUT
                                                                                                                            PRI
                                                                                      PNG      IDNPER SUR          CHL SVNOMNSWESGP USA
                                                                                    TJKVNM       LKA
                                                                                                  MNE
                                                                                                      SWZ
                                                                                                         DOM
                                                                                                                    CZE
                                                                                                                                     NOR
                                                                                   BGD  PAK   COGPRY THA  BLZ
                                                                                                           BRAVEN
                                                                                                             HRV HUN
                                                                                                               POL      CYPESP
                                                                               GHALAO    CIVKGZ JORGTM
                                                                                                    VUT  CUB    URY
                                                                                                                SVK    SAU  FIN          QAT
                                                                                                                 ARG                  BRN
                                                                               BEN     SYR
                                                                                       CMRALB PHL ECU   PAN
                                                                                                      TUR  GAB
                                                                                                           LTU BLR         BHS
                                                                          MDG                AZE    BIH
                                                                                                     MKD  LVA
                                                                                                           ZAF         PRT AUS  CAN
                                                      ZAR                               IND        SLV
                                                                                            BOLARMUKRROM      MEX
                                   6




                                                                            UGA    KHM                BGR
                                                                LBR        MWI     NPL
                                                                                       MDAHND             IRN EST
                                                                           ZMB
                                                                     BDI CAF  GMB NIC      GIN ZWE          GNQ    LBY
                                                                    TZA   TGO NGA         AGO   GEO        RUS
                                                                    GNB   RWA
                                                                            MLI
                                                                              MOZ SEN
                                                                             SLE    KEN
                                                                                         BTN       DZA
                                                                                  HTI
                                                                            YEMTCD
                                                                        ETHBFA                           KAZ
                                                                                                         TUN
                                                      AFG
                                                                                   LSO           MAR              ATG
                        5




                                                                                 SDNMNG            IRQ
                                                                                                    NAM
                                                                SOM                  MRT
                                                                      ERI


                                                                                                       BWA
              4




                                                                        NER

                                                                                                                        ρ = 0.5843, N = 162
                                                            6                 7       8          9         10                         11
                                                                              Real GDP per Capita (log, 2000)


                                                       Figure 6: Actual Aggregate Yield across Countries



To what extent are these yield differences the result of differences in land quality and geography
across rich and poor countries? We now address this question using our spatial accounting frame-
work, through the set of counterfactual experiments outlined in Section 3.3.



Production efficiency We ask what the aggregate yield within each country would be if in
each cell and for each current crop, output was produced according to its potential yield—highest
attainable TFP given water and farming inputs—rather than its actual yield, holding the set of crops
and the allocation of land across crops fixed to their actual values? We call the constructed yield
for each country the potential aggregate yield. Figure 7 documents the potential aggregate yield for

                                                                                            23
each country by real GDP per capita. While there is substantial variation in potential aggregate
yields across countries—the ratio of the top to bottom deciles in the potential yield distribution
is a factor of 3—the differences are not systematically related to the level of development. For
example, the disparity in the potential aggregate yield between Senegal and Tajikistan, two low
income countries, is roughly the same as the potential aggregate yield disparity between Finland and
the Netherlands, two high income countries. Unlike the actual aggregate yields, Figure 7 illustrates
that there is only a slight positive relationship between potential aggregate yields and GDP per
capita, with a correlation in logs of only 10 percent.


                                                                             UZB
                                                                                                      TKM
                                                                                TJK
             Potential Yield (log, Int.$ per Hectare)
                                                   8




                                                                                                             ATG
                                                                                                                   MLT      NLD
                                                                                   PNG        MNE                        PRI
                                                                                                        GNQ               BEL ARE
                                                                                         AZE    FJISWZ HRVBLR CHL
                                                                                                              MYS
                                                                      RWA
                                                                        UGASLB          KGZARM
                                                                                             EGY
                                                                           BEN                         GABPOL
                                                                                                     CUB
                                                                                                     DOM          SVN
                                                                                                                    ISR
                                          7.5




                                                                      MDG            CIV COG  PER
                                                                                            GEO      LBN           GRC
                                                                                                     SUR          PRT              LUX
                                                             LBR TZA CAF      HTI               BIH
                                                                                                  COL                       CHE BRN
                                                        ZAR       BDI ZMB              ALB       ROM
                                                                                                VUT
                                                                                             LKAUKR
                                                                                             ZWE
                                                                                                       LTU
                                                                                                     TUN CRISVK     NZL JPN
                                                                                                                            SGP
                                                                                                                             KWT
                                                                           GHALSO MDA                      URY
                                                                                                             HUN KOR GER USA
                                                                       MWI
                                                                      TGO MOZ KHM  GUY
                                                                                   VNM  BOL
                                                                                                 MKD
                                                                                           CHN BGR  THA
                                                                                                      LVA VEN   CZE    GBR
                                                                               BGD CMR
                                                                               NPL
                                                                               LAO   BTN
                                                                                    PAK      PRY
                                                                                           IDN                        ESP
                                                                                                                    TWN
                                                                                                                         DNK
                                                                                                                          IRL
                                                                        MLI            GINPHL
                                                                                            JOR
                                                         AFG     GNB
                                                                         SLE    KENSYRHND MAR
                                                                                              ECUTURPAN
                                                                                                      BLZ
                                                                                                GTM JAMZAF ARGLBY CYP ITA
                                                                                                                       FRAAUT
                                                                                    IND        DZA
                                                                                               SLV     RUS
                                                                                                       BRAEST          SWE
                                                                                                                     OMN
                                 7




                                                                        BFATCD
                                                                        YEM SDN NIC AGO        IRQ IRN MEX
                                                                          NGA
                                                                          GMB                                     SAU              QAT
                                                                     ETH                                                      NOR
                                                                                                                      BHS
                                                             SOM               SEN
                     6.5




                                                                                                    BWA
                                                                                                                          CAN
                                                                                                                         AUS
                                                                                                                       FIN
                                                                                                     KAZ
                                                                                  MRT
                                                                                  MNG
                                                                  ERI                           NAM
                                                                     NER
             6




                                                                                                                   ρ = 0.1035, N = 162
                                                           6               7       8          9         10                          11
                                                                           Real GDP per Capita (log, 2000)


                                                        Figure 7: Potential Aggregate Yield across Countries



We now focus attention on the differences between rich and poor countries. In Panel A of Table 2,
we report the results of the production efficiency counterfactual for the average of the richest decile
of countries, the average of the poorest decile countries, and their ratio. The first column reports the
actual aggregate yield, the second column the potential aggregate yield, and the third column the
yield ratio between the potential to actual for each group of countries. Panel B reports the results


                                                                                         24
for cereal crops only. The results are striking. Production efficiency would increase the aggregate
yield in all countries but much more so in poor relative to rich countries—compared to actual yields,
the potential yield is only 65 percent higher in rich countries whereas it is 393 percent higher in
poor countries. In other words, if countries produced the crops they are producing in the cells they
are actually producing them but according to the their potential yields, then the aggregate yield
disparity between rich and poor countries would drop from the actual 3.14-fold to only 1.05-fold,
that is the productivity disparity would virtually disappear. A similar result arises for the subgroup
of cereal crops which covers a set of crops produced in most countries of the world such as wheat,
rice, maize, sorghum, millet, and others, in Panel B of Table 2. Although the magnitude difference
of the actual aggregate yield is larger for this subgroup of crops (4.6-fold vs. 3.1 for all crops), the
potential disparity is once again substantially reduced to 24 percent (versus 5 percent for all crops),
echoing a similar message.

We have used a common set of crop prices to aggregate yields in all locations and countries, however,
the conclusions from the production efficiency counterfactual remain when focusing on individual
crops for which we only use the physical measure of productivity. Table 3 reports the production
efficiency counterfactual for each of the three most representative crops produced across the world:
wheat, rice, and maize; where the yield is measured as output in tonnes per unit of land, a physical
measure of productivity. The rich-poor disparity in the actual yield differs across crops with 6.53-
fold and 5.11-fold disparities for maize and rice but only 2.53-fold disparity for wheat. Producing
these crops according to potential yields would reduce the rich-poor ratio to 1.60-fold in the case
of maize and 1.22-fold in the case of rice. In the case of wheat the rich-poor disparity drops to
0.86-fold. Despite these differences across individual crops, the main message remains the same:
poor countries are producing much further away from their potential yield than rich countries, and
if all countries produced at their potential the rich-poor yield gap would be all but eliminated.

These results point to low efficiency in producing each crop in each cell as a key factor for the



                                                  25
                                  Table 2: Production by Potential Yield

                                                     Panel A: All Crops
                                                      (country obs. = 162)

                                       Actual Yield      Potential Yield       Ratio
                         Rich 10%         739.5              1,220.0            1.65
                         Poor 10%         235.5              1,160.6            4.93
                         Ratio             3.14                1.05            1/2.99
                                                   Panel B: Cereal Crops
                                                      (country obs. = 160)

                                       Actual Yield      Potential Yield       Ratio
                         Rich 10%         672.5              1,108.7            1.65
                         Poor 10%         145.7               893.8             6.14
                         Ratio             4.61                1.24            1/3.72

Notes: Rich and Poor refer to the highest and lowest decile of the world income distribution, where income is
Real GDP per capita in 2000 (PWT 6.3). Actual and potential yields are measured as total real gross output per
hectare in international prices (GK $/ha). Each country-level yield is constructed by aggregating up from the GAEZ
pixel-level information at the 5 arc-minute resolution (roughly 10-by-10 km). Potential yield assumes rain-fed and
irrigated water supply, and mixed level of input use for every pixel. The Ratio refers to the ratio of potential to
actual aggregate yield.



agricultural productivity differences between rich and poor countries, rather than differences in
land quality.

The pattern of our results is not specific to rich and poor countries. Figure 8 documents the yield
ratio—the ratio of potential to actual aggregate yield—against real GDP per capita in logs for the
entire set of countries in our sample. As is clear, the yield ratio is indeed systematically negatively
correlated with the level of development, with a correlation coefficient of -0.64 in logs. That is,
conditioning on the set of crops each country produces on each plot, developing countries produce
much further away from their potential than developed countries.

We find that poor countries not only have on average larger potential to actual aggregate yield ratios
but also higher dispersion in yield ratios across cells within a country compared to rich countries,

                                                        26
                                  Table 3: Production by Potential Yield

                                                       Panel A: Wheat
                                                      (country obs. = 107)

                                       Actual Yield      Potential Yield        Ratio
                         Rich 10%          2.71               5.50               2.03
                         Poor 10%          1.07               6.43               6.00
                         Ratio             2.53               0.86              1/2.96
                                                         Panel B: Rice
                                                      (country obs. = 103)

                                       Actual Yield      Potential Yield        Ratio
                         Rich 10%          6.64               8.28               1.25
                         Poor 10%          1.70               7.72               4.54
                         Ratio             3.91               1.07              1/3.65
                                                        Panel C: Maize
                                                      (country obs. = 141)

                                       Actual Yield      Potential Yield        Ratio
                         Rich 10%          8.56              13.56               1.58
                         Poor 10%          1.31               8.48               6.47
                         Ratio             6.52               1.60              1/4.08

Notes: Rich and Poor refer to the highest and lowest decile of the world income distribution, where income is real
GDP per capita in 2000 (PWT 6.3). Actual and potential yields are measured as tonnes per hectare. Each country-
level yield is constructed by aggregating up from the GAEZ pixel-level information at the 5 arc-minute resolution
(roughly 10-by-10 km). Potential yield assumes rain-fed and irrigated water supply, and mixed level of input use for
every pixel. The Ratio refers to the ratio of potential to actual aggregate yield.




                                                        27
                                  3
                                                                                                                   ATG


             Potential to Actual Yield Ratio (log)                                                       BWA

                                                                                    LSO
                                                                        NER
                                                                                                   IRQ TUN
                                                                                                 MAR
                                      2

                                                                  SOM      RWA    SDN
                                                                                   HTI
                                                           AFG                                              GNQ
                                                                                                GEO
                                                                   TZA CAF  MOZ
                                                                          BFA                   ARM
                                                                                  KEN BTN
                                                               LBR ERI TGO SLETCD
                                                                          UGA
                                                                    BDI ZMB
                                                                          YEM                    ZWE
                                                                   GNB ETHMLI      MRT
                                                                                  TJK MDA
                                                                                             AZE
                                                                                                   DZA           BLR
                                                          ZAR            MWI
                                                                        MDG                                             PRT
                                                                             BEN KHM       GIN       ROM GAB
                                                                                                    UKR
                                                                                                    BIH            LBY
                                                                                   MNG
                                                                                 NPL              MNE      RUS
                                                                                          ALB
                                                                                           BOL
                                                                                           KGZ        BGR
                                                                                                      MKD LTU
                                                                                                    NAM                                BRN
                                                                                         AGO
                                                                                        CIV
                                                                                          HND             LVA
                                                                                                         CUB HRV
                                                                                                            TKMPOL
                                                                            NGA     PNG
                                                                                   NICCMR COG VUT             EST
                                                                              UZB
                                                                            GMB  SEN                  SWZDOM
                                                                                                           ZAF  SVK          PRI
                       1




                                                                             GHA       IND PHLECU  SLVTURKAZ
                                                                                                          IRN URYCHL MLT
                                                                                                  PER   PAN
                                                                                 LAO SYR         LKA     SUR MEXHUN SVN
                                                                                                        THA
                                                                                 BGD PAK        JOR GTM
                                                                                                 PRYFJI  LBN  VENARG
                                                                                                          BLZ               ESP SGP
                                                                                      VNM             COL                 ISR
                                                                                                                     CZECYP
                                                                                      GUY                  BRA                       USA
                                                                             SLB               IDN           CRI   MYS      BHS
                                                                                              CHNEGY                   SAU                QAT
                                                                                                                         TWN
                                                                                                                           OMN
                                                                                                                         GRC  ITA
                                                                                                                              SWECAN
                                                                                                                                AUSCHE
                                                                                                                         NZL     AUT
                                                                                                                                DNKARE
                                                                                                                       KOR GBR  BEL NOR LUX
                                                                                                                               JPN
                                                                                                                               GER
                                                                                                                              FRA
                                                                                                          JAM                FINNLD
                                                     ρ   = −0.6396, N = 162                                                      IRLKWT
                                  0




                                                              6               7       8          9         10                          11
                                                                              Real GDP per Capita (log, 2000)


                         Figure 8: Potential to Actual Aggregate Yield Ratio across Countries


Figure 9 documents the standard deviation of (log) potential to actual yield ratios across locations
in each country against the level of income per capita.



Spatial efficiency A fact of poor and developing countries is the prevalence of large rural popu-
lations, often operating at subsistence levels and that face poor infrastructure, conditions that may
lead farmers to produce crops that are not necessarily suitable to the geographical characteristics
of the land they operate, see for instance Adamopoulos (2011), Gollin and Rogerson (2014), and
Adamopoulos and Restuccia (2014). To assess the relevance of reallocation across space we ask:
How would the aggregate yield change if we reallocated the production of individual crops across
cultivated cells according to where they exhibit the highest relative yield in the country, holding
the total land allocated to each crop in the country at its actual level?

Table 4 reports the results of this counterfactual. Spatial reallocation has a positive effect on
aggregate output, with an increase of around 20 percent, but the magnitude of the effect is similar

                                                                                              28
                                                         .8
             Std. of log Potential to Actual Yield Ratio
                                                                                                             BWA


                                              .6                                                                TKM

                                                                                                 HND
                                                                                 ZMB     LSO                            LBY
                                                                                          KEN          MAR SWZ
                                                                                                        ECU                KOR
                                                                                                AGO      NAM TUN
                                                                                          TJK
                                    .4



                                                                           BDI                           GTM
                                                                                                        PER                 SAU
                                                                                    TCD
                                                                                     SDN PNG
                                                                                           SYR
                                                                                           CMR                  ZAF
                                                                                  MOZHTI MRT          ZWE
                                                                                                        IRQ          URY
                                                                                                              DOM             ISR
                                                                               MWI     SEN
                                                                                         NIC IND       MNE                  PRT
                                                                         TZA                            SLV        MEX
                                                                                                 BOL                             PRI
                                                                                    UZB
                                                                                  NGA
                                                                                   GHA                     COL IRN
                                                                                                             THA
                                                                     SOM ERINER MLI
                                                                                YEM           BTN             SURCRI
                                                                                                                   VEN
                                                                                 SLE
                        .2




                                                                ZAR                BEN       PAK AZE                        MLT JPN        BRN
                                                                             ETHBFA
                                                                                UGA                 CHN         BRA
                                                                 AFG                   NPL VNM KGZ           PAN HRVARG
                                                                                                           TUR                  ESP
                                                                                                                                  ITA
                                                                     LBR      MDG
                                                                              RWA               GINPHL BIH BLZ                  BHS AUS
                                                                              TGO          GUY     COG    MKD
                                                                                                        DZA             MYS    OMN
                                                                                  GMB LAO            ARM
                                                                                                      EGY
                                                                                                      PRY        GNQ         GRC         USA
                                                                         GNB CAF       BGD
                                                                                         MNG ALB GEO
                                                                                                     JOR       JAM EST CHL CYP
                                                                                                              KAZ
                                                                                              CIV     LKA ROM LBN
                                                                                                               LVA
                                                                                                                RUS     ATG SVN      AUTKWT
                                                                                       KHM          IDN              SVK
                                                                                                                    POL
                                                                                                                GAB HUN  CZE NZL
                                                                                                                             TWN GBR
                                                                                                                                 FIN   CHE
                                                                                   SLB                   FJI
                                                                                                           BGRCUB                 SWE ARE
                                                                                           MDA           UKR
                                                                                                         VUT    LTU BLR              CAN
                                                                                                                                   GER
                                                                                                                                    BEL
                                                                                                                                  FRANLD NOR
                                                                                                                                    DNK
                                                                                                                                     IRL      LUX
                                                                                                                                              QAT
             0




                                                                                                                                       SGP
                                                              ρ = −0.3033, N = 162
                                                                   6              7       8          9         10                          11
                                                                                  Real GDP Per Capita (log, 2000)


     Figure 9: Within-Country Dispersion of log Potential to Actual Yield Ratio across Cells


among rich and poor countries and, as a result, spatial reallocation does not help reduce the
aggregate productivity ratio between rich and poor countries beyond the potential efficiency effect.



Total efficiency With this counterfactual we ask, how would the aggregate yield change if in each
cell in each country the highest yielding crop was produced, holding the amount of cultivated land
in each plot constant? This experiment allows us to construct for each country a counterfactual
potential aggregate yield that reflects the potential yield for each crop and cell as well as the output
maximizing crop choice in each cell. Countries produce in each cell the crop that yields the highest
return, given their local growing conditions and the (international) relative prices of crops.

Table 5 reports the results of this counterfactual for all crops. If countries shift their crop mix to
the highest yielding crops, cell-by-cell, then the aggregate yield disparity between rich and poor
countries would drop from the actual 3.14-fold to 0.77-fold. In other words, by adjusting the crop
mix to the most suitable given their geographic characteristics, poor countries would be about 30

                                                                                                  29
                    Table 4: Spatial Efficiency—Reallocation of Crops across Space


                                                                    All Crops
                                                          (country obs. = 162)

                                            Aggregate Yields                        Ratio Spatial
                                        Actual Potential Spatial                    to Potential

                          Rich 10%       739.5        1,220.0          1,446.0           1.19
                          Poor 10%       235.5        1,160.6          1,359.4           1.17

                          Ratio           3.14          1.05            1.06                 –

Notes: Rich and Poor refer to the highest and lowest decile of the world income distribution. “Spatial” refers to the
counterfactual yield under the “Spatial Efficiency” experiment. Each country-level yield is constructed by aggregating
up from the GAEZ pixel-level information at the 5 arc-minute resolution (roughly 10-by-10 km). Potential and spatial
yields assume rain-fed and irrigated water supply, and mixed level of input use for every pixel.



percent more productive than rich countries.

Figure 10 shows that the total efficiency yield is essentially flat across the income distribution, with
a correlation coefficient in logs of 0. Figure 11 documents the ratio of the total efficiency yield
to the potential yield indicating a slight negative slope indicating that the spatial-crop mix choice
generates higher productivity gains in poor compared to rich countries.

To quantify the contribution of production efficiency versus changes in the crop mix choice, we note
that the reduction of the actual yield gap from 3.14-fold to 0.77-fold arises from a reduction of the
actual yield gap from 3.14 to 1.05 from production efficiency and then to 0.77 from the crop mix
choice,
                                            prod. efficiency    total efficiency
                                             z}|{                     z}|{
                                   3.14
                                   |    × {z 0.33 } ×                 0.73         = 0.77.
                                            1.05

This implies that around 80 percent of the reduction in the aggregate yield gap (log(0.33)/ log(0.25))
is due to production efficiency within each crop-cell, while the remaining 20 percent is due to


                                                               30
 Log of Total Efficiency Yield (Int.$ per Hectare)
                                                9
                                                                                                                 CHL


                                                                                          ALB EGY               URY
                                      8.5                                                       GEO MKD
                                                                       RWA   UZB                    BIH     TKM  ARG SVN      BEL
                                                                      ETH       LSO
                                                                                 TJK         AZE
                                                                                           KGZ        SWZ
                                                                                                ARM ROM          BLR
                                                                                                                SVK      ISRITAAUT
                                                                 GNB                            JOR
                                                                                                  MNE          POL   CZE NZL
                                                                 TZA MWIBEN
                                                                        ZMB            IND         DZA
                                                                                                 MAR  BGR  LTU HUN
                                                                                                           ZAF
                                                                                                         LBN
                                                                                                                       MLT
                                                                                                                       PRT
                                                                                                                        CYP
                                                                                                                               NLD
                                                                                                                              DNK
                                                                                                                             GER
                                                                                                             HRV ATGKOR     GBR
                                                                                                                        GRCFRA          LUX
                                                                  BDI      NGA KENMDA
                                                                         UGA         SYR
                                                                                     CMR
                                                                                        BTNBOL PER
                                                                                          HND       GTM
                                                                                                   SLV
                                                                                                 ZWE                       ESP
                                                                                                                             JPN
                                                         AFG               MOZ  NPL PAK
                                                                              SDN                PRYUKR
                                                                                                      TURTUN       LBY     PRI CHE
                                                                       TGO         NIC   AGO
                                                                                           GINCHN         LVA
                                                                                                         CUB  VEN              IRL
                                                        ZAR            MDG  GHAHTI      CIV                BRA                          QAT
                                                                         BFA
                                                                           GMB BGD                    COLDOM CRI
                                                                                                              MEX
                                                                          SLE                    LKAFJI PAN
                             8


                                                             LBR                LAO
                                                                                KHM          COG
                                                                                              PHL          GABEST
                                                             SOM                     VNM
                                                                                    PNG           ECU
                                                                                                    NAM IRNRUS              SWE
                                                                      CAF SLB                      IRQ                             USA
                                                                             TCD               IDN          GNQ        SAUOMN
                                                                                                                         TWN        NOR
                                                                         YEM
                                                                         MLI                              BLZ      MYS      FIN ARE
                                                                                                        THA
                                                                                     GUY            VUT                              BRN
                                                                                  MNG                    SUR                  AUS
                    7.5




                                                                 ERI           SEN                        JAM                    KWT
                                                                                                                             SGP
                                                                                                                            CAN


                                                                                                      BWA
          7




                                                                                                       KAZ
                                                                      NER                                                BHS
                                                                                     MRT



                                                                                                                       ρ = 0.0084, N = 162
                                                           6               7         8        9         10                           11
                                                                          Log of Real GDP Per Capita (2000)


                                                     Figure 10: Total Efficiency Aggregate Yield across Countries
                                           2
Log of Total Efficiency to Potential Yield




                                                                                                  NAM
                                                                         ETH
                               1.5




                                                                               NGA
                                                                                 MNG                          ARG
                                                                   ERI
                                                                   GNB               IND        DZA         URYCHL       FIN
                                                                             SDN NIC                                      ITAAUT      QAT
                                                             SOM                       ALB JOR
                                                                                      AGO
                                                                                       HND    MAR MKDZAF
                                                                                                SLV                  CYP
                                                                          GMB LSO
                                                                                KEN SYR
                                                                                                 GTM       MEX CZE          AUS
                                                                                                                            DNK
                                                                       MWI                                                FRA
                                                                        BFA                        BGRBRA SVK
                                                                                             GEO BIH           HUN
                                                                                                                LBY NZL  GBR
                                                                                                                        ESPGER
                                                         AFG                            BOL EGYROM
                                                                                      BTN          TURIRN                         NOR
                      1




                                                                               NPL CMR
                                                                                     PAK                           KOR
                                                                                                                    SAU
                                                                 TZA           SEN      GIN PRY IRQ     LTUEST      SVN
                                                                 BDI   ZMB
                                                                      TGO MOZ       MDA    CHN                               CAN
                                                                                                                           JPN
                                                                                                                             IRL
                                                                   NER   SLE
                                                                        YEMTCD                ZWE      LVA
                                                                                                        RUSVEN        ISR
                                                                                                                    PRT   SWE
                                                                      RWA  BEN          KGZARM   UKR
                                                                                                   SWZ     POLBLR      OMN            LUX
                                                                           GHALAO
                                                                               BGD        AZE        PAN
                                                                                                      LBN
                                                                                                      TUN            GRC    BEL
                                                                                           PHLECU
                                                                                               PER                             CHE
                                                        ZAR                                               CRI
                                                                                                          HRV
                                                                        UGA HTIKHM VNM        LKA COL  BLZ
                                                                                                      KAZ             TWN
                                                                      MDG
                                                                        MLI      MRTCIV     IDN       CUB                        USA
                                                                                               MNE BWA
           .5




                                                             LBR
                                                                                          COG         DOM           MLT      NLD
                                                                     CAF        TJK                    JAM
                                                                                                     THA
                                                                                                 FJI     TKM
                                                                                                        GAB              PRI
                                                                            UZB     GUY
                                                                                                                ATG
                                                                           SLB                   VUT
                                                                                                                                KWTBRN
                                                                                  PNG                 SUR               BHS
                                                                                                         GNQ    MYS
                                                                                                                                 ARE
 0




                                                                                                                               SGP

                                                                                                                   ρ = −0.1050, N = 162
                                                           6               7         8        9         10                           11
                                                                          Log of Real GDP Per Capita (2000)


Figure 11: Total Efficiency to Potential Aggregate Yield across Countries



                                                                                           31
                                  Table 5: Total Efficiency Counterfactual


                                                             All Crops
                                                      (country obs. = 162)

                                            Aggregate Yields                 Ratio Total
                                        Actual Potential Total               to Potential


                          Rich 10%       739.5      1,220.0      2,498.3        2.05
                          Poor 10%       235.5      1,160.6      3,254.7        2.80

                          Ratio           3.14        1.05        0.77            –

Notes: Rich and Poor refer to the highest and lowest decile of the world income distribution. “Total” refers to the
counterfactual yield under the “Total Efficiency” experiment. Each country-level yield is constructed by aggregating
up from the GAEZ pixel-level information at the 5 arc-minute resolution (roughly 10-by-10 km). Potential and total
yields assume rain-fed and irrigated water supply, and mixed level of input use for every pixel.



improvements in the crop mix choice in each location.

This counterfactual points to poor countries producing systematically lower yielding crops given
their internal land quality characteristics.




4     Robustness

We examine the sensitivity of our main results to: (a) aggregating crops by weighing them ac-
cording to their caloric content rather than using FAO international prices; (b) using instead of
potential yields, agro-climatic yields that abstract from soil and terrain constraints; (c) alternative
assumptions about the level of farming inputs; and, (d) alternative assumptions about the water
supply.




                                                        32
Caloric Content of Crops In developing countries, a large proportion of farmers consume most
of the output they produce as the amount of produced output is close to subsistence levels. For these
farmers, the caloric intake from the different crops may be more relevant than international prices
for the evaluation of the different crops. To examine the robustness of our benchmark results that
use international prices from the FAO, we consider an alternative of aggregating crops (in actual
and potential yields) by their caloric content. Tables (6) and (7) report the average actual and
counterfactual yields by income group for production efficiency and total efficiency counterfactuals
respectively, with Panel A documenting the results using caloric content and Panel B documenting
the corresponding benchmark results with international prices for comparison. The caloric content,
measured in kilo calories (kcal) per 100g, are obtained from the USDA’s National Nutrient Database
for Standard Reference (Release 28).

We find that the main conclusions of our benchmark results remain intact: there are substantial
differences in actual yields across countries (3.14 in benchmark, 3.57 with calorie “prices”); pro-
ducing existing crops according to potential yields removes the vast majority of the cross-country
aggregate yield differences (1.05 in benchmark, 1.24 with calorie “prices”); and allowing for crop
mix and location to change reverses the aggregate yields difference between rich and poor countries
(0.77 in benchmark, 0.75 with calorie “prices”).



Agro-climatic Potential Yields GAEZ calculates in each grid cell agro-climatic yields by crop,
that measure potential biomass yield. These are the yield potentials that can be achieved taking
into account temperature, radiation and moisture regimes of each grid cell, and specific growing
requirements of each crop. Agro-climatic crop yields do not take into account soil or terrain con-
straints that can reduce potential yields. In Figure 12 we plot the aggregate counterfactual yield
for each country against GDP per capita (both in logs), if countries were to produce each crop in
each cell according to the crop-cell-country agro-climatic yield. The reported counterfactual yield
is computed under rain-fed water conditions and intermediate level of inputs-management for each

                                                   33
                             Table 6: Production Efficiency by Potential Yield

                         Panel A: USDA Calorie “Prices” of Crops (000s of kcal)
                                                        (country obs. = 162)

                                        Actual Yield      Potential Yield         Ratio
                         Rich 10%        18,199.94          28,972.52              1.59
                         Poor 10%         5,103.17          23,370.01              4.58
                         Ratio              3.57               1.24               1/2.88
                                   Panel B: FAO International Crop Prices
                                                        (country obs. = 162)

                                        Actual Yield      Potential Yield         Ratio
                         Rich 10%         739.51             1,220.02              1.65
                         Poor 10%          235.47            1,160.63              4.93
                         Ratio              3.14               1.05               1/2.99

Notes: Rich and Poor refer to the highest and lowest decile of the world income distribution, where income is Real
GDP per capita in 2000 (PWT 6.3). Actual and potential yields in Panel A are measured as total real gross output
per hectare in international prices (GK $/ha), while in Panel B they are measured as energy (000s of kcal) per hectare.
Calorie “prices” (kcal per 100 grams) are obtained from USDA, National Nutrient Database for Standard Reference
(Release 28). Each country-level yield is constructed by aggregating up from the GAEZ pixel-level information at
the 5 arc-minute resolution (roughly 10-by-10 km). Potential yield assumes mixed level of input use for every pixel.
The yield gap refers to the ratio of potential to actual yield.



cell in each country. This serves as a robustness to the “Production Efficiency” experiment, where
in the benchmark counterfactual the potential yield for each crop-cell-country used was under both
rain-fed and irrigated water supply conditions, and under mixed level of inputs-management. The
conclusion drawn from the benchmark counterfactual for “Production Efficiency” is robust to using
agro-climatic yields. The aggregate potential yield is flat with respect to income per capita. Egypt
and countries of the Arabian peninsula stand out as outliers due to large desert areas, which are
particularly arid under pure rain-fed water conditions.



Effect of Assumed Input Level In the benchmark counterfactual of “Production Efficiency,” we
compute the potential aggregate yield for each country when each crop-cell-country yield is produced


                                                          34
                                   Table 7: Total Efficiency Counterfactual

                         Panel A: USDA Calorie “Prices” of Crops (000s of kcal)
                                                        (country obs. = 162)

                                        Actual Yield           Counterfactual Yield
                         Rich 10%        18,199.94                  83,140.95
                         Poor 10%         5,103.17                 111,328.03
                         Ratio              3.57                       0.75
                                   Panel B: FAO International Crop Prices
                                                        (country obs. = 162)

                                        Actual Yield           Counterfactual Yield
                         Rich 10%          739.5                     2,498.3
                         Poor 10%          235.5                     3,254.7
                         Ratio              3.14                       0.77

Notes: Rich and Poor refer to the highest and lowest decile of the world income distribution, where income is Real
GDP per capita in 2000 (PWT 6.3). Actual and potential yields in Panel A are measured as total real gross output
per hectare in international prices (GK $/ha), while in Panel B they are measured as energy (000s of kcal) per hectare.
Calorie “prices” (kcal per 100 grams) are obtained from USDA, National Nutrient Database for Standard Reference
(Release 28). Each country-level yield is constructed by aggregating up from the GAEZ pixel-level information at
the 5 arc-minute resolution (roughly 10-by-10 km). Potential yield assumes rain-fed and irrigated water supply, and
mixed level of input use for every pixel. The yield gap refers to the ratio of potential to actual yield.



according to potential yields, holding constant across all countries, water supply conditions to rain-
fed and irrigated and inputs-management to mixed level. We evaluate the sensitivity of our results
of potential yield across countries using different assumptions about input levels. Recall that an
important element in the cross-country comparisons we make is that the level of inputs is kept the
same in all countries, so the differences in the potential yields for each crop and location reflect
only variation in the geographical attributes of the land in each location. But it may be that the
geographical endowments in poor countries are less conducive to the use of certain inputs and if so
using the mixed level of inputs in our baseline may bias our results.

In Figure 13 we show the effect on aggregate potential (counterfactual) yields of altering the as-
sumption of inputs used for all countries. The top panel shows the potential aggregate yield across

                                                          35
                                                               10
                 Potential Agroclimatic Yield (log, Int.$ per Ha)
                                                                                              KHM
                                                                                              LAO                     SUR
                                                                           LBR GNB    ZMB
                                                                                     MDG
                                                                                      MWI
                                                                                        SLE   BGD VNM
                                                                                                    GUY
                                                                                                      BTN   PHLLKA ROM
                                                                                                             IDN
                                                                                                              GEO
                                                                                                               ZWE   THA HRV
                                                                                                                    BGR         HUN
                                                                                                                              SVK
                                                                                                                               ARG     TWNFRA
                                                                                                                                     SVN    JPN
                                                                    ZAR        TZA CAF
                                                                                     TGO
                                                                                BDI ETHUGA
                                                                                       BFA
                                                                                          BEN
                                                                                         MOZ
                                                                                          GHA
                                                                                         GMB
                                                                                         NGA
                                                                                             HTI
                                                                                              NPLNICMDA
                                                                                               KEN
                                                                                              LSO   CMR
                                                                                                        HND
                                                                                                        ALB
                                                                                                      CIVGIN
                                                                                                       AGO
                                                                                                     IND
                                                                                                            CHN
                                                                                                           AZE
                                                                                                           COG
                                                                                                         BOL  ARM
                                                                                                               MAR
                                                                                                                  BIH
                                                                                                                 SLV
                                                                                                               PRY  MKD
                                                                                                                  UKR
                                                                                                                  GTM
                                                                                                                MNE
                                                                                                                 DZA
                                                                                                                ECU SWZ
                                                                                                                    TURTUN
                                                                                                                      LBN
                                                                                                                     PAN
                                                                                                                    COL  BRA
                                                                                                                         LTU
                                                                                                                        LVA
                                                                                                                         ZAF
                                                                                                                       DOM
                                                                                                                      BWARUS
                                                                                                                              URY
                                                                                                                            VEN
                                                                                                                             POL
                                                                                                                            MEX
                                                                                                                           CRI
                                                                                                                         GABESTBLR
                                                                                                                                   CZEGRC
                                                                                                                                     PRT
                                                                                                                                       ISR
                                                                                                                                     MLT
                                                                                                                                 ATGKOR
                                                                                                                                 MYS   NZL
                                                                                                                                           ITA
                                                                                                                                          GBR
                                                                                                                                          PRI
                                                                                                                                         ESP
                                                                                                                                           SWE
                                                                                                                                              AUT
                                                                                                                                            GER
                                                                                                                                             DNK
                                                                                                                                             BEL  USABRNLUX
                                                                                                                                                CHE
                                                                                                                                                SGP
                                                                                     RWA
                                                                                       MLI TCD
                                                                                            SDN
                                                                                          SLB  TJK
                                                                                              SENPNGSYR  KGZ  JOR VUT
                                                                                                                  NAM CUB GNQ
                                                                                                                        BLZ      CHL  CYP AUS NLD
                                                                                                                                              CAN
                                                                                                                                              IRL
                                                                     AFG                   UZB   MRT                    IRN      LBY               NOR
                                                                               ERINER                             FJI KAZ
                                                                                                                PER
                                                                                                                 IRQ   JAMTKM             FIN
                                                                                                                                         BHS
                                                                                                MNGPAK
                                                5
                                                                           SOM




                                                                                                              EGY
                                0




                                                                                                                                    SAU        ARE

                                                                                                                                       OMN



                                                                                                                                  ρ = −0.1507, N = 159
                 −5




                                                                       6               7       8          9         10                               11
                                                                                       Real GDP per Capita (log, 2000)


           Figure 12: Agro-climatic Aggregate Yield (rain-fed, intermediate input level)


countries under the intermediate level of inputs (and rain-fed conditions), and the bottom panel
under the high level of inputs (and rain-fed conditions). The main conclusion from the benchmark
experiment regarding the lack of systematic correlation between the potential aggregate yield and
GDP per capita remains intact, under the assumption of either intermediate or high input levels.
The outliers of Egypt and countries of the Arabian peninsula remain, just as under the agro-climatic
yields (since water supply conditions are rain-fed in all of these cases).

Next, we calculate the aggregate potential yield in each country for the three most prevalent crops
across the world, wheat, maize, and rice, for each available level of inputs in the GAEZ database,
namely low, intermediate, and high, under rain-fed conditions. We report in Figure 14 the ratio of
potential yields with high inputs to low inputs in the left panel and for the ratio of high inputs to
intermediate inputs in the right panel. Panel A in Figure 14 reports the ratio of potential yields
for wheat, Panel B for maize and Panel C for rice. While there are changes between potential
aggregate yields with different input levels within countries, these changes are not systematically

                                                                                                         36
                                              Panel A: Intermediate Input Level (rain-fed)


                                         10
Potential Yield (log, Int.$ per Hectare)

                                                                        KHM   MDA       GEO  ROM
                                                                                              BGR
                                                                                            UKR          ARG
                                                                                                        SVK
                                                                                                          HUN SVN           USA
                                                                ZMB
                                                                MWIMOZ  BGD
                                                                         KENVNM KGZ  AZE LKA
                                                                                         ZWE
                                                                                        ARM     THA  HRV
                                                                                                   RUS
                                                                                                 SUR    URY          FRA
                                                                                                                MLT GBRBEL
                                                                                                                       DNK
                                                         GNB
                                                         TZA TGO BFABENHTI
                                                                         TJK
                                                                        LSONICSYR
                                                                               IND BOL
                                                                                  ALB
                                                                                  HND PHL  DZA
                                                                                         MAR
                                                                                           SLV
                                                                                         PRY  MKD
                                                                                            BIH
                                                                                            GTM
                                                                                              TURTUN
                                                                                                BWAZAF
                                                                                                   BRA POL
                                                                                                   LTUVENBLR CZE
                                                                                                           CHL
                                                                                                           ATG    ISR
                                                                                                                 NZL
                                                                                                                PRT  ITAAUT
                                                                                                                      GER CHE
                                                                                                                        CAN
                                                                                                                      JPN
                                                                                                                    ESP          LUX
                                              ZAR           NERMDG NGA
                                                                 MLI
                                                                  SLEUZB
                                                                   GMB
                                                                     TCD
                                                                    GHA LAO
                                                                        NPL
                                                                      SDN     CMR
                                                                              GUYAGO   IDN
                                                                                   GINCHN        LBN
                                                                                                 DOM
                                                                                                  LVA
                                                                                                PAN
                                                                                                 KAZ  MEX        GRC SWEIRL
                                                                                                                       AUS
                                                                                                                        NLD
                                5

                                               AFG   LBR      CAFUGA    SENMRT  CIV       ECU SWZ
                                                                                          MNE
                                                                                        JOR   COLCUB
                                                                                                  IRNCRI   MYS
                                                                                                           LBY
                                                          BDI ETH
                                                               RWA        MNGPAK COG              BLZ EST      KOR
                                                                                                                CYPPRI        BRN
                                                     SOM ERI        SLB     PNGBTN          NAM
                                                                                           IRQ
                                                                                            VUT
                                                                                            FJI
                                                                                                    TKM
                                                                                                   GAB           TWNBHS
                                                                                                                             NOR
                                                                                                    GNQ              FIN  SGP
                                                                                          PER JAM


                                                                                        EGY
                                                                  YEM
                   0




                                                                                                             SAU
                                                                                                               OMN
                                                                                                                       KWT     QAT
      −5




                                                                                                                        ARE




                                                                                                            ρ = −0.1875, N = 162
                        −10




                                                 6               7       8          9         10                              11
                                                                 Real GDP per Capita (log, 2000)

                                                     Panel B: High Input Level (rain-fed)
                                         10
Potential Yield (log, Int.$ per Hectare)




                                                                ZMB
                                                                MWI     KHM
                                                                        BGD  MDA AZE         ROM
                                                                                              BGR
                                                                                            UKR  SURHRV   HUN SVN
                                                                                                         ARG
                                                                                                        SVK                  USA
                                                         TZA TGO UGABEN
                                                                   MOZ   KENVNM    BOL  GEO
                                                                                         PRY
                                                                                         ZWE
                                                                                         LKA    THA    POL
                                                                                                        URY
                                                                                                   LTUVEN
                                                                                                   RUS
                                                                                                 TUN     BLR CZE  ISRGBR
                                                                                                                MLT     DNK
                                                                                                                        BEL
                                                                                                                      FRA
                                                                                                                       GER SGP BRN
                                              ZAR    LBR GNB CAF BFA
                                                               MDG  GHA
                                                                   NGA
                                                                  SLE    TJK
                                                                       HTI
                                                                      SDN  NIC
                                                                             CMR
                                                                             GUYCIVKGZ
                                                                                 AGO
                                                                               IND     IDN
                                                                                      PHL
                                                                                        ARM BIH
                                                                                            GTM
                                                                                           SLV
                                                                                         MAR  MKD
                                                                                                BWABRA
                                                                                                  LVA
                                                                                                   ZAF     ATG        ITANLD
                                                                                                                           CHE
                                                                                                                         AUT
                                                                                                                         IRL
                                                                                                                         CAN
                                                                                                                       JPN
                                               AFG          NER
                                                          BDI ETH
                                                                 MLI
                                                               RWA
                                                                     UZB
                                                                     TCDNPL
                                                                        LAO
                                                                        LSO PNG
                                                                             SYR
                                                                           MRT     GINCOG
                                                                                  HND
                                                                                  ALB  CHN DZA
                                                                                          ECU COL
                                                                                              SWZ
                                                                                              TUR
                                                                                            VUT
                                                                                          MNE
                                                                                                 CUB
                                                                                                PANGAB
                                                                                                 DOM
                                                                                                  BLZ
                                                                                                 KAZ
                                                                                                 LBN
                                                                                                      MEX
                                                                                                    GNQ
                                                                                                     CRI   CHL
                                                                                                      EST MYS   PRT
                                                                                                                 NZL
                                                                                                                 GRC  SWE
                                                                                                                     PRI
                                                                                                                    ESP AUS NOR LUX
                                                                   GMB                            IRN      LBY KOR
                                                         ERI        SLB SEN     BTN JORIRQ          TKM          TWN
                                5




                                                     SOM                  MNGPAK            NAM
                                                                                            FJI                 CYP  FIN
                                                                                          PER JAM                   BHS
                   0




                                                                                        EGY




                                                                                                             SAU
      −5




                                                                                                                OMN

                                                                                                            ρ = −0.0896, N = 158
                        −10




                                                 6               7       8          9         10                              11
                                                                 Real GDP per Capita (log, 2000)




                              Figure 13: Potential Aggregate Yield by Input Level




                                                                                  37
correlated with income. The main take-away from Figure 14 is that our main finding of a weak
relationship between potential yields and real GDP per capita across countries is present under
alternative input-level assumptions.



Effect of Assumed Water Supply Conditions In Figure 15 we show the effect of water supply
conditions on the relationship of the potential aggregate yield for cereals and output per capita.
In the top panel, we keep water supply conditions constant to rain-fed for each crop-cell-country
(and intermediate level of inputs-management), and in the bottom panel we keep them constant
to irrigated for each crop-cell-country (and intermediate level of inputs-management). The main
conclusion of no relationship between potential aggregate yields and income levels across countries
remains the same. The difference between the two panels of Figure 15 is that under rain-fed water
supply conditions there are the outliers of Egypt and countries of the Arabian peninsula, just as
under the agro-climatic yields. The second panel shows, that while having in place irrigation can
partially alleviate the extreme dry conditions in parts of these countries, there is still no relationship
of potential aggregate yields and income across countries.




5     Conclusions

That land quality and geography matter for agricultural production at the micro-level is ubiquitous
as argued by both agronomists (e.g, Doorenbos and Kassam, 1979; Steduto et al., 2012, GAEZ)
and agricultural economists (e.g., Sherlund et al., 2002; Di Falco and Chavas, 2009; Fuwa et al.,
2007; Jaenicke and Lengnick, 1999). Using detailed micro-geography data, in this paper we quantify
the macro-level consequences of land quality for agricultural productivity, measured as output per
hectare (yield). In particular, we examine to what extent differences in agricultural yields across
countries are the result of natural advantages/disadvantages or the result of economic choices. We
find that land quality differences cannot justify the agricultural productivity gaps between rich

                                                   38
                  2.5                                                              Panel A: Wheat




                                                                                                                         1.5
                                                         GUY                                                                                                   GUY

                                                                                                                                                                                       FIN
                                           BDI                               FIN                                                                                           BLZ             NOR
                                                           COG FJIBLZ
                                                             LKA                                                                                    BDI                    JAM
                                                                                 NOR                                                                                           EST
                                                SLE                                                                                                          PNG                  MYS




                                                                                                     High to Intermediate Inputs (in logs)
                                                   KHM    GIN           MYS                                                                                       GIN     PAN
                                2




                                                                                                                                       1
                                                     PNG
                                                   BGD                                                                                                     KHM      IDN
                                                                                                                                                                     LKA
                                                                                                                                                       RWA BGD
                                                 NGA
                                                 SLB
                                                UGA    CMR IDN PANJAMEST                                                                                UGA    CMR COG  FJI    VEN
                                                                                                                                                               VNMPHL COL   LVA
   High to Low Inputs (in logs)




                                                   LAO                                                                                                                       BRA       GBR
                                    ZAR        RWA     VNMPHL THA  BRA
                                                                               NLD                                                           ZAR     ETHSLE
                                                                                                                                                           LAO BTN
                                                                                                                                                         NGA
                                                                                                                                                                             LTU
                                                                                                                                                                              CRI   SVN NLD
                                                                                                                                                                        VUT
                                                                                                                                                                         SWZ   POL
                                                         BTN         VEN SVN GBR                                                                      MDGSLB
                                                                                                                                                       ZMB          STPIRQ
                                                                                                                                                                     PRY        BLR      DNK
                                                                                                                                                                                       SWE
                                                                                                                                                                                         IRL
                                             ETH                COL
                                                                  LVA
                                                                   LTU                                                                                       NICAGO
                                                                                                                                                           NPL        ECU  CUB            CHE
                                              MDG    NIC       VUT   POL
                                                                    CRI                                                                                MWI  KEN
                                                                                                                                                           HTI
                                                                                                                                                         MOZ    IND  ZWE  THAGNQ
                                                                                                                                                                              HRV  CZE GER
                                                                                                                                                                                         CAN
                                                                                                                                                                                         AUT
                                                                                                                                                   TZA              CHN
                                               ZMB       AGO PRY CUBBLR        DNK                                                                 ERI
                                                                                                                                                                 HND
                                                                                                                                                                  BOL
                                                                                                                                                                PAK
                                                                                                                                                                      PER
                                                                                                                                                                       NAM
                                                                                                                                                                       GTM  RUS
                                                                                                                                                                             ZAF HUN ISR
                                                                                                                                                                                URY     BELUSA
                                                                SWZ            IRL
                                                                              GER                                                                           MNG AZE
                                                                                                                                                          UZB        GEOBIH
                                                                                                                                                                          DOM        NZL
                                                                                                                                                                               MEX KOR
                                                                                                                                                                             TKM               LUX
                                                    KENHND IRQ GTMGNQ
                                                                    HRV       BEL
                                                                             SWE                                                                                           TUN
                                                                                                                                                                          BWA
                   1.5




                                                                                                                                                                      MNEMKD
                                                                                                                                                                         ROM
                                                                                                                                                                        UKR       CHL BHSAUS
                                                                                                                                                                                       FRA




                                                                                                                           .5
                                           TZAMWIMOZ
                                                   NPL      STP                 CHE
                                                                          KOR CAN
                                                                               AUT                                                           AFG            TJK ALB
                                                                                                                                                           LSO    KGZMAR
                                                                                                                                                                      SLVBGRIRNSVK
                                                                                                                                                                           KAZ   ARG
                                                                                                                                                                                  LBY   JPN
                                                             ZWE
                                                              SLV
                                                              ECU
                                                        IND CHNNAM
                                                               BIHRUSHUN CZE         LUX                                                                    COM       DZA            GRC
                                                                      URY   BHS  USA                                                                           SYR   ARM
                                                                                                                                                               MDA JOR    LBN
                                                                                                                                                                         TUR        MLT
                                                    MNGBOL  GEO
                                                              PERBWA MEX     FRA
                                                                           NZL                                                                                                      PRT
                                           ERI      COM
                                                   HTI          ROM
                                                                 DOM
                                                                   ZAF     ISRJPN                                                                                                     ESP
                                                                                                                                                                                       ITA
                                                  UZB
                                                        PAKAZE  BGR SVK
                                                               UKR
                                                                MKD
                                                              MNE
                                                          ALB    TUN
                                                                   TKM  CHL    AUS
                                    AFG                   KGZ    KAZ   ARG
                                                    TJKMDA MAR IRN         GRC
                                                   LSO        DZA
                                                            ARM         LBY
                                                                          MLT
                                                                TUR       PRTITA                                                                                                   CYP
                                                       SYR                  ESP
                                                            JOR LBN
         1




                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                                                                                     EGY

                                                               EGY
                                                                            CYP




                                                                                                   −.5
.5




                                                                                                                                                            SDN
                                                   SDN

                                                               ρ = −0.1243, N = 136                                                                                  ρ = −0.0701, N = 136




                                                                                                                        −1
                  0




                                     6    7     8    9     10    11                                                                           6    7     8    9     10    11
                                     Log Real GDP Per Capita (2000)                                                                           Log Real GDP Per Capita (2000)



                                                                                    Panel B: Maize



                                                                                                                         1.5
                  2




                                                                                                                                                                                 TTO

                                           BDI   GMB              SUR
                                                                          TTO

                                              SLESEN                              NLD
                                                  BGD                  POL
                                                                        BLR                                                                         BDI
                                                SDN                       ATG
                                              UGA                 THA                   LUX                                                                                  GNQ
                                                                   CUB

                                                                                                                                        1
                                                                   JAM                                                                                                      JAM MYS
                                                                                                    High to Intermediate Inputs (in logs)
                                                  KHM                              CHE
                                                                                   SGP                                                                  SLE                          CYP
                                                TCD                              BEL                                                                        BGD         DMA BLZLCA
                              1.5




                                                                       VEN                                                                                           COG              ISR SGP
                                                                     GNQ          CAN
                                                                                 GER                                                                         MNG
                                           NERBFA MNG
                                             RWA        AGO
                                                       CIV
                                                        BTN        BLZ MYS                                                                      LBR    RWA KHM             SUR    ATG
                                              MLI
                                             TGO
                                               NGA    CMR
                                                       IND                                                                                               GMB VNM IDN THA   CUB POL
                                                                                                                                                                                BLR        CHE LUX
   High to Low Inputs (in logs)




                                    ZARLBR     BEN
                                               GHA    VNM  COG   SWZ
                                                               NAM             BHS                                                                                           GAB
                                                             ZWE     BRA
                                                                      HRV    CYP
                                                                              ISR                                                                                 BTN
                                                                                                                                                                CMR
                                                                                                                                                                GUY            VEN        CAN
                                                                                                                                                                                          NLD
                                             ZMB NPL GIN
                                            ETH
                                            CAF             IDN
                                                          BOL   BIH
                                                              SLV
                                                             PRY
                                                              PER BWA       SVNBRBAUT                                                        ZAR
                                                                                                                                                        UGA SEN
                                                                                                                                                            LAO  CIVPHL
                                                                                                                                                                 IND      SWZ
                                                                                                                                                                          COLBRA
                                                                                                                                                                              HRV        GER
                                               SLB
                                             MWI
                                               MOZLAO GUY CHN   VUTGAB CZE
                                                              DMA           KOR                                                                      ETH BEN
                                                                                                                                                       TGO
                                                                                                                                                     CAF
                                                                                                                                                            NPL
                                                                                                                                                          SDN
                                                                                                                                                         GHA
                                                                                                                                                          TCD
                                                                                                                                                         NGA       GIN
                                                                                                                                                                  AGO
                                                                                                                                                                        PER
                                                                                                                                                                      STP
                                                                                                                                                                      CHN MKD
                                                                                                                                                                        ECU
                                                                                                                                                                         BIH
                                                                                                                                                                              CRI            BRN
                                         TZA        MRT                MEX        AUS                                                                    SLB
                                                                                                                                                        BFA   PNG
                                                                                                                                                              NIC   BOL
                                                                                                                                                                   HND     PAN HUN
                                                                                                                                                                         FJI
                                                                                                                                                                         VUT
                                                                                                                                                                       PRY          SVNBHSAUT
                                         GNB      HTI
                                                   KEN   HND LKAFJI
                                                              ECU        HUNNZL     USA                                                             NERZMB
                                                                                                                                                        MLI HTI
                                                                                                                                                       MWI         ALB LKA
                                                                                                                                                                       ZWE
                                                                                                                                                                         NAM   MEX
                                                                                                                                                                             ZAF
                                                                                                                                                                           DOM      KOR
                                                                                                                                                                                     NZL
                                                                                                                                                                                   CZE   BELUSA
                                             MDG    NIC          MKD
                                                                 COL ZAFSVK                                                                        TZA
                                                                                                                                                   GNBMDG    KEN        SLVKAZ
                                                                                                                                                                          TUR   SVK
                                                                                                                                                                               KNA    BRB
                                                           PHL    DOM CRI       FRA                                                                      MOZ TJK PAK    MNE
                                                                                                                                                                      GEO BGR URY
                                                                                                                                                                          ROM
                                                                                                                                                                         GTM
                                                                                                                           .5
                                         ERI        PNGPAK      UKR    LCA       JPN                                                                                     UKR RUS
                                                                                                                                                                           BWA  ARG       AUS
                                                                                                                                                                                        FRA
                                                                                                                                                                                         JPN
                                                UZB          GEO ROM
                                                                   KAZ                                                                             ERI    UZBCOM KGZ AZE          GRD
                                                                                                                                                                                    PRT
                                                         ALBMNEGTM KNA  URY                                                                                   MRT     ARM            GRC
                                                                 BGR
                                                                  PAN
                                                                    RUS  ARG         BRN                                                                        MDA                 MLT ITA
                                                         KGZ     TUR                                                                                        LSO
                                                   TJK                      MLT                                                                                 SYR                    ESP
                1




                                                                             GRC
                                                      MDA  AZE            GRD ESP
                                                   COMSYR STP
                                                             ARM    IRN     PRT ITA                                                                                    IRQIRN
                                                  LSO          IRQLBN                                                                                                JOR
                                                                                                                                                                      DZA LBN
                                                               JOR                                                                           AFG
                                                                                                                0



                                    AFG                             TKM                                                                                                    TKM
                                                                DZA                                                                                                  MAR

                                                               MAR

                                                                                                                                                                                 CHL
.5




                                                                                                                                                                         TUN
                                                                                                   −.5




                                                                          CHL
                                                                  TUN



                                                                          LBY
                                                                                                                                                                                 LBY

                                                               ρ = −0.0997, N = 151                                                                                  ρ = −0.0375, N = 151
                                                                                                                        −1
                  0




                                     6    7     8    9     10    11                                                                           6    7     8    9     10    11
                                     Log Real GDP Per Capita (2000)                                                                           Log Real GDP Per Capita (2000)



                                                                                     Panel C: Rice
                                                                                                                         2.5
                  4




                                                                                                                                                                                         CHE




                                                                                  CHE
                                                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                   High to Intermediate Inputs (in logs)
                               3
  High to Low Inputs (in logs)




                                                                                                                           1.5




                                                                                                                                                                               GRD
                                                                                                                                                                             LCA
               2




                                                                                                                                                            LAO
                                                                                                                                                              VNM               MYS     SGP
                                                                                                                 1




                                                    VNM                     SGP
                                           BDI   LAO                 MYS ITA                                                                                       CHNVUT            ITA
                                                         IDNVUT
                                                            FJI                                                                                   BDI                           TTO
                                              GMB     BTN     SUR
                                                              THA MEX                                                                                              IDN SWZ
                                                                                                                                                                        THA  MEX
                                              SLB        CHNCOL GAB  GRD
                                                                     TTO ESP                                                                         RWA        BTN                 ESP
                                    ZARLBR   SLESEN
                                            RWA     GUYCOG
                                                           PER GNQ
                                                          GEO
                                                         PHL
                                                           ECU    VEN                                                                                 SLE
                                                                                                                                                       GMB
                                                                                                                                                       SLB
                                                                                                                                                                           GNQ
                                                                                                                                                                         CUB
                                           ETH
                                                 KHM
                                                 BGD
                                                  NIC
                                             MLI NPL  AGO
                                                    CMR
                                                     IND
                                                   PNG
                                                     PAK      PAN
                                                               CUBLCA
                                                                BRA
                                                               BLZ
                                                             SWZ          JPN BRN
                                                                          FRA                                                                ZAR
                                                                                                                                                    ETH   SEN GUY
                                                                                                                                                               IND
                                                                                                                                                                AGOSTP
                                                                                                                                                                   PHLFJI
                                                                                                                                                                     ECU
                                                                                                                                                                       COL   VEN
                                                                                                                                                                           BRA
                                                                                                                                                                                          BRN
                                         TZAZMB
                                            MDG
                                           CAFNGACOM
                                               TCD     HND
                                                     CIV
                                                       GIN SLV  RUS
                                                                 CRI                                                                                      KHM CMR
                                                                                                                                                               CIV      SUR
                                                                                                                                                                        PAN CRI       JPN
                                                                                                                                                                                     FRA
                                         GNB BFA
                                            MWI
                                             UGA         STP
                                                           DMA
                                                          LKA    HRV                                                                            LBR        KEN
                                                                                                                                                     TGO NPL
                                                                                                                                                          BGD    GIN SLV GAB
                                                                                                                                                                    GEO
                                            TGO
                                              MOZ
                                              GHA
                                              BEN KEN BOL PRY
                                                          ZWE DOMARG
                                                            GTM
                                                                     ATGBRB
                                                                           AUS
                                                                         BHS
                                                                             USA                                                                  TZAMDG
                                                                                                                                                      UGA
                                                                                                                                                      MLI
                                                                                                                                                    CAFNGANIC
                                                                                                                                                     MWI
                                                                                                                                                       GHA  PNG
                                                                                                                                                           COM
                                                                                                                                                               PAK
                                                                                                                                                                 HNDPRY
                                                                                                                                                                    ZWE
                                                                                                                                                                     PER
                                                                                                                                                                     DMA BLZ
                                                                                                                                                                        DOM
                                                           MNE                                                                                    GNBZMB
                                                                                                                                                       BEN
                                                                                                                                                       MOZ
                                                                                                                                                        TCD
                                                                                                                                                      BFA           LKA
                                                                                                                                                                   COG
                                                                                                                                                                  BOL                  AUS
                                                                       KOR                                                                                                RUS  ARG  BHS  USA
                                                                                                      .5




                                               SDN           TUR                                                                                                      GTM
                                                       ALB
1




                                                                                                                                                                     MNE     KNA
                                                                                                                                                                            HRV ATGBRB
                                                                   IRN
                                                   HTI          BIH   URY                                                                               SDN                   URY
                                             NER                    ZAF                                                                                   HTI          TUR
                                                                                                                                                                                  KOR
                                                                                                                                                                          IRN
                                                                     KNA                                                                                         ALB  BIH
                                                                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                      NER                  ZAF

                                                                 ρ = 0.1322, N = 104                                                                                   ρ = 0.1733, N = 104
                  0




                                     6    7     8    9     10    11                                                                           6    7     8    9     10    11
                                     Log Real GDP Per Capita (2000)                                                                           Log Real GDP Per Capita (2000)




                                    Figure 14: Potential Aggregate Yield for Different Crops by Input Levels



                                                                                              39
                                              Panel A: Rain-fed (intermediate input level)

   Potential Yield (log, Int.$ per Hectare)                                MDA
                                                              ZMBMOZ   KEN                ROM
                                                                                     GEOUKRBGRCUBHRVSVKATG MLT PRI
                                                                                                     ARG          BEL USA
                                                              MWI     KHM                             HUN
                                        6              TZA TGO
                                                       GNB
                                                                  BENHTI
                                                                      BGD
                                                                       TJK
                                                                         NIC
                                                                           VNM
                                                                                  AZE
                                                                                 KGZ
                                                                                HND
                                                                                      LKAGTMTHA
                                                                                     ARM
                                                                                      ZWE
                                                                                       MNEMKD
                                                                                         BIH
                                                                                        SLV
                                                                                      PRY
                                                                                              SUR   URY
                                                                                                RUSPOL
                                                                                                   VEN
                                                                                                     BLR
                                                                                                           SVN FRADNK
                                                                                                         CZE ISRGBRNLD
                                                                                                                   AUT
                                                                                                                 GER
                                                                                                                ITA  CHE
                                              ZAR LBR            NGA
                                                                  GHA LSOPNG   AGO
                                                                                ALB
                                                                                 BOL
                                                                                   PHL  DZA
                                                                                      MAR       LTU
                                                                                                 CRI
                                                                                                ZAF
                                                                                              DOM
                                                            CAF SLE
                                                               BFA
                                                             MDG
                                                               UGA UZB     CMRCIV
                                                                             IND CHN
                                                                           GUY
                                                                                           TUR
                                                                                             BWA
                                                                                             PAN
                                                                                    IDNECU SWZ
                                                                                           COL  BRA
                                                                                               JAM
                                                                                                       CHL     BHS
                                                                                                             NZL
                                                                                               LVAMEX MYS GRCSWE
                                                                                                                   CAN
                                                                                                                 JPN
                                                                                                                   IRL   BRNLUX
                                                               MLI TCD
                                                             RWA      NPL SYR GINCOG
                                                                      LAO
                                                                    SDN                  FJI  TUN
                                                                                               BLZ
                                                                                              KAZ              ESPAUS
                                               AFG      BDI
                                                          NER    GMB     MRT                  LBN
                                                                                               IRN          PRT
                                                                                                GAB    LBY
                                                       ERI ETH SLB SEN  MNG              VUT TKM   EST      CYP
                                                                                                           KOR         NOR
                                                   SOM                       PAK     JORNAM                  TWN
                                                                              BTN       IRQ
                               4



                                                                                                                FIN
                                                                                      PER
                    2




                                                                                      EGY
                                                                YEM

                                                                                                          SAU
        0




                                                                                                             OMN KWT

                                                                                                                           QAT
                                                                                                         ρ = −0.1285, N = 159
                         −2




                                                 6              7       8          9         10                           11
                                                                Real GDP per Capita (log, 2000)

                          Panel B: Gravity Irrigation (intermediate input level)
   Potential Yield (log, Int.$ per Hectare)




                                                                   UZB     MDA KGZGEO         CUB     ARG
                                                                                                ZAF URY                 USA
                                                                      KHM             LKA ROM
                                                                      BGD
                                                                       TJK        AZE UKR     DOM           MLT
                                        6




                                                              ZMB
                                                              MWI      KEN                  THA
                                                       GNB       MOZ        IND CHN        BGR
                                                                                         GTM
                                                                                              KAZ
                                                                                             SURRUS
                                                                                                  HRVSVKATG TWN BEL
                                                                                                       HUN
                                                                                                        CHL
                                                       TZA MDG             VNM        ZWE
                                                                                      EGY
                                                                                     ARM         TKM                CAN
                                                                                                                   AUS
                                                                                                                  FRA
                                                                  BEN
                                                                SLE HTI NIC     BOL
                                                                           GUY PHL
                                                                         PNG          PRY
                                                                                      MAR
                                                                                        DZA
                                                                                       MNE        CRI BLR     ISR JPN
                                                                                                                 GBR
                                                                                                                 PRINLD
                                               AFG LBR                NPL  SYR              PAN    POL MYSKOR
                                                                                                   VEN
                                              ZAR            TGO
                                                               UGA    LAO
                                                                      LSO    CIV
                                                                        MNGPAK  GIN IDNECU
                                                                               ALB
                                                                               HND
                                                                              AGO       SLVCOL
                                                                                           MKD
                                                                                           TUR
                                                                                           SWZ
                                                                                         BIH
                                                                                              TUN
                                                                                             BWA
                                                                                                BRA
                                                                                                LTUMEX
                                                                                              JAM
                                                                                               BLZ      LBY SVN ITA
                                                                                                          CZE
                                                                                                                   DNK
                                                                                                                    IRL   BRN
                                    5




                                                                  GHA                                        GRCESPGER
                                                                                                                    AUT
                                                   SOM           GMB
                                                                 NGA
                                                               MLI         CMR           FJI IRN            PRT
                                                                                                              NZL SWE CHE
                                                        BDI CAF                         IRQ LBNLVA                      ARE  LUX
                                                             RWASLB
                                                           ETH                    COGJOR
                                                                                       PER      GAB          CYP
                                                               BFATCDSEN                 VUT                SAU
                               4




                                                       ERI                                                                   QAT
                                                                             BTN                                BHS
                                                               YEM      MRT              NAM       EST                   NOR
                                                                    SDN                                        OMN
                                                          NER
                          3




                                                                                                                       KWT
                                                                                                                FIN
                    2




                                                                                                         ρ = −0.0268, N = 160
                                                 6              7       8          9         10                           11
                                                                Real GDP per Capita (log, 2000)




Figure 15: Potential Aggregate Yield in Cereals by Water Supply




                                                                                 40
and poor countries. If farming practices were the same around the world then land quality would
not be a constraint on farmers in poor countries. Instead we trace the problem to what crops are
produced, where they are produced within the country, and most importantly how efficiently they
are produced in each cell of land.

Our analysis illustrates that there are large gaps between actual and potential yields in poor coun-
tries, much larger than in rich countries. The implication is that using existing technologies and
improving allocations can increase agricultural productivity 5-fold. These seem like sizeable un-
realized gains in productivity. One possibility is that the technologies agronomists treat as easily
localized (in the calculation of potential yields) cannot be profitably implemented everywhere in
the developing world. The other possibility is that there are constraints that prevent the adoption
of modern technologies and frictions that prevent markets from efficiently allocating resources in
developing countries. More work is needed to understand the importance of each one of these ex-
planations. While a large body of recent work has been studying the constraints and frictions that
impact agricultural productivity, with mounting evidence of their importance, much less work has
been done on understanding the localization of agricultural technologies in developing countries.
GAEZ has been following a variety of approaches for “ground-truthing” and verifying the results
of their crop suitability analysis, but more needs to be done in terms of further validation. At
the same time further research is needed to understand what factors constrain the choices of farm-
ers in the developing world, preventing them from better exploiting their land and environmental
endowments.




                                                41
References
Adamopoulos, T. (2011). Transportation costs, agricultural productivity, and cross-country income
  differences. International Economic Review, 52(2):489–521.

Adamopoulos, T. and Restuccia, D. (2014). The size distribution of farms and international pro-
  ductivity differences. American Economic Review, 104(6):1667–97.

Costinot, A. and Donaldson, D. (2012). Ricardo’s theory of comparative advantage: Old idea, new
  evidence. The American Economic Review, 102(3):453–458.

Costinot, A. and Donaldson, D. (2016). How large are the gains from economic integration? theory
  and evidence from us agriculture, 1880-1997.

Costinot, A., Donaldson, D., and Smith, C. (2016). Evolving comparative advantage and the
  impact of climate change in agricultural markets: Evidence from 1.7 million fields around the
  world. Journal of Political Economy, 124(1):205–248.

Di Falco, S. and Chavas, J.-P. (2009). On crop biodiversity, risk exposure, and food security in the
  highlands of ethiopia. American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 91(3):599–611.

Donaldson, D. and Storeygard, A. (2016). The view from above: Applications of satellite data in
  economics. The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 30(4):171–198.

Donovan, K. (2016). Agricultural risk, intermediate inputs, and cross-country productivity differ-
  ences. Unpublished manuscript, University of Notre Dame.

Doorenbos, J. and Kassam, A. (1979). Yield response to water. Irrigation and drainage paper,
  33:257.

Fuwa, N., Edmonds, C., and Banik, P. (2007). Are small-scale rice farmers in eastern india really in-
  efficient? examining the effects of microtopography on technical efficiency estimates. Agricultural
  Economics, 36(3):335–346.

Gollin, D., Lagakos, D., and Waugh, M. E. (2014a). Agricultural productivity differences across
  countries. The American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings, 104(5):165–170.

                                                 42
Gollin, D., Lagakos, D., and Waugh, M. E. (2014b). The agricultural productivity gap. The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(2):939–993.

Gollin, D., Parente, S., and Rogerson, R. (2002). The role of agriculture in development. American
  Economic Review, pages 160–164.

Gollin, D. and Rogerson, R. (2014). Productivity, transport costs and subsistence agriculture.
  Journal of Development Economics, 107:38–48.

Herrendorf, B. and Schoellman, T. (2015). Why is measured productivity so low in agriculture?
  Review of Economic Dynamics, 18:1003–1022.

Holmes, T. J. and Lee, S. (2012). Economies of density versus natural advantage: Crop choice on
  the back forty. Review of Economics and Statistics, 94(1):1–19.

Jaenicke, E. C. and Lengnick, L. L. (1999). A soil-quality index and its relationship to efficiency and
  productivity growth measures: two decompositions. American Journal of Agricultural Economics,
  81(4):881–893.

Lagakos, D. and Waugh, M. E. (2013). Selection, agriculture, and cross-country productivity
  differences. The American Economic Review, 103(2):948–980.

Nunn, N. and Qian, N. (2011). The potato’s contribution to population and urbanization: Evidence
  from a historical experiment. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(2):593–650.

Prasada Rao, D. (1993). Intercountry comparisons of agricultural output and productivity. Tech-
  nical report.

Restuccia, D., Yang, D. T., and Zhu, X. (2008). Agriculture and aggregate productivity: A quan-
  titative cross-country analysis. Journal of Monetary Economics, 55(2):234–250.

Sherlund, S. M., Barrett, C. B., and Adesina, A. A. (2002). Smallholder technical efficiency control-
  ling for environmental production conditions. Journal of Development Economics, 69(1):85–101.

Steduto, P., Hsiao, T. C., Fereres, E., and Raes, D. (2012). Crop yield response to water. FAO
  Roma.

                                                  43
Tombe, T. (2015). The missing food problem: Trade, agriculture, and international productivity
  differences. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 7(3):226–258.

Wiebe, K. D. (2003). Land quality, agricultural productivity, and food security: Biophysical processes
  and economic choices at local, regional, and global levels. Edward Elgar Publishing.

Wiebe, K., S. M. N. C. and Breneman, V. (2000). Resource quality and agricultural productivity:
  A multi-country comparison. USDA.




                                                 44
On-Line Appendix (Not for Publication)

A     Country Sample

Table A.1 lists all 162 countries in our data set, along with the corresponding country code, the
number of cells covering the country, and the level of real GDP per capita in 2000.


                      Table A.1: List of Countries and Other Information

           Country                              Code    Cell Count   GDP per capita
           Afghanistan                          AFG           9000               327
           Albania                              ALB            444              3177
           Algeria                              DZA          30751              5276
           Angola                               AGO          14988              2901
           Antigua and Barbuda                  ATG              5             14522
           Argentina                            ARG          40080             12519
           Armenia                              ARM            451              4333
           Australia                            AUS         100208             30240
           Austria                              AUT           1447             31574
           Azerbaijan                           AZE           1311              3722
           Bahamas                              BHS            160             24593
           Bangladesh                           BGD           1759              1794
           Belarus                              BLR           4057             12188
           Belgium                              BEL            558             29693
           Belize                               BLZ            271              7910
           Benin                                BEN           1374              1336
           Bhutan                               BTN            523              2817
           Bolivia                              BOL          13284              3346
           Bosnia and Herzegovina               BIH            836              5798
           Botswana                             BWA           7297              7219
           Brazil                               BRA         101847              8391
           Brunei Darussalam                    BRN             65             48210
           Bulgaria                             BGR           1754              6374
           Burkina Faso                         BFA           3262              1121
           Burundi                              BDI            312               706
           Cambodia                             KHM           2184              1764
           Cameroon                             CMR           5470              2448
           Canada                               CAN         244154             31471
           Central African Republic             CAF           7287               918
           Chad                                 TCD          15448              1445


                                               45
          Table A.1: List of Countries and Other Information

Country                             Code   Cell Count   GDP per capita
Chile                              CHL         11199            14309
China                              CHN        136881             4076
Colombia                           COL         13318             6620
Congo                              COG          4032             3835
Costa Rica                         CRI           609             9463
Cote d’Ivoire                      CIV          3795             2761
Croatia                            HRV           919             9775
Cuba                               CUB          1381             7636
Cyprus                             CYP           129            20275
Czech Republic                     CZE          1419            16044
Democratic Republic of the Congo   ZAR         27327              312
Denmark                            DNK           898            30468
Dominican Republic                 DOM           598             7559
Ecuador                            ECU          2996             4894
Egypt                              EGY         13029             4690
El Salvador                        SLV           253             5192
Equatorial Guinea                  GNQ           314             8820
Eritrea                            ERI          1469              668
Estonia                            EST          1015            10405
Ethiopia                           ETH         13365              892
Fiji                                FJI          230             5784
Finland                            FIN          9008            26402
France                             FRA          9266            27311
Gabon                              GAB          3056             8504
Gambia                             GMB           132             1289
Georgia                            GEO          1099             4310
Germany                            GER          6608            29051
Ghana                              GHA          2819             1359
Greece                             GRC          1970            20708
Guatemala                          GTM          1326             5530
Guinea                             GIN          2908             3235
Guinea-Bissau                      GNB           403              657
Guyana                             GUY          2475             2457
Haiti                              HTI           336             1655
Honduras                           HND          1360             3062
Hungary                            HUN          1590            13025
India                              IND         40163             2687
Indonesia                          IDN         22138             4151
Iran (Islamic Republic of)         IRN         22489             8049
Iraq                               IRQ          6069             5403


                                   46
          Table A.1: List of Countries and Other Information

Country                             Code   Cell Count   GDP per capita
Ireland                             IRL          1334           31389
Israel                              ISR           285           22356
Italy                               ITA          4774           27142
Jamaica                            JAM            135            7877
Japan                              JPN           5488           28341
Jordan                             JOR           1220            4329
Kazakhstan                         KAZ          47485            7641
Kenya                              KEN           6800            1943
Korea, Republic of                 KOR           1434           18597
Kuwait                             KWT            225           36146
Kyrgyzstan                         KGZ           3098            3310
Lao People’s Democratic Republic   LAO           2847            1777
Latvia                             LVA           1371            8119
Lebanon                            LBN            144            7505
Lesotho                            LSO            414            1770
Liberia                            LBR           1125             492
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya             LBY          21221           14674
Lithuania                          LTU           1325            8566
Luxembourg                         LUX             47           63392
Madagascar                         MDG           7353             965
Malawi                             MWI           1425            1032
Malaysia                           MYS           3856           14178
Mali                               MLI          15355            1108
Malta                              MLT              6           19442
Mauritania                         MRT          12944            2085
Mexico                             MEX          25084           10339
Mongolia                           MNG          26562            2008
Montenegro                         MNE            214            4877
Morocco                            MAR           5529            4574
Mozambique                         MOZ           9647            1245
Namibia                            NAM          10397            5531
Nepal                              NPL           1944            1783
Netherlands                        NLD            677           31927
New Zealand                        NZL           4206           21437
Nicaragua                          NIC           1538            2058
Niger                              NER          14499             811
Nigeria                            NGA          10772            1275
Norway                             NOR           8617           41777
Oman                               OMN           3849           23752
Pakistan                           PAK          11827            2696


                                   47
          Table A.1: List of Countries and Other Information

Country                            Code    Cell Count   GDP per capita
Panama                             PAN           888             7124
Papua New Guinea                   PNG          5470             2194
Paraguay                           PRY          5062             4556
Peru                               PER         15324             4975
Philippines                        PHL          3538             3955
Poland                             POL          5882            10834
Portugal                           PRT          1381            19606
Puerto Rico                        PRI           113            25955
Qatar                              QAT           142            61389
Republic of Moldova                MDA           576             2420
Romania                            ROM          3958             6151
Russia                             RUS        421168             8305
Rwanda                             RWA           293              994
Saudi Arabia                       SAU         25034            19207
Senegal                            SEN          2372             1732
Sierra Leone                       SLE           863             1171
Singapore                          SGP             7            35424
Slovakia                           SVK           858            11844
Slovenia                           SVN           341            19043
Solomon Islands                    SLB           334             1318
Somalia                            SOM          7490              480
South Africa                       ZAF         16282             8441
Spain                              ESP          7727            24945
Sri Lanka                          LKA           793             4603
Sudan                              SDN         30052             1546
Suriname                           SUR          1706             7490
Swaziland                          SWZ           228             6587
Sweden                             SWE         11321            27174
Switzerland                        CHE           704            34414
Syrian Arab Republic               SYR          2672             2446
Taiwan                             TWN           464            21513
Tajikistan                         TJK          2120             1902
Thailand                           THA          6227             7058
The former Yugoslav
  Republic of Macedonia            MKD            396            6358
Togo                               TGO            682             984
Tunisia                            TUN           2186            7572
Turkey                             TUR          11699            6428
Turkmenistan                       TKM           7077            8716
Uganda                             UGA           2834            1094


                                  48
                      Table A.1: List of Countries and Other Information

          Country                                    Code     Cell Count      GDP per capita
          Ukraine                                    UKR            10587                  5644
          United Arab Emirates                       ARE              908                 38604
          United Kingdom                             GBR             4857                 27032
          United Republic of Tanzania                TZA            11088                   681
          United States                              USA           160841                 39241
          Uruguay                                    URY             2467                 11426
          Uzbekistan                                 UZB             6960                  1477
          Vanuatu                                    VUT              157                  5607
          Venezuela                                  VEN            10758                 10553
          Viet Nam                                   VNM             3970                  2407
          Yemen                                      YEM             5148                  1129
          Zambia                                     ZMB             9045                  1038
          Zimbabwe                                   ZWE             4813                  4528

Notes: The cell count of each country is from GAEZ, and refers to the number of 5-arc-minute cells covering the
country. Real GDP per capita is from the PWTv6.3.




                                                    49
