                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                  BUYING THE VERDICT

                                       Lauren H. Cohen
                                        Umit G. Gurun

                                      Working Paper 24542
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24542


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    April 2018




We would like to thank Daniel Klerman, Prasad Krishnamurthy, Panos Patatoukas, Raghu Rau,
Stephen Solomon, Jed Stiglitz, and seminar participants at the University of California at
Berkeley Law School and Haas Business School as well as the 2017 Conference on Empirical
Legal Studies held at Cornell University. We gratefully acknowledge funding from the National
Science Foundation (SciSIP-1535813). All errors are ours. Please send comments to either
author. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Lauren H. Cohen and Umit G. Gurun. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Buying the Verdict
Lauren H. Cohen and Umit G. Gurun
NBER Working Paper No. 24542
April 2018
JEL No. D22,G30,K41,K42,L14,M21,M37

                                           ABSTRACT

We document evidence that firms systematically increase specialized, locally targeted advertising
following the firm being taken to trial in that given location - precisely following initiation of the
suit. In particular, we use legal actions brought against publicly traded firms over the 20 year
sample period that progress to trial from 1995-2014. In terms of magnitude, the increase is
sizable: targeted local advertising increases by 23% (t=4.39) following the suit. Moreover, firms
concentrate these strategic increases in locations where the return on their advertising dollars are
largest: in smaller, more concentrated advertising markets where fewer competitor firms are
advertising. They focus their advertisement spikes specifically toward jury trials, and in fact
specifically toward the most likely jury pool. Lastly, we document that these advertising spikes
are associated with verdicts, increasing the probability of a favorable outcome.


Lauren H. Cohen
Harvard Business School
Baker Library 273
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
lcohen@hbs.edu

Umit G. Gurun
University of Texas at Dallas
School of Management
800 W Campbell Rd. SM41
75080 Richardson, TX
umit.gurun@utdallas.edu
Firms are legally obliged to operate within the standards of their operating

jurisdictions. Even so, and despite the fact that firms spend substantial capital in

order to stay within this legal framework, infractions occur. While many of these

infractions are settled privately, a large number do make it into the court system to

be adjudicated.    These tend to be larger stakes cases (from a value-weighted

perspective) for the firms involved.1    Moreover, the U.S. legal system is founded

upon the notion that a jury of one’s peers can conduct an arms-length review of a

case adjudicating the guilt (or lack of sufficient evidence for guilt) of the alleged

legal infraction. However, the moment that a party is sued, it has a clear incentive

to influence the jury in its favor. Much of this convincing takes place inside the

courtroom.    However, one power that large, publicly facing, and well-funded

organizations have at their disposal is to do so also outside of the courtroom.     In

this paper, we document strong evidence for one form of that influence – namely,

we find that firms systematically increase specialized, local advertising when it is

taken to a court-trial in a given location – specifically in the geographic location of

the court deliberation, and precisely following initiation of the suit.

       We test all legal actions taken against publicly traded firms in federal

courthouses over the nearly 20-year sample period from 1995-2014. In particular,

we focus on those that progressed to trial proceedings. We find that these are spread

throughout the United States, across industries, and over time. However, they share



1
  Lederman, Leandra, 1999, “Which Cases Go to Trial: An Empirical Study of Predictors
of Failure to Settle,” Case Western Law Review, Volume 49-2.



                                Buying the Verdict - 1
a common response by the firms who are defendants. Upon being sued in a given

location, firms significantly increase advertising in that location.       In terms of

magnitude, they increase advertising by 23% (t=4.39) following the suit.              In

contrast, we see no increase: i.) in the same city, by the firm, but before and leading

up to suit (we find a sharp discontinuity directly following the suit); ii.) in any other

similar city at the same time by the same firm (so it is not a firm-level or even firm-

market type policy move); and iii.) in the exact same city where the firm is located

by any other firm operating there.    Moreover, firms are significantly more likely to

initiate advertising in cities (in which it had previously advertised zero), directly

following lawsuit – probability of advertising initiation increasing by 25% (t=4.45).

To concretize this, assume we find that Walmart is sued in Akron, OH in 2001. We

see a large spike in Walmart’s advertising in Akron directly following the suit. We

see no abnormal movement in Walmart’s advertising policy or spending leading up

to the suit. Additionally, Walmart does not increase advertising following the suit

in Toledo, OH (a similar sized market with similar growth rates leading up to 2001).

Moreover, Target shows no abnormal move in the same sued-location, Akron, OH,

at the exact same time that Walmart is ramping up advertising (so it has nothing

to do with a general location-time effect).

       We establish the precision of our effect to the specific time, firm, and location

of our shocks using a number of placebo-effect set-ups (e.g., redefining the “suit”

year as years prior in the same location).       Additionally, we do so through the

inclusion of a number of fine fixed-effects. In particular, we include firm-by-time




                                Buying the Verdict - 2
(e.g., comparing all cities in which Walmart operates and advertises in a given year),

as well as firm-by-city (e.g., comparing over time Walmart’s advertising decisions

and policies in solely Akron, OH). We find that the effect remains economically

large and statistically significant in all of these specifications. Moreover, when we

split our sample over time, we find that these effects are large and significant up

through the present day.

       As an example of our impact, take the case of Samsung. Samsung is the most

sued firm in the Eastern District of Texas Federal District Court. This comes nearly

entirely from patent infringement allegation cases, and has been driven in recent

decades by the rise in NPE activity (Cohen, Kominers, and Gurun (2016)). Patent

infringement litigation trials are unique in that nearly all are adjudicated with a

jury (as opposed to bench trials (i.e., decided by the judge) – Lemley (2013)).

Moreover, the stakes of these cases have been large – in the tens to hundreds of

millions of dollars of awarded damages against the firm, with many suits still ongoing

(Fish and Richardson (2016), Klerman and Greg Reilly (2016)). How has Samsung

responded to this spate of allegations? Beside spending large amounts to launch

legal defenses against the infringement claims, we have seen it make a number of

other deliberate decisions.

       First, each year Marshall Texas holds a locally famous Winter Festival (the

Marshall Winter Festival). Following generous Samsung sponsorship, that festival

began with the Samsung Holiday Celebration Show (Figure 1). Secondly, Samsung

paid for the construction of the Samsung Ice Skating Rink in Marshall, Texas. The




                               Buying the Verdict - 3
Samsung Ice Skating Rink is not only the sole outdoor ice-skating rink in all of Texas

(for clear reasons), it is located directly outside the front of door of the District

Courthouse (Figure 2), visible to all jurors who enter. Third, Samsung sponsored

numerous High School Scholarships. For example:

       1.) The Samsung General Scholarship;

       2.) The Samsung Math and Science Scholarship; and even,

       3.) The Samsung Football Scholarship.

A requirement to receive one of these scholarships (as seen in Figure 3) was attending

high school in Marshall, Texas or one of the surrounding towns to Marshall.

Samsung’s spending pattern, its initiation solely following the firm’s legal suits in

Marshall, and its focus on the local community, make this an interesting example of

a firm (by revealed preference) thinking it optimal to make these time-, and region-

focused investments. What we find in this paper is general evidence across time,

location, and firms, of corporations engaging in this “influencing of the verdict,”

behavior.

       We test a number of other implications of influencing the verdict behavior by

firms. Firstly, if the behavior that we document truly is a result of firms attempting

to impact their perception in a given region, we might expect firms to concentrate

this behavior in markets in which their return on advertising is the highest. Along

these lines, this impact may be easier to realize in smaller, more concentrated

advertising markets (e.g., Akron vs. Los Angeles). We find evidence of exactly this




                               Buying the Verdict - 4
in the data – this explicit ramping of advertising is concentrated in smaller, more

concentrated markets following suits.

       Secondly, if firms really are attempting to maximize influence with their

spikes in advertising, we might expect them to concentrate on markets where there

are fewer other firms also advertising; so where their increase in advertising will take

up a larger share of the market. Again, this is precisely what we see in the data.

Firms concentrate significantly larger advertising spikes in locations where there are

fewer other firms also advertising.

       Thirdly, if what we document truly does represent firms attempting to

influence the verdict, we may expect these firms to concentrate on jury (as opposed

to judge (bench)) adjudicated trials, as the average member of the jury pool is likely

more influencable than the judge. While many types of lawsuits have variation in

the usage of jury vs. bench, one type of lawsuit that is nearly uniformly decided by

jury – as mentioned above - are patent lawsuits. We thus segregate out patent

lawsuits and test specifically on these. Consistent with this buying the verdict being

more concentrated in jury trials, we find that the advertising spike is large and

significant in the case of patent (jury) lawsuits, but small and statistically zero in

the case of bench trials.

       Fourth, we use the novel micro-level reporting of our data to further explore

the mechanism. In particular, we have the amount spent in advertising by a given

firm specifically on television advertising in a given location. Moreover, we have the

amount of television watched within a given location, broken down finely into 5-




                                Buying the Verdict - 5
year increments of the demographic (e.g., 15-19 year olds, 20-24 year olds, 25-29

year olds, 30-34 year olds, etc.). We use these data in two ways. First, if influencing

the verdict really is driving firm behavior, we might expect firms to concentrate

their television advertising efforts precisely where the audience eyes per advertising

dollar are highest (e.g., a potential proxy for return on advertising investment). We

find exactly this to be true – firms concentrate television advertising efforts precisely

where audience per television advertising dollar are the highest. Second, using the

fine demographic viewership data, we are able to separate viewers into the most

likely jury pool (the average juror in our sample is aged 50), and those television

viewers that couldn’t possibly be jurors (minors - viewers under the age of 18). We

find that television advertising dollars are strategically targeted exactly at the most

likely jury pool. Alternatively, we see no spike in advertising in the same location

to minors (who are ineligible to be jurors).

       Lastly, it is worth noting that the effects we document are robust across our

sample period - even through present day. Thus, this does not appear to be a

behavior that is an artifact of the past, but instead is a robust firm behavior through

the present; making the need to understand it acute.

       Taking a step back, we believe that the sum of our evidence points most

plausibly to firms taking strategic, targeted actions in order to the influence the

verdict of litigation against them outside - in addition to inside - the courtroom.

However, there are other potential explanations. For instance, it might be that the

firm is advertising more in places that it is being sued because it also faces brand




                                Buying the Verdict - 6
backlash on the product-side precisely in those locations (e.g., Chipotle food-borne

contaminant issues were spatially hitting different locations (and not others); and

the BP Oil spill along the Gulf Coast). You might then see advertising spike in

these locations following an infraction not to convince jurors, but instead to simply

convince customers (and the communities) that the firm’s brand was committed to

a certain level of product quality, or investment in the community. In order to test

this, we test a number of its implications. First, as mentioned above we see the

effect of this increase in advertising strong and concentrated in patent (jury) trials.

This is despite the fact that patent infringement allegations are amongst the most

esoteric and most difficult to both describe to (and describe direct damages toward)

the average consumer, and so might be least likely to cause localized public harm or

outrage. Second, consistent with the firm not simply protecting important local

relationships, we see a large and significant 25% increase in initiations following a

lawsuit in that location. These locations (by revealed preference) were not locations

that the firm sufficiently valued the act of advertising in - so not strategically

important enough to advertise ongoing stakeholder relationships with - until

precisely after the lawsuit, only after which advertising was initiated.        Third,

following the advertising spike of firms after lawsuits, we find that firms advertising

in those sued locations are back to baseline by 3 years following (when the suits

have been adjudicated).

       Lastly, we explore two sets of firms that we might ex ante expect to have less

incentive to advertise absent the litigation. First, we examine business-to-business




                               Buying the Verdict - 7
firms. These firms – who sell goods only to other businesses, not to retail consumers

– unsurprisingly, advertise significantly less, as their business models are on average

based on longer-term supply relationships with other firms. However, when we run

our exact same specification, we find that B2B significantly increase advertising

precisely following lawsuits. In fact, they have a 50% larger probability of initiating

advertising following suit (relative to retail facing firms), perhaps not surprisingly,

largely due to their lower need for advertising (and presence) ex ante. Second, we

examine plaintiff firms’ advertising responses, as well. Plaintiffs (the firms filing

suit or damages against another party) have not been accused of any wrongdoing,

and thus potentially have less of a need to repair any brand damage with consumers.

However, they have an equivalent incentive to curry favor with juries in order to

rule in their favor in order to win the lawsuit. We find that firms as plaintiffs – like

defendants – significantly increase advertising precisely in those locations in which

they bring lawsuits, and precisely at the time they bring the suit.

       Turning to the impact of this advertising on outcome of the trial, we do find

suggestive evidence of “buying the verdict.” We caveat this, as we do not observe

settlements, or terms of settlements, and thus we can estimate only the trials that

proceed to verdict for either the plaintiff or defendant. This being said, we find that

a one standard deviation in this targeted advertising by firms increases their win

rates by roughly 6 percentage points. Off of a mean of 44%, this equates to a roughly

14 percent increase in rate.




                                Buying the Verdict - 8
       Stepping back, the fact that this behavior is: i.) robust across time, firms,

and locations, ii.) lines up across strategic dimensions of the behavior, and iii.) is

strong and robust through present-day, suggests that it is worth examining more

closely as litigation against firms continues to rise. The broader implication of this

is that policy makers, given this increasing trend in behavior, should consider what

impact it is having – and whether it is a desired impact – on the judicial process

and its outcomes.

        The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section I provides a brief

background and literature review. Section II describes the data we use, while

Sections III presents the main results on influencing the verdict, and establishes its

identification in firm-, time-, and location-specific space. Section IV explores the

mechanism in more detail, establishing where buying the verdict behavior is more

acute, and its increasing usage over time. Section V refines the buying the verdict

activity and estimates the economic impact of influencing the verdict, while Section

VI concludes.




I.     Background and Literature

       Litigation is generally recognized as being costly, unpredictable and

inefficient. Yet it is also a fact of life that any business activity inevitably involves

litigation. Average percentage of litigation costs as a percentage of total revenues

rose from 0.62% to 0.89% between 2000 and 2008. While the outside litigation costs

doubled, (from $66 million to $115 million), the in-house litigation costs remained



                                Buying the Verdict - 9
similar ($16 to $18 million).2 Increasingly litigious corporate environment has been

also documented in recent surveys involving smaller companies. The 2015 Litigation

Trends Annual Survey, compiled by Norton Rose Fulbright, found that 34% of the

803 corporate counsels responded to survey reported a litigation spending budgets

of $1 million to $5 million in 2014. The corresponding figure in 2013 was 26%. A

significant portion of all commercial litigation settles short of trial.3

        Our paper is primarily related to the literature on how persuasion affects

different clienteles’ opinions. Our evidence shows that advertising plays a role in

persuading the public opinion on the company and potentially create a positive

impression of the firm on potential jurors. In their survey paper DellaVigna and

Gentzkow (2010) list four different clienteles through with persuasion changed the

way these groups made their decision: consumers, investors, voters, and donors.4


2
  Litigation Cost Survey of Major Companies, 2010, Lawyers for Civil Justice, Civil Justice
Reform Group, and the U.S. Chamber Institute for Legal Reform.
3
  See Hope Viner Samborn, The Vanishing Trial: More and More Cases Are Settled,
Mediated or Arbitrated Without a Public Resolution, 88 A.B.A.J. 24 (October 2002). The
author discusses a widely cited study from Marc Galanter that found the number of cases
resolved by trial in 2001 was only 2.2% of all cases filed in federal court. See also Beverly J.
Hodgson, Who’s the Alternate Now?, Conn. Law Tribune, March 8, 2004, at 2 (“ a recent
survey of federal district courts reveals that just 1.8% of civil cases go to trial.” and “In the
state courts, the estimate is that just under 5 percent of the civil cases filed are ever tried.”).
4
  DellaVigna and Gentzkow (2010) categorizes models in modeling persuasion in two group.
In the first category, persuasion affects behavior because it changes receivers’ beliefs. This
includes models in which receivers are rational Bayesians, such as informative (Stigler 1961,
Telser 1964) and signaling (Nelson 1970) models of advertising, cheap-talk models (Crawford
& Sobel 1982), and persuasion games (Milgrom & Roberts 1986), among others. In the
second category, persuasion affects behavior independently of beliefs. This includes models
such as those of Stigler & Becker (1977) and Becker & Murphy (1993) in which advertising
enters the utility function directly, as well as older models of persuasive advertising
(Braithwaite 1928).



                                   Buying the Verdict - 10
       The first clientele is consumers. Bagwell (2007) notes that firms spend

considerable amounts of money for advertising primarily because they believe

consumers respond to these advertising efforts. He puts forth three channels through

which advertising can affect consumers’ response to advertising. According to the

first channel, called as the information view, search costs may deter a consumer from

learning of each product’s existence, and advertising help consumers learn about

advertised product’s existence, price and quality. In this view, when a firm

advertises, consumers receive at low cost additional direct (prices, location) and/or

indirect (the firm is willing to spend on advertising) information. According to the

persuasive view, advertising alters consumers’ tastes and creates spurious product

differentiation and brand loyalty. If the demand for a firm’s product is inelastic,

advertising can help extract more rent from these consumers. According to

persuasive view of advertising, advertising creates no “real” value to consumers, but

rather induces artificial product differentiation and this leads to a marketplace with

high prices and profits. Examples of this view has been documented in financial

markets in which homogeneous products are marketed to investors. Hastings,

Hortacsu, and Syverson (2011) show that the use of advertising of private social

security funds in Mexico is related to their pricing. Bertrand et al. (2010) use a field

experiment to show that advertising increases demand for consumer loans. Gurun,

Matvos and Seru (2016) shows mortgage providers are able to lend at higher rates

in areas they advertising efforts are higher.

       The second clientele persuasion is communication at is investors. For this




                               Buying the Verdict - 11
purpose, firm use various channels such as corporate responsibility events, press

releases, CEO interviews (Kim and Meschke 2012), conference calls (Cohen, Lou,

Malloy 2016)), analyst reports (Womack 1998), advertising (Lou 2012), or media

(Engelberg and Parsons      2012), Gurun and Butler 2012). A third clientele of

persuasion is voters. Persuasion may come from politicians themselves, interested

third parties (Gerber and Green 2000), or the news media (DellaVigna and Kaplan

2007, Gentzkow 2006). A fourth group is nonprofits or charities which solicit

contributions with the objective of increasing donations. Examples of this work

include Landry et al. (2006), and List & Lucking-Reiley (2002). Our evidence shows

that advertising plays a role in persuading the public opinion on the company and

potentially create a positive impression of the firm on potential jurors.




II.    Data and Summary Statistics

       We draw from a variety of data sources to construct the sample we use in

this paper. To identify involvement in litigation events, we use the Audit Analytics

Litigation database, which covers the period from 1995 to 2013 and reports

information on litigation for Russell 1000 firms from legal disclosures filed with the

SEC. Audit Analytics collects details related to specific litigation, including the

original dates of filing and locations of litigation; information on plaintiffs,

defendants, and judges; and, if available, the original claim amounts and the

settlement amounts.




                              Buying the Verdict - 12
       To measure regional level advertising, we utilize Kantar Media Stradegy

database. This database allows us to calculate firm level advertisement across

Designated Market Areas (DMA) from 1995-2014. DMA regions define boundaries

of targeted local advertising and direct marketing campaigns across multiple media.

A DMA typically refers to a geographic region rather than a city or county, and

may contain zip codes from neighboring states. Stradegy contains data from 105 of

all 210 DMAs, which correspond to 92% of the population in the United States.

Because our interest lies in local level advertising, in our tests we primarily use total

advertising spending information in the following channels: spot TV, spot Radio,

outdoor (billboard) and local newspapers. Our unit of analysis is Firm x DMA x

Year, i.e. amount of advertising spending by a given firm at a given Designated

Market Area (DMA) in a given year.

       In some of our tests, we focus on a particular media channel, namely spot

TV, to identify the relation between advertising and litigation. For these tests, we

draw data from TV ratings information contained in the Nielsen Ratings database.

This database allows us to estimate the number of TV exposure hours a given age

group watches TV. This estimate combines information on duration and timing of

the rating measurement period (Day Time M-F 9a-4p vs. Primetime) and number

of persons viewing TV estimates in a given demographics (age group and gender).

Finally, we obtain monthly stock returns from the Center for Research in Security

Prices (CRSP) and firms’ book value of equity and earning per share from

Compustat. We obtain analyst data from the Institutional Brokers Estimate System




                               Buying the Verdict - 13
(IBES).

       To construct our sample, we first match both the litigation and the

advertising data to public firm identifiers. To match Audit Analytics to Compustat

firms, we use the CIK identifier contained in the data. This identifier is a number

given to an individual company by the SEC. To match AdSpender to Compustat,

we use several pieces of information given on the advertiser. For a given

advertisement, we can observe the brand, their advertiser (company), and the parent

company of the advertiser. We first hand match advertiser to Compustat firm

names. In cases where we cannot match advertiser to a Compustat firm, we use the

parent company information for matching process.

       To link local advertisement to litigation, we hand match 90 of the federal

district courthouses to DMAs. We match 65 of the federal district courthouses to a

DMA for which we have local advertising data. These 65 federal courthouses handle

14,412 dockets, approximately 90% of all dockets filed in all federal district

courthouses during the same time period.

       To create our main sample, we join litigation and advertising databases only

for those DMAs for which we have both advertising and litigation data. Moreover,

if a firm is sued multiple times in a given DMA, we collapse these multiple litigation

events to one observation. We define Sued as a dummy variable equal to 1 if a firm

was litigated at least one time in a federal district courthouse in a given DMA in

year t. We also define Sued Patent as a dummy variable which equals to 1 if a firm

was litigated for patent infringement reason. Similarly, we define Sued Tort as a




                              Buying the Verdict - 14
dummy variable equal to 1 if the litigation event is related tort. Our dataset includes

only the cases contained in the Audit Analytics database, we are not able to identify

litigation if a firm is litigated in state court or if the defendant firm did not consider

the litigation material and not reported to SEC, the primary data source of Audit

Analytics. In Table II, we tabulate unique number of dockets reported in the Audit

Analytics database by year. Because our advertising data covers period covers years

between 1996 and 2014, we use dockets with filing years between 1995 and 2013. In

Panel B, we tabulate the number of unique dockets filed in top 5 federal district

courthouses. In Panel C, we tabulate the number of unique dockets by case type for

the top 5 categories.




III.   Buying the Verdict: Empirical Results

       Litigation represents a potentially large liability to firms; in the extreme

negative realization, it can impact potential firm viability. The optimal response of

firms is investing to maximize the chance of a positive outcome, which while

including a large investment of legal expertise within the courtroom, also allows for

investment outside of the courtroom itself. In particular, one power that large,

publicly facing, and well-funded organizations have at their disposal is to use the

channel of influence of local, specialized advertising. Namely, when a firm is taken

to trial in a specific geographic location, we test whether behavior with regard to

this location changes in systematic ways.




                                Buying the Verdict - 15
       Table III shows the first test examining the behavior of firms. In particular,

it explores the advertising behavior of firms, and in particular, how this behavior

may change around the times- and locations- of being sued. We examine all legal

actions taken against publicly traded firms over the nearly 20 year sample period

from 1995-2013. In particular, we focus on those that progressed to trial proceedings.

Our unit of analysis is Firm x DMA x Year, i.e. amount of advertising spending by

a given firm at a given Designated Market Area (DMA) in a given year. DMA

regions define boundaries of targeted local advertising and direct marketing

campaigns across multiple media.

       Table III regresses the amount of future (year t+1) advertising spending by

a given firm in a given Designated Market Area (DMA) in a given year on a number

of determinants. The independent variable of interest is Sued: a dummy variable

which equals to 1 if a firm was litigated at least one time in the federal courthouse

in a given DMA in year t. We also include control variables of DMA Market Size:

the sum of all local advertising expenses by all firms at a given DMA in year (t);

and Advertising Spending (t): advertising expenditure by the same firm, in the same

location, in year (t). In these specifications, we also include fine fixed effects.

Specifically, we include DMA fixed effects to control for time invariant local market

conditions that impact a firm’s decision to advertise there (e.g., New York City vs.

Omaha), and Year fixed effects to control for systematic trends and shocks impacting

all firms over time. We then include Firm x Year fixed effects, which control very

finely for any firm-time effect that could impact its advertising policy across DMAs




                              Buying the Verdict - 16
in the same year (e.g., Apple’s rollout of IPhone 7), or alternatively Firm x DMA

fixed effects, which control finely for any firm-specific, time-invariant, but location

specific, advertising strategy differences (e.g., Coca Cola’s general advertising

strategy in Tuscaloosa vs. Seattle).

       From Table III, we see strong and consistent evidence that upon being sued

in a given location, firms significantly increase advertising in that specific location.

Column 8 of Table III shows the full specification. In terms of magnitude, controlling

for other determinants of firm advertising, firms increase advertising by 23.6%

(t=4.39) following the suit.    Moreover, in Columns 1 and 2, we run the same

regressions, but instead of level of advertising, we test for the impact of the suit on

the probability of initiating advertising in a DMA that had zero beforehand. These

show similar inferences. Namely, the coefficient on Sued in Column 2 implies that

upon being sued, a firm is 25.4% (t=4.45) more likely to initiate advertising in that

location had it not been advertising there beforehand (from a mean of only 1.3%).

       One might worry that the increases in advertising that we document in Table

III are simply artifacts of firm-level policies to expand the firms’ footprints in those

locations. Thus, we might simply be capturing a firm strategic policy shift – whereby

the increasing footprint (or desire for a footprint) in a location causes both higher

chances of suit and increase in advertising (but no direct causal relation between the

latter two). It would then have nothing to do with lawsuits causing the increase in

advertising.




                               Buying the Verdict - 17
       In order to explore this in more detail, we explore the pre-trends, and parallel

trends of fine comparison locations. These are in Exhibit 1. Exhibit 1 compares,

for the same firm over the same time period (so Firm x DMA fixed effects) – DMAs

hit by a lawsuit at time 0 (left graph) compared to DMAs not hit by a suit at the

same time. Exhibit 1 shows three broad patterns: First, there are.no pre-trends in

any DMA in advertising (either the DMAs that will eventually be sued (left) or

those that will not (right). Second, advertising spikes directly after the suit, but

only in those locations in which the suit is filed (not other locations for the same

firm). Third, advertising gradually decreases in the sued location as the suit is

resolved, and by three years post-suit (when the cases are usually resolved),

advertising is back to baseline compared to both pre-suit, and to advertising in the

same year (t=3) in other, non-sued locations.

       In sum, there is no evidence of any change in advertising expenditures by the

same firms, in the same locations, leading up to the suit; nor of the same firm at the

same time in other locations. We only see the increase following the suit, only in

the locations where the firm is sued, and only by the firms that are sued. This

advertising then gradually drops as the suits complete. Table III and Exhibit 1 thus

provide initial evidence of firms targeted advertising expenditures around the time

– and spatial heterogeneous locations – of lawsuits.

       In Table IV, we run a series of robustness analyses to observe how our

baseline results vary across different variable definitions and alternative

specifications. For instance, in the first two columns, the dependent variable is the




                               Buying the Verdict - 18
growth of advertising in a given DMA for a given firm between years (t) and (t+1).

We define growth as log(Advertising Spending in a DMA in (t+1) / Advertising

Spending in a DMA in (t)). We test this in both the full sample (Column 1) and a

sample that excludes extreme growth rates (e.g. 500%) (Column 2). In specifications

3 to 7, we use Future Advertising Spending, varying the control variable set, fixed

effects, and clustering choice of standard errors. In Columns 8-11 of Table IV we use

a sample that contains advertising information throughout the entire span of the

litigation, rather than solely year t+1. The results in Table IV tell a consistent

story – irrespective of fixed effects included, standard error clustering choice, or

advertising specification, the main results remain strong and significant: large,

publicly traded firms strongly increase targeted local advertising in a specific

geographic location following a lawsuit in that location.




IV.    Mechanism Behind Buying the Verdict

       In this section, we explore the mechanism behind the targeted advertising

increases we document in Section III in much more depth. In particular, we explore

where, when, and to whom, the targeted advertising spikes following suits are

largest.

A. Recent Behavior: First Half vs. Second Half of Sample

       In Table V, we investigate whether our results have varied over time. In

particular, as lawsuits have become more frequent – and the stakes larger - in the




                              Buying the Verdict - 19
latter parts of the sample, we test to see whether the influencing the verdict behavior

has changed, as well. We thus run our regressions separately for the most recent

sample period i.e. 2005-2014, compared to earlier periods, i.e. 1995-2004.       From

Table V, we see that the influencing the verdict behavior of firms is strong, robust,

and significant in both the Earlier and Recent periods. This underscores the need to

understand this phenomenon more fully, as its use appears to be strong and

persistent (in estimated magnitude) up through present day.

B. Use Across Cities: Large vs. Small DMAs

       If our results truly are driven by incentives to influence the verdict, we may

expect to see firms using this channel more intensely where it is likely to have a

larger impact. In particular, for a given dollar of advertising, it is likely to have

larger impact in smaller, more concentrated advertising markets (e.g., Akron vs. Los

Angeles). We test exactly this in Table VI. Namely, we split our DMAs into the

largest (NYC, LA, Chicago, and San Francisco) and the smaller DMAs. Columns 1

and 2 then run identical, full specifications in the largest (Column 1) vs. smaller

(Column 2) DMAs. As can be seen comparing the coefficient on Sued in Columns

1 and 2, while present in both samples, the magnitude of the advertising spike is

almost 3 times as large in economic magnitude in the smaller, more concentrated

advertising DMA regions.

       Lastly, in Column 3 we test another cross-sectional implication of firms

engaging in this behavior. In particular, if firms really are attempting to maximize

influence with their advertising spikes, we might expect them to concentrate these




                               Buying the Verdict - 20
spikes on locations with fewer other firms competing for advertising (so their

increases are a relatively larger shock to the total market). In order to test this, we

introduce a variable, DMA with Few Firms, a dummy variable that takes a value

of one if the number of firms in the DMA is below the sample median. This

specification also includes an interaction term, Sued x DMA with Few Firms. The

positive coefficient on this interaction term in Column 4 of Table VI indicates that

firms indeed do concentrate significantly larger advertising spikes in locations where

there are a smaller number of other firms advertising.

C. Litigation Type: Jury Trials vs. Bench Trials

       If the empirical regularities that we have thus far documented in firm

advertising responses really do represent firms’ attempts to influence the verdict, we

may expect these firms to concentrate on jury (as opposed to judge (bench))

adjudicated trials, as the average member of the jury pool is likely more influencable

than the judge. The average juror:5 is roughly 50 years old, has lower than average

education (i.e., high-school, but no bachelor’s degree), and limited legal expertise –

compared with the average sitting judge.

       While many types of lawsuits have variation in the usage of jury vs. bench,

a class of lawsuits that are nearly uniformly decided by jury are patent lawsuits. In

contrast, a class of lawsuits in which the majority are adjudicated through a judge




5
 The Role of Age in Jury Selection and Trial Outcomes,
http://repository.cmu.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1351&context=heinzworks



                               Buying the Verdict - 21
are tort lawsuits.6 We thus segregate out both patent lawsuits and tort lawsuits in

the data, and test specifically on these samples. The results are reported in Table

VII. Consistent with this buying the verdict being more concentrated when the jury

pool can be more easily influenced, we find that the advertising spike is significantly

higher in the case of patent (jury) lawsuits (over twice as large) as in tort lawsuits.

The results in Table VII also help to provide further evidence against an endogeneity

story related to firms ramping up firm activities. In particular, the patent cases

have nearly nothing to do with firm-specific strategic geographic location expansion.

For example, Marshall, TX sees the plurality of patent infringement cases, and yet

has a relatively small population with modest business presence.

D. Plaintiffs

       The paper thus far has focused on defendant’s responses upon being accused

of a legal infraction. We next examine plaintiff firms’ advertising responses, as well.

Plaintiffs (the firms filing suit or damages against another party) have contrastingly

not been accused of any wrongdoing, and thus potentially have less of a need to

repair any brand damage with consumers. However, they do have an equivalent

incentive to curry favor with juries in order to rule in their favor to win the lawsuit.

We run these tests in Columns 3 and 4 of Table VII. We find that firms as plaintiffs




6
  Refo, Patricia Lee, Opening Statement: The Vanishing Trial, The Journal of the Section
of Litigation (Volume 30-2), Winter 2004 – The American Bar Association
(https://www.americanbar.org/content/dam/aba/publishing/litigation_journal/04winter
_openingstatement.authcheckdam.pdf).



                               Buying the Verdict - 22
– like defendants – significantly increase advertising precisely in those locations in

which they bring lawsuits, and precisely at the time they bring the suit.

E. Targeted Advertising to Jury Pool

   If firms have the goal of maximizing the impact on their potential jury pools, we

might expect to see them target advertising expenditures specifically toward the

pool of individuals most likely to be jury members. Given the granular nature of

our data – in particular with regard to television advertising – we can test for exactly

this. In order to do that we use the Nielsen Rating data which allows us to measure

the amount of television watched within a given location, broken down into 5-year

increments of the demographic viewership (e.g., 10-14 year olds, 15-19 year olds, 20-

24 year olds, 25-29 year olds, 30-34 year olds, etc.). We use this data to create a

measure of viewership in the prime-demographic of the average jury member (aged

45-54 years) – which we call Prime Jury. We compare this to those television viewers

that couldn’t possibly be jurors, using a variable we call Children Viewers (minors -

viewers from age 2 to 5). Lastly, we now regressions solely focusing on the television

advertising behavior of firms (as opposed to total advertising expenditures in a given

location), such that the dependent variable measures the future television

advertising expenditures following being sued in a given location.

       The results are reported in Table VIII. We find evidence that television

advertising dollars are strategically targeted precisely at the likely jury pool. This

is seen in the positive interaction term on SuedxPrime Jury. In contrast, we see no

spike in advertising in locations where minors are a large share of the viewership




                               Buying the Verdict - 23
population (who couldn’t possibly be jurors).

       Lastly, if the advertising spikes we see following suits were aimed to maximize

influence, we may expect to see firms concentrating their television advertising

dollars in those markets where return on TV advertising investment were the

highest. Table IX provides suggestive evidence of firms doing this. In particular,

following suits, firms concentrate television advertising efforts especially where

audience per television advertising dollar are the highest (as seen in the positive and

marginally significant coefficient on the interaction term between Audience Per Ad

Dollar x Sued).

F. Additional Placebo Tests

       In addition to the diff-in-diff from Exhibit, we run a number of additional

placebo tests. In Columns 1-3 of Table X, we include an additional dummy variable

to capture litigation events of firms that operate in the same industry (Column 1) –

Industry, in the same headquarter state (Column 2) State, and that operate in the

same industry and have the same headquarter state (Column 3) Industry x State.

These dummy variables do not load up significantly in any of the specifications (in

an economic or statistical sense), indicating the firm’s use of advertising is not

responding to litigation events of competing firms in the product-space, or

geographic proximity. However, being the direct target of litigation (Sued – Own)

remains associated with a large and significant advertising response controlling for

all of these.




                               Buying the Verdict - 24
V.     Discussion & Economic Impact of Buying the Verdict

       Taking a step back, we believe that the sum of our evidence points most

plausibly to firms taking strategic, targeted actions in order to the influence the

verdict of litigation against them outside - in addition to inside - the courtroom.

However, there are other potential explanations. For instance, it might be that the

firm is advertising more in places that it is being sued because it also faces brand

backlash on the product-side precisely in those locations (e.g., Chipotle food-borne

contaminant issues were spatially hitting different locations (and not others); and

the BP Oil spill along the Gulf Coast). You might then see advertising spike in

these locations following an infraction not to convince jurors, but instead to simply

convince customers (and the communities) that the firm’s brand was committed to

a certain level of product quality, or investment in the community.

       We explore this alternative explanation versus advertising more pointedly

focused on juries following litigation. First, as mentioned above we see the effect of

this increase in advertising strong and concentrated in patent (jury) trials. This is

despite the fact that patent infringement allegations are amongst the most esoteric

and most difficult to both describe to (and describe direct damages toward) the

average consumer, and so might be least likely to cause localized public harm or

outrage. Second, consistent with the firm not simply protecting important local

relationships, we see a large and significant 25% increase in initiations following a

lawsuit in that location. These locations (by revealed preference) were not locations

that the firm sufficiently valued the act of advertising in - so not strategically




                              Buying the Verdict - 25
important enough to advertise ongoing stakeholder relationships with - until

precisely after the lawsuit, only after which advertising was initiated.        Third,

following the advertising spike of firms after lawsuits, we find that firms advertising

in those sued locations are back to baseline by 3 years following (when the suits

have been adjudicated). Fourth, we find that the advertising is focused directly on

the demographic that is most likely to be jury pool members (and not spread across

the entire demographic spectrum).

       Lastly, we explore two sets of firms that we might ex ante expect to have less

incentive to advertise absent the litigation. First, we examine business-to-business

firms. These firms – who sell goods only to other businesses, not to retail consumers

– unsurprisingly, advertise significantly less, as their business models are on average

based on longer-term supply relationships with other firms.         We identify B2B

industries by going through each industry 3 digit SIC code and classifying it into

either a primarily B2B or retail facing firm.        When we run our exact same

specification, we find that B2B significantly increase advertising precisely following

lawsuits. This is shown in Table XI.

       In fact, from Panel B of Table XI, comparing Columns 3 and 4 – B2B have

a 50% larger probability of initiating advertising following suit (relative to retail

facing firms) – 31% vs. 21%; perhaps not surprisingly, largely due to their lower

need for advertising (and presence) ex ante.

       Second, as mentioned above, we examine plaintiff, who have not been accused

of any wrongdoing, and thus potentially have less of a need to repair any brand




                               Buying the Verdict - 26
damage with consumers. We find that plaintiffs significantly increase advertising

precisely in those locations in which they bring lawsuits, and precisely at the time

they bring the suit (much like defendants).

         Turning to the impact of this advertising on outcome of the trial, we do find

suggestive evidence of “buying the verdict,” in Table XII. We caveat this, as we do

not observe settlements, or terms of settlements, and thus we can estimate only the

trials that proceed to verdict for either the plaintiff or defendant. This being said,

we find that a one standard deviation ($870,000) in this targeted advertising by

firms increases their win rates by roughly 6 percentage points. Off of a mean of

44%, this equates to a roughly 14 percent increase in rate.




VI.      Conclusion

         In this paper, we document systematic evidence that firms engage in

specialized, locally targeted advertising when taken to a court-trial in a given

location. In particular, using legal actions brought against publicly traded firms

over the nearly 20 year sample period that progress to trial from 1995-2014 we show

that these large, publicly facing, and well-funded organizations have at their disposal

a channel outside of the courtroom – which they utilize – to influence the verdict of

cases.     When faced with a suit in a given location, firms significantly increase

advertising in that location. In terms of magnitude, they increase advertising by

23% (t=4.39) following the suit. In contrast, we see no increase: i.) in the same city,

by the firm, but before and leading up to suit (we find a sharp discontinuity directly



                                Buying the Verdict - 27
following the suit); ii.) in any other similar city at the same time by the same firm

(so it is not a firm-level or even firm-market type policy move); and iii.) in the exact

same city where the firm is located by any other firm operating there.

       Further, firms appear to use these advertising spikes in a strategic manner.

First, they focus the advertising efforts in those particular locations where the effect

is expected to be largest – in terms of both the number of jurors they can sway, and

in terms of the highest return on advertising dollar. Moreover, they focus their

television advertising dollar spikes specifically on the potential jury pool (e.g., 45-55

year olds), and not on those who cannot serve on juries (e.g., 2-5 year olds). In

addition, these spikes are concentrated in jury adjudicated cases, as opposed to

bench (judge-adjudicated) trials. Lastly, we document that these advertising spikes

are associated with verdicts, increasing the probability of a favorable outcome.

       Stepping back, the sum of our results implies that firms are having a subtle,

potentially important, impact on case outcomes through their strategically-targeted

actions outside of the courtroom. The fact that this behavior is: i.) robust across

time, firms, and locations, ii) lines up across strategic dimensions of the behavior,

and iii.) is strong and robust through present-day, suggests that it is worth

examining more closely as litigation against firms continues to rise.        Given our

results, policy makers should contemplate this mode and channel of influence, and

whether it should play a role in the legal process.




                               Buying the Verdict - 28
References

Aaker DA, Carman JM. 1982. Are you overadvertising? J. Advert. Res. 22(4):57–70

Ackerberg DA. 2001. Empirically distinguishing informative and prestige effects of
advertising. Rand J. Econ. 32(2):316–33

Ackerberg DA. 2003. Advertising, learning, and consumer choice in experience good
markets: an empirical examination. Int. Econ. Rev. 44(3):1007–40

Bagwell K. 2007. The economic analysis of advertising. In Handbook of Industrial
Organization, Vol. 3, ed. M Armstrong, R Porter, pp. 1701–844. Amsterdam: North-
Holland

Becker GS, Murphy KM. 1993. A simple theory of advertising as a good or bad. Q.
J. Econ. 108: 941–64

Bertrand M, Karlan DS, Mullainathan S, Shafir E, Zinman J. 2010. What’s
advertising content worth? Evidence from a consumer credit marketing field
experiment. Q. J. Econ. 125:263–305

Braithwaite D. 1928. The economic effects of advertisement. Econ. J. 38:16–37

DellaVigna, Stefano, 2009, Psychology and economics: Evidence from the field,
Journal of Economic Literature 47, 315–372.


DellaVigna, Stefano, and Matthew Gentzkow, 2010, Persuasion: Empirical evidence,
Annual Review of Economics 2, 643–669.


DellaVigna S, Kaplan E. 2007. The Fox News effect: media bias and voting. Q. J.
Econ. 122(3): 1187–234


DellaVigna S, List JA, Malmendier U. 2009. Testing for altruism and social pressure
in charitable giving. NBER Work. Pap. 15629


Engelberg J, Parsons C. 2012. The causal impact of media in financial markets.
Journal of Finance.
Gentzkow MA. 2006. Television and voter turnout. Q. J. Econ. 121(3):931–72

Gentzkow MA, Shapiro JM. 2004. Media, education and anti-Americanism in the
Muslim world. J. Econ. Perspect. 18(3):117–33

Gentzkow MA, Shapiro JM. 2006. Media bias and reputation. J. Polit. Econ.
114(2):280–316


Gentzkow MA, Shapiro JM. 2009. Media market structure and political
participation: historical evidence from U.S. newspapers. Unpublished manuscript,
Univ. Chicago

Gentzkow M, Shapiro J. 2010. What drives media slant? Evidence from U.S. daily
newspapers. Econometrica 78(1):35–71

Gerber A, Karlan D, Bergan D. 2009. Does the media matter? A field experiment
measuring the effect of newspapers on voting behavior and political opinions. Am.
Econ. J. Appl. Econ. 1(2):35–52


Gerber AS, Gimpel J, Green D, Shaw D. 2007. The influence of television and radio
advertising on candidate evaluations: results from a large scale randomized
experiment. Work. Pap., Yale Univ.


Gerber AS, Green DP. 2000. The effects of canvassing, telephone calls, and direct
mail on voter turnout: a field experiment. Am. Polit. Sci. Rev. 94(3):653–63

Green DP, Gerber AS. 2008. Get Out the Vote! How to Increase Voter Turnout.
Washington, DC: Brookings Inst. Press

Green DP, Gerber AS, Nickerson DW. 2008. Getting out the vote in local elections:
results from six door-to-door canvassing experiments. J. Polit. 65(04):1083–96


Gurun, Umit G. and Alexander W. Butler, 2012, Don’t believe the hype: Local media
slant, local advertising, and firm value, The Journal of Finance 67, 561–597.


Hortacsu, Ali, and Chad Syverson, 2004, Product differentiation, search costs, and
competition the mutual fund industry: A case study of S&P 500 index funds,
Quarterly Journal of Economics 119, 403–456.


Hastings, Justine, Ali Hortacsu, and Chad Syverson, 2011, Advertising and
competition in privatized social security: The case of Mexico, Working paper,
University of Chicago.


Iyengar S, Simon AF. 2000. New perspectives and evidence on political
communication and campaign effects. Annu. Rev. Psychol. 51:149–69


Klerman, Daniel and Greg Reilly, 2016, Forum Selling, University of Southern
California Law Review 89, 241-316.


Lou, Dong, 2014, Attracting investor attention through advertising, Review of
Financial Studies 27, 1797–1829.


Nelson, Phillip, 1974, Advertising as information, Journal of Political Economy 82,
729–754.


Reuter, Jonathan, and Eric Zitzewitz, 2006, Advertising and bias in the financial
media, Quarterly Journal of Economics 121, 197–227.
                                                                             Exhibit 1
                                                  Advertising Diff-in-Diff and Pre-trends surrounding Litigation

                                  This figure plots the coefficient on Sued of the full regression specification in Table III
                                  Column 8, i.e. Advertising (t+x)= b1* Sued + b2* Advertising (t+x-1) + Z, where x=-3
                                  in the first bar, x=-2 in the second bar, x=-1 in the third bar, x=1 in the fourth bar, x=2
                                  in the fifth bar, x=3 in the sixth bar. The right chart shows response to litigation in
                                  DMA(y,t), when the firm is litigated in DMA(x, t0), where DMA(y) is closest to DMA(x)
                                  in terms of advertising spending in year t0 (i.e. the DMAs right above and right below
                                  DMA(x) when sorted by advertising expenditure).


                                                          Advertising by firms hit by a Lawsuit (t=0)

                                              Metro Areas Hit By Litigation at              Metro Areas Not Hit By Litigation
                                                          (t=0)                                          (t=0)

                                                                (t=0)                                        (t=0)
Advertising Expenditures in DMA




                                             -3     -2     -1           1   2   3           -3    -2    -1           1   2   3
                                         Table I – Summary statistics
      This table presents summary statistics on the dataset used in the tests. Unit of observation
      is Firm x DMA x Year, i.e. amount of advertising spending by a given firm at a given
      Designated Market Area (DMA) in a given year. DMA regions define boundaries of targeted
      local advertising and direct marketing campaigns across multiple media. A DMA typically
      refers to a geographic region rather than a city or county, and may contain zip codes from
      neighboring states. Our data vendor, Kantar Media, collects data from 102 of all 206 DMAs,
      which correspond to 92% of the population in the United States. Advertising Expense refers
      to total local advertising in local media outlets, i.e. spot TV, spot Radio, outdoor (billboard)
      and local newspapers. Future Advertising Spending (log), our main variable of interest, is
      the log of total local advertising in year t+1. Initiate is a dummy variable that takes a value
      of one if the firm didn’t advertise in the corresponding DMA in year t, but advertises in
      year t+1. DMA Market Size is sum of all local advertising expenses by all firms at a given
      DMA in a given year. Sued is a dummy variable equal to 1 if a firm was litigated at least
      one time in a federal district courthouse in a given DMA in year t. Our dataset includes
      only the cases contained in the Audit Analytics database. Sued Patent is a dummy variable
      equal to 1 if a firm was litigated for patent infringement reason. Sued Tort is a dummy
      variable equal to 1 if the litigation is related tort. Audit Analytics reports information on
      litigation for Russell 1000 firms from legal disclosures filed with the SEC. Audit Analytics
      collects details related to specific litigation, including the original dates of filing and locations
      of litigation; information on plaintiffs, defendants, and judges. We match 65 of the federal
      district courthouses to a DMA for which we have local advertising data. Our sample contains
      13,301 dockets with a filing year between 1995 and 2013. This corresponds to 90% of all
      dockets filed in all federal district courthouses.

                   Panel A. Summary Statistics on Local Advertising and Litigation Actions

             Advertising     Future Adv.      DMA
               Expense         Spending      Market
                (Raw)           (log)         Size         Initiate        Sued       Sued Patent    Sued Tort
Mean           964,613             8.501         0.387          0.013         0.019         0.008         0.004
Median          21,894             9.994         0.141          0.000         0.000         0.000         0.000
STD           6,310,581            5.182         0.638          0.112         0.135         0.087         0.062
p5                0                0.000         0.023          0.000         0.000         0.000         0.000
p95           3,505,976           15.070         1.706          0.000         0.000         0.000         0.000
N              498,386           498,386       498,386       498,386        498,386       498,386       498,386
                       Table II – Summary statistics on litigation events
In Panel A, we tabulate unique number of dockets used in our analysis. Information on
these dockets come from Audit Analytics database. Audit Analytics reports information on
litigation for Russell 1000 firms from legal disclosures filed with the SEC. Audit Analytics
collects details related to specific litigation, including the original dates of filing and locations
of litigation; information on plaintiffs, defendants, and judges. We restrict our analysis to
dockets in which either defendant or plaintiff (or both) is a public firm and the court of the
docket is covered by one of the DMAs in our advertising database. Our advertising data
covers period covers years between 1996 and 2014 and we use dockets with filing years
between 1995 and 2013. In Panel B, we tabulate the number of unique dockets filed in top
5 federal district courthouses. In Panel C, we tabulate the number of unique dockets by case
type for the top 5 categories.

                          Panel A. Breakdown of Dockets over Years

                                    Year          Number of Cases
                                    1995                 82
                                    1996                160
                                    1997                223
                                    1998                295
                                    1999                429
                                    2000                594
                                    2001                842
                                    2002                720
                                    2003                867
                                    2004                1,168
                                    2005                1,192
                                    2006                1,186
                                    2007                1,054
                                    2008                829
                                    2009                838
                                    2010                827
                                    2011                808
                                    2012                627
                                    2013                290
                                    Total              13,031
 Panel B. Breakdown of Dockets across Top 10 DMAs

       DMA Name                   Number of Cases
   1   New York                        2086
   2   Philadelphia                    1726
   3   San Francisco                   1375
   4   Los Angeles                         994
   5   Shreveport                          660




Panel C. Breakdown of Dockets across Top 5 case types

           Case Type           Number of Cases
       1   Securities               4037
       2   Patent                   3425
       3   Contract                 2283
       4   Tort                     1453
       5   Labor                     668
                                            Table III – Buying the Verdict: Main Effect
In this table, we use a fixed effect OLS model. Unit of observation is Firm x DMA x Year, i.e. amount of advertising spending
by a given firm at a given Designated Market Area (DMA) in a given year. Initiate is a dummy variable that takes a value of
one if the firm didn’t advertise in the corresponding DMA in year t, but advertises in year t+1. The dependent variable in the
last six columns, Future Advertising Spending (log), our main variable of interest, is the log of total local advertising in year
t+1. Advertising Spending (t) refers to contemporaneous advertising expense, i.e. the log of total local advertising in year t. Sued
is a dummy variable equal to 1 if a firm was a defendant at least one time in the federal courthouse in a given DMA in year t
for the case types recorded in the Audit Analytics database. The specification includes fixed effects for DMA, to proxy for time
invariant local market conditions that could affect a firm’s decision to advertise. By including FirmxYear fixed effects, we
investigate a given firm’s allocation of advertising expenditure across DMAs in the same year. Standard errors, clustered by
FirmxYear, are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels.

                                     (1)        (2)          (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)           (7)           (8)
                                                           Future        Future        Future        Future        Future        Future
                                                         Advertising   Advertising   Advertising   Advertising   Advertising   Advertising
                                   Initiate   Initiate    Spending      Spending      Spending      Spending      Spending      Spending


      Sued                         0.320***   0.254***    0.917***      0.170***      0.997***      0.235***      0.999***      0.236***
                                   (0.007)    (0.006)      (0.061)       (0.062)       (0.048)       (0.054)       (0.048)       (0.054)
      Advertising Spending (t)                                                        0.821***      0.539***      0.821***      0.539***
                                                                                       (0.006)       (0.010)       (0.006)       (0.010)
      DMA Market Size                                                                                              -0.028        -0.008
                                                                                                                   (0.044)       (0.053)


      Fixed Effect – DMA            YES                     YES                         YES                         YES
      Fixed Effect – Year                      YES                        YES                         YES                         YES
      Fixed Effect - Firm x Year    YES                     YES                         YES                         YES
      Fixed Effect - Firm x DMA                YES                        YES                         YES                         YES
      Observations                 498,386    485,704     491,391       478,840       498,386       485,704       498,386       485,704
      R-squared                     0.769      0.824        0.603         0.575         0.694         0.618         0.694         0.618
                                         Table IV – Robustness: Alternative Specifications
In this table, we use a fixed effect OLS model. Unit of observation is Firm x DMA x Year, i.e. amount of advertising spending
by a given firm at a given Designated Market Area (DMA) in a given year. The dependent variable in the first two columns is
the growth of advertising in given DMA for a given firm between years t to t+1. We define growth as log (Ad Spending in year
t+1 / Ad Spending in year t). The dependent variable in the remaining columns is unlogged Future Advertising Spending (column
3), logged Future Advertising Spending (columns 4 to 11). In column 2, we drop extreme growth rates to minimize effect of
outliers, i.e. we dropped observations with Ad Growth more than 10 times. DMA Market Size is subsumed in specifications that
include DMAxYear fixed effects, i.e. columns 4, 6, 7, 9 and 11. In Columns 4-11, our baseline specification is altered by inclusion
of various fixed effects that capture factors that could effect a firm’s advertising decision. In the last four specifications (Columns
8-11), we use a sample that contains advertising information through out the course of the litigation, rather than only year t+1.
In the last row of the table, we report the standard error clustering level. ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1,
5, and 10 percent levels.
                                 (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)           (7)
                                                           Future
                                                         Advertising     Future        Future        Future        Future
                                                          Spending     Advertising   Advertising   Advertising   Advertising
                             Ad Growth     Ad Growth       (Raw)        Spending      Spending      Spending      Spending


Sued                          0.999***      0.896***      1.905***      1.437***      0.236***      0.256***      0.994***
                               (0.048)       (0.043)       (0.270)       (0.050)       (0.046)       (0.055)       (0.045)
DMA Market Size               -0.179***     -0.076***                   0.814***      0.539***      0.529***      0.818***
                               (0.006)       (0.006)                     (0.003)       (0.004)       (0.010)       (0.004)
Advertising Spending (t)       -0.028       -0.102***      0.845**                     -0.008
                               (0.044)       (0.037)       (0.342)                     (0.041)


Fixed Effect - DMA              YES           YES           YES
Fixed Effect - Year                                                                     YES
Fixed Effect - Firm                                                       YES
Fixed Effect - Firm x Year      YES           YES           YES                                                     YES
Fixed Effect - Firm x
DMA                                                                                     YES           YES
Fixed Effect - Year x
DMA                                                                       YES                         YES           YES
Observations                   498,386       469,700       498,386       508,461       485,704       485,704       498,386
R-squared                       0.449         0.378         0.234         0.576         0.618         0.624         0.697


Standard Errors Clustered
by                           Firm x Year   Firm x Year   Firm x Year   Year x DMA    Firm x DMA    Firm x Year   Firm x DMA
                                   (8)           (9)          (10)          (11)
                                 Future        Future        Future        Future
                               Advertising   Advertising   Advertising   Advertising
                                Spending      Spending      Spending      Spending


Sued                            0.866***      0.143***      0.866***      0.143***
                                 (0.031)       (0.046)       (0.031)       (0.041)
DMA Market Size                 0.796***      0.548***      0.796***      0.548***
                                 (0.005)       (0.009)       (0.003)       (0.004)
Advertising Spending (t)         -0.068*       -0.038       -0.068**       -0.038
                                 (0.041)       (0.046)       (0.029)       (0.035)
Fixed Effect - DMA                YES                         YES
Fixed Effect - Year                             YES                         YES
Fixed Effect - Firm
Fixed Effect - Firm x Year        YES                         YES
Fixed Effect - Firm x DMA                       YES                         YES
Fixed Effect - Year x DMA
Observations                     521,989       524,999       521,989       524,999
R-squared                         0.723         0.687         0.723         0.687


Standard Errors Clustered by   Firm x Year   Firm x Year   Firm x DMA    Firm x DMA
                                                     Table V – Sample Split by Time
In this table, we use a fixed effect OLS model to estimate the baseline model reported in Table 3 for two subsamples, 1995-2004
(Early Period) and 2005-2014 (Recent Period). Unit of observation is Firm x DMA x Year, i.e. amount of advertising spending
by a given firm at a given Designated Market Area (DMA) in a given year. The dependent variable, Future Advertising Spending
(log), our main variable of interest, is the log of total local advertising in year t+1. DMA Market Size is sum of all local advertising
expenses by all firms at a given DMA in a given year. Advertising Spending (t) refers to contemporaneous advertising expense,
i.e. the log of total local advertising in year t. Sued is a dummy variable equal to 1 if a firm was litigated at least one time in the
federal courthouse in a given DMA in year t for the case types recorded in the Audit Analytics database. Standard errors,
clustered by FirmxYear, are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent
levels.

                                                                                         (1)             (2)
                                                                                        Future          Future
                    VARIABLES                                                         Advertising     Advertising
                                                                                      Spending        Spending

                    Sued Early Period                                                  0.206***        1.132***
                                                                                        (0.070)         (0.064)
                    Sued Recent Period                                                 0.392***        1.044***
                                                                                        (0.066)         (0.062)
                    DMA Market Size                                                      -0.08           -0.044
                                                                                        (0.058)         (0.084)
                    Advertising Spending (t)                                           0.842***        0.799***
                                                                                        (0.008)         (0.009)

                    Fixed   Effect   – DMA                                                               YES
                    Fixed   Effect   – Year                                              YES
                    Fixed   Effect   - Firm x Year                                                       YES
                    Fixed   Effect   - Firm x DMA                                        YES

                    Observations                                                        244,006         254,380
                    R-squared                                                            0.693           0.695
                                               Table VI – Sample Split by DMA Size
In the first two columns of this table, we use a fixed effect OLS model to estimate the baseline model reported in Table 3 for two
subsamples, DMAs with highest amount of total local advertising (column 1) and other DMAs (column 2). The highest advertising
DMAs are New York, Chicago, Los Angeles, and San Francisco. In the last specification, we introduce a variable, DMA with Few
Firms, a dummy variable that takes a value of one if the number of firms in the DMA is below the sample median. This
specification also includes an interaction term, Sued x DMA with Few Firms. Standard errors, clustered by FirmxYear, are
reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels.

                                                    Large DMA                 Small DMA
                                                 Future Advertising        Future Advertising      Future Advertising
        VARIABLES                                    Spending                  Spending                Spending

        Sued                                           0.441***                 1.043***                 0.924***
                                                        (0.089)                  (0.057)                  (0.049)
        DMA Market Size                                  0.048                    -0.087                   -0.044
                                                        (0.079)                  (0.102)                  (0.045)
        Advertising Spending (t)                       0.828***                 0.813***                 0.821***
                                                        (0.015)                  (0.006)                  (0.006)
        DMA with Few Firms                                                                               0.112***
                                                                                                          (0.019)
        Sued x DMA with Few Firms                                                                        0.681***
                                                                                                          (0.101)

        Fixed Effect - DMA                               YES                      YES                      YES
        Fixed Effect - Firm x Year                       YES                      YES                      YES

        Observations                                    30,699                   460,951                 498,386
        R-squared                                        0.834                    0.690                   0.694
                                    Table VII – Jury vs. Bench Trials and Litigation by Plaintiff
In the first two columns of this table, we use a fixed effect OLS model to estimate the baseline model reported in Table 3 to
estimate the relation between litigation types (i.e. patent, tort) and advertising. Unit of observation is Firm x DMA x Year, i.e.
amount of advertising spending by a given firm at a given Designated Market Area (DMA) in a given year. The dependent
variable, Future Advertising Spending (log), our main variable of interest, is the log of total local advertising in year t+1. DMA
Market Size is sum of all local advertising expenses by all firms at a given DMA in a given year. Advertising Spending (t) refers
to contemporaneous advertising expense, i.e. the log of total local advertising in year t. Sued Patent is a dummy variable equal
to 1 if a firm was litigated for patent infringement reason. Sued Tort is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the litigation is related to
tort. Sued - Plaintiff is a dummy variable equal to 1 if a firm was a plaintiff at least one time in the federal courthouse in a given
DMA in year t for the case types recorded in the Audit Analytics database. Standard errors, clustered by FirmxYear, are
reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels.
                                       (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)
                                     Future        Future        Future        Future
                                   Advertising   Advertising   Advertising   Advertising
                                    Spending      Spending      Spending      Spending

Sued Patent                         0.994***      0.285***
                                     (0.069)       (0.080)
Sued Tort                           0.556***        0.076
                                     (0.077)       (0.085)
Sued - Plaintiff                                                0.779***      0.316***
                                                                 (0.086)       (0.077)
DMA Market Size                       -0.007        -0.002        -0.004        -0.003
                                     (0.044)       (0.053)       (0.044)       (0.053)
Advertising Spending (t)            0.816***      0.538***      0.814***      0.538***
                                     (0.006)       (0.010)       (0.006)       (0.010)
Fixed   Effect   -   DMA               YES                         YES
Fixed   Effect   -   Year                           YES                         YES
Fixed   Effect   -   Firm x Year      YES                         YES
Fixed   Effect   -   Firm x DMA                     YES                         YES

Observations                        498,386       485,704       498,386       485,704
R-squared                            0.694         0.618         0.694         0.618
                                                   Table VIII – Targeting Jury Pool
In this table, we use a fixed effect OLS model to estimate the baseline model reported in Table 3 to estimate the relation between
the local TV advertising spending and the viewership base. Unit of observation is Firm x DMA x Year. The dependent variable,
Future Advertising Spending _TV (log) is the log of total local spot TV advertising in year t+1. DMA Market Size is sum of all
local advertising expenses by all firms at a given DMA in a given year. Advertising Spending -TV refers to contemporaneous TV
advertising expense, i.e. the log of total local TV advertising in year t. Sued is a dummy variable equal to 1 if a firm was litigated
at least one time in the federal courthouse in a given DMA in year t. Prime Jury is the estimated total number of hours male
and female between ages 45 and 54 in the watch TV in a given DMA in a given year (average age of a juror = 50). Children
Viewers is the estimated total number of hours minors between ages 2 and 5 in the watch TV in a given DMA in a given year.
We use Nielsen Ratings database to estimate the number of TV exposure hours a given age group watches TV. This estimate
combines information on duration and timing of the rating measurement period (Day Time M-F 9a-4p vs. Primetime) and number
of persons viewing TV estimates in a given demographics (age group and gender). Standard errors, clustered by FirmxYear, are
reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels.
                                  (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)
                                Future          Future          Future          Future
                              Advertising     Advertising     Advertising     Advertising
                             Spending _ TV   Spending _ TV   Spending _ TV   Spending _ TV


Advertising Spending - TV      0.333***        0.333***        0.659***        0.659***
                                (0.018)         (0.018)         (0.012)         (0.012)
DMA Market Size                 -0.258**        -0.276**         -0.060          -0.109
                                (0.111)         (0.119)         (0.123)         (0.133)
Sued                             0.130           0.095         1.634***        1.597***
                                (0.104)         (0.105)         (0.093)         (0.095)
Prime Jury                     4.449***        3.506***        3.751***          2.026
                                (1.029)         (1.333)         (1.111)         (1.481)
Sued x Prime Jury              0.940***         4.707**          0.063          4.032**
                                (0.341)         (1.924)         (0.273)         (1.594)
Children Viewers                                 1.760                          3.226**
                                                (1.593)                         (1.624)
Sued x Children Viewers                         -4.569**                        -4.786**
                                                (2.301)                         (1.875)


Fixed Effect - DMA               YES             YES
Fixed Effect - Year                                              YES             YES
Fixed Effect - Firm x Year       YES             YES
Fixed Effect - Firm x DMA                                        YES             YES



Observations                    214,015         214,015         224,755         224,755
R-squared                        0.729           0.729           0.698           0.698
                                         Table IX – Targeting Highest ROI TV Advertising
In this table, we use a fixed effect OLS model to estimate the baseline model reported in Table 3 to estimate the relation between
the local TV advertising spending and the viewership base. Unit of observation is Firm x DMA x Year. The dependent variable,
Future Advertising Spending -TV is the log of total local spot TV advertising in year t+1. Advertising Spending - TV refers to
contemporaneous TV advertising expense, i.e. the log of total local TV advertising in year t. DMA Market Size is sum of all local
advertising expenses by all firms at a given DMA in a given year. Sued is a dummy variable equal to 1 if a firm was litigated at
least one time in the federal courthouse in a given DMA in year t. Audience Per Ad Dollar is the log of ratio of total number of
potential viewers to total TV advertising expenditure. Standard errors, clustered by Firm x Year, are reported in parentheses.
***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels.

                                                                Future Advertising Spending - TV


                         Advertising Spending – TV                            0.699***
                                                                               (0.012)
                         Sued                                                  6.471*
                                                                               (3.324)
                         Audience Per Ad Dollar                                 0.169
                                                                               (0.128)
                         Audience Per Ad Dollar x Sued                         0.481*
                                                                               (0.259)
                         DMA Market Size                                       -0.389*
                                                                               (0.203)

                         Fixed Effect – DMA                                     YES
                         Fixed Effect - Firm x Year                             YES

                         Observations                                         178,537
                         R-squared                                             0.711
                                                 Table X – Additional Placebo Tests
In this table, we use a fixed effect OLS model used in baseline model to investigate the impact of competitors’ litigation events. In
Columns 1 to 3, we include an additional dummy variable to our baseline specification to capture litigation events of firms that operate
in the same industry (Column 1), in the same headquarter state (Column 2), and that operate in the same industry and have the same
headquarter state (Column 3). Standard errors, clustered by FirmxYear, are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote statistical
significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels.

                                                               (1)              (2)              (3)
                                                             Future           Future           Future
                                                           Advertising      Advertising      Advertising
                                                            Spending         Spending         Spending

                             Sued - Own                      0.254***        0.259***         0.237***
                                                              (0.058)         (0.058)          (0.058)
                             DMA Market Size                   -0.002          -0.003           -0.001
                                                              (0.055)         (0.055)          (0.055)
                             Advertising Spending (t)        0.541***        0.541***         0.541***
                                                              (0.010)         (0.010)          (0.010)
                             Sued - Industry                   0.053
                                                              (0.078)
                             Sued - State                                      0.012
                                                                              (0.165)
                             Sued - IndustryxState                                              0.063
                                                                                               (0.060)

                             Observations                    477,708          477,708          477,708
                             R-squared                        0.612            0.612            0.612
                                                       Table XI. B2B Results
In this table, we estimate our baseline model reported in Table 3 for two sets of firms, firms in B2B industries and firms in non
B2B industries. We identify B2B industries by going through each industry 3 digit SIC code and classifying it into either a
primarily B2B or retail facing firm. Initiate is a dummy variable that takes a value of one if the firm didn’t advertise in the
corresponding DMA in year t, but advertises in year t+1. Future Advertising Spending (log) is the log of total local advertising
in year t+1. Advertising Spending (t) refers to contemporaneous advertising expense, i.e. the log of total local advertising in year
t. Sued is a dummy variable equal to 1 if a firm was a defendant at least one time in the federal courthouse in a given DMA in
year t for the case types recorded in the Audit Analytics database. In Panel A, we include DMA and FirmxYear fixed effects.
In Panel B, we include Year and FirmxDMA fixed effects. Standard errors, clustered by FirmxYear, are reported in parentheses.
***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels.

                                                             Panel A.
                                                                         Non B2B                             Non B2B
                                                    B2B Industry         Industry        B2B Industry        Industry
                                                       Future             Future            Future            Future
                                                     Advertising        Advertising       Advertising       Advertising
                                                      Spending           Spending          Spending          Spending

          Sued                                        1.234***            0.871***          0.397***         0.264***
                                                       (0.097)             (0.058)           (0.012)          (0.007)
          DMA Market Size                               0.105               -0.048          -0.010***        -0.007***
                                                       (0.086)             (0.055)           (0.002)          (0.001)
          Advertising Spending (t)                    0.728***            0.837***          -0.011***        -0.008***
                                                       (0.011)             (0.008)           (0.000)          (0.000)

          Fixed Effect - DMA                            YES                 YES               YES              YES
          Fixed Effect - Firm x Year                    YES                 YES               YES              YES

          Observations                                 121,065            337,631            121,065          337,631
          R-squared                                     0.649              0.707              0.817            0.782
                                   Panel B.

                                               Non B2B                     Non B2B
                            B2B Industry       Industry     B2B Industry   Industry
                               Future           Future
                             Advertising      Advertising
VARIABLES                     Spending         Spending       Initiate      Initiate

Sued                          0.259**          0.226***      0.309***      0.211***
                               (0.111)          (0.068)        (0.011)       (0.007)
DMA Market Size                 0.164            -0.055       -0.004**      -0.002**
                               (0.108)          (0.066)        (0.002)       (0.001)
Advertising Spending (t)      0.523***         0.547***      -0.011***     -0.008***
                               (0.018)          (0.013)        (0.000)       (0.000)

Fixed Effect - Year             YES              YES            YES          YES
Fixed Effect - Firm x DMA       YES              YES            YES          YES

Observations                  121,065          337,631        121,065      337,631
R-squared                      0.649            0.707          0.817        0.782
                                                   Table XII. Buying the Verdict
In this table we regress defendant win rate, a dummy variable that takes a value of one if a defendant wins the case, on its
advertising expenditure spent following the litigation year. To identify the litigation outcomes, we rely on 2014 Federal Court
Cases: Integrated Data Base disseminated by ICPSR. This database contains information to identify whether the final judgment
of the case is in favor of defendant or plaintiff. The database also allows us to identify the manner in which the cases disposed.
For example, we can identify the cases were transferred or remanded, disposed because of dismissal (lack of jurisdiction, voluntary
dismissal, settlement). In our specification, we exclude cases that were disposed because of dismissal or transfer, and focus on
cases that were disposed with a judgement. Standard errors are clustered by year. ***, **, and * denote statistical significance
at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels.


                                                        Defendant Win Rate            Defendant Win Rate
                    Future Advertising Spending               0.017***                       0.013**
                                                               (0.005)                       (0.005)


                    Fixed Effect - Year                         YES                           YES
                    Fixed Effect - DMA                                                        YES


                    Observations                                2,287                         2,287
                    R-squared                                   0.061                         0.159
         Figure 1 – Samsung example




Source: Marshall News Messenger - Marshall, TX
         Figure 2 – Samsung example




 Samsung Ice Skating Rink




Source: Marshall News Messenger - Marshall, TX
         Figure 3 – Samsung example




Source: Marshall News Messenger - Marshall, TX
