NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INNOVATION AND TRADE POLICY IN A GLOBALIZED WORLD
Ufuk Akcigit
Sina T. Ates
Giammario Impullitti
Working Paper 24543
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24543

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2018

We thank seminar and conference participants at Harvard University, Princeton University,
Stanford University, Duke University, the NBER Summer Institute “International Trade &
Investment” and “Macroeconomics and Productivity” groups, the University of Maryland, the
University of Pennsylvania, the University of Nottingham, the University of Zurich, the
University of Munich, the Federal Reserve Board, the Bank of Italy, the International Monetary
Fund, the International Atlantic Economic Society, ASSA Meetings 2018, the Italian Trade Study
Group, CREST Paris, SKEMA, the SED Conference, and the CompNet Conference. We also
thank Daniel J. Wilson for sharing and helping with his data. Akcigit gratefully acknowledges the
National Science Foundation, the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, and the Ewing Marion Kauffman
Foundation for financial support. The views in this paper are solely the responsibilities of the
authors and should not be interpreted as reflecting the view of the Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System, any other person associated with the Federal Reserve System, or the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Ufuk Akcigit, Sina T. Ates, and Giammario Impullitti. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Innovation and Trade Policy in a Globalized World
Ufuk Akcigit, Sina T. Ates, and Giammario Impullitti
NBER Working Paper No. 24543
April 2018
JEL No. F13,O4
ABSTRACT
How do import tariffs and R&D subsidies help domestic firms compete globally? How do these
policies affect aggregate growth and economic welfare? To answer these questions, we build a
dynamic general equilibrium growth model where firm innovation endogenously determines the
dynamics of technology, and, therefore, market leadership and trade flows, in a world with two
large open economies at different stages of development. Firms’ R&D decisions are driven by (i)
the defensive innovation motive, (ii) the expansionary innovation motive, and (iii) technology
spillovers. The theoretical investigation illustrates that, statically, globalization (defined as
reduced trade barriers) has ambiguous effects on welfare, while, dynamically, intensified
globalization boosts domestic innovation through induced international competition. Accounting
for transitional dynamics, we use our model for policy evaluation and compute optimal policies
over different time horizons. The model suggests that the introduction of the Research and
Experimentation Tax Credit in 1981 proves to be an effective policy response to foreign
competition, generating substantial welfare gains in the long run. A counterfactual exercise shows
that increasing tariffs as an alternative policy response improves domestic welfare only when the
policymaker cares about the very short run, and only when introduced unilaterally. Tariffs
generate large welfare losses in the medium and long run, or when there is retaliation by the
foreign economy. Protectionist measures generate large dynamic losses by distorting the impact
of openness on innovation incentives and productivity growth. Finally, our model predicts that a
more globalized world entails less government intervention, thanks to innovation-stimulating
effects of intensified international competition.
Ufuk Akcigit
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 East 59th Street
Saieh Hall, Office 403
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
uakcigit@uchicago.edu

Giammario Impullitti
School of Economics
University of Nottingham
Clive Granger Building, University Park
Nottingham, NG7 2RD
Giammario.Impullitti@nottingham.ac.uk

Sina T. Ates
Federal Reserve Board of Governors
20th & C St.
Washington, DC 20551
sina.t.ates@frb.gov
A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w24543

Innovation and Trade Policy in a Globalized World

1

Introduction

Since the past U.S. presidential race, a heated debate centered on the position of the United States
in its trade relationships. President Donald J. Trump’s speeches focused, among other issues, on
the United States losing its security and competitiveness to other major economic players in the
world. A favored, and widely discussed, policy suggestion was raising barriers to international
trade. Finally, on March 9, 2018, the United States imposed tariffs on certain imports. Only three
weeks after the implementation of U.S. tariffs, on April 2, China retaliated by imposing tariffs on
various U.S. products.
Interestingly, similar concerns were raised three decades ago, during the 1970s and early
1980s, following the U.S. exposure to a remarkable convergence by advanced countries such as
Japan, Germany and France, in terms of technology and productivity (see Figure 1). This generated extreme concern among U.S. policy circles, most notably the Ronald Reagan administration.
As opposed to the recent focus on protectionist measures, the Reagan government, among other
policies, introduced a research and development (R&D) tax credit scheme in 1981 for the first
time in U.S. history.

Labor Productivity Growth in Manufacturing
(output/hour, in %, 1976−80 avg.)

8

Japan

6
Italy
France
Germany

4
Canada
UK

US

2
−2

2

6
Growth in Patenting
(Patent Applications in the U.S., in %, 1976−80 avg.)

10

Figure 1: Convergence between the U.S. and its peers
Notes: The figure shows the relationship between growth of average labor productivity in the manufacturing sector and growth in
the number of patent applications for the U.S. and its major trading partners between 1976 and 1980. We obtain data on patent
applications in the U.S. from the USPTO and on international productivity comparisons from Capdevielle and Alvarez (1981).

To shed light on this recurring debate on how to tackle international technology competition,
this paper evaluates alternative trade and innovation policies, focusing on strategic interactions
between firms. We provide a new set of empirical facts that motivate the construction of a new
dynamic general equilibrium theory of international technology competition, which we then

1

Innovation and Trade Policy in a Globalized World
employ to perform quantitative policy analysis.
As illustrated in Figure 1, the U.S. performed poorly relative to its advanced peers in terms of
labor productivity and innovation in the second half of the 1970s. The average growth in outputper-hours-worked in manufacturing was the lowest in the U.S. Moreover, innovation by these
foreign competitors, proxied by new patent applications registered in the U.S. by the residents of
these foreign countries, expanded substantially except for the United Kingdom The figure also
reveals that the largest growth rates in patent applications have been recorded by those countries
whose labor productivity growth in manufacturing most outpaced the United States. Strikingly,
patent applications by U.S. residents actually declined in absolute terms during the same period.
United States Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) data reveal that the ratio of foreign patents
to total patents doubled between 1975 and 1985.1 While the U.S. held 70 percent of the patent
applications in 1975, 10 later years this share declined to around 55 percent.2
.04

.7

Introduction of Federal
R&D Tax Credit (ERTA)

17
AZ

16

MO AZ
NJ MO
RI

NJ

NH NH

RI

R&D/Sales

13

.03

U.S. Patent
Share

11 11
10
9
8

IL

.65

CT CT CT

MA MA MA MA MA
IL

IL

IL

IL

IL

OR OR OR OR OR OR OR

KS KS KS KS KS KS KS KS

.025

6
5

R&D Intensity

ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND

.6

CA CA CA CA CA CA CA CA CA

WV WV WV WV WV WV WV WV WV WV

.02
1

1

1

3

WI

WI

WI

WI

WI

WI

WI

WI

WI

IA

IA

IA

IA

IA

IA

IA

IA

IA

IA

IA

IN

IN

IN

IN

IN

IN

IN

IN

IN

IN

IN

US Share in Total Patents

.035

WI

MN MN MN MN MN MN MN MN MN MN MN MN MN MN

.55
1975 1977 1979 1981 1983 1985 1987 1989 1991 1993 1995

Year

Figure 2: R&D and innovation intensity of the U.S. firms
Notes: The figure shows the evolution of aggregate R&D intensity (defined as the ratio of total R&D spending over total sales) of the
public U.S. firms listed in the Compustat database, and the share of patents registered by U.S. residents in total patents registered
in the USPTO database from 1975 to 1995. The ratios are calculated annually. The bars show the total number of U.S. states with a
provision of R&D tax credits, along with their names, for every year since the first adoption of such a measure in 1982.

Unlike the debate today, concerns over U.S. competitiveness in those years led to the introduction of a set of demand- and supply-side policies explicitly targeting incentives for innovation.
One of those was the introduction of the R&D tax credits at the federal level for the first time in
1 See Figure A.1 in Appendix A.1. This section gives a further account of the empirical findings on international
technological competition and the relevant policies during the period of interest.
2 Similar trends are found in countries’ share of global R&D at the sectoral level [see Impullitti (2010)].

2

Innovation and Trade Policy in a Globalized World
1981, immediately followed by individual states’ actions. Upon these policy changes, aggregate
R&D intensity of U.S. public firms showed a dramatic increase, indicated by the blue line in
Figure 2. With an expected delay, the annual share of patents registered by U.S. residents in total
patent applications increased as well, as denoted by the orange line in the same figure.3 Starting
in 1982 with Minnesota, several states followed suit by introducing state-level R&D tax credits
(Figure 2). In contrast, there was no significant action in R&D policies for the other major countries (Figure 3).4 Motivated by these facts, this paper provides a new quantitative investigation
of the effects of R&D subsidies in an open economy, comparing them with the effects of raising
trade barriers as a response to rising foreign technology competition. This policy comparison also
provides new theoretical insights and quantitative perspectives on the gains from globalization.

Federal/National R&D Subsidy Rate

.25

.2

Introduction of R&D
tax credit (ERTA)
Changing the base
calculation

.15

.1

.05

0
1980
US

1985
UK

1990

Year

JAP

ITA

1995
FRA

GER

Figure 3: Effective R&D tax credit rates across countries
Notes: The figure depicts effective R&D subsidy rates in the U.S. and its major trading partners from 1979 to 1995 (unavailable for
Canada).

A sensible quantitative analysis of the economic processes presented above necessitates an
open-economy framework where economic growth is shaped by the interplay of innovation and
international technological competition. The appropriate framework also needs to recognize the
strategic interaction between large firms, because global R&D races and international trade are
dominated by such firms, whose choices affect market aggregates and give rise to strategic market power. The aircraft industry is an example of a technology-intensive sector dominated by two
3 Information

on sales and R&D expenditures of U.S. public firms are obtained from the Compustat database.
Impullitti (2010), R&D subsidies are calculated using corporate tax data from Bloom et al. (2002),
who take into account different tax and credit systems. The subsidies reflect key features of the tax system aimed at
reducing the cost of R&D, particularly depreciation allowances and tax credits for R&D expenditures. This structure
is responsible for the positive value of our subsidy measure initially. For more details, see Impullitti (2010).
4 Following

3

Innovation and Trade Policy in a Globalized World
firms, Airbus and the Boeing Company, which compete strategically for global market leadership
[Irwin and Pavcnik (2004), Baldwin and Krugman (1988)]. The top one percent of trading U.S.
firms account for about 80 percent of total U.S. trade, enabling them, through their large market
shares, to impact market prices [Bernard et al. (2017), Hottman et al. (2016)]. Hence, the strategic
interaction between internationally competing firms is crucial when building a model to analyze
our facts; and gaining new insights on trade and innovation policies. Moreover, as our facts are
intrinsically dynamic, a careful policy evaluation needs to take into account the changes along
the transition path.
With these key points in mind, we build a new two-country dynamic endogenous growth
model where innovation determines the dynamics of technology and global market leadership.
Our framework builds on the step-by-step innovation models of Schumpeterian creative destruction, which allow for strategic interaction among competitors. In both countries, final-goods
firms produce output by combining a fixed factor and a set of intermediate goods, sourced from
domestic and foreign producers. In each intermediate sector, a home and a foreign firm compete
for global market shares and invest in R&D to improve the quality of their product. Free entry
by a fringe of domestic and foreign firms creates an additional source of competitive pressure
on both leaders and followers in each product line. International markets are characterized by
trade costs and international diffusion of ideas in the form of knowledge spillovers. A theoretical investigation of this setting shows that, statically, openness to trade benefits the fixed factor
in the final good production via higher-quality intermediate good imports. This translates into
higher productivity in domestic final-good production. By contrast, the aggregate effect on business owners, which operates through a combination of larger market size for some businesses
and loss of markets to foreign rivals for others, is ambiguous. More importantly, trade openness
impacts the economies’ dynamics by affecting firms’ motives for innovation.
The open-economy dimension of our model redefines firms’ incentives to innovate that are
typical of the standard step-by-step models. The key driver of innovation in the generic stepby-step framework is the escape-competition effect, in which incumbent firms have an incentive to
move away from the follower in order to escape competition. A novel implication of our model
is that two such effects arise in a similar spirit. The main difference in an open economy is that
vertical competition within each product line assumes an international dimension, as competing
firms are from different countries. In each line, firms from both countries compete to serve the
domestic and foreign market. Innovation generates a ranking of the product lines based on the
quality/productivity difference between the home firm and the foreign firm. As in models of
trade with firm heterogeneity [e.g., Melitz (2003)], trade costs generate quality cutoffs that partition the product space into exporting and non-exporting firms. But, in contrast to these models,
where competition takes place horizontally between firms producing different goods and where
firms are ranked based on their absolute productivity level, the ranking and, consequently, the
cutoffs in our model are pinned down by firms’ productivity relative to their foreign competitors.
4

Innovation and Trade Policy in a Globalized World
When the quality of domestic intermediate goods in country c is too inferior relative to its foreign
counterpart, final-good producers in country c decide to source their intermediate goods from
abroad, which determines country c’s import cutoff on relative quality. Likewise, if the relative
quality of the domestic producer in country c is above a certain threshold, the foreign final good
producers decide to import from the intermediate good producer in country c, which specifies
the export cutoff on the relative quality for country c. Hence, the open-economy structure leads
to two cutoffs around which strategic competition between firms becomes stiffer.
The key feature of these two cutoffs is that innovation efforts intensify around them due to
increased competition. Just below the import cutoff, domestic firms exert additional effort to
gain their leadership in the home market; hence, we name it the defensive R&D effort. Likewise,
when a domestic firm is just below the export cutoff, it exerts additional effort to improve its
lead and conquer the foreign market. We call this effort the expansionary R&D effort. These
two new effects generate a double-peaked R&D effort distribution over the relative quality space
that, remarkably, is also supported in the USPTO patent data. From a policy point of view,
the distinction between defensive and expansionary R&D is crucial, as they generate different
responses to alternative industrial policies.
Another important feature of our model is the free entry of new firms. In both the domestic
and foreign economies, new entrants try to replace incumbents. The entry rate is state dependent
in that there will be more domestic entry into those sectors where the domestic incumbents
maintain a larger lead over their foreign rivals. This is another prediction of the model for which
we find empirical support in the patent data. We observe more patents coming from new entrants
in patent classes where U.S. incumbents have a larger fraction of the patents.
We parameterize the model to match key trade, innovation, and growth facts in the late 1970s
and reproduce the evolution of global leadership in those years, with the U.S. initially representing the technological frontier in most sectors, while a set of European countries plus Japan leads
in a few. The transitional dynamics of the model reproduces the convergence in technological
leadership observed in the patent data during the 1970s and early 1980s. We validate our model’s
mechanism with out-of-sample tests concerning the link between innovative activity and technological leadership and the elasticity of firm-level R&D spending to policy changes. In particular,
we lay out striking similarities between the model and the data as to the innovation patterns of
firms at different technological positions vis-à-vis their foreign competitors. Furthermore, simulating the calibrated model beyond the calibration period, we examine the dynamics of foreign
technological convergence—a mode of globalization that has not been widely explored in the
literature—in the absence of policy interventions. In particular, we demonstrate the significant
deterioration in the positions of U.S. firms in international technological competition that would
have arisen in the absence of any policy intervention.
In regards to policy evaluation, we first analyze welfare implications of protectionism—i.e.,

5

Innovation and Trade Policy in a Globalized World
raising import tariffs unilaterally. The welfare implications of this policy change depend on the
time horizon over which the policy is evaluated. A rise in tariffs generates short-run gains, as
it tames international business stealing caused by foreign catching-up, keeping business profits
at home. These gains more than compensate for the negative effect on aggregate productivity
of replacing better-quality imported goods with inferior domestic counterparts. Over the first
decade after a 20 percent increase in tariffs, there are gains of up to 0.2 percent of consumption.
However, protective measures reduce incentives for domestic firms to invest in defensive innovation, because they weaken the foreign competitive pressures domestic firms are exposed to.
As time goes by, this force dominates, leading to substantial drops in welfare in the long run. It
operates through the key sources of gains from trade in this economy. First, declining defensive
innovative effort limits the ability of the economy to make up for the foregone productivity that
would otherwise be enhanced by the high-quality imports. Second, it depresses the gains from
additional profits generated by protected businesses, reducing the growth in that income relative
to baseline. Weaker foreign competition caused by protectionism and the ensuing reduction in
defensive innovative activity also shape the optimal trade policy in our model: Lower tariffs are
preferred when the welfare impact is evaluated over a longer time horizon.
As an alternative policy option to protectionism, we feed the model an increase in R&D
subsidies similar to the U.S. move in the early 1980s and assess its welfare properties over a
period of intensifying foreign competition. The effective average U.S. R&D subsidy increases
from about 5 percent in the 1970s to approximately 19 percent in the post-1981 period. This
subsidy increase generates non-negligible gains in the model in both the short and long run. Over
the three decades following the subsidy increase, the consumption-equivalent welfare is about 0.9
percent higher, with this gain driven by both business stealing and innovation. Reducing the cost
of innovation, subsidies stimulate both entrant and incumbent firms’ R&D in the U.S., thereby
accelerating productivity growth and allowing U.S. firms to obtain market leadership. We also
show that the optimal subsidy level for the same horizon is much higher than the observed
change, as the growth-stimulating impact of subsidies, which becomes stronger over time, calls
for higher subsidies over longer horizons. In fact, the observed increase in subsidies is an optimal
response when only a horizon shorter than 10 years is considered.
Next, we analyze the optimal policy design when both options are available to the policymaker. A key result is that the direction of the trade policy component crucially depends on the
assumption about the response of the trade partners. When the policymaker creates the policy
under the assumption that unilateral changes are possible, the optimal policy favors protectionist trade measures combined with aggressive R&D subsidies. The reason is that protectionist
policies protect domestic profits, yet lower the innovation incentives. Hence, aggressive R&D
subsidies are needed to make up for the reduced innovation efforts. However, if the trade partners retaliate, the optimal trade policy reverses and calls for a regime as liberal as possible. The
risk of losing the export market plays the key role in this reversal.
6

Innovation and Trade Policy in a Globalized World
Last but not least, our analysis shows that less policy intervention is needed as the world
becomes more globalized through reduced trade costs. This interesting result is due to the fact
that lower trade costs intensify competition in the global market place. More competitive markets
induce more innovation, both defensive and expansionary. In other words, as globalization
takes place, markets take care of the innovation incentives and eliminate the need for policy
intervention.
We close our paper with a final exercise that sheds new light on the recent debate concerning
the effect of rising import competition on firm-level and aggregate innovative activity in exposed
sectors. For instance, Autor et al. (2016) find a negative relationship focusing on the U.S., whereas
Bloom et al. (2016) find a positive effect for the European experience. In a simple experiment using our model, we show how this relationship may transpire in both directions depending on the
sectoral composition of firms’ initial technological position relative to their foreign competitors.
Thus, our model provides a rationale that reconciles contradictory findings in previous empirical
work.
Taking stock, foreign technological catching-up has taken its toll on the technological leadership of U.S. firms and led to significant losses in their profits through business stealing. Increasing R&D subsidies during periods of accelerating foreign competition proves to be an effective
response to foreign competition, while raising trade barriers generates only small welfare gains
in the short run at the expense of substantial losses in the long run. The key message of our
analysis is that when a country experiences fiercer foreign technological competition, R&D subsidies help national firms compete without giving up gains from trade. Finally, optimal trade
policy design crucially depends on the possibility of foreign retaliation, in which case the threat
of losing export markets calls for a more liberal trade regime.
Literature Review. This paper is related to several lines of research in the literature. The endogenous technical change framework that we use as the backbone of our economy is a model of
growth through step-by-step innovation as in Aghion et al. (2001, 2005) and the latest developments by Acemoglu and Akcigit (2012) and Acemoglu et al. (2016).5 These closed-economy models are solved in steady state, also abstracting from free entry, with the exception of Acemoglu et
al. (2016), which features entry and transitional dynamics. We propose the first open-economy
version of this class of models, introduce free entry, solve for its transition path, and provide a
quantitative exploration of the gains from globalization and the role of innovation subsidies in
open economies.
On modeling the trade side, our setting draws similarities to the theoretical literature that
analyzes the impact of trade exposure on (industry-level) aggregate productivity in models with
5 Building

on another strand of growth models pioneered by Romer (1990), Grossman and Helpman (1990) use
an expanding variety model to analyze the role of international trade and trade policies in determining the long-run
growth. The adoption of a step-by-step framework instead enables us to study explicitly the strategic interaction
between firms and its implication for innovation and trade patterns.

7

Innovation and Trade Policy in a Globalized World
heterogeneous firm productivities, pioneered by Melitz (2003).6 Also, our structural general
equilibrium framework incorporates several forces, such as competition and market size, whose
impact on firm innovation is highlighted by recent empirical work that focuses on the nexus
of innovation and trade [see Muendler (2004), Bustos (2011), Iacovone et al. (2011), Autor et al.
(2016), Chen and Steinwender (2016), and, in particular, Bloom et al. (2016) and Aghion et al.
(2017), among others].7 It also encompasses technology transfer alongside firm innovation as
sources of productivity growth, in line with the empirical findings of Cameron et al. (2005). We
contribute to this literature by formalizing and quantifying a new theory of endogenous firm
decisions and openness to trade.
Building on the seminal contributions of Rivera-Batiz and Romer (1991) and Grossman
and Helpman (1993), our analysis emphasizes the role of firms’ innovation decisions in shaping policy-induced aggregate dynamics and, thus, makes contact with a growing literature on
dynamic gains from trade.8 A set of recent papers introduced knowledge diffusion into trade
models as a source that shapes dynamic gains [Perla et al. (2015), Buera and Oberfield (2016),
and Sampson (2016), among others]. Impullitti and Licandro (2017), on the other hand, analyze
gains from trade in a model of innovation-driven productivity growth with firm heterogeneity and variable markups. In their analysis of the balanced growth paths, they find that the
growth effects of trade liberalization doubles the welfare gains obtainable in a static version of
the model. Analyzing various extensions of the canonical Melitz (2003) framework, Burstein and
Melitz (2013) discuss the effects of trade liberalization on firm dynamics. In parallel to our findings, they highlight how firms’ innovation responses determine transitional dynamics induced
by trade liberalization. Bloom et al. (2013) develop a trapped-factor model to show that trade
liberalization in a low-wage country could reduce the opportunity cost of innovation. Our work
contributes to this literature by emphasizing the role of strategic interaction between firms in
shaping their innovation responses and, thereby, the dynamic gains from trade. We also examine
these gains quantitatively along the transition path thanks to our framework, which is capable of
tracking the endogenous evolution of competition and innovation patterns in a tractable fashion.
Last but not least, endogenous productivity growth and transitional dynamics provide further
channels through which trade liberalization and policy may affect aggregate welfare, in addition
6 In

the fashion of these models, firms with heterogeneous productivities select the markets to serve in our model.
Conversely, openness to trade may affect the input-sourcing decisions of firms. For an analysis of this effect in a setup
of heterogeneous firms, see Antràs and Helpman (2004).
7 While Bloom et al. (2016) show the positive effect of Chinese import penetration on the technical change in
12 European countries, Aghion et al. (2017) examine the differential impact of market size and competition effects
on innovation decisions of exporting French firms with heterogeneous initial productivity levels. They find that the
market size effect is the dominant force for firms that have higher productivity at times of increased demand. On a
related note, Mayer et al. (2014) and Mayer et al. (2016) look at the product range and mix of multi-product firms as
another source of within-firm productivity variations. They document the positive effect of increased export market
competition on firm productivity through adjustments in these margins.
8 In this regard, our attempt advances the literature in the direction pointed out by Burstein and Melitz (2013).
In their recent chapter, the authors stress the need for more research on dynamic gains from trade, as opposed to
extensively studied static ones, and on the implications of firm and technology dynamics as a potential source.

8

Innovation and Trade Policy in a Globalized World
to those considered by Atkeson and Burstein (2010) and Arkolakis et al. (2012).9
Finally, industrial policies in open economies have been studied by a large body of work.10
Spencer and Brander (1983) and Eaton and Grossman (1986) explore theoretically the strategic
motive to use tariffs and subsidies (to production and innovation) to protect the rents and the
market shares of domestic firms in an imperfectly competitive global economy.11 In a theoretical
small open-economy framework of endogenous growth, Grossman and Helpman (1991a) study
the implications of R&D subsidies and industrial policies for optimal long-run growth and welfare. Ossa (2015) sets up a quantitative economic geography model to study production subsidy
competition between U.S. states. In the spirit of our work, Impullitti (2010) uses a multi-country
version of the standard Schumpeterian growth model to assess the welfare properties of R&D
subsidies in an open economy, although his work is confined to the steady state.12 Considering trade policy, Demidova and Rodríguez-Clare (2009) find that an import tariff can be welfare
enhancing in a static small open economy with firm heterogeneity and product differentiation.
Recently, Costinot et al. (2015) and Costinot et al. (2016) provide intriguing insights on the typedependent formulation of optimal policy design in static Ricardian and monopolistic competition
environments, respectively.13 In contrast to these studies, a distinct feature of our model is the
link between different modes of foreign competition and innovation at the firm level. We show
that in this setting, different policies affect different types of innovations: For instance, unilateral
protectionism distorts incentives for defensive R&D, whereas retaliation by trade partners distorts
incentives for expansionary R&D. This relationship, and the resulting dynamic gains from trade
and transitional dynamics, are central to the design of optimal trade and innovation policy. Differentiating between the short and long run, we demonstrate the crucial dependence of policy
implications on the horizon considered along the transition.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the theoretical framework,
followed by Section 3 with analytical results. Section 4 outlines the calibration procedure and provides out-of-sample tests. Section 5 discusses policy implications and optimal policies. Section
6 discusses the model’s implications in regards to import competition and domestic innovation.
Section 7 presents sensitivity and robustness analysis. Section 8 concludes.
9 Considering

a simple model of sequential production in intermediate goods, Melitz and Redding (2014) also
point to trade-induced changes in domestic productivity as a source of departure from the findings of Arkolakis
et al. (2012), which state that welfare gains from trade in a group of standard models can be derived from a few
aggregate-level sufficient statistics and, accordingly, should be fairly modest. Alessandria and Choi (2014) emphasize
the significance of accounting for transition in this regard.
10 Institutional challenges in applying appropriate industrial policies are beyond the scope of this paper. Interested
readers can see Rodrik (2004) for an extensive discussion.
11 See Leahy and Neary (1997) and Haaland and Kind (2008) for recent contributions. While the literature focuses
on static models, Grossman and Lai (2004) analyze strategic intellectual property rights policy in a multi-country
endogenous growth model.
12 The paper also relates to the recent quantitative analysis of R&D subsidies in a closed economy. See Acemoglu
et al. (2017) and Akcigit et al. (2016a,b).
13 Analyzing trade policies over the business cycle, the recent work by Barattieri et al. (2017) explores the recessionary effects of protectionism in a DSGE framework.

9

Innovation and Trade Policy in a Globalized World

2

Model

We present a model of international technological competition in which firms from two countries,
indexed by c ∈ { A, B} , compete over the ownership of intermediate good production. Each
country has access to the same final good production technology. There is a continuum of
intermediate goods indexed by j ∈ [0, 1] used in final good production. The final good is used
for consumption, production of intermediate goods, and innovation. There is free trade in final
good sectors and no trade in assets. Lack of trade in assets rules out international borrowing and
lending and enables the two countries to grow at different rates during the transition.
In each production line of intermediate goods there are two active firms—one from each
country—engaging in price competition to obtain a monopoly of production. Trade of intermediate goods is costly due to a combination of iceberg costs and tariffs. The firm that produces
the variety of better quality after adjusting for the trade cost holds a price advantage. Firms
innovate by investing resources to improve the quality of their product in the spirit of step-bystep models. If the quality difference between the products of two firms is large enough, then
the firm with the leading technology can cover the trade cost and export to the foreign country.
Because innovation success is a random process, the global economy features a distribution of
firms supplying products of heterogeneous quality. In addition to trade in intermediate and final
goods, there is a second channel of interdependency linking the countries: trade in ideas. The
exchange of ideas consists of technology diffusion through international knowledge spillovers.
In addition to incumbent firms, there is an outside pool of entrant firms. These firms engage
in research activity to obtain a successful innovation that enables them to replace the domestic
incumbent in a particular product line. Introducing the entry margin allows the model to distinguish the effects of domestic and foreign competition. Understanding these distinct forces
becomes particularly important once we use our model for policy evaluation.
Finally, our main goal is to investigate the quantitative policy implications of our model. For
interested readers, we provide a brief theoretical discussion of a simplified version of the model
in Section 3 and present analytical expressions and results of the main static and dynamic forces
in Appendix C.

2.1

Preferences

Consider the following economy in continuous time. Both countries admit a representative
household with the following CRRA utility:
Ut =

Z ∞
t

exp(−ρ (s − t))

10

1− ψ

Ccs − 1
ds,
1−ψ

(1)

Innovation and Trade Policy in a Globalized World
where Cct represents consumption at time t in country c, ψ is the curvature parameter of the utility function, and ρ > 0 is the discount rate. The budget constraint of a representative household
in country c at time t is
rct Act + Lc wct = Pct Cct + Ȧct + Gct ,

(2)

where rct is the return to asset holdings of the household, Lc is the fixed factor (could be labor
or land) supplied inelastically in country c, wct is the fixed factor income, Pct is the price of the
consumption good in country c, and Gct is the lump-sum taxes/transfers. Households in country
c own all the firms in the country; therefore, the asset market clearing condition requires that the
asset holdings have to be equal to the sum of firm values
Act =

Z 1
0

Ṽcjt + Vcjt dj,

where tilde “˜” denotes values pertaining to entrant firms. We assume full home bias in asset
holding, an assumption that is robustly supported by the empirical evidence in the 1980s and
1990s.14

2.2

Technology and Market Structure

2.2.1

Final Good

The final good, which is to be used for consumption, R&D expenditure, and as an input in the
intermediate good production, is produced in perfectly competitive markets in both countries
according to the following technology:
β

Lc
Yct =
1−β

Z 1
0

β
1− β

β
1− β

q Ajt k Ajt + q Bjt k Bjt

 1− β

dj.

(3)

Here, k j refers to the intermediate good j ∈ [0, 1], q j is the quality of k j , and β is the share of fixed

factor in total output. Intermediate goods can be obtained from any country, whereas the fixed
factor Lc is assumed to be immobile across countries. We normalize the supply of the fixed factor
Lc = 1 in both countries to reduce notation.
Firms in both countries may potentially produce each variety j, and in the absence of trade
frictions they are perfect substitutes in the final good production, once adjusted for their qualities. As a result, final good producers will choose to buy their inputs from the firm that offers
a higher quality of the same variety. When trade costs exist, final good producers buy the in14 For

instance, in 1989, 92 percent of the U.S. stock market was held by U.S. residents. Japan, the U.K., France, and
Germany show similar patterns, at 96 percent, 92 percent 89 percent, and 79 percent, respectively. A similar picture
can be observed until the early 2000s, when the home bias started to decline [see, for example, Coeurdacier and Rey
(2013)].

11

Innovation and Trade Policy in a Globalized World
termediate good of higher quality, once the prices are adjusted to reflect the trade costs. Final
good producers in both countries have access to the same technology, which will allow us to
focus on the heterogeneity of the intermediate goods sector. Both countries produce the same
identical final good, which, under the assumption of frictionless trade in final goods, implies that
the price of the final output in both countries will be the same.15 We normalize that price to be
the numeraire without any loss of generality.

2.2.2

Intermediate Goods and Innovation

Incumbents.

In each product line j, two incumbent firms—one from each country—compete

for the market leadership à la Bertrand. Each of these firms has the same marginal cost of
production, η, yet they differ in terms of their output quality, qcj . We say that country A is the
leader in industry j if q Ajt > q Bjt and the follower if q Ajt < q Bjt . Firms are in a neck-and-neck position
when q Ajt = q Bjt . The quality q Ajt improves through successive innovations in A or spillovers
from B (detailed later). When there is an improvement in country c specific to product line j
during an interval of time ∆t, the quality increases proportionally such that qcj(t+∆t) = λnt qcjt ,
where λ > 1 and nt ∈ N is a random variable, which will be specified below. We assume that
initially qcj0 = 1, ∀ j ∈ [0, 1].
Let us denote by Nt =

Rt

of a firm at time t is qcjt = λ

n ds
0 s
Ncjt

the number of quality jumps up to time t. Hence, the quality

. The relative state of a firm with respect to its foreign competitor

is called the technology gap between two countries (in the particular product line) and can be
summarized by a single integer m Ajt ∈ N such that
q Ajt
λ NAjt
= N = λ NAjt − NBjt ≡ λm Ajt .
q Bjt
λ Bjt
As we shall see, mcjt is a sufficient statistic for describing line-specific values, and we will therefore drop the subscript j when a line-specific value is denoted by m. We assume that there is a
relatively large but exogenously given limit in the technology gap, m̄, such that the gap between
two firms is mct ∈ {−m̄, ..., 0, ..., m̄} .
Firms invest in R&D in order to obtain market leadership through improving the quality of
x and x denote the amount of R&D investment and the resulting Poisson
their products. Let Rcj
cj

arrival rate of innovation by country c in j, respectively. The production function of innovations
 Rx  γ1c
takes the following form: xcjt = γc αc qcjtcjt
.
Note that qcjt in the denominator captures the fact that a quality is more costly to improve if
it is more advanced. This production function implies the following convex cost for generating
15 Freeing

intermediate good demand and profits from relative final good price movements, frictionless trade in final goods provides significant computational tractability to our already intricate structure, with endogenous forwardlooking innovation decisions solved over transition while also keeping track of the endogenous gap distribution.

12

Innovation and Trade Policy in a Globalized World
an arrival rate xcjt :

Entrants.


αc γ
R x xcjt , qcjt = qcjt xcjtc .
γc

(4)

Every period, a new entrepreneur in each product line and from each country invests

in innovation to enter the market. If an entrepreneur succeeds in her attempt, the entrant firm
replaces the domestic incumbent; otherwise, the firm disappears. The innovation technology for
 γ̃1

x
c
R̃cjt
entrants is, x̃cjt = γ̃c α̃c qcjt
, which implies the following convex cost function:

α̃c γ̃
R̃ x x̃cjt , qcjt = qcjt xcjtc .
γ̃c

(5)

Figure 4 demonstrates the evolution of leadership in intermediate product lines as a result
of incumbent innovation, entry, and exit.
quality, q

quality, q
A B
entry

entry

exit

line 1

line 2

line 3

line 4

line 5

product
line, j

exit

line 1

a) Product lines

line 2

line 3

line 4

line 5

b) Entry, exit, and leadership

Figure 4: Evolution of product lines
Notes: Panel A exhibits the positions of competing incumbent firms with heterogeneous quality gaps in a set of product lines. Firms
from country B (designated by blue squares) are technological leaders in the first two lines, firms from country A (red circle) are
leaders in the next two lines, and firms are in neck-and-neck position in the last line. Panel B illustrates the effects of innovation by
incumbents and entrants and the resulting dynamic of entry, exit, and technological leadership. Empty squares or circles denote the
previous position of firms that innovate or exit.

In the left panel, five product lines with heterogeneous technology gaps are shown. In the
first two lines, firms from country B (designated by a square) lead, and in the next two lines,
firms from country A (designated by a circle) lead. In the last line, firms are in neck-and-neck
position. The right panel exhibits how these positions evolve. Country A seizes technological
leadership in the first two lines in two different ways. In line 1, an entrant from A enters with
a large enough quality improvement, moving ahead of the previous leader, who is from B, and
also driving the previous domestic incumbent out of business. In line 2, the incumbent from A
generates an innovation with a step size that is larger than the existing gap, which enables it
13

product
line, j

Innovation and Trade Policy in a Globalized World
to surpass the previous leader. While there is no change in line 3, firms become neck-and-neck
in line 4 as a result of a successful innovation by the incumbent from B. In line 5, an entrant
innovation from B breaks the neck-and-neck competition and brings the technological leadership
to B, while also forcing the country’s previous incumbent to exit.
Lastly, notice that changes in technological leadership may not result in business stealing
when trade costs exist. Consider line 2, where country B’s final good producers initially buy
domestic inputs from the technologically superior domestic intermediate producer. Even if technological leadership changes hands in this line, country B’s final good producers may still prefer
buying domestic intermediate inputs instead of importing the better-quality foreign input if trade
costs make it unprofitable despite the quality advantage of country A’s firm.
Innovations and Step Size.

Each innovation improves the relative position of the firm in the

technological competition. Conditional on innovation, the new position at which the firm will
end up is determined randomly by a certain probability mass distribution Fm (·).16 Because the
maximum number of gaps is capped by m̄, there is a different number of potential gaps that each
firm may reach depending on its current position in the technological competition. For instance,
if a firm is leading by 10 gaps, with a single innovation it can potentially open up the advantage
to {11, ..., m̄}, whereas for a neck-and-neck firm, an innovation can help it reach {1, ..., m̄} . Hence,

the probability mass function that determines the new position, Fm (·), is a function of m.

In order to keep the model parsimonious, we assume that there exists a fixed given distribution F (·), and we derive Fm (·) from this distribution in the following way. First, we define the
benchmark distribution over positions larger than −m̄, the most laggard position, as depicted in
Figure 5a. We assume that it has the following functional form:

F (n) ≡ c0 (n + m̄)−φ ∀ n ∈ {−m̄ + 1, ..., m̄} .

(6)

This parametric structure is defined by only two parameters: a curvature parameter φ > 0 and a
shifter c0 that ensures ∑n F (n) = 1. It implies a decaying probability in the new position n. This
decay translates into a decay in the probability of an innovation generating larger technological
jumps.
The highest gap size a firm can reach is m̄. Therefore, the step size distribution specific to
the firm’s position, Fm (·), is defined over positions n ∈ {m + 1, ..., m̄} and is derived as follows:
(
Fm ( n ) =

F ( m + 1) + A ( m )
F (s)

f or n = m + 1
f or n ∈ {m + 2, ..., m̄}

.

(7)

As demonstrated in Figure 5b, A (m) ≡ ∑m
s=−m̄+1 F ( s ) is an additional probability of improving
16 Conversely, each innovation comes with an associated step size that is randomly generated by some probability
mass function.

14

Innovation and Trade Policy in a Globalized World
F

F

A
F(n)

=

c0 (n + m̄)−φ

=

F−m̄ (n)

Fm (n) ∀n ∈ [m + 1, m̄]

A

m̄

−m̄ + 1

gap size
−m̄ + 1 m m + 1

a) Benchmark

m̄

gap size

b) At position m

Figure 5: Probability mass function for new position
Notes: Panel A illustrates the function F (·), defined in equation (6), which we use to generate the position-dependent distributions
of innovation size. Thus, it describes also the probability distribution over potential positions, where an innovation can take the most
laggard incumbent, denoted by Fm̄ (·). Similarly, Panel B illustrates Fm (·) for a generic position m.

the current quality only one more step, on top of what F (·) would imply for that event, which
is given by F (m + 1). This specification for position-specific distributions implies that as firms
become technologically more advanced relative to their competitors, it is relatively harder to open
up the gap more than one step at a time. Moreover, their derivation comes at no additional cost
in terms of parameters thanks to the additive nature of A. Finally, notice that F−m̄ (n) = F (n).
An explanation for this particular way of modeling innovation step sizes is in order. In the
basic step-by-step model, each innovation improves the existing quality of the follower either by
a single step or by making the follower catch up with the leader no matter how big the initial
gap is. The former is dubbed “slow catch-up regime,” while the latter is dubbed “quick catch-up
regime” in Acemoglu and Akcigit (2012). A slow catch-up regime would imply a slow process
of convergence in leadership shares in contrast to what is observed in the data, and yet the quick
catch-up regime would have the opposite effect. Therefore, by incorporating F (n), we generalize
the modeling of firms’ catching up and equip the model with enough flexibility to replicate the
convergence process observed in the data.17
The treatment of A (m) in the derivation of position-specific distributions serves the same

purpose. An alternative could assume equal distribution of the truncated probability mass A (m)

across potential positions {m + 1, ..., m̄}. This alternative would imply a relatively fatter right tail

in Fm (n) and, thus, a higher chance of climbing up the position ladder. However, this structure
would favor the U.S., most of whose firms are technological leaders in their products, as opposed
to the foreign countries, whose firms are lagging in most product lines. Even though a laggard
17 Note

that this specification converges to the standard step-by-step model as φ → ∞.

15

Innovation and Trade Policy in a Globalized World
firm can close the gap by multiple steps, a leading firm in this alternative setup could easily open
up the gap again. It happens because for a leading firm, equal allocation of A (m) across the few

better positions the firm may reach entails a higher chance of reaching better positions quickly
again (as compared to the current specification where the probability of one-step improvements

is disproportionately higher at larger leads). Because of this advantage of the leading firms, the
model, once initiated at the empirical distribution, would have a strong force working against
the shift in the leadership distribution toward smaller gaps. This feature would contrast with the
convergence process in the data, as the empirical distribution strongly favors the U.S. in the early
years of the sample period. By contrast, our current structure with innovations of heterogeneous
step sizes helps the model generate the correct speed of convergence as in the data, while the
distributional assumptions capture the idea of “advantage of backwardness” as in Gerschenkron
(1962), as relatively more laggard firms are in a more advantageous position to receive multiplestep innovations.
During a small time interval ∆t → 0, the resulting law of motion for the quality level of an

incumbent from A that operates in product line j can be summarized as follows. For m > −m̄
the law of motion becomes
(

λn q Ajt with probability x Ajt + x̃ Ajt Fm (n) ∆t
for n ∈ {m + 1, ..., m̄}
q Aj(t+∆t) =
,

q Ajt
with probability 1 − x Ajt + x̃ Ajt Fm (n) ∆t

and for m = −m̄ the law of motion follows


n

for n ∈ {−m̄ + 1, ..., 2m̄}
 λ q Ajt with probability x Ajt + x̃ Ajt F−m̄ (n) ∆t


q Aj(t+∆t) =
.
q Ajt
with probability 1 − x Ajt + x̃ Ajt F−m̄ (n) ∆t




λq Ajt with probability x Bjt + x̃ Bjt Fm (n) ∆t
Consider the quality levels associated with the incumbent firms from country A. In a product
line where the firm from A is in position m, the quality improves when either the domestic
incumbent or entrant innovates. Moreover, the quality in a product line where the firm from A
is in the highest possible lag −m̄ improves not only with innovations by the domestic incumbent

and entrant, but also with innovations by the foreign incumbent or entrant, reflecting knowledge
spillovers. The assumption of a maximum number of gaps and the resulting spillovers imply
that in industries where this maximum is reached, an additional innovation by the leader, despite
improving its quality, cannot widen the gap further. The underlying economic intuition is that
when the leader at gap m̄ innovates, the technology at gap −m̄ + 1 becomes freely available to
the follower in this product line. Because in this economy the leader and the follower belong
to different countries by construction, this knowledge spillover implies a technology flow across
country borders. This spillover helps our model economy generate cross-country convergence in
innovation, technology, and income.
16

Innovation and Trade Policy in a Globalized World

2.3

Equilibrium

In this section, we solve for the Markov Perfect Equilibrium of the model where the strategies
are functions of the payoff relevant state variable m. We start with the static equilibrium. Then
we build up the value functions for the intermediate producers and entrants and derive their
closed form solutions along with the R&D decisions. These variables help us characterize the
evolution of the world economy over time. Henceforth, we will drop the time index t unless it
causes confusion and denote export-related variables by an asterisk.

2.3.1

Households

We start with the maximization problem of the household. The Euler equation of the household
problem determines the interest rate in the economy as: rct = gct ψ + ρ.

2.3.2

Final and Intermediate Good Production

Next, we turn to the maximization problem of the final good producer in country c ∈ { A, B}.

Using the production function (3), the final good producers generate the following demand for
the fixed factor Lc and intermediate good j ∈ [0, 1]:
1
β
β −1
β 1− β
Lc
q jt k jt dj
1−β
0
 β
− β
β
β β
1− β
1− β
= Lc qcjt q Ajt k Ajt + q Bjt k Bjt
.

wct =
pcjt

Z

(8)
(9)

Now we consider the intermediate good producers’ problem. In our open-economy setting,
producers can sell their goods both domestically and internationally. However, as trade is subject to iceberg costs, the producer faces different demand schedules on domestically sold and
exported goods. Therefore, the producer earns different levels of profits on these goods depending on the destination country. Let us start with the case of domestic business. Intermediate
firms produce using the final good as input with a constant marginal cost η.18 Then, the profit

18 The structure with the final good being the only input to intermediate good production helps the computation
of the model substantially, as the intermediate production and export decisions become independent of fixed factor
prices. Appendix E presents a version of the model where the fixed factor is an input to intermediate good production
in a particular way, providing a benchmark to study the detrimental effect of foreign catch-up and the resulting loss
of intermediate production on the compensation of the fixed factor.

17

Innovation and Trade Policy in a Globalized World
maximization problem of the monopolist in product line j becomes19
n
o

β β 1− β
π q jt = max Lc q jt k jt − ηk jt ∀ j ∈ [0, 1] .
k jt ≥0

The optimal quantity and price for intermediate variety j follow from the first order conditions:
1−β
k jt =
η


 β1

and

q jt

pj =

η
,
1−β

(10)

with Lc set to 1. The realized price is a constant markup over the marginal cost and is independent of the individual product quality. Thus, the profit earned by selling an intermediate good
domestically is

π q jt = πq jt ,
where π ≡ η

β −1
β

1− β

(1 − β) β β. Notice that in deriving profits, we assumed that the monopolist is
able to charge the unconstrained monopoly price. Assumption 1 introduced below ensures that
the leaders are able to act as unconstrained monopolists.
The problem when selling abroad is different due to trade costs. In line with the trade
literature, we assume that in order to export one unit of an intermediate good, the exporting
firm needs to ship 1 + κ units of that good (κ ≥ 0). Moreover, a firm in country A exporting
to country B pays τ B units of flat-rate excise import tariffs.20 This means that when the firm

considers meeting the foreign demand, it will take into account that its marginal cost will be

1 + κ + τ B η. Given the trade costs, only the firm with the higher cost-adjusted quality will find
it profitable to sell in the other country. Hence, the firm from country A exports intermediate
good j to country B if and only if
q Ajt

(1 + κ + τ B )

1− β
β

≥ q Bjt .

In this Bertrand competition setting, the existence of a competitor with inferior quality—by definition, located in the foreign country—could potentially push the leader to limit pricing. To
simplify the analysis we make the following assumption:
Assumption 1 In every product line, incumbents enter a two-stage game where each incumbent pays an
arbitrarily small fee ε > 0 in the first stage in order to bid prices in the second stage.
Assumption 1 ensures that only the incumbent with the highest cost-adjusted quality pays
the fee and is therefore able to set the monopoly price in the second stage. Under this assumption,
19 The

monopolist’s maximization problem assumes the equilibrium property that a final good producer buys an
intermediate input from one firm only. Therefore, the monopolist producer’s demand k j is given by equation (9) with
the amount supplied by the other firm k − j set to zero (see Assumption 1).
20 In the baseline model, we assume that the governments burns out the tariff revenue, thus making tariffs to
operate similar to iceberg costs. In Section 7.5, we relax this assumption as a robustness experiment.

18

Innovation and Trade Policy in a Globalized World
similar derivations as in the case of domestic sales lead to the following optimal quantity of
exports and associated profits:
k∗cjt =



1−β
(1 + κ + τ c 0 ) η

 β1


Lc0 qcjt

and

p∗cj =

1 + κ + τc

0



η

1−β

⇒


πc∗ q jt = πc∗ Lc0 qcjt ,

(11)

  β−β 1
1− β
η
(1 − β) β β. Figure 6 summarizes the
effect of positive trade costs on the technology frontier of two competing countries.
with c ∈ { A, B}, c 6= c0 , and πc∗ =



1 + κ + τc

0

quality, q
A1

A1

A2

A firms, when sold at home

A1’

A2’

A firms, when sold abroad

A1’
B1
B1’

B2
B2’
A2
A2’

0

Export

Domestic sale only

Import

1

product
line, j

Figure 6: Effect of iceberg cost on quality and trade flows
Notes: The figure exhibits the technology frontiers, defined as the product qualities of incumbent firms over all product lines, of two
countries in an example economy (shown by the solid lines). When exporting, the effective technology frontiers (given by the dashed
lines) are lower than the actual ones because the exporters need to incur iceberg costs.

Without loss of generality, Figure 6 illustrates a special case where the quality frontiers of
the two economies align perfectly in a descending order of qualities across sectors. The solid
lines define the quality frontier of the domestic intermediate producers, where A and B denote
the home and the foreign country, respectively. The dashed lines show the level of these qualities
when adjusted by trade costs. Firms of the home country can export a product as long as the
cost-adjusted quality, denoted by the dashed line A0 , is higher than the domestic quality of
that product available in the foreign country, denoted by the solid B line. When the reverse
occurs, the home country imports the higher-quality product. Otherwise, firms serve only their
domestic markets. Two intersections of dashed and solid lines determine two cutoffs that define
three regions of product lines according to their position in trade. Next, we define these cutoffs
analytically.
19

Innovation and Trade Policy in a Globalized World
We denote by m∗c the smallest gap by which a leader from country c ∈ { A, B} needs to lead

its follower in order to be able to export its good. Due to trade costs, it is possible that an in-

termediate good producer has a higher-quality product compared to its foreign competitor (e.g.,
qc > qc0 ), but in cost-adjusted terms the quality of its good is lower than the foreign counterpart

 1−β β
0
c
such that the firm cannot export (qc / 1 + κ + τ
< qc0 ). To secure a quality advantage even
after trade costs are accounted for, the technology gap between a leader and its follower has to
reach the threshold
(
m∗c

m



≡ arg min m ∈ [0, m̄] : λ ≥ 1 + κ + τ

c0

 1−β β

m

)
.

(12)

Now we define the quality index of sectors where firms from country c are in state m. Denote
the measure of product lines where firms from c are m-steps ahead by µcm . Then the aggregate
quality across these product lines is given by
Qcmt ≡

Z

qcjt I{ j∈µcm } dj.

Using the equilibrium conditions derived previously, total output is given as
Yct =

m̄

∑

m=−m∗c0 +1



1−β
η

 1−β β

 1−β β
−m∗c0 
Qcmt
Qc0 mt
1−β
+ ∑
.
c
1 − β m=−m̄ (1 + κ + τ ) η
1−β

(13)

The first sum denotes the contribution of domestic intermediate goods. The second sum, which
is across product lines where foreign exporters lead domestic firms by at least m∗c0 gaps, denotes

the contribution of imported goods. Finally, the fixed factor price is wct = βYct , which follows
from the first order condition of the final good producer given by equation (8).
We complete the description of equilibrium properties of goods’ production with their implications for trade flows. The final good is freely traded and it absorbs possible imbalances
in intermediate goods trade. Hence, trade in this economy is balanced, and the relative price
driving the adjustment is the relative price of the fixed factor w A /w B .

2.3.3

Firm Values and Innovation

This subsection presents equilibrium firm values and innovation decisions.21

21 In equilibrium, m is a sufficient statistic for firm value. Lemma 1 at the end of this subsection verifies this result.
Accordingly, we replace subscript j with m unless otherwise necessary.

20

Innovation and Trade Policy in a Globalized World

Incumbent Firms.

We can write the value function for country A’s incumbents:22

γA



 (x
Amt )
r At VAmt (qt ) − V̇Amt (qt ) = max Π m; τ A , τ B qt − 1 − s A α A
qt
x Amt
γA


i
h
m̄
+ x Amt ∑ Fm (nt ) VAnt λ(nt −m) qt − VAmt (qt )



n t = m +1

+ x̃ Amt [0 − VAmt (qt )]


+ x B(−m)t + x̃ B(−m)t

m̄

∑

nt =−m+1

h

F−m (nt ) VA(−nt) (qt ) − VAmt (qt )

i

)
,
(14)


where Π m; τ A , τ B is defined as

∗
 πL A + π L B i f

 
Π m; τ A , τ B =
πL A
if


0
if

m ≥ m∗A

m∗A > m > −m∗B .
m ≤ −m∗B

Note that profit level depends on foreign tariffs because profits from exports, derived in equation
(11), are affected by it.
The first line on the right-hand side denotes the operating profits net of R&D costs, where
sA

is the R&D subsidy. Profits are linear in product quality, creating an incentive for innovation

even for firms at the largest lead. As is evident from the definition of Π m; τ A , τ B , capturing
the domestic market or expanding into foreign markets adds to profits, thereby intensifying the
incentives to innovate. Expansion of markets through exports reflects the market-size effect. The
second line denotes the expected gains from innovation. This expectation is over potential new
positions. The exact position is determined probabilistically by the step size of innovation. For
firms that are close to their rivals and, thus, feel the competition at its most intense, the innovation
effort reflects a dominant incentive for taking over the competitor in order to gain market power.
This is an escape-competition effect typical of step-by-step innovation models. A distinguishing
feature of our model, however, is that this force emerges at two distinct positions instead of a
single one as is typical of closed-economy versions. The first case is when a laggard firm is
one-step behind short of beating the foreign exporter and gaining access to domestic production.
This leads to an intense innovation activity by the laggard firm, which we label as defensive R&D.
Second, a similar intensification happens when a domestic producer is one step short of gaining
access to export markets, in which case expansionary R&D is observed. We further discuss this
extension of the escape-competition effect across multiple stages of competition—in particular, over
domestic and foreign markets—in Section 4.2 by confronting the model with the data.
The last two lines on the right hand side capture the creative destruction by domestic and
22 The

problem for incumbent firms from country B is defined reciprocally.

21

Innovation and Trade Policy in a Globalized World
foreign competitors. The third line reveals that entry by domestic firms forces the incumbent
to exit with probability one, as by construction every product line is forced to have one firm
from each country. This domestic business-stealing effect reduces the value of an incumbent firm
and therefore its incentive to innovate. Moreover, in an open economy, there is an additional
channel through business stealing. The last line explains the changes as a result of innovation
in the foreign country. Any innovation there, regardless of the source being an entrant or an
incumbent, deteriorates the position and the value of the domestic incumbent, and the size of the
deterioration is again determined probabilistically by F−m (·).23 We label this additional channel

as the international business-stealing effect.24

The firms’ problems are characterized by an infinite-dimensional space of intermediate good
qualities. The following lemma renders the firm environment independent of the current quality of their products, reducing the state space to finite dimensions and allowing for numerical
tractability.
Lemma 1 The value functions are linear in quality such that Vcm (q) = qvcm for m ∈ {−m̄, ..., m̄} where

r At v Amt − v̇ Amt = max
x Amt











 ( x )γ A
Π m; τ A , τ B − 1 − s A α A Amt
γA
h
i
m̄
n
−
m
(
)
t
+ x Amt ∑nt =m+1 Fm (nt ) λ
v Ant − v Amt










+ x̃ Amt [0 − v Amt ]




h
i


m̄


 + x B(−m)t + x̃ B(−m)t ∑nt =−m+1 F−m (nt ) v A(−nt) − v Amt

,









This ensures that the innovation decision of the firm does not depend on j once controlled for m.
Proof. See Appendix B.1.
The first order conditions of the problems defined above yield the following equilibrium
R&D decisions for an incumbent in state m:
 h
n
oi γ 1−1
c

m̄
1

 αc (1−sc ) ∑n=m+1 Fm (n) λ(nt −m) vcnt − vcmt
xcmt =
i γ 1−1
h


c

1
( λ − 1) v
cm̄t

α c (1− s c )

Entrants.

i f m < m̄
.

(15)

i f m = m̄

Recall that entry is directed at individual product lines and a successful entrant im-

proves on the active domestic incumbent’s technology. The problem of an entrant that aims at a
product line where the current domestic incumbent is m > 0 (m < 0) steps ahead (behind) is as
23 The distribution function is labeled with the subscript − m because it is associated with the competitor’s position.
Note that there is no threat of exit posed by the foreign entrant, as that entrant replaces the incumbent of its own
country.
24 We define the value functions for the two boundary cases where the incumbent is m̄-steps ahead (behind) in
Appendix B.2. As discussed there, the international knowledge spillover manifest itself in the value function of m̄-stepbehind incumbent.

22

Innovation and Trade Policy in a Globalized World
follows:
(
Ṽcmt (qt ) = max
x̃cmt



m̄
α̃c
− ( x̃cmt )γ̃c qt + x̃cmt ∑ Fm (nt ) Vcnt λ(nt −m) qt
γ̃c
n t = m +1

)
.

(16)

Again, Fm (·) denotes the probability distribution of potential step sizes, from which a random
step will realize conditional on having an innovation. An entrant who fails to innovate exits the
economy. Solving this problem leads to the following equilibrium value of the entrant firm:
Ṽcmt (qt ) =



1
1−
γ̃c



α̃c ( x̃cmt )γ̃c qt > 0,

which is independent of the production line’s index j and is determined by the current gap size.
The equilibrium innovation rates for entrants become

x̃cmt =





h

1
λvcm̄t · α̃−
c

 γ̃ 1−1

i f m = m̄

c

 α̃−1 ∑m̄
(nt −m) v
cnt
c
n = m +1 Fm ( n ) λ

i γ̃ 1−1
c

i f m < m̄

.

(17)

Closing the model, aggregate consumption is derived from the budget constraint in equation
(2). Aggregate R&D spending Rct is derived combining equations (4), (5), (15), and (17):
Rct =

m̄

∑



s=−m̄


γ̃
γ
αc xcstc + α̃c x̃cstc Qcst ,

(18)

and total intermediate production input Kct is determined by equations (10)-(11):
Kct =

m̄

∑



 
1+κ+τ η
c0

s=m∗c

1−β
(1 + κ + τ c 0 ) η

 β1

m̄−1

1−β
Qcst + ∑ η
η
s=−m∗ +1


 β1

Qcst .

(19)

c0

The government spending reads as
Gct = sc

m̄

∑

s=−m̄

γ

αc xcstc Qcst ,

(20)

implying that the total expenditure on subsidies is funded by the total lump-sum taxes collected.
Notice that tariffs do not generate revenue in the baseline model (Section 7.5 relaxes this assumption). We leave the analytical discussion of the evolution of the aggregate quantities such as µcmt
and Qcmt , which summarize the dynamics of the model, to Appendix B.3. Now we define the
equilibrium.
Definition 1 (Equilibrium) Let the world economy consist of two countries c ∈ { A, B}. A Markov

23

Innovation and Trade Policy in a Globalized World
Perfect Equilibrium is an allocation
t∈[0,∞)

{rct , wct , p j , k jt , k∗jt , xcjt , x̃cjt , Yct , Cct , Rct , Kct , Gct , Lc , {µcmt , Qcmt }m∈{−m̄,...,m̄} }c∈{ A,B},j∈[0,1]
such that (i) the sequence of prices and quantities p j , k jt , k∗jt satisfy equations (10)-(11) and maximize the
operating profits of the incumbent firm in the intermediate good product line j; (ii) the R&D decisions

xcjt , x̃cjt are defined in equations (15) and (17), and Rct is given in equation (18); (iii) labor supply Lc is
equal to the profit-maximizing labor choice of the final good producers defined by equation (8); (iv) Yct is as
given in equation (13); (v) Cct is as derived from equation (2); (vi) Kct is given in equation (19); (vii) wages
wct clear the labor markets at every t; (viii) interest rates rct satisfies the households’ Euler equation; (ix)
government has a balanced budget at all times in line with equation (20); (x) and {µcmt , Qcmt }m∈{−m̄,...,m̄}
are consistent with optimal R&D decisions.

2.4

Welfare

Aggregate welfare in economy c over horizon T calculated at time t0 is given by
Wct0 =

Z t0 + T
t0

exp(−ρ (s − t))

1− ψ

Ccs − 1
ds.
1−ψ

In the quantitative section, we will report the welfare differences between a counterfactual and
the baseline economy in consumption equivalent terms using the following relationship:
Z t0 + T
t0

(C new )1−ψ − 1
exp(−ρ (s − t0 )) cs
ds =
1−ψ

Z t0 + T
t0


base 1−ψ − 1
(1 + ς) Ccs
exp(−ρ (s − t0 ))
ds.
1−ψ

new between t and t + T satisfying
If a policy change at time t0 yields a new income sequence Cct
0
0

the above relationship, we say that the policy change results in ς% variation in consumptionequivalent welfare over horizon T. This means that the representative consumer in the baseline
economy would need to receive ς% additional income at each point in time between t0 and t0 + T
in order to obtain the level of welfare it would have in the counterfactual scenario.

3

Analytical Results in a Simplified Model and Taking Stock

Before proceeding to the quantitative investigation of the model, we find it worthwhile to discuss
some of the key economic forces of our model in more detail.25 We split the discussion into two
parts: static and dynamic. Even though it is not possible to express the equilibrium objects in a

25 We

refer the reader who is interested in quantitative analysis to Section 4.

24

Innovation and Trade Policy in a Globalized World
fully analytical form in transition, we make significant progress in that direction by focusing on
a slightly simplified version here.26 We start with the discussion of static forces.

3.1

Static Effects of Openness

In this subsection, we will abstract from iceberg costs and we will consider two extreme
economies: open economy (i.e., no tariffs) versus autarky (i.e, tariff rates are infinite). We can
solve for the static equilibrium for these two alternative economies and show that income of the
fixed factor is always bigger in an open economy—i.e., w autarky < wopen . This result is intuitive.
In a world with open economies, more productive intermediate good producers sell to the final
good producers in both countries. This selection channel facilitates the transfer of better-quality
intermediate goods across countries, increasing the productivity of the fixed factor utilized in the
production of domestic final output. Therefore, this channel, labeled as direct transfer of technology
in Keller (2004), leads to a higher fixed factor income in both countries.
However, the impact of openness on profits is not obvious. In contrast to the state of autarky,
the open economy allows relatively more productive firms to sell to a larger market by providing
the opportunity to export. Yet, at the firm level the selection channel implies that less productive
domestic firms lose their profits to foreign competitors, which they would earn otherwise in
autarky, causing a decline in aggregate profit income. As a result, the net effect of openness on
total profits remains ambiguous. Proposition 1 summarizes these findings.
Proposition 1 In the environment without iceberg trade costs described above:
A) Opening the economy to international trade increases the income of the fixed factor, i.e., w autarky <
wopen . However, the total change in profits of the domestic business owners is ambiguous and
R 1 autarky
depends on the initial composition of the technology gaps between two countries, i.e., 0 Π j
dj ≶
open

∑m̄
m=−m̄ µm Πm .

B) The static effect of unilateral trade policy liberalization (reduction in tariffs) on aggregate income
is shaped by the loss of profits to foreign exporters and the gain in fixed factor income and has an
ambiguous direction.
Proof. See Appendix C.
For instance, in an extreme case where a country is lagging in all sectors by a very small
margin, opening to trade from autarky may decrease national income initially, as the small productivity gain from transferring slightly better technology may not compensate for the loss of
profits in all sectors.

26 For a thorough discussion of similar channels in the context of a basic Schumpeterian creative destruction model,
see Chapter 15 in Aghion and Howitt (2009).

25

Innovation and Trade Policy in a Globalized World

3.2

Dynamic Effects of Openness and Escape Competition

In order to emphasize the dynamic strategic interaction between intermediate producers introduced by foreign competition, we focus on a special case of our model. In particular, we consider
a standard step-by-step open-economy setting with two symmetric countries that abstracts from
firm entry, features quick catch-up by followers, and minimizes the incentives for quality improvements. First, we take α̃c → ∞ implying zero entry in both countries. Second, innovations

improve a leader’s position by a single step—i.e. Fm (n = m + 1) = 1, ∀m ≥ 0. Third, we set
Fm (n = 0) = 1, ∀m < 0, to allow any innovating follower to reach neck-and-neck position.

Fourth, we assume that λ = 1 + ε where ε is arbitrarily close to zero, implying that quality

improvements from innovations are minuscule.27 The following proposition argues that, in this
environment, firms in neck-and-neck position have the highest innovation intensity.
Proposition 2 The above assumptions imply that
1. the innovation intensity becomes the highest at neck-and-neck position;
2. the followers innovate at the same intensity and strictly less than the neck-and-neck firms;
3. the leaders do not innovate.
Formally, x0 > x−m = x−m̄ > xm̄ = xm = 0 for m > 0.
Proof. See Appendix C.
Proposition 2 formalizes the fact that the positive effect of foreign competitive pressures on
innovation incentives becomes the strongest when firms compete against rivals producing goods
of similar quality. This effect is analogous to the one in closed-economy step-by-step models—
namely, the “escape-competition” effect—but it gains an international aspect in the context of
a small open economy. Moreover, notice that in our general model, the international structure
modifies the escape-competition effect in more subtle ways than merely shifting the origin of the
competitive pressure from domestic to foreign. In fact, the intensification of innovation as a result
of international competition arises at two points in our generalized model instead of one because
of trade costs. Firms have an incentive to escape competition for two similar yet distinct reasons:
to capture domestic profits (defensive R&D) and to capture export markets (expansionary R&D).
In Section 4, we proceed with the full-fledged model, removing simplifying features introduced in this subsection for the sake of analytical investigation.

27 Therefore,

innovation incentives are driven by business-stealing and escape-competition effects.

26

Innovation and Trade Policy in a Globalized World

4

Quantitative Analysis

In this section, we study the quantitative implications of our theoretical framework. After calibrating the model, we first discuss its performance in terms of out-of-sample predictions. Then,
we focus on the implications of R&D subsidies and tariff policies for technological competition.
We evaluate alternative scenarios including the simultaneous use of measures and retaliation
by trade partners in terms of their welfare consequences. We start our exploration with the
calibration of our model.

4.1

Calibration

When mapping our two-country model to the data, we envision a world that consists of the U.S.
and a foreign country, which is a weighted combination of the six countries employed in the
empirical section: Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, and the U.K.28 The weights associated
with each country, listed in Table 1, reflect the count of patents registered in the U.S. by the
residents of a specific country in the initial year of the sample (1975) as a fraction of all foreign
patents registered in the U.S. in that year.29 In the remainder of this section, country A will
represent the U.S. and country B the foreign country.
Table 1: Patent weights of countries

Canada

France

Germany

Italy

Japan

U.K.

6.2%

11.7%

30.0%

3.8%

33.1%

14.6%

As Figure 3 shows, there is a significant break in the R&D policy before and after 1981.
Moreover, as shown in Figures A.1 in Appendix A.1, there is a strong convergence in the relative
shares of domestic and foreign patents registered in the U.S. prior to 1981, which also holds true
for the share of sectors led by domestic and foreign firms. A key objective of our calibration
strategy is to reproduce this convergence in order to conduct our policy evaluation exercises in
an environment that mimics the intensification of the foreign technological competition faced by
U.S. firms in those years. Therefore, we match the model to a set of moments that we obtain
from the data that span 1975 to 1981. Then, we impose to the calibrated model the changes in
R&D policy observed in the data and analyze their implications for the post-1981 period (1981 to
1995).30
28 These

are the most innovation-intensive countries competing with the U.S., measured by their share of patent
applications in the USPTO patent data.
29 Weights may not sum to 1 because of rounding.
30 We focus our analysis on the period before 1995 for several reasons. First, we want to avoid the run-up to the
U.S. dot-com bubble and the crisis that followed in the early 2000s. Second, we isolate our period from heightened

27

Innovation and Trade Policy in a Globalized World
In the calibrated model, we try to keep the least amount of heterogeneity across countries
other than subsidy levels in order to focus solely on the effect of policy differences. The two large
open economies share symmetric technologies except the scale parameters of R&D cost functions
and the imposed R&D subsidies. These assumptions leave us with the following 16 structural
parameters to be determined:
n
o
A
B
θ ≡ α A , α B , α̃ A , α̃ B , γ, γ̃, ρ, ψ, β, κ, η, λ, φ, τ75−81 , s75
−81 , s75−81 .
Some of these parameters are calibrated externally and the remaining are calibrated internally.
We start with the external calibration.

4.1.1

External Calibration

We take the CRRA parameter of the utility function ψ = 2, a standard value in the macroeconomics literature. We set the time discount parameter ρ = 1%. These preference parameters
imply a 2.8 percent interest rate in the balanced growth path and an average rate of 1.8 percent
between 1975 and 1981 for the U.S. We set β = 0.5, which leads to a roughly 65 percent share
of fixed factor income in U.S. GDP in the balanced growth path, with η set equal to 1 − β.31 We

assume R&D cost functions to have a quadratic shape such that γ = γ̃ = 2, which is the common
estimate in the empirical R&D literature (see Acemoglu et al. (2017) for a thorough discussion).
The left panel of Table 2 lists these values.
Table 2: List of parameter values

Panel A: Externally calibrated

Panel B: Internally calibrated

Parameter

Value

Description

Parameter

Value

Description

ψ

2

Elasticity of substitution

αA

0.64

R&D scale, incumbents US

γ, γ̃

2

R&D cost curvature

αB

1.14

R&D scale, incumbents FN

ρ

1%

Rate of time preference

α̃ A

44.6

R&D scale, entrants US

β

0.6

Factor income share

α̃ B

8.77

R&D scale, entrants FN

A
s75
−81
B
s75
−81

5.3%

R&D subsidy US, 75-81

φ

1.35

Curvature of F (n)

3.8%

R&D subsidy FN, 75-81

λ

1.49%

Innovation step size

κ

11.4%

Iceberg trade cost

τ75−81

8%

Tariff rate

A crucial set of parameters is the R&D subsidy rates. The numbers we use are those calcompetition exerted by China. Although valuable in itself, this would introduce a second period of exogenous variation to our analysis, making it more complicated for no apparent benefit. Finally, our theoretical assumption of home
bias is better suited for this relatively earlier period of financial globalization.
31 By income approach, GDP is equal to the sum of profits and wages earned.

28

Innovation and Trade Policy in a Globalized World
culated in Impullitti (2010), which lack only Canada.32 These data go back to 1979. Given that
the rates in the sample countries do not markedly fluctuate before the mid-1980s, we assume the
values before 1979 to be the same as in 1979. For the calibration part, the subsidy rates for both
countries are 1975-1981 averages, which are again weighted for the foreign countries. When we
simulate the model for the post-1981 period, we will recalculate the subsidy rates to match the
averages across 1982 to 1995. We also recalculate the weights of foreign countries the same way
but use 1981 patent counts.

4.1.2

Internal Calibration and Identification

We have eight remaining parameters: {α A , α B , α̃ A , α̃ B , λ, φ, κ, τ75−81 }. One of these, φ, determines
the shape of the generic step-size distribution. In order to calibrate them, we use seven data
points and the distribution of firms across technology gaps that we derive using USPTO patent
data. We start with the discussion of the seven moments, summarized in Table 3, that are not
directly related to the gap distribution. Again, moments pertaining to the foreign country are
weighted averages of the values for individual countries.
The first two moments are the average growth rates of total factor productivity (TFP) in both
countries, calculated using TFP series in Coe et al. (2009). The next two moments are aggregate
non-defense R&D expenditure as a percentage of GDP, which we obtain from the Main Science
and Technology Indicators (MSTI) database of the OECD.33 As a fifth target, we include the birth
rate of new establishments for the U.S. computed using the BDS database.34 The sixth moment is
the ratio of U.S. manufacturing exports to GDP, which we derive using World Bank data. These
moments allow us to determine six parameters as follows. Aggregate R&D shares discipline
the scale parameters of the incumbent R&D cost functions {α A , α B } . The scale parameter of the
entrant R&D cost function for country A (α̃ A ) is determined by the U.S. establishment birth rate.
Then, TFP growth rates pin down the basic step size λ and the entrant R&D cost for country B

(α̃ B ) . The U.S. export-to-GDP ratio determines the iceberg cost κ, as κ sets m∗ , the minimum gap
a firm needs to open up in order to export, given λ. Finally, average U.S. tariff revenue during
the calibration period, which we obtain from U.S. International Trade Commission, determines
the tariff rate, which we take to be common for both countries.
The last parameter to be internally calibrated is φ, which controls the curvature of the generic
probability function over technology gaps, F (n) . As manifested by equations (A.1), this function,
32 We

address this issue by recalculating the patent weights after dropping Canada.
Non-defense R&D spending data do not include Japan. However, Science and Engineering Indicators reports of
the National Science Foundation, based on MSTI data, provide estimates of this variable for Japan, which we use to
amend our calculations with the OECD data. Also, MSTI data start in 1981, which is why we use the initial values of
this variable.
34 We prefer entry by establishments instead of firms because while in the data firms enter at different sizes, in our
model every firm operates in one product line.
33

29

Innovation and Trade Policy in a Globalized World
by forming the basis of position-specific Fm (n), becomes an integral determinant of the model
dynamics that govern the evolution of firms’ measure across technology gaps (µcm ’s) . We make
use of this relationship to discipline the shape of F (n) . To this end, we first derive the empirical
distribution of sectors across technology gaps using the information on patents provided by the
USPTO data. This procedure, illustrated in Figure 7, provides us with the data counterpart of
firms’ measure across technology gaps (gap distribution) in the model.
# US patents
# total

A01B

0.50

A61K

0.02

B02C
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·

0.46

E21B

0.98

F04B

0.53

400+ sectors

Patent Classes

Tech. gaps/bins
1

0.54
0.51
0.48
0.45

0.03
0

m = m̄ = 16

·
·
·
·
·

m=1
m=0
m = −1

·
·
·
·
·

m = −m̄ = −16

Figure 7: Mapping USPTO patent data to the model
Notes: The figure illustrates how patent classes in the USPTO data are assigned to equally sized bins on a unit measure according to
the share of patents owned by U.S. residents, obtaining an empirical distribution of technology gaps.

We start with sorting sectors in a given year according to the fraction of patents in each sector
that are registered by U.S.-based entities in that year.35 Then, we divide this unit interval into
33 equally spaced bins, each of which corresponding to a range of approximately 3 percent. For
instance, sectors with a fraction of U.S. patents between 0 and 3 percent would fall into m = −16,

sectors with a fraction between 4 percent and 6 percent would fall into m = −15, and so on.

Sectors in the data correspond to product lines in our model and, thus, the measure of sectors
across bins (normalized to sum to 1) corresponds in our model to µm ’s for country A across
33 gap levels from −m̄ = −16 to m̄ = 16.36 Figure 8a shows the distribution in the data for
35 The

total mass of patents in a given year consists of patents by registrants from the U.S. and the other six foreign
countries that we used throughout the paper. For the robustness of our results to a method where sectoral country
shares are calculated based on cumulative patent counts over a number of years, see Section 7.4.
36 We chose the maximum gap to allow for a realistic catch-up process for laggard firms while having enough
observations in each bin of the empirical distribution.

30

Innovation and Trade Policy in a Globalized World
years 1975 (circled black line) and 1981 (solid blue line).37 It reveals that, initially, a substantial
mass of U.S. firms are technological leaders, with the mean gap being close to seven; however,
subsequently, their distribution has shifted leftward, with the mean gap falling to around four
in 1981. This shift translates into a larger mass of U.S. firms in relatively smaller gap sizes and,
therefore, signifies a strong foreign technological catch-up. The calibration of φ aims to match
the dynamics of this catch-up process that occurred between 1975 and 1981, as described in the
discussion of the model fit below.
In order to obtain the model counterparts of our data targets, we simulate the two economies
between 1975 and 1981, initializing the model at the empirical gap distribution in 1975. Initially,
we normalize the quality of U.S. intermediate goods to one—i.e., q Aj1975 = 1 ∀ j.38 We solve

the transition path of the model over 1975 to 1981 as described below. We derive the model

counterparts of the seven moments presented in Table 3 by taking averages of the simulated
series over the relevant period. We also compute the evolution of the gap distribution in the
model using equations (A.1) defined in Appendix B.3 and try to hit the empirical gap distribution
in 1981 as the terminal point of the economy in transition.
0.08

0.09
0.08

Data = Model US, 1975
Data US, 1981
Model US, 1981

0.07

US distribution in 1981

0.07
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02

0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01

0.01
0
-20

0.06

? = 0:4 # ?^
? = 0:8 # ?^
?^ = 1.37, calibrated
? = 1:2 # ?^

-15

-10

-5

0

5

10

15

Technological gaps btw. domestic and foreign firms

0
-20

20

a) Technological gap distribution: data and calibration

-15

-10

-5

0

5

10

15

Technological gaps btw. domestic and foreign firms

20

b) Identification of φ

Figure 8: Gap distribution after policy changes
Notes: Panel A depicts three technology gap distributions and demonstrates the model’s performance (positive values on the horizontal axis denote U.S. technological leadership). The dotted solid line is the empirical distribution in 1975, which also defines the
initial distribution for the model simulation in the calibration. The solid blue line is the empirical distribution in 1981 and defines
the target distribution of the simulation. The dashed red line is the model-generated distribution in 1981, simulated at the calibrated
parameters. Panel B illustrates the effect of φ (the curvature parameter of the step-size distribution function) on the simulated gap
distribution, the variation in which enables the identification of φ. It exhibits various model-generated distributions in 1981 that
result from simulations with varying levels of φ as other parameters being held at their calibrated values.

37 Distributions

are smoothed using a kernel density function with a bandwidth of 1.8.
quality levels of firms from B are initialized accordingly with respect to their position in technological
competition. Mathematically, this normalization implies that if in product line j the firm from A is at position m, then
q Bj1975 = λ−m , m ∈ {−m̄, ..., m̄}.
38 The

31

Innovation and Trade Policy in a Globalized World

Solution Algorithm and Model Fit.

In order to solve the model, we first discretize it. The so-

lution algorithm assumes that the economy starts in 1975 and transitions to the balanced growth
path in T periods, where each period is divided into (∆t)−1 = 25 sub-periods. The algorithm is
an iterative backward solution method. The main procedure of the algorithm consists of solving for the balanced growth path and then deriving the values over the transition period going
backward from the balanced growth path. A brief description is as follows:39
1. Let M be the set of data moments and Mm be the model counterpart. Define R (M − Mm )

as the objective function that calculates a weighted sum of the difference between data and
model moments.

2. Guess a set of values for the internally calibrated parameters θ guess .
3. Calculate the balanced growth path, where time derivatives are zero by definition. Compute
the innovation rates, the implied growth rates, and finally the interest rates compatible with
balanced growth.
4. Next calculate the equilibrium over the transition. Guess a time path for interest rates
with the terminal values being set to balanced-growth levels at every iteration. Solve for
firm values and innovation rates backward in time starting from the balanced growth path.
Using the resulting sequences, simulate forward the income path and its growth rate. Use
the Euler equation to derive the implied interest rates and compare them to the series fed
initially.
5. Once step 4 converges, use the final interest rate series to compute the aggregate variables
and the model counterparts of the data moments.

6. Minimize R M − Mm θ guess using a minimization routine. We use the sum of squared
errors as the objective function.40

The targeted moments and the model performance in matching these moments are summarized in Table 3 and Figure 8a.
Along the transition, the catching-up country exhibits higher R&D-to-GDP ratios and grows
faster than the leading country. The model captures these differences between the two economies
observed in the data quite successfully. The entry rate and the export shares are also well fitted.
Finally, the position of the dashed red line relative to the solid blue one in Figure 8a indicates the
strong performance of the model in matching the 1981 distribution of technology gaps.
In the model, the forces of cross-country convergence that enable the reproduction of the
catch-up observed in the data are chiefly governed by the curvature of the step-size distribution
φ. Figure 8b illustrates how different values of φ lead to various shapes of technology gap
39 A

detailed explanation of the steps is presented in Appendix D.1.
moments that pertain to the gap distribution are weighted by the targeted number of bins in order to make
the total weight of the distribution-related moments the same as the other targets.
40 The

32

Innovation and Trade Policy in a Globalized World
Table 3: Model fit

Moment

Estimate

Target

Source

TFP Growth U.S.

0.47%

0.55%

Coe et al. (2009) 1975-81

TFP Growth FN

1.98%

1.73%

Coe et al. (2009) 1975-81

R&D/GDP U.S.

1.65%

1.75%

OECD 1981

R&D/GDP FN

1.90%

1.96%

OECD 1981

Entry Rate U.S.

9.98%

10.0%

BDS 1977-81

Export Share U.S.

7.06%

7.00%

WB 1975-81

Tariff revenue U.S.

5.70%

7.70%

U.S. ITC 1975-81

distribution. Each line in the figure represents a distribution that emerges in 1981 once the
model is simulated between 1975 and 1981 at the calibrated parameter values except φ, which
takes a different value in each iteration. Lower values of φ mean a flatter probability distribution
F (n) over step sizes (or, equivalently, positions ahead), allowing technologically laggard firms
to catch up more quickly. Therefore, a low value of φ would imply a larger leftward shift in the
initial gap distribution of U.S. firms. The position of the solid blue line in Figure 8b relative to
the circled black line, which represents the calibration result, illustrates this case. The converse
happens for larger values of φ, as demonstrated by the relative position of the yellow dashed
line, which is generated by a value that is 20 percent higher than the calibrated one.
The distribution across new positions, F (n), is the engine of convergence. More precisely,
the international knowledge spillover allows laggard firms from the foreign country to stay in
the global innovation race. Importantly, an innovation can generate an improvement of multiple
steps for laggard firms, whereas the number of potential steps to improve becomes smaller as a
firm opens up the technological gap with its follower. In Gerschenkron (1962)’s terms, this structure creates an “advantage of backwardness” for followers—i.e., laggard firms have an advantage
in the number of steps they can improve with each innovation, while far-ahead leaders cannot
open their lead further quickly. Thus, foreign firms catch up with domestic firms along the
transition, generating a cross-country technological convergence. This convergence in our economy echoes that in the Solow model with the key difference that while in Solow convergence is
driven by decreasing returns in capital accumulation, in our economy knowledge spillovers and
an “advantage of backwardness” drive the convergence.
The internally calibrated parameters resulting from this procedure are listed in the right
panel of Table 2. The combination of the trade costs and the step size implies m∗ = 11—i.e., a firm
needs to lead by at least 11 technological gaps to export. The level of φ generates a considerable
chance of improving multiple steps with a single innovation for laggard firms. For example, the
probability that an innovation by the most laggard firm brings a multi-step improvement is 60

33

Innovation and Trade Policy in a Globalized World
percent.41

4.2

Validation of the Model

Before discussing the properties and the policy implications of the calibrated model, we present
four out-of-sample tests to assess the quantitative plausibility of the integral mechanism of our
model in light of empirical relationships not used in the calibration process.
Validation Exercise I: Incumbent Innovation vs. Leadership
Figure 9 compares the relationship between innovation efforts of incumbent firms and their
technological position relative to their competitors in the model and in the data. Figure 9a
displays incumbents’ innovation intensity as a function of the technology gap. Figure 9b shows
average patenting intensity of U.S. firms in the USPTO data, measured by patent applications
per firm, across sectors ranked according to their share of patents registered by U.S. residents, as
described in Section 4.1.2.42 In Figure 9a, we observe two spikes at −m∗ = −12 and m∗ − 1 = 11

that are related to cutoffs defined in equation (12). The left one emerges because of the defensive
R&D effort, as the firm increases its innovation to improve its position and capture domestic
production. Similarly, the right peak emerges because of the expansionary R&D effort of firms
that sell domestically. They increase their innovation efforts massively when closer to the export
cutoff, as a new innovation right before that threshold enables the domestic firm to expand
into the export market. Interestingly, we observe a similar shape with two peaks also in the
data, as illustrated in Figure 9b. Again, the peaks emerge in sectors where U.S. firms hold
a strong technological advantage or disadvantage as measured by the sectoral share of total
patents registered by U.S. residents. The remarkable performance of the model in capturing the
innovation intensity observed in the data provides further evidence for our model’s ability in
mimicking firms’ innovation behavior.
The jump in innovation in the proximity of the export cutoff is consistent with a large body
of evidence showing that firms innovate in order to enter the export market. Using Chilean plantlevel data, López (2009) finds that productivity and investment increase before plants begin to
export. Aw et al. (2011), using Taiwanese plant-level data, estimate a dynamic structural model
41 Conversely,

the probability that the most laggard firm receives a single-step innovation is 40 percent.
create the empirical measure of average innovation intensity across technology gaps as follows. First, we
calculate the total number of domestic patent applications and unique domestic owners of those patents for each pair
of technology class and year. Next, we rank these class-year pairs according to the share of domestic applications in
total applications and assign them to technology bins as in Figure 7. Then, in each bin, we sum the total domestic
patents and unique domestic assignees across class-year pairs. The ratio of those is the average patenting intensity
per assignee in a given bin, which proxies for innovation intensity in our model. The exercise considers applications
between 1975 and 1995, a long span of time, as the comparison is to the balance growth path in the model. To generate
the figure, we also drop patents assigned to the assignee id “0”, as most of the other assignee values have more than
six digits. Figure A.6 in Appendix D.2 shows that including those patents leads to sharper spikes in the data.
42 We

34

3.5

Innovation and Trade Policy in a Globalized World

1.2
Incumbent innovation US

Defensive
innovation

0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5

Expansionary
innovation

0.4

3
2.5

Innovation effort

0.9

2

1

1.5

Patent application per firm, avg.

1.1

1

0.3
0.2
-15

-10

-5

0

5

10

−15

15

−10

−5

Gaps (m)

a) Model: Incumbent innovation intensity

0

Gaps

5

10

15

b) Data: Patenting intensity of U.S. incumbents

Figure 9: Innovation effort and leadership
Notes: Panel A shows the innovation intensity of U.S. incumbent firms in the balance growth path of calibrated economy. Panel
B shows the average number of patents applied for by the U.S. firms in the USPTO data across technology gaps (the creation of
the technology gaps is illustrated in Figure 7). The hollow markers designate actual data points (circles for the earlier period and
triangles for the later), and the lines are fit using smoothing splines.

of the decisions of firms to innovate and to enter the export market. They find that these two
decisions are highly correlated—i.e., firms entering the export market are more likely to also
speed up their investment in R&D. Lileeva and Trefler (2010) find that Canadian plants that were
induced by the U.S. tariff cuts to start exporting (i) increased their labor productivity, (ii) engaged
in more product innovation, and (ii) had higher adoption rates for advanced manufacturing
technologies.
Validation Exercise II: Innovation Intensity in Manufacturing
As another validation test, we present a case study on the link between trade barriers and
firms’ innovation efforts. Our model implies that because of intensified competition around
trade thresholds, which are determined by trade costs, firms increase their innovation efforts in
these regions. One way to detect this relationship in the data is to focus on firms’ innovation
behavior in a specific sector and its evolution over time with respect to changes in trade barriers
in that sector. To perform such an analysis, we map USPTO patent data to Standard International Trade Classification (SITC) industries (revision 2) and concentrate on the manufacturing
sector, which makes up about half of patenting activity, over a period with substantial reductions in tariff rates.43 Data on tariffs are available from the World Integrated Trade Solution
(WITS) database of the World Bank. Studying tariff reductions in a specific sector instead of a
cross-industry comparison allows us to proceed without resorting to using a reliable estimate
43 We

obtain crosswalks for mapping USPTO data to SITC industry level from Lybbert and Zolas (2014).

35

Innovation and Trade Policy in a Globalized World
of industry-specific trade costs—known to be notoriously difficult to obtain [Anderson and van
Wincoop (2004), Hummels and Lugovskyy (2006)]—as long as non-tariff barriers are not rising
over time.

2.5
4
2

3

1.5

Tariff
reduction phase

4

Pre−1993
Post−1998

2

5

Patent application per firm, avg.

3

6

6

Tariff rate on US imports (dashed)

Tariff rate on US exports (solid)

3.5

1
1994

Years

1999

0

2
1989

2004

−15

a) Tariff rates over time

−10

−5

0

5

10

Technological gaps btw. domestic and foreign firms

15

b) Incumbent innovation before 1993 and after 1997

Figure 10: Tariffs and incumbents’ innovation intensity across technology gaps in manufacturing
Notes: Panel A shows the reduction in the average effective tariff rates applied to U.S. imports and exports of manufactured goods
following the Uruguay round of the GATT. Tariff rates applied by or to goods of individual countries are obtained from WITS and
are weighted by the patenting intensity of the trade partners in the USPTO data. Panel B shows the change in the innovation intensity
of incumbent U.S. patentees in the manufacturing sector across technology gaps. The hollow markers designate actual data points
(circles for the earlier period and triangles for the later), and the lines are fit using smoothing splines.

Figure 10a shows the decline in the tariff rates to which manufacturing imports and exports
of the U.S. were subject over 1990s.44 On average, both barriers were 2 percent lower between
1997 and 2004 than between 1989 and 1993, in part as a result of the Uruguay round of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade completed in 1994 and other bilateral trade agreements. In
parallel, Figure 10b depicts the innovation intensity of incumbent patentees in the U.S. manufacturing sector with respect to their technological position relative to foreign competitors, again
before and after the mid-1990s.45 Noticeably, incumbent-innovation intensity in the manufacturing sector exhibits a double-peaked profile in line with our findings for the complete set of
patents in the USPTO data. Moreover, we observe that the period of tariff reductions coincides
44 The tariff data on WITS go back to 1989. The U.S. is one of the few countries that reports tariffs on imports
reliably across time and trade partners. We use the same sample of trade partners as in the original analysis (Canada,
Germany, France, Italy, Japan, and the U.K.) and weight the average effective tariff to manufacturing imports from
each of them by their patent share in the USPTO data in 1988. Similar reductions in tariffs are observed when
accounting for larger groups of countries as well. Tariffs on U.S. manufacturing exports are more limited, reported
only by Canada and Japan. We use the Japanese series, as Japan constitutes about half of foreign patents registered in
the U.S. by the late 1980s. Finally, we use the broad sector grouping for manufacturing in WITS data, which comprises
chapters 6 (manufactured products) and 8 (miscellaneous manufactured articles) of the SITC classification (excluding
non-ferrous metals with the code 68).
45 We constructed the innovation intensity of incumbents in the manufacturing sector over technology gaps following similar steps to those described in Section 4.1.2, except that we used SITC subindustries instead of patent classes
as the unit of analysis. To be in line with the WITS data, we used the same specification of the manufacturing sector,
which consists of SITC chapters 6 and 8.

36

Innovation and Trade Policy in a Globalized World
with an inward shift of peaks in incumbents’ innovation intensity profile across technology gaps.
This observation mirrors the predictions of our model: Lower bilateral trade barriers imply that
firms with a lesser technology advantage over their competitors start exporting, making the competition for markets stiffer at smaller technology gaps and thereby resulting in peaks closer to
(purely technological) neck-and-neck position (which occurs at zero).46

Validation Exercise III: Entrant Innovation vs. Leadership
Entry is another source of business stealing in the model. However, in contrast to incumbents, entrants are not subject to immediate competitive pressures from the other country’s firms. Therefore, the shape of entrants’ R&D effort profile, demonstrated in Figure 11a, reflects mainly the

.6

market size effect around the two cutoffs and not a direct effect of foreign competition.

Entrant innovation US

0.1

0.095

.5

0.105

.4

Patent entry rate by sector

Poisson arrival rate

0.11

.3

0.09

0.085
-15

-10

-5

0

5

10

15

−15

−10

−5

Gaps (m)

a) Entrant innovation intensity in model

0

Gaps

5

10

15

b) Patenting intensity of U.S. entrants in data

Figure 11: Innovation effort and leadership
Notes: Panel A shows the innovation intensity of U.S. entrant firms in the balance growth path of calibrated economy. Panel B
shows the average entry rate of patents applied for by the U.S. firms that appear in a sector in the USPTO data for the first time
across technology gaps (for the creation of the technology gaps, see Figure 7). Number of patents by new patentees is weighted by
the number of all patents registered by U.S. residents. The fitted line shows predicted values from a weighted linear regression of
average entry rate on bins weighted by the number of sector-year observations in each bin.

Moreover, because entry to the highest gaps implies access to export markets, it is more
profitable, and this leads to a higher entry effort aimed at these positions. Figure 11b shows
that this is indeed the case in the USPTO patent data, where we again classified sectors into bins
according to the technological lead, as in Figure 9b. The solid black line in the figure depicts the
flow of new patents (normalized by the number all U.S. patents in that sector-year observation
to eliminate sectoral differences in patenting intensity) registered by U.S. residents that appear
46 Figure 20 in Section 5.7 illustrates the effect of bilateral changes in trade costs on incumbents’ innovation intensity
profile in our model.

37

Innovation and Trade Policy in a Globalized World
for the first time in a sector, averaged out across sector-year observations between 1975 and 1995
in each bin.47 We observe that the entry intensity is higher for sectors where existing U.S. firms
have larger technological leads over their foreign competitors.

Validation Exercise IV: Credit Elasticity of R&D
The ultimate source of growth in our model is innovation. Therefore, when analyzing the effect
of policies on aggregate outcomes, a correct measurement of the responsiveness of innovative
activity to policy changes is of utmost importance. In order to evaluate our estimated model’s
implications in that regard, we now investigate the empirical elasticity of innovative activity to
R&D credits and compare it with its model counterpart.
In order to measure the credit-elasticity of innovation, we exploit the state-level variation
in the dates when credit policies came into action and conduct a simple firm level regression
analysis using the Compustat database. The regression specification is as follows:
ln Yjst = β 0 + β 1 ln SCst + β 2 ln Yjst−1 + ψj + ψt + ut ,

(21)

where ψj and ψt represent firm and year dummies, respectively, and ut is the error term. SCst is
the tax credit level in state s where firm j operates. For the dependent variable Y we use both
R&D and patent counts. We utilize two different specifications for this regression that differ in
the inclusion of the lagged value of the dependent variable. The results are summarized in Table
4. All versions (represented by columns of the table) reveal the positive effect of state level R&D
tax credits on the firms’ innovative activities. This effect is also robust to the existence of lagged
values of the dependent variable in the regression.
The first column of Table 4 shows that, on average, the elasticity of R&D spending with
respect to changes in R&D credit is 3.15. To ensure the quantitative validity of firms’ response
to policy changes in our model, we derive the model counterpart of the same statistic. We
first compute the log-difference in R&D expenditure for incumbent firms of country A in each
A
A
position m right before and after the subsidy change from s75
−81 to s81−95 . Following the same

steps used to create empirical variables, the average elasticity of R&D spending to subsidy is
given by


Z 1 d log α A x γc
Aj1981 q j1981
0

A
d log 1 + s1981






γc
d log α A x Am1981
Q Am1981

.
dj = ∑
A
A
m log 1 + s81−95 − log 1 + s75−81

This model statistic has a value of 2.27 in contrast to 3.15 in the data. It implies that in the
model, an increase in R&D subsidy induces a solid response of R&D expenditure, in line with
its empirical counterpart, although its strength is somewhat weaker than in the data. Note
47 Observations

of the same sector over different years are treated as separate entries in Figure 11b.

38

Innovation and Trade Policy in a Globalized World
Table 4: The effect of R&D tax credit on innovation (excl. federal credits)
Dep. Var.:

ln( R&Dt )
(1)

ln( R&Dt )
(2)

ln( Patentst )
(3)

ln( Patentst )
(4)

ln(State creditt )

3.153
(10.92)∗∗∗

0.524
(2.12)∗∗

2.948
(10.93)∗∗∗

1.203
(4.28)∗∗∗

ln( R&Dt−1 )

-

0.631
(106.67)∗∗∗

-

-

ln( Patentt−1 )

-

-

-

0.499
(72.83)∗∗∗

Year Dummy

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Firm Dummy

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Notes: The table lists the results obtained from different OLS specifications that illustrate the effect of (U.S. state-level) tax credits
on U.S. firms’ innovation. t-statistics are provided in parentheses. ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗ denote significance at 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10
percent, respectively.

that the empirical economy-wide elasticity is likely to be lower than state-level elasticity due to
reallocation of resources across states; therefore, it is also reassuring to see that our simulated
macro elasticity is below the state-level empirical estimate.

5

Policy Evaluation

In this section, we first demonstrate the foreign catch-up process that the U.S. would experience in
absence of policies. Then we perform a quantitative investigation of various policy alternatives
and assess their welfare implications. We discuss the design of optimal policies considering
different horizons for policy and accounting for the transition period. We start the discussion
with protectionist measures. Then, we continue with R&D policies, analyzing both the observed
post-1981 R&D subsidy changes and the optimal subsidy levels. We also consider the design of
optimal joint policy and conclude with a discussion of how retaliation for domestic trade policies
by trade partners can alter the structure of optimal policies.

5.1

Technological Convergence and Foreign Catching-Up

Foreign technological catch-up is a key implication of the model. Improvements in a country’s
trade partners’ technology is a mode of globalization that has received less attention in the literature than the reduction of trade and offshoring barriers. To explore this relationship in our
model, we focus on how foreign technological catch-up manifests itself in the technological advantage of the leading country, which again represents the U.S. In particular, Figure 12 shows
the evolution of the average technological lead that U.S. firms would have over their foreign

39

Innovation and Trade Policy in a Globalized World

Mean technology gap of U.S. firms

competitors in the absence of any policy intervention.

6

5

4

3

2

1
1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

Years

Figure 12: Average technology lead of the U.S. firms, no policy intervention
Notes: The figure exhibits the evolution of the average technology lead that the U.S. firms have over their foreign competitors across
years along the transition of the calibrated economy.

The dramatic decline is the symptom of a strong international business-stealing effect,
whereby foreign firms progressively capture leadership in more and more markets, and profits
that were previously collected by the U.S. firms are now going into the pockets of foreign firms.
This negative welfare consequence of the international business-stealing effect suggests that the
foreign technological convergence indeed hurt the U.S. economy. Now we turn to the analysis of
industrial policies that could potentially help the economy tackle foreign technological catch-up.

5.2

A Unilateral Increase in Import Tariffs

In this subsection, we explore the implications of a unilateral increase in tariffs as an alternative
to R&D subsidies and discuss optimal tariff policy. Figure 13a shows the consumption-equivalent
welfare gains/losses for the representative household generated by a 50 percent rise in tariffs τ US
in 1981 (equivalent to a 4 percentage point change). Compared to the path in a counterfactual
economy that does not experience any policy intervention, protectionism seems to pay off in the
short run, where small gains are generated from the increase in home profits. However, over
time, the gains decline and turn negative after two decades.
Digging deeper, unilaterally higher trade barriers initially generate a small increase in profit
income by protecting some sectors from import penetration and shifting market ownership toward home firms. Recall, though, that the measure of relatively most laggard firms that can
benefit from trade protection is relatively small for the U.S., as indicated by the left tail of the
dashed line in Figure 8a. Therefore, the initial gain from laggard firms recapturing production
in the domestic market is limited. Moreover, the replacement of foreign exporters by the laggard
40

Innovation and Trade Policy in a Globalized World

0.25

1.2
Protection

1

0.15

0.9

Innovation effort

0.1

Percentage

Incumbent innovation US
Protectionism

1.1

0.2

0.05
0
-0.05
-0.1

0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4

-0.15

0.3

-0.2

0.2
5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

50

-15

Time Periods

-10

-5

0

5

10

15

Gaps (m)

a) Consumption equivalent welfare

b) Innovation response to protectionism

Figure 13: Welfare effects of protectionism: unilateral 50 percent (4 ppts) increase in tariffs
Notes: The figure illustrates the effects of a unilateral 20 percent increase in U.S. trade barriers (protectionist U.S. policy without
retaliatory response). Panel A shows the welfare change in consumption equivalent terms over different time horizons. Panel B
shows the shift in the innovation-effort profile of U.S. incumbent firms over technology gaps.

home firms means that the high-quality foreign products are foregone and replaced by inferior domestic alternatives. This foregone intermediate good quality leads to substantial welfare
losses. Even though the combined welfare effect is slightly positive over the short run, it turns
significantly negative over time.
As time passes, the factor that governs variations in welfare is the decline in competitive
pressures on domestic firms, which leads to a drop in their innovative activity. Figure 13b shows
that innovation efforts by most of the laggard U.S. firms decrease substantially. Because the
protectionist policy shifts the threshold for losing the domestic market to a foreign competitor
further to the left, more firms move further from such an immediate threat. This weaker defensive
innovation motive leads to a compression of innovation efforts by these firms, making it harder
to compensate for the loss of imported frontier technology. Moreover, most U.S. firms, being
either exporters or solid domestic producers that are technologically close to or ahead of their
competitors, do not benefit from higher domestic tariffs. As shown in Figure 13b, innovation
decisions of this large group of firms barely change, implying that they do not contribute any
additional boost to profit income or factor productivity in response to the policy move.48 All
in all, the short-run gains from profits are subdued over time by the loss of foreign technology,
while weaker defensive innovation incentive leads to less domestic innovation and, thus, to a
slower growth of productivity and profit income.

48 Evidently, the time path of the average technology lead of the U.S. firms is lower than the one in the “nointervention” case depicted in Figure 12 (see Figure A.5a in Appendix D.2).

41

Innovation and Trade Policy in a Globalized World

5.3

Optimal Unilateral Tariffs

The negative relationship between the aggregate innovation effort and protection plays also an
important role for the design of optimal tariff policy. As shown in Figure 14a, the optimal tariff
policy, where the U.S. unilaterally sets the tariffs on goods imported to the U.S., effectively closes
the borders to imports, when the relevant horizon over which the policymaker calculates the
welfare is very short, such as a decade. However, the preferred level of tariffs decreases as
the relevant horizon becomes longer and suggests a more liberal tariff regime with respect to
the calibrated economy when the horizon considered extends beyond two decades. As Figure
14b demonstrates, the reason is the damping effect of higher tariff rates on domestic aggregate
innovation. This dynamic negative effect dominates static gains over time and, therefore, implies
lower tariffs for optimal policy when longer time horizons are considered.
18

0.33
Aggregate innovation

16

Average innovation intensity

0.325

Optimal tariff rate in %

14
12
10
8
6
4

0.32

0.315

0.31

0.305

0.3

2
0
10

0.295

20

30

40

0

50

0.02

0.04

0.06

0.08

0.1

0.12

0.14

0.16

0.18

0.2

Tariff rate

Horizon in years

a) Optimal tariff policy over time horizons

b) Average innovation over openness

Figure 14: Optimal tariff policy and innovation over openness
Notes: Panel A shows the optimal unilateral tariff policy for the U.S. over various policy horizons. Horizontal dashed line denotes
the calibrated tariff level. Panel B shows the negative effect of unilaterally higher U.S. tariff rates on average innovation intensity of
both entrant and incumbent U.S. firms, with 1 denoting the calibrated tariff rate.

5.4

Introduction of R&D Subsidies

Policy intervention in the early 1980s to improve the competitiveness of U.S. companies pushed
up the level of R&D subsidies significantly from an average of 5.1 percent in the pre-1981 period
to an average of 19.2 percent in the subsequent period. The subsidy level in the foreign country
remained fairly constant, with 3.8 percent and 4.1 percent in the respective periods. Figure 15
shows the effect of the subsidy to incumbents’ R&D spending on the post-1981 distribution of
technology gaps.
42

Innovation and Trade Policy in a Globalized World
0.07

0.09
Data = Model US, 1975
Model US, 1981
Model US, no change, 1995

0.08

0.06

Model US, no change, 1995
Model US, subsidy, 1995
Model US, optimal sub., 1995

0.07
0.05
0.06
0.05

0.04

0.04

0.03

0.03
0.02
0.02
0.01

0.01
0
-20

-15

-10

-5

0

5

10

15

0
-20

20

-15

-10

Gaps (m)

-5

0

5

10

15

20

Gaps (m)

Figure 15: Gap distribution after policy changes
Notes: Panel A exhibits the technology gap distributions in the calibrated model at three points in time: initially in 1975 (dotted solid
line, the same as in the data), in 1981 (solid blue line), and in 1995 (dashed red line) assuming there was no policy change. Positive
values on the horizontal axis denote U.S. technological leadership. Panel B exhibits the resulting gap distributions in 1995 under
three different scenarios: under no policy change (dashed red line, the same as in Panel A), under the actual R&D policies after 1981
(solid blue line), and under the model-implied optimal R&D policy rate for the horizon between 1981 and 1995 (dotted solid line).

In the left panel, the model gap distribution in 1981 is the solid blue line, which is closely
calibrated to data in 1981 (not shown). In the benchmark economy with no policy intervention,
the transition after 1981 results in a large leftward shift, leading to the red dashed line distribution
by 1995 on both panels. By contrast, in the alternative economy where subsidies were introduced
in 1981, the resulting distribution in 1995 becomes the solid blue line in the right panel. The effect
of higher subsidies is a small shift to the right relative to the no-intervention benchmark case
represented by dashed lines. This positive shift would have been drastic had the optimal level of
R&D subsidy been introduced in 1981 (circled solid line). We will discuss optimal subsidies in
the next subsection.
Table 5: Observed R&D Subsidy: 1981-2016

Subsidy rate
Observed R&D Subsidy in the 1980s

19.2%

Welfare gains
1981-2016
0.87%

Now we examine the welfare properties of the R&D subsidy intervention. We compute the
welfare difference for a 35-year horizon from 1981 until the present (2016). The result is reported
in Table 5. We find that the U.S. subsidy increase generates a 0.9 percent consumption gain every
year over a span of 35 years. Decomposing the overall welfare change into variations in individual
sources of income (not shown), we find that these gains are driven by an increase in innovation
by U.S. firms, which in turn leads to faster growth in both the U.S. factor productivity and profit

43

Innovation and Trade Policy in a Globalized World
income. As illustrated in Figure 16a, the underlying economic mechanism is straightforward:
By reducing the cost of R&D, subsidies stimulate innovation in U.S. incumbent firms, thereby
accelerating productivity growth and allowing U.S. firms to obtain market leadership, and the
related profits, in most sectors of the economy. The gains from these channels more than offset
the resources devoted to the higher aggregate R&D spending.49
1.2
Incumbent innovation US
R&D subsidy

1.2

1

0.8

Percentage

Innovation effort

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.2

R&D subsidy

0
-15

-10

-5

0

5

10

15

5

10

15

20

Gaps (m)

25

30

35

40

45

50

Time Periods

a) Change in innovation by incumbents

b) Consumption equivalent welfare

Figure 16: Consumption equivalent welfare
Notes: The figure illustrates the effects of a unilateral R&D-subsidy increase in the U.S. (replicating actual policy changes). Panel A
shows the shift in the innovation-effort profile of U.S. incumbent firms over technology gaps. Panel B shows the welfare change in
consumption equivalent terms over different time horizons.

In Figure 16b, we show the evolution of welfare gains over time generated by the increase
in U.S. subsidies. The figure shows that in the short run of less than 10 years, the subsidy
change leads to a welfare loss, which rapidly turns to gains as years go by. This early loss
is due to a subsidy-induced shift of resources from consumption to innovation. Over time, the
profit shifting and, even more importantly, the increase in labor productivity generated by higher
domestic innovation offset the losses, leading to sizable gains.

5.5

Optimal R&D Subsidies

Next we compute the optimal R&D subsidies for the home country and compare them with the
U.S. subsidy observed in the data in the post-1981 period (reported in Table 5). Precisely, we
compute the subsidy rate that maximizes the present discounted value of welfare in a 35-year
horizon from 1981 to 2016 and calculate the welfare gains from the optimal subsidy with respect
to the benchmark scenario, where the U.S. subsidy does not change in 1981. We also compare
49 Figure A.5b demonstrates the positive effect of higher subsidies on the time path of average technology lead of
the U.S. firms, resulting in a significantly higher path than the one in the “no-intervention” case in Figure 12.

44

Innovation and Trade Policy in a Globalized World
these welfare gains under optimal subsidy with those obtained under the observed post-1981
subsidy. Table 6 reports the results for the optimal policy.
Table 6: Optimal U.S. R&D Subsidy: 1981-2016

Subsidy rate
Optimal R&D Subsidy

66%

Welfare gains
1981-2016
5.49%

The comparison of Table 5 to Table 6 indicates that although U.S. policymakers went in the
right direction by increasing the subsidy rate in response to accelerating foreign catching-up in
the 1980s, they did not go far enough. According to our model, the subsidy rate should have been
about 66 percent, more than three times higher than the observed one. This high subsidy would
have increased welfare by a striking 5.8 percent every year in the 35-year period considered. In
fact, the observed post-1981 subsidy is only optimal for a time horizon of about 8 years.
In our model, the optimal subsidy is determined by a rich set of externalities typical of
Schumpeterian growth models, albeit with some novel twists.50 First, future innovations build
on the stock of current innovations, but current innovators do not take into account that their
activity will benefit future innovators. This effect, known as the intertemporal spillover effect, leads
to underinvestment in R&D and provides a reason to subsidize R&D. Second, entrant innovation
destroys domestic incumbents’ business, exerting a negative externality on domestic incumbent
innovation. This effect, known as the business-stealing effect, leads to overinvestment in R&D and
rationalizes a tax on R&D. In addition, the international aspect of our model generates a third
externality that misses in standard closed-economy models of Schumpeterian creative destruction. Through catching up or leapfrogging, a laggard domestic firm can steal the foreign leader’s
business (or part of it). This effect, which we label as the international business-stealing effect, can
encourage or discourage innovation, depending on the technology gap between the competing
firms. Finally, our model also features international technology spillovers, which is another source of
inefficiency in R&D. Hence, the open-economy dimension of our model introduces additional interesting channels on top of the classic strategic trade and industrial policy literature [e.g., Eaton
and Grossman (1986)]. By increasing innovation, R&D subsidies help domestic firms compete
in the global market, thereby shifting profits from foreign firms to national ones and increasing
national income.
Figure 17a shows optimal subsidy levels for several horizons. Evidently, optimal subsidy
level increases with the length of the policy horizon, because a longer horizon allows larger
gains from policy-induced growth to materialize. Intuitively, optimal R&D subsidies are trading
50 Closed-form expressions defining these externalities in standard versions of the quality-ladder model can be
found in Grossman and Helpman (1991b) and Segerstrom (1998).

45

0.7

0.78

0.65

0.76

More Global

Less Global

0.74

0.6

Optimal subsidy rate

Optimal subsidy rate

Innovation and Trade Policy in a Globalized World

0.55

0.5

0.45

0.72
0.7
0.68
0.66

0.4
0.64
0.35
10

20

30

40

0.62
-0.08

50

Horizon in years

-0.06

-0.04

-0.02

0

0.02

0.04

0.06

Change in openness (trade cost)

a) Over different horizons

b) Over openness (over the fixed horizon of 35 years)

Figure 17: Optimal U.S. R&D subsidy, over different horizons and levels of openness
Notes: Panel A exhibits the profile of the optimal R&D policy for the U.S. over various policy horizons. Panel B exhibits optimal
R&D policy rate for the U.S. over a fixed horizon of 35 years subject to varying degrees of globalization. Zero means the calibrated
level of tariffs for both countries, and negative numbers mean a more global world.

off the current reduction in consumption with future gains in growth rates. The longer the
horizon, the larger the realized gain from the increased growth rate of aggregate consumption.
Another interesting result is shown in Figure 17b, where we plot the level of optimal subsidy
for a fixed 35-year horizon in economies with varying degrees of openness. It is evident that in a
more open economy with smaller trade costs, the level of optimal R&D subsidy is lower, implying
that a less aggressive policy is appropriate. This result is again driven by the innovation-boosting
effect of foreign competition, which intensifies defensive and expansionary R&D motives.

5.6

Joint Policy Analysis: Optimal Innovation and Trade Policy

Having analyzed the implications of individual policy options, we now focus on the optimal
joint policy in which the U.S. could use both R&D subsidy and one-sided tariff policy in tandem.
Figure 18 plots the optimal R&D subsidy under this scenario over different horizons with a
solid blue line, and the optimal tariff rate with a dashed blue line. The figure reveals that the
optimal subsidy levels are close to the ones found when R&D subsidies were considered in
isolation (Figure 17a), being only slightly higher in some horizons.51 However, we find that
51 Although the close levels of R&D subsidies in single and joint policy exercises may appear to be indicative of
a weak interaction between trade and R&D policies, Figure A.7 in Appendix D.2 demonstrates that this is not the
case. The figure shows optimal R&D subsidy levels over policy horizons for three different values of unilateral import
tariffs. The figure reveals that while the optimal R&D-policy profile barely differs between cases of no-tariff-change
and 40 percent higher tariffs, it is substantially lower when the tariff levels are reduced 70 percent. The reason for this
difference is that unilateral protectionist policies affect incentives of a small portion of U.S. firms (as suggested by the

46

0.08

Innovation and Trade Policy in a Globalized World
the policymaker optimally chooses a strongly protectionist measure over any horizon with a
constant 16 percent tariff rate, effectively closing the borders to any import penetration. This is
in stark contrast with Figure 14a, which shows that optimal tariffs decline with longer horizons,
when considered in isolation. The reason is that, being allowed to set subsidy levels freely,
the home country can incentivize its firms to innovate at higher rates, compensating for the
loss of innovative efforts as a result of lower competitive pressure that protectionism causes.
Therefore, allowing the economy to adjust both margins freely, the joint policy alternative leads
to a highly protectionist regime. However, it is crucial to note that when considering optimal
policies, we assumed away any reaction from the foreign country and focused only on one-sided
tariff policies. Next, we delve into the implications of such foreign response.
0.2

0.7

0.18
0.17

0.6

0.16
0.55
0.15
0.5

0.14
0.13

0.45
0.12
0.4

10

Optimal tariff rate (dashed)

Optimal R&D subsidy (solid)

0.19
0.65

0.11

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

0.1
50

Horizon in years

Figure 18: Optimal joint policy with unilateral tariff changes
Notes: The figure compares horizon-dependent optimal joint policy in case of (trade-policy) retaliation to that in the baseline.

5.7

Effect of Foreign Retaliation on Optimal Joint Policy

Until now, we analyzed the trade policy in a unilateral fashion: The home country could set its
tariff rates freely, without facing a response from the foreign country. Although this analysis
serves as a helpful benchmark, such unilateral moves would be unlikely in reality. The natural
question is, what would be the effect of foreign retaliation on the design of trade policy?52 To
share of very laggard U.S. firms in the data), whereas a large enough reduction changes the incentives of a significant
share of U.S. firms. In fact, increased competition induces a bigger share of U.S. firms to increase their innovation
effort, reducing the need for aggressive R&D subsidies.
52 The introduction of the Smoot-Hawley Tariff Act in the U.S. during the early stages of the Great Depression
provides an example of how the unilateral introduction of trade policies could trigger retaliatory responses from
trade partners, potentially harming the domestic economy.

47

Innovation and Trade Policy in a Globalized World
answer this question, we analyze our policy alternatives under the assumption that any change
in tariffs imposed by the home country is perfectly matched by the foreign one. Figure 19 shows
the optimal joint policy in this modified setting with bilateral tariff changes (circled black lines),
in juxtaposition with the results obtained in the benchmark setting (blue lines).
0.3

0.7
Unilateral
Bilateral

0.25

0.6
0.2
0.55
0.15

0.5
0.45

0.1

0.4
0.05

Optimal tariff rate (dashed)

Optimal R&D subsidy (solid)

0.65

0.35
0.3
10

0
15

20

25

30

35

40

45

50

Horizon in years

Figure 19: Optimal joint policy in unilateral and bilateral tariff changes
Notes: The figure compares horizon-dependent optimal joint policy in case of (trade-policy) retaliation to that in the baseline.

While there are no significant qualitative differences in the optimal R&D subsidy levels, there
is a complete reversal in the trade policy. Now, the optimal policy liberalizes the economy’s trade
regime as much as possible, removing tariffs irrespective of the length of the policy horizon under consideration. This result arises because in this setting, protectionist policies limit not only
the market for imports to the home country, but also exports from the home country, because
the tariff changes are replicated by the foreign trade partner. The effects of retaliatory tariff increases on the U.S. incumbents are demonstrated in Figure 20. As opposed to Figure 13b, the
cutoff for exports increases, making them accessible to only a small group of firms. Moreover, a
reduction in innovative activity—driven by similar reasons explained in the analysis of unilateral
policies—happens now for a wider range of firms. Conversely, liberal policies expand the export
market of the home country and stimulate innovation for a large set of firms via a more intense
expansionary R&D motive. Given that most U.S. incumbents are in technologically leading positions, the optimal trade policy under the assumption of retaliation favors these firms by opening
up their markets to export at the expense of a few more laggard firms losing their markets to
foreign importers.53
53 A similar reversal happens when individual trade policy is applied in the case of foreign retaliation, with full
liberalization being preferred even when the shortest horizons are concerned.

48

Innovation and Trade Policy in a Globalized World

1.2
Incumbent innovation US
Protectionism

Innovation effort

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

-15

-10

-5

0

5

10

Technological gap btw. domestic and foreign firms

15

Figure 20: Innovation effort in case of retaliation, 4 percentage point bilateral increase in trade costs
Notes: The figure shows the shift in the innovation-effort profile of U.S. incumbent firms over technology gaps as a result of bilateral
protectionist policies.

6

Foreign Competition and Domestic Innovation

A recent strand of papers in the empirical trade and firm dynamics literature has drawn notable
attention thanks to their important and seemingly contradictory contributions to a heated topic:
the effect of foreign competition on domestic firms and industries and, in particular, their innovative activity. Bloom et al. (2016) argue that Chinese import competition induced innovative
activity in exposed domestic sectors in Europe [see also Coelli et al. (2016), Gorodnichenko et al.
(2010), and Iacovone (2012)], whereas Autor et al. (2016) argue the opposite, using data on U.S.
firms and sectors [see also Hashmi (2013) and Hombert and Matray (2015)], and yet a third set
of papers including Aghion et al. (2017) find ambiguous results.
In this section, we show that our framework can help reconcile these seemingly contradictory
observations in the literature. In particular, we present an exercise on rising import competition
and illustrate that its effect on aggregate innovation crucially depends on the sectoral composition
of domestic firms in terms of their technological competence relative to the foreign competitors.
As a result, import competition has a non-monotonic impact on aggregate innovation, given the
innovation profile in Figure 9a.
Our exercise considers six different economies: Three of them in a relatively laggard initial
condition—i.e., in most sectors, their firms are distant followers—and three relatively frontier
ones. To generate intensifying import competition in our model, we consider the removal of tariffs. As is evident from the earlier discussion of unilateral protectionist policies, this change shifts
the defensive-R&D cutoff inwards, creating heterogeneous effects on firm innovation: Firms that

49

Innovation and Trade Policy in a Globalized World
fall further behind the defensive-R&D cutoff decrease their innovation effort, while firms that
become closer to the cutoff intensify theirs. The overall effect at the aggregate level depends on
the distribution of sectors across relative technological positions in foreign competition. Figure
21a illustrates this point, displaying three economies that are distinguished by their technological
gap distribution across domestic firms’ positions. The values in the figure show the percentage
change in the industry-level innovation rate in response to lower tariffs. In the economy with the
largest mass of the relatively most laggard sectors, the effect is negative, while it becomes positive as the technological gap distribution shifts to the right. The reason is that the economy with
the least negatively skewed distribution includes relatively more firms that happen to be around
the new defensive-R&D cutoff, feeling the more intense threat of losing markets and therefore
exerting more innovative effort. However, it is not correct to draw the conclusion that relatively
more advanced economies benefit from intensifying foreign competition, as we discuss next.
0.25

0.25

-2.81%
0.2

0.2

0.48%
0.15

0.15

0.1

0.1

-0.19%
4.07%
0.05

0.05

6.07%
0
-20

-15

-10

-5

0

5

-0.79%

10

15

0
-20

20

Technological gaps btw. domestic and foreign firms

-15

-10

-5

0

5

10

15

Technological gaps btw. domestic and foreign firms

a) Three relatively laggard sectors

b) Three relatively advanced sectors

Figure 21: Effect of trade liberalization on aggregate innovation
Notes: The figure contrasts the change in aggregate innovation caused by trade liberalization in various sectors defined by different
initial technological gap distributions. Specified values show percentage change in aggregate innovation in each sector.

Figure 21b compares three economies where most firms are leaders in global technological
competition. We observe that while the economy denoted by the solid blue line experiences a
small rise in overall innovative activity in response to stiffer foreign competition, the relatively
less advanced economy (red dashed line) experiences a considerably larger increase. The result
hinges again on the share of firms in each economy that increase their innovative activity the
most with intensifying competition. Finally, the economy denoted by black dots experiences
a decline in overall innovation, proving that even an advanced economy—like the countries of
interest in most studies referenced above—may get hurt by more intense foreign competition.
50

20

Innovation and Trade Policy in a Globalized World
Although minuscule in absolute terms, the relatively larger mass of relatively most laggard firms
drive this implication, because these firms, now with their chances of capturing a market being
diminished, decrease their innovation efforts in response to the more foreign competition.
In sum, our analysis indicates that the impact of trade liberalization might have a positive
or negative impact on the liberalizing economy’s aggregate innovation level depending on the
initial relative technology gap between the competing countries. Moreover, even a relatively very
advanced economy might experience a reduction in aggregate innovation, if it has an enough
number of sectors that are getting discouraged by foreign competition.

7

Sensitivity and Robustness

In this section, we provide various robustness checks for our main results.

7.1

Lower Maximum Technology Gap m̄

Our first exercise considers the robustness of the baseline results to the value of the maximum
technology gap that can separate two incumbent firms. In our baseline, this value is set to
m̄ = 16. As a robustness check, we calculate the empirical gap distribution by setting m̄ = 10
and recalibrate our model accordingly. When a unilateral increase in U.S. tariffs considered, we
observe a similar shift in incumbent innovation as in Figure 13b. Panel A of Table 7 compares the
resulting consumption-equivalent changes to the baseline experiment for various horizons. The
results resonate with the baseline values, except with a slightly larger welfare cost over the long
run. Furthermore, profiles of optimal unilateral R&D and tariff policies over different horizons,
summarized in Panel B and Panel C, respectively, are very similar to those found in the baseline
calibration. Hence, we conclude that our original findings are robust to the values of m̄.

7.2

Dropping the U.K.

As illustrated in Figure 1, the U.K. has a similar productivity and innovation performance to
the U.S. in the late 1970s, in stark contrast with the other advanced competitors of the U.S.
Conjecturing that idiosyncratic factors may have negatively separated the performance of the
U.K. from its peers, we recalibrate our model using data that exclude the U.K. For this exercise,
we re-weight our targets using data on the remaining five foreign countries and re-compute
the empirical gap distribution. Figure A.8a in Appendix D.2 shows that the shift in the initial
distribution caused by dropping the U.K. is minuscule, which is also the case with the other

51

Innovation and Trade Policy in a Globalized World
Table 7: Policy experiment results and comparison to the baseline results
Welfare for 50% tariff increase

Panel A
Horizon in years

10

20

30

40

50

Baseline

0.17%

0.04%

m̄ = 10

0.20%

0.04%

−0.07%

−0.16%

−0.24%

Horizon in years

10

20

30

40

50

Baseline

34%

54%

64%

68%

70%

m̄ = 10

34%

56%

68%

70%

72%

−0.11%

−0.26%

Optimal subsidy levels

Panel B

−0.39%

Optimal unilateral tariff levels

Panel C
Horizon in years

10

20

30

40

50

Baseline

18%

12%

0%

0%

0%

m̄ = 10

16%

12%

0%

0%

0%

targets. Consequently, the parameter values obtained by this alternative calibration, as well as
the quantitative results, barely differ from the baseline; hence, we do not repeat them here.

7.3

Quality-adjusted Patents

In this exercise, we test the robustness of our analysis to the use of citation-weighted patent
counts when forming moments from the data as well as the empirical technology gap distribution. Using citation-weighted patents implies about a 4 percent higher share for Japan among all
countries in 1975 at the expense of Germany, the share of which declines by the same amount.
As illustrated in Figure A.8b in Appendix D.2, this reshuffling leads to only minimal changes in
the empirical technology gap distribution, which also holds true for other moments. As a result,
the calibration output is very similar to baseline, as one would expect, when using the alternative
measure. Therefore, we skip the rest of the results generated by this alternative calibration.

7.4

Gap Distribution Based on Cumulative Patent Count

In our baseline calibration, we match the shift in the empirical gap distribution from 1975 to 1981,
where we generate the distributions using patent counts in individual years.54 In this exercise,
we test the robustness of our results to computing the empirical gap distributions based on the
cumulative patent counts starting from 1965. Doing so, we measure the evolution of technological
leadership based on the cumulative patent stock. In particular, when we compute the U.S. patent
share in a sector in a certain year as in Figure 7, we use the patents registered in that sector
54 One reason for starting in 1975 is that in the raw USPTO data, the number of patents that are assigned to a
technology class is much smaller before the mid-1970s compared to subsequent years.

52

Innovation and Trade Policy in a Globalized World
between 1965 and the particular year of interest. For example, to generate the empirical gap
distribution in 1975, we rank sectors using information from patents registered between 1965
and 1975 instead of 1975 alone. As can be expected, the shift in the empirical gap distribution is
less pronounced in this method, because the country shares of patent stocks vary more slowly.
Therefore, in Figure A.9a in Appendix D.2, the distribution in 1981 is to the right of the baseline
one. However, this limited change does not lead to substantial differences in our calibration.
Indeed, as shown in Table 8, the optimal unilateral tariff policy looks quite similar to the one
in the baseline economy. Hence, we conclude that our results are immune to the alternative
empirical computation method of distributional targets.55
Table 8: Cumulative Patents and the Optimal Unilateral Tariffs

7.5

Horizon in years

10

20

30

40

50

Baseline

18%

12%

0%

0%

0%

Cumulative patents

28%

20%

2%

0%

0%

Tariff Revenue as a Lump-sum Transfer

In the baseline exercises, tariffs operate similar to iceberg costs without generating any revenue
for the government. In this exercise, we explore the implications of a tariff policy, whose revenue
is shared by the households via lump-sum subsidies. Then, net government spending becomes
i 1−β β
h
∗
Qc0 mt
1− β
γc
c − mc0
Gct = sc ∑m̄
α
x
Q
−
τ
∑
s=−m̄ c cst cst
m=−m̄ (1+κ +τ c )η
1− β in a modified version of equation (20),
accounting for tariff revenue. The profile of the optimal unilateral tariff policy, summarized
in Table 9, mirrors what we found in our baseline setting in that liberalization is optimal for
a far-sighted policymaker. However, complete removal of tariffs becomes optimal at a longer
horizon than in the baseline. This result should be expected because in this case, tariff reduction
comes at a cost to households, decreasing the amount of lump-sum subsidies generated by the
tariff revenue. Nevertheless, the main message that protectionist policies are only optimal for
policymakers that have relatively shorter horizons remains intact in this alternative setting.
Table 9: Optimal unilateral tariffs and comparison to the baseline results
Horizon in years

10

20

30

40

50

Baseline

18%

12%

0%

0%

0%

Tariff with revenue

14%

10%

4%

0%

0%

55 As shown in Figure A.9b in Appendix D.2, the calibration to the alternative distributions also performs well in
matching the limited shift, resulting in a model-generated gap distribution in 1981 that lies to the right of the one in
the baseline calibration. This comparison reveals that the similarity of policy implications in both calibrations is not
driven by a spuriously stronger force of foreign convergence emerging in the alternative calibration than implied by
the relatively limited shift in the empirical distributions.

53

Innovation and Trade Policy in a Globalized World

7.6

Lower Discount Rate ρ

In the baseline calibration, we fixed the discount rate of the households to 1 percent. In order
to test the sensitivity of our results to this parameter, we also ran an alternative calibration,
setting the discount rate to 0.5 percent. Our calibration outcome barely changes in this exercise
suggesting that our analysis is robust to varying degrees of the discount rate. Because the effects
are negligible, we do not present the results here.

7.7

Modeling Labor in the Intermediate Goods Sector

A central concern in the debate on gains from trade is the potential harm that import penetration
can cause to domestic workers by stealing the market of the domestic firms [Autor et al. (2013)].
In our baseline model, labor, which is used in the final good sector, benefits from trade liberalization thanks to the higher labor productivity, which is brought about by better-quality imports
replacing inferior domestic counterparts. As a robustness exercise, we modify the baseline model
in order to allow trade to have an adverse impact on labor. In this version, labor is utilized in the
production of intermediate goods; therefore, foreign catch-up leads to a wage loss as a byproduct
of business stealing. We re-estimate this new version of the model and compare its key policy
implications with the ones of the baseline model. For the sake of brevity, we present the details
of the exercise and the results in Appendix E. Our key baseline results go through in this version
as well, except that unilateral tariff policies appear to increase economic welfare for longer horizons. However, the threat of retaliation works just as in our baseline framework, inducing the
policymaker optimally choose to remove tariffs across all horizons.

8

Conclusion

In this paper, we shed light on a recurring debate about the competitiveness of U.S. firms relative to their foreign competitors and how to improve their position. Motivated by a set of
novel facts on advanced foreign countries catching up to the U.S. during the 1970s and 1980s,
we build an open-economy general equilibrium framework of endogenous growth and trade to
evaluate the effectiveness of innovation and trade policies in improving the competitiveness of
U.S. firms. Firm innovation decisions in our model are motivated by defensive and expansionary innovation motives as well as domestic and international business-stealing effects. While
knowledge spillovers and decreasing returns to knowledge accumulation lead to cross-country
convergence, productivity differences drive trade flows. While realistically mimicking an extensive set of empirical relationships, our machinery is still tractable enough to allow for the analysis
of transitional dynamics, which proves to be crucial for policy evaluation.

54

Innovation and Trade Policy in a Globalized World
Our theoretical and quantitative analysis obtains several key results. Theoretically we show
that in the static sense, increased openness benefits the fixed factor in final production by raising
its compensation via higher-quality intermediate imports, while the impact on business owners
is ambiguous, because larger export demand and loss of markets to better foreign rivals exert
opposing forces. In the dynamic sense, increased openness, and thus foreign competition, encourages more domestic innovation through stronger incentives for defensive and expansionary
R&D. Quantitatively, we first show that foreign technological catching-up hurts U.S. welfare by
stealing away business and profits of U.S. firms. Second, we assess that the introduction of R&D
subsidies in the U.S. was a viable response to restore the technological competitiveness of U.S.
firms, with a notable welfare contribution in the medium term. Moreover, our model implies that
the optimal subsidy is increasing over time horizons and decreasing in openness. The latter is an
intriguing result, which owes again to the dynamic innovation-stimulating effect of foreign competition on domestic firms. Finally, we consider a counterfactual protectionist response to foreign
catching-up. We find that, in the context of our model, increasing trade barriers for imports unilaterally increases U.S. economic welfare only in the short run, chiefly through the substitution
of imports, with domestic production leading to higher domestic profits. However, failing to
incentivize U.S. firms to accelerate technological improvement, the protectionist policy cannot
compensate for the loss of high-quality imports and leads to substantial welfare losses in the
medium to long run. Therefore, protectionist policies in our model, despite helping businesses
to retain profits in the short run, make consumers worse off over the longer term.

References
Acemoglu, Daron and Ufuk Akcigit, “Intellectual Property Rights Policy, Competition and Innovation,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 2012, 10 (1), 1–42.
, , Douglas Hanley, and William R. Kerr, “Transition to Clean Technology,” Journal of Political
Economy, 2016, 124 (1), 52–104.
,
, Harun Alp, Nicholas Bloom, and William R. Kerr, “Innovation, Reallocation and
Growth,” 2017. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 18993.
Aghion, Philippe and Peter Howitt, The Economics of Growth, MIT Press, 2009.
, Antonin Bergeaud, Mathieu Lequien, and Marc Melitz, “The Impact of Exports on Innovation: Theory and Evidence,” 2017. Manuscript.
, Christopher Harris, Peter Howitt, and John Vickers, “Competition, Imitation and Growth
with Step-by-step Innovation,” Review of Economic Studies, 2001, 68 (3), 467–492.
, Nicholas Bloom, Richard Blundell, Rachel Griffith, and Peter Howitt, “Competition and
Innovation: An Inverted-U Relationship,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2005, 120 (2), 701–728.
Akcigit, Ufuk and William R. Kerr, “Growth through Heterogeneous Innovations,” Journal of
Political Economy, 2017.

55

Innovation and Trade Policy in a Globalized World
, Douglas Hanley, and Nicolas Serrano-Velarde, “Back to Basics: Basic Research Spillovers,
Innovation Policy and Growth,” 2016. Centre for Economic Policy Research Discussion Paper
11707.
, , and Stefanie Stantcheva, “Optimal Taxation and R&D Policies,” 2016. National Bureau
of Economic Research Working Paper 22908.
Alessandria, George and Horag Choi, “Establishment Heterogeneity, Exporter Dynamics, and
the Effects of Trade Liberalization,” Journal of International Economics, 2014, 94 (2), 207–223.
Anderson, James E. and Eric van Wincoop, “Trade Costs,” Journal of Economic Literature, 2004, 42
(3), 691–751.
Antràs, Pol and Elhanan Helpman, “Global Sourcing,” Journal of Political Economy, 2004, 112 (3),
552–580.
Arkolakis, Costas, Arnaud Costinot, and Andrés Rodríguez-Clare, “New Trade Models, Same
Old Gains?,” American Economic Review, February 2012, 102 (1), 94–130.
Atkeson, Andrew and Ariel T. Burstein, “Innovation, Firm Dynamics, and International Trade,”
Journal of Political Economy, 2010, 118 (3), 433–484.
Autor, David, David Dorn, Gordon H. Hanson, Gary Pisano, and Pian Shu, “Foreign Competition and Domestic Innovation: Evidence from U.S. Patents,” 2016. National Bureau of
Economic Research 22879.
Autor, David H., David Dorn, and Gordon H. Hanson, “The China Syndrome: Local Labor
Market Effects of Import Competition in the United States,” American Economic Review, October
2013, 103 (6), 2121–2168.
Aw, Bee Yan, Mark J. Roberts, and Daniel Yi Xu, “R&D Investment, Exporting, and Productivity
Dynamics,” American Economic Review, 2011, 101 (4), 1312–1344.
Baldwin, Richard and Paul Krugman, “Industrial Policy and International Competition in Widebodied Jet Aircraft,” in Richard Baldwin, ed., Trade Policy Issues and Empirical Analysis, University of Chicago Press, 1988, pp. 45–78.
Barattieri, Alessandro, Matteo Cacciatore, and Fabio Ghironi, “Protectionism and the Business
Cycle,” 2017. Manuscript.
Bernard, Andrew B., J. Bradford Jensen, Stephen J. Redding, and Peter K. Schott, “Global
Firms,” Journal of Economic Literature, 2017. forthcoming.
Bloom, Nicholas, Mirko Draca, and John Van Reenen, “Trade Induced Technical Change? The
Impact of Chinese Imports on Innovation, IT and Productivity,” Review of Economic Studies,
2016, 83 (1), 87–117.
, Paul M Romer, Stephen J. Terry, and John Van Reenen, “A Trapped-factors Model of Innovation,” American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 2013, 103 (3), 208–213.
, Rachel Griffith, and John Van Reenen, “Do R&D Tax Credits Work? Evidence from A Panel
of Countries 1979–1997,” Journal of Public Economics, 2002, 85 (1), 1–31.
Buera, Francisco J. and Ezra Oberfield, “The Global Diffusion of Ideas,” 2016. National Bureau
of Economic Research 21844.
56

Innovation and Trade Policy in a Globalized World
Burstein, Ariel and Marc J. Melitz, “Trade Liberalization and Firm Dynamics,” in Daron Acemoglu, Eddie Dekel, and Manuel Arellano, eds., Advances in Economics and Econometrics Tenth
World Congress. Applied Economics, Vol. 2, 2013, pp. 283–328.
Bustos, Paula, “Trade Liberalization, Exports, and Technology Upgrading: Evidence on the Impact of MERCOSUR on Argentinian Firms,” American Economic Review, 2011, 101 (1), 304–340.
Cameron, Gavin, James Proudman, and Stephen Redding, “Technological Convergence, R&D,
Trade and Productivity Growth,” European Economic Review, 2005, 49 (3), 775–807.
Capdevielle, Patricia and Donato Alvarez, “International Comparisons of Trends in Productivity
and Labor Costs,” Monthly Lab. Rev., 1981, 104, 14–20.
Chen, Cheng and Claudia Steinwender, “Import Competition, Heterogeneous Preferences of
Managers, and Productivity,” 2016. Harvard Business School Working Paper.
Coe, David T., Elhanan Helpman, and Alexander W. Hoffmaister, “International R&D
Spillovers and Institutions,” European Economic Review, 2009, 53 (7), 723–741.
Coelli, Federica, Andreas Moxnes, and Karen Helene Ulltveit-Moe, “Better, Faster, Stronger:
Global Innovation and Trade Liberalization,” 2016. National Bureau of Economic Research
22647.
Coeurdacier, Nicolas and Helene Rey, “Home Bias in Open Economy Financial Macroeconomics,” Journal of Economic Literature, 2013, 51 (1), 63–115.
Costinot, Arnaud, Andrés Rodríguez-Clare, and Iván Werning, “Micro to Macro: Optimal Trade
Policy with Firm Heterogeneity,” 2016. National Bureau of Economic Research 21989.
, Dave Donaldson, Jonathan Vogel, and Iván Werning, “Comparative Advantage and Optimal
Trade Policy,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2015, 130 (2), 659–702.
Demidova, Svetlana and Andrés Rodríguez-Clare, “Trade Policy Under Firm-level Heterogeneity in a Small Economy,” Journal of International Economics, June 2009, 78 (1), 100–112.
Eaton, Jonathan and Gene M. Grossman, “Optimal Trade and Industrial Policy under
Oligopoly,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1986, 101 (2), 383–406.
Gerschenkron, Alexander, Economic Backwards in Historical Perspective: A Book of Essays, Belknap
Press of Harvard University Press, 1962.
Gorodnichenko, Yuriy, Jan Svejnar, and Katherine Terrell, “Globalization and Innovation in
Emerging Markets,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, April 2010, 2 (2), 194–226.
Grossman, Gene M. and Edwin L.-C. Lai, “International Protection of Intellectual Property,”
American Economic Review, 2004, 94 (5), 1635–1653.
and Elhanan Helpman, “Comparative Advantage and Long-run Growth,” American Economic
Review, 1990, 80 (4), 796–815.
and , “Growth and Welfare in a Small Open Economy,” in E. Helpman and A. Razin, eds.,
International Trade and Trade Policy, Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1991, chapter 8, pp. 141–163.
and , “Quality Ladders in the Theory of Growth,” Review of Economic Studies, 1991, 58 (1),
43–61.

57

Innovation and Trade Policy in a Globalized World

and

, Innovation and Growth In the Global Economy, MIT press, 1993.

Haaland, Jan I. and Hans Jarle Kind, “R&D Policies, Trade and Process Innovation,” Journal of
International Economics, 2008, 74 (1), 170–187.
Hall, Bronwyn H., Adam B. Jaffe, and Manuel Trajtenberg, “The NBER Patent Citation Data
File: Lessons, Insights and Methodological Tools,” 2001. National Bureau of Economic Research 8498.
Hashmi, Aamir Rafique, “Competition and Innovation: The Inverted-U Relationship Revisited,”
Review of Economics and Statistics, 2013, 95 (5), 1653–1668.
Hombert, Johan and Adrien Matray, “Can Innovation Help US Manufacturing Firms Escape
Import Competition from China?,” 2015. CEPR Discussion Papers 10666.
Hottman, Colin J., Stephen J. Redding, and David E. Weinstein, “Quantifying the Sources of
Firm Heterogeneity,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2016, 131 (3), 1291–1364.
Hummels, David and Volodymyr Lugovskyy, “Are Matched Partner Trade Statistics a Usable
Measure of Transportation Costs?*,” Review of International Economics, 2006, 14 (1), 69–86.
Iacovone, Leonardo, “The Better You Are the Stronger It Makes You: Evidence on the Asymmetric Impact of Liberalization,” Journal of Development Economics, 2012, 99 (2), 474–485.
, Wolfgang Keller, and Ferdinand Rauch, “Innovation Responses to Import Competition,”
2011. Mimeo, Princeton University.
Impullitti, Giammario, “International Competition and US R&D Subsidies: A Quantitative Welfare Analysis,” International Economic Review, 2010, 51 (4), 1127–1158.
and Omar Licandro, “Trade, Firm Selection, and Innovation: The Competition Channel,”
Economic Journal, 2017.
Irwin, Douglas A. and Nina Pavcnik, “Airbus versus Boeing Revisited: International Competition in the Aircraft Market,” Journal of International Economics, 2004, 64 (2), 223–245.
Keller, Wolfgang, “International Technology Diffusion,” Journal of Economic Literature, 2004, 42
(3), 752–782.
Leahy, Dermot and J. Peter Neary, “Public Policy towards R&D in Oligopolistic Industries,”
American Economic Review, 1997, 87 (4), 642–662.
Lileeva, Alla and Daniel Trefler, “Improved Access to Foreign Markets Raises Plant-level Productivity for Some Plants,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2010, 125 (3), 1051–1099.
López, Ricardo A., “Do Firms Increase Productivity in Order to Become Exporters?,” Oxford
Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, 2009, 71 (5), 621–642.
Lybbert, Travis and Nikolas Zolas, “Getting Patents and Economic Data to Speak to Each Other:
An “Algorithmic Links with Probabilities” Approach for Joint Analyses of Patenting and Economic Activity,” Research Policy, 2014, 43 (3), 530–542.
Mayer, Thierry, Marc J. Melitz, and Gianmarco I.P. Ottaviano, “Product Mix and Firm Productivity Responses to Trade Competition,” 2016. National Bureau of Economic Research 22433.

58

Innovation and Trade Policy in a Globalized World
, Marc Melitz, and Gianmarco I.P. Ottaviano, “Market Size, Competition, and the Product
Mix of Exporters,” American Economic Review, 2014, 104 (2), 495–536.
Melitz, Marc, “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate Industry
Productivity,” Econometrica, 2003, 71, 1695–1725.
Melitz, Marc J. and Stephen J. Redding, “Missing Gains from Trade?,” American Economic Review, 2014, 104 (5), 317–321.
Muendler, Marc-Andreas, “Trade, Technology, and Productivity: A Study of Brazilian Manufacturers, 1986-1998,” 2004. CESifo Working Paper Series 1148.
Ossa, Ralph, “A Quantitative Analysis of Subsidy Competition in the US,” 2015. National Bureau
of Economic Research Working Paper 20975.
Perla, Jesse, Christopher Tonetti, and Michael E. Waugh, “Equilibrium Technology Diffusion,
Trade, and Growth,” 2015. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 20881.
Rivera-Batiz, Luis A. and Paul M. Romer, “Economic Integration and Endogenous Growth,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1991, 106 (2), 531–555.
Rodrik, Dani, “Industrial Policy for the Twenty-first Century,” 2004. CEPR Discussion Paper
4767.
Romer, Paul M., “Endogenous Technological Change,” Journal of Political Economy, 1990, 98, S71–
S102.
Sampson, Thomas, “Dynamic Selection: An Idea Flows Theory of Entry, Trade, and Growth,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2016, 131 (1), 315–380.
Segerstrom, Paul S., “Endogenous Growth without Scale Effects,” American Economic Review,
1998, 88, 1290–1310.
Spencer, Barbara J. and James A. Brander, “International R&D Rivalry and Industrial Strategy,”
Review of Economic Studies, 1983, 50 (4), 707–722.
Wilson, Daniel J., “Beggar Thy Neighbor? The In-state, Out-of-state, and Aggregate Effects of
R&D Tax Credits,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 2009, 91 (2), 431–436.

59

Innovation and Trade Policy in a Globalized World

Appendices
A
A.1

Additional Empirical Material
Empirical Facts

This section presents empirical regularities in global technological competition and describes the
technological convergence between the U.S. and other major economies. An account of federaland state-level R&D tax credit policies follows. The section concludes with suggestive evidence
on the positive effect of R&D tax credits on firm-level performance.

Fact 1: Technological Convergence
There is a striking change in the relative position of foreign countries relative to the U.S. in
the worldwide technological competition over the course of 1970s until the mid-1980s. At both
aggregate and sectoral level, we observe a clear pattern of catching-up, which we measure using
patent and citation counts.
.5

Share

.4

.3

.2

1965

1975

Application Year

Foreign Share, patents

1985

1995

Foreign Share, citations

Figure A.1: Share of foreign patents: 1965-1995

Using USPTO data on patent counts, Figure A.1 shows the yearly change in the proportion
of patents registered in the U.S. by foreign entities (solid line).56 It also depicts the same ratio for
the citations received by those patents (dashed line). Both lines display an obvious, increasing
trend, which means that the growth in the number of foreign-based patents is higher than the
56 The distinction between domestic and foreign patents is by geographic location of registry. For more detail, see
Hall et al. (2001).

60

Innovation and Trade Policy in a Globalized World
growth in U.S.-based ones. Interestingly, the convergence process comes to a halt around the
mid-1980s, and we observe an reversal of the trend.

Patents by country

80000

60000

40000

20000

1965

1975

1985

Application Year

US patents

1995

Foreign Patents

Figure A.2: Patent Counts

Fact 2: R&D Tax Incentives
Partly motivated by these and other similar facts, concerns about the strength of the U.S. industries and their ability to compete in a fast-moving global economy increased dramatically in the
late 1970s. The key discussions focused on whether the new technologies arising from federally
funded R&D were being fully and effectively exploited for the benefit of the national economy,
whether there were barriers slowing down private firms in creating and commercializing innovations and new technologies, and whether public-private collaboration in research and innovation
could help the U.S. economy in facing these new challenges. Several new policy measures were
introduced in those years, with particular attention to avoiding unduly substitution of government for private firms in activities that the latter can naturally perform better. These actions
included several programs to facilitate the transfer of the outcome of the federal R&D to private
businesses (e.g., the National Cooperative Research Act of 1984, and the Technology Transfer Act
of 1986), policies to strengthen intellectual property rights such as the Bayh-Dole Act (1980), and
in particular tax incentives to innovation that started with the Research and Experimentation Tax
Credit (R&E) in 1981.
The R&E Tax Credit introduced a 25 percent tax deduction on the increase in R&D spending
over the average of the past three years. In 1985 the statutory rate was reduced to 20 percent, and
in 1990 the base for eligibility was defined as the average of the 1984–88 R&D to sales ratio (with
a maximum of 16 percent) times current sales. The U.S. competitors in high-tech industries—
Japan and the large European economies—introduced or already had in place tax incentives for
innovation. Using corporate tax data, Bloom et al. (2002) estimate the R&D subsidy produced
by tax policies in the U.S., Japan, and key European countries. The data take into account the
different tax and tax credit systems used in each country and measure the reduction in the cost
of $1 of R&D investment produced by the tax system. Figure 3 of the main text shows the R&D
61

Innovation and Trade Policy in a Globalized World
tax subsidy for the set of countries we are interested in.
The variations across countries are mainly due to the presence and effectiveness of a specific
tax credit for R&D. The sudden increase in U.S. subsidies, for instance, takes place with the
introduction of the R&E Tax Credit in 1981 and with the revision of the base defining incremental
R&D in 1990. We can see that in 1980 the reduction in innovation cost attributable to the tax
system was about 5 percent; it jumps to about 15 percent in 1981 and further increases to more
than 25 percent in 1990. In Japan there is a fixed tax credit of limited effectiveness for the period
considered. In the rest of the countries there are no special tax provisions or credits given on
R&D expenditures, and the positive and fairly constant subsidy rates are produced by tax credits
common to all assets.

30

.08

.06
20
.04
10
.02

0

0
1980

1985

1990
Year

Patent−wtd. avg.

1995

Effetive Credit Rate, avg. across states (Lines)

Number of States with Tax Credit (Bars)

In 1982 starting with Minnesota, U.S. states also introduced tax subsidies for R&D. In Figure
A.3 we report the evolution of the average rate of U.S. state tax credits together with the number
of states offering a tax credit each year, using tax credit data of Wilson (2009). The simple
average of effective tax credits across states offering a credit was about 6 percent in 1995, nearly
one-fourth of the federal one, and the number of states following such a policy rose to 32. Figure
A.3 also shows the average R&D credit level weighted by the state-level patent production, whose
evolution over time is parallel to the simple average.57

2000

Simple average

Source: Authors’ calculations, USPTO, Wilson (2009)

Figure A.3: U.S. state-level R&D tax credit

57 As opposed to the simple average, the weighted average multiplies the state-level effective credit by the fraction
of total U.S.-based patents registered in that state.

62

Innovation and Trade Policy in a Globalized World

B
B.1

Additional Derivations
Proofs

Lemma 1 We confirm this lemma by guess-and-verify method. Conjecture the following form:
Vcmt = qvmt . Substituting this expression into equation (14), we get:


r At v Amt q − v̇ Amt q = maxΠ (m) q − 1 − s
x Amt
"

+ x Amt

m̄

∑

n t = m +1

A



( x Amt )γ A
αA
q
γA
#

Fm (nt ) v Ant λ(nt −m) q − v Amt q

+ x̃ Amt [0 − v Amt q]


+ x B(−m)t + x̃ B(−m)t

m̄

∑

nt =−m+1

h
i
F−m (nt ) v A(−nt) q − v Amt q .

Dividing all sides by q, we obtain the desired result.

B.2

Value Functions for Boundary Gaps

To complete the exposition of incumbents’ problem we present the two boundary cases where
the incumbent is m̄-steps ahead (behind):58
γA

 (x
Am̄t )
r At VAm̄t (q) − V̇Am̄t (q) = max (πL A + π ∗ L B ) q − 1 − s A α A
q
x Am̄t
γA



+ x Am̄t [VAm̄t (λq) − VAm̄t (q)] + x̃ Am̄t [0 − VAm̄t (q)]
)


h
i
m̄
+ x B(−m̄)t + x̃ B(−m̄)t
∑ F−m̄ (nt ) VA(−n)t (q) − VAm̄t (q) ,
nt =−m̄+1

and
r At VA(−m̄)t (q) − V̇A(−m̄)t (q) = max

X A(−m̄)t







+ x A(−m̄)t






− 1 − sA αA
m̄

∑

nt =−m̄+1

x A(−m̄)t
γA

γ A
q

h


i
F−m̄ (nt ) VAnt λ(nt +m̄) q − VA(−m̄)t (q)

h
i
+ x̃ A(−m̄)t 0 − VA(−m̄)t (q)
h
i
+ ( x Bm̄t + x̃ Bm̄t ) VA(−m̄)t (λq) − VA(−m̄)t (q) .
58 These value functions assume that m̄-step ahead leader captures both the domestic and the foreign market—i.e.,
the quality advantage at the largest gap is enough to cover the trade costs.

63

Innovation and Trade Policy in a Globalized World
The last term in the value function of m̄-step-behind incumbent captures the knowledge
spillovers. When a leader at the maximum gap m̄ innovates, the follower in this sector automatically sees its technology jump by a measure λ. Together with the market-size, escapecompetition, and business-stealing effects described above, the international knowledge spillover is
the last key feature driving innovation in our framework. In each period this spillover keeps
laggard firms in the innovation race, preventing them from falling too far behind. Because the
innovation technology is the same for all firms, laggards always have a chance to catch up.

B.3

Aggregation and the Distribution of Leadership

The growth rate of this economy is determined by the changes in aggregate quality/productivity
across intermediate goods, Qcmt . In order to analyze the evolution of aggregate quality and
breaking it down into its various sources we need to consider all possible scenarios of innovation
outcomes and keep track of the resulting changes in quality levels across product lines at each
gap size. Below we report the evolution of aggregate qualities, and in the next subsection we
describe the full derivation. Changes in Q Amt are characterized by the following expressions:59
Q̇ Amt =

m −1

∑

s=−m̄

Fs (m) ( x Ast + x̃ Ast ) λm−s Q Ast +

m̄

∑

s = m +1



F−s (−m) x B(−s)t + x̃ B(−s)t Q Ast

h
i
− x Amt + x B(−m)t + x̃ Amt + x̃ B(−m)t Q Amt
i
h
Q̇ Am̄t = ( x Am̄t + x̃ Am̄t ) (λ − 1) − x B(−m̄)t − x̃ B(−m̄)t Q Am̄t +

m̄−1

∑

s=−m̄

h
i
Q̇ A(−m̄)t = ( x Bm̄t + x̃ Bm̄t ) (λ − 1) − x A(−m̄)t − x̃ A(−m̄)t Q A(−m̄)t +

Fs (m̄) ( x Ast + x̃ Ast ) λm̄−s Q Ast

m̄−1

∑

s=−m̄

Fs (m̄) ( x Bst + x̃ Bst ) Q A(−s)t .

The first equation is the generic expression that describes the change in the aggregate quality
of intermediate goods produced by firms from country c at position m. The first sum captures
the addition of new incumbents improving to gap m. An innovation with step size λm−s by a
domestic incumbent or entrant at position s < m happens with probability Fs (m), and it implies
that the domestic incumbent in that product line will reach gap m. The second sum captures
the addition of product lines, where the position of the domestic incumbent worsened to m from
a better one. An improvement by foreign incumbents or entrants from position −s < −m to
−m, which happens with probability F−s (−m), hits the domestic incumbent in that product
line enjoying the position s > m and brings it down to gap m. The third component in the
equation captures the fact that any innovation in a product line where the domestic incumbent is
at position m causes a change in its position and, thus a negative change in the aggregate quality
index across product lines of position m. The other two equations describe the boundary cases.
In case of m̄, notice that innovation by the domestic incumbent or entrants does not change the
59 The

evolution of the variables for country B is given reciprocally.

64

Innovation and Trade Policy in a Globalized World
gap between the domestic incumbent and the foreign follower due to spillover effects but raises
the average quality by the step size. Reciprocally, any innovation by the foreign incumbent or
entrant improves the quality of the good that the most laggard domestic incumbents produce
because of spillover effects.
The laws of motion that determine the measure of product lines where the incumbent from
country c is at position m are described by
µ̇ Am̄t



−1
= µ̇ B(−m̄)t = ∑m̄
s=−m̄ Fs ( m̄ ) ( x Ast + x̃ Ast ) µ Ast − µ Am̄t x B(−m̄)t + x̃ B(−m̄)t


∑m̄
s=m+1 F−s (− m ) x B(−s)t + x̃ B(−s)t µ Ast

µ̇ Amt

= µ̇ B(−m)t =

µ̇ A(−m̄)t =

µ̇ Bm̄t

−1
+ ∑m
Fs (m) ( x Ast + x̃ Ast ) µ Ast
h s=−m̄
i
− x Amt + x B(−m)t + x̃ Amt + x̃ B(−m)t µ Amt



−1
F
= ∑m̄
m̄
x
+
x̃
µ
−
µ
x
+
x̃
(
)
(
)
s
Bst
Bst
A(−s)t
A(−m̄)t
A(−m̄)t
A(−m̄)t .
s=−m̄
(A.1)

The drivers of the dynamics are the same as in the case of aggregate quality indices, except
that step sizes are not relevant in determining the changes in µ. Notice that the change in the
measure of position-m product lines in a country corresponds to the change in the measure of
position-(−m) product lines in the other country. Moreover, because there is a unit measure
of intermediate product lines we have ∑m µcm = 1. Therefore, information on 2m̄ − 1 measures
is enough to describe the distribution of product lines according to the technological gap size
between the two active incumbents from each country.

C

Simplified Model and Analytical Results

This appendix details the discussion in Section 3 and presents proofs of the propositions.

C.1

Static Effects of Openness

At the aggregate level, the static effects of openness on the income and welfare of consumers
stem from three main channels, with two of them having a positive direction and one having
a negative direction. To show this, we consider a closed economy and analyze the effects of it
opening up. In autarky, the total output in country c is
1−β
YcC =
η


 1−β β

(1 − β )

−1

65

Z 1
0

qcj dj ≡ ϕ

Z 1
0

qcj dj,

Innovation and Trade Policy in a Globalized World
which is produced using only domestic intermediates. Likewise, the fixed factor and profit
incomes are
Z
wcC = βYcC and ΠCc = π

1

0

qcj dj = β (1 − β) Yc .

The gross national income, sum of profits and fixed factor income, is given by
Z 1

N IcC = β (1 − β) YcC + βYcC = (2 − β) βϕ

0

qcj dj.

When this economy opens to trade (subject only to tariffs) the same expressions become
1−β
=
η


YcO

 1−β β

−1

Z

1

Z 1

Iqcj >q̂c0 j qcj dj +
Iqcj <q̂c0 j q̂c0 j dj
(1 − β )
0
0


Z 1
− 1− β
= YcC + ϕ
Iqcj <q̂c0 j (1 + τ ) β qc0 j − qcj dj,



0

where we define q̂ ≡ q/ (1 + τ )
wO
c

=

βYcO

1− β
β

, abstracting from tariffs for now. Similarly,
ΠO
c

and

=π

Z 1
0

Iqcj >q̂c0 j qcj dj + π

∗

Z 1
0

Iq̂cj >qc0 j qcj dj,

with gross income given by
N IcO = π

Z 1
0

Iqcj >q̂c0 j qcj dj + π ∗

Z 1
0

Iq̂cj >qc0 j qcj + βYcO .

(A.2)

Thus, the comparison between incomes in autarky and the open economy boils down to the
comparison of
Z 1
0

qcj dj and

Z 1
0

Iqcj >q̂c0 j qcj dj + (1 + τ )

− 1−β β

Z 1
0

Iq̂cj >qc0 j qcj dj,

determining the profit component, and to the comparison of
Z 1
0

qcj dj and

Z 1
0

Iqcj >q̂c0 j qcj dj + (1 + τ )

− 1−β β

Z 1
0

Iqcj <q̂c0 j qc0 j dj,

determining fixed factor income. Figure A.4 illustrates these comparisons. As in Figure 6, solid
lines determine the domestic technology frontier, whereas dashed lines show the iceberg costadjusted levels of these frontiers that emerge when engaging in trade. The left panel shows the
product lines and the associated qualities that determine aggregate profit income for the home
country in an open world. The right panel shows the technology frontier that determines the
productivity of the domestic fixed factor.
First, compared to the state of autarky, the open economy allows relatively more productive
firms to sell to a larger market by providing the opportunity to export. This positive effect of
market size on aggregate income is evident from the first component in equation (A.2), as profits
of leading firms increase proportionally by π ∗ . This increase corresponds to the upward expan-

66

Innovation and Trade Policy in a Globalized World
profits
πq

quality
q

US1+US1’

US firms, when sold at home

US1

US2

US1’

US2’ US

firms, when sold abroad

US firms, actual wages

US firms, actual profits

US1

US1

US1’

US1’

FN1

FN1
FN2

FN1’

FN2

FN1’

FN2’

0

FN2’

US2

US2

US2’

US2’

1

product
line, j

0

a) Effect on profits

1
b) Effect on wages

Figure A.4: Static effects of openness
Notes: Panel A illustrates the profits generated by the U.S. incumbents in an example economy. In autarky, profits are given by the
solid line US1-US1’, whereas in an open economy, profits are given by the thick red line starting at (US1+US1’). When the economy
is open, exporters earn the sum of profits from selling both domestically, based on their actual product quality (solid line US1-US2),
and abroad, based on their trade-cost-adjusted quality (dashed line US1’-US2’). Firms that cannot export and sell only domestically
generate profits based on their actual product quality. Incumbents in sectors where the U.S. imports the specific good have zero
profits. Panel B illustrates the relevant quality frontier that determines the labor productivity and, thus, the domestic wage paid in
the final good sector. In autarky, the relevant frontier is given by the product qualities of all domestic firms (US1-US1’). In an open
economy, the relevant quality frontier (thick red line US1-FN2) is the upper envelope of product qualities available in both countries,
taking into account the quality of imported intermediate goods.

sion of the red line in Figure A.4a, determined by the additional income from exporting. Note
that the effective quality when exporting is reduced by trade costs. The second static effect of
openness works through the selection of more productive intermediate good producers due to
increased competition exerted by foreign competitors. This selection channel facilitates the transfer of better-quality intermediate goods across countries, increasing the productivity of the fixed
factor utilized in the production of domestic final output. Figure A.4b illustrates this selection
mechanism, which indicates that the fixed factor productivity is a function of the upper envelope
of product qualities available in the international market. Therefore, this channel, labeled as direct transfer of technology in Keller (2004), leads to a higher fixed factor income in both countries.60
However, the selection channel implies at the firm level that less productive domestic firms lose
the profits to foreign competitors, which they would earn otherwise in autarky, resulting in a decline of aggregate profit income. As illustrated in Figure A.4a, some product lines fail to generate
profits, as they are substituted by imports.

60 Notice

that iceberg costs prevent the trade of some better-quality foreign goods available in the market.

67

product
line, j

Innovation and Trade Policy in a Globalized World
Next we present the proof of Proposition 1.61
Proposition 1 The effect of opening up on wage income is given by ∆w = βφ∆w , where ∆w is
defined as the following difference:
∆w ≡

=

Z 1
0

Iqcj >q̂c0 j qcj dj + (1 + τ )

0


Iqcj <q̂c0 j q̂c0 j − qcj dj

Z 1

− 1−β β

Z 1h
0

Z
i
1 − Iqcj >q̂c0 j qc0 j dj −

1
0

qcj dj

> 0.
The transfer of better technology affects this component positively. The total effect on profits
given by ∆Π = π∆Π , where ∆w is defined as the following difference:
∆Π ≡

=

Z 1
0

Iqcj >q̂c0 j qcj dj + (1 + τ )

0

Iq̂cj >qc0 j q̂cj dj −

Z 1

Z 1
0

− 1−β β

Z 1
0

Iq̂cj >qc0 j qcj dj −

Z 1
0

qcj dj

Iqcj <q̂c0 j qcj dj

≶ 0.
The first component is the gain from exports, and the second component is the loss of profits
from firms that are laggard in international competition. The direction of the difference depends
on the measure of leading firms in country c as well as on the difference between the average
quality of country c’s leading and laggard firms.
Therefore, the combined effect on national income, which reads as
∆w + ∆Π = βϕ∆w + π∆Π ,
is ambiguous.
In the case of unilateral tariff reduction, domestic exporters are not affected, as the unilateral
tariff reduction only affects the cutoff for imports. Therefore, its effect is determined by the loss
of domestic profits and the gains from technology transfer driven by the higher import volume.

C.2

Dynamic Effects of Openness and Escape Competition

As explained in Section 2.3.3, market size and selection channels affect not only the aggregate values, but also firm decisions, introducing a dynamic force. Furthermore, two important dynamic
channels whose impact are completely absent in a static comparison are defensive and expansionary R&D motives, the incentive of firms producing goods of similar (adjusted) qualities to escape

61 Additionally, scale effects arise in a setting where competing countries are of different sizes. For a discussion,
see Chapter 15 in Aghion and Howitt (2009).

68

Innovation and Trade Policy in a Globalized World
foreign competition and gain market dominance. To focus on these strategic interactions, consider the simplified environment described in Section 3.2 and abstract from trade frictions. In
this environment firm values can be written as
2
x−
m̄
+ x−m̄ [v0 − v−m̄ ]
2
x2
rv−m = − −m + x−m [v0 − v−m ] + xm [v−m−1 − v−m ]
2
x02
rv0 = − + x0 [v1 − v0 ] + x0 [v−1 − v0 ]
2
x2
rvm = 2π − m + xm [vm+1 − vm ] + x−m [v0 − vm ]
2
2
xm̄
rvm̄ = 2π −
+ xm̄ [vm̄ − vm̄ ] + x−m̄ [v0 − vm̄ ]
2

rv−m̄ = −

with m ∈ {1, ..., m̄ − 1} .62 The following proposition argues that, in this environment, firms in
neck-and-neck position have the highest innovation intensity.
Proposition 2 First, note that v−m = v−m̄ and vm = vm̄ satisfy the set of equation for m > 0.
This implies that we have three distinct firm values and innovation rates, and that xm̄ = xm = 0.
Now we show x0 > 0, x−m̄ > 0 and x0 > x−m = x−m̄ .
1. vm̄ > v0 : Assume not such that v0 ≥ vm̄ = v1 . Then [v1 − v0 ] ≤ 0, and x0 = 0. This
implies v0 = 0 ≥ vm̄ = v1 . But v0 = 0 would mean rvm̄ = 2π − x−m̄ vm̄ and thus vm̄ > 0, a
contradiction. Therefore x0 > 0.
2. v0 > v−m̄ : Assume not such that v−m̄ ≥ v0 . Then x−m̄ = 0 implying that v−m̄ = 0 ≥ v0 .
This is possible only if x0 = 0. But since vm̄ > v0 as shown above, x0 > 0, a contradiction.
Therefore x−m̄ > 0.
3. [vm̄ − v0 ] > [v0 − v−m̄ ]: Assume not such that [v0 − v−m̄ ] ≥ [vm̄ − v0 ] .This means v0 < 0
unless x0 = 0. If v0 < 0, it is a contradiction by step 2. If x0 = 0 meaning that v0 = 0 it is
a contradiction by step 1. Therefore [vm̄ − v0 ] > [v0 − v−m̄ ] and x0 > x−m = x−m̄ > xm̄ =
xm = 0.

D

Quantitative Appendix

D.1

Solution Algorithm

1. Let M be the set of data moments and Mm be the model counterpart. Define R (M − Mm )
as the function that calculates a weighted sum of the difference between data and model
moments.
62 Lemma 1 applies also in this environment. For the sake of the argument, we assume that neck-and-neck firms
have zero profits. We also drop country identifiers thanks to symmetry.

69

Innovation and Trade Policy in a Globalized World
2. Guess a set of values for the internally calibrated parameters θ guess .
3. Calculate the balanced growth path (BGP), where time derivatives are zero by definition.

h =0
Start iteration h = 0 with the guess r TA , r TB
.

h
(a) At iteration h, take r TA , r TB given and solve incumbent firm values jointly for both
countries by backward iteration.
i. Guess {v AmT +∆t , v BmT +∆t }m∈{−m̄,..,m̄} . Assuming these to be the true BGP values
compute innovation rates { x AmT , x̃ AmT , x BmT , x̃ BmT }m∈{−m̄,..,m̄} . Notice that these
are innovation rates at one period before, as innovation is a forward looking decision and thus depends on the next period value in discrete time.
ii. Compute {v AmT , v BmT }m using the value function equations. By the definition of
BGP, values at T + ∆t and T should be the same.
iii. Check if

max vcmT +∆t − vcmT < ε.
m,c

If not met, set {vcmT +∆t }m = {vcmT }m and repeat.
(b) Take the BGP innovation rates and set Q Am0 = 1 ∀m. Iterate forward on aggregate
quality indices Qcmt using the transition equations until growth rates of the implied

h
income processes for both countries stabilize. Call these gTA , gTB .



h
h
h +1
(c) Check if r TA , r TB and gTA , gTB meet the Euler equation. If not, set r TA , r TB
to
 A B h
interest rates implied by the Euler equation with gT , gT and repeat until convergence.
4. Next calculate the equilibrium over the transition. Start iteration h = 0 by guessing a time

h =0
path for interest rates rtA , rtB t={1975,...,1975+T } . The terminal values are set to the BGP at
every iteration.
h
(a) At iteration h, given the terminal (BGP) values {v AmT , v BmT }m
compute the imh
plied innovation rates { x AmT −∆t , x̃ AmT −∆t , x BmT −∆t , x̃ BmT −∆t }m . Then, given termi
h
h
nal interest rates r TA , r TB , compute {v AmT −∆t , v BmT −∆t }m
. Iterate backwards us A B h
ing the rt , rt t={1975,...,1975+T } until t0 = 1975 to obtain the implied series
h
{ x Amt , x̃ Amt , x Bmt , x̃ Bmt }mt
={1975,...,1975+ T } .

(b) Set Q Am0 = 1 ∀m. Using the implied innovation rates, compute Qcmt for t =
{1975, ..., 1975 + T } by forward iteration and back up the implied income processes.

h
(c) Compute income growth rates gtA , gtB t . Using period-by-period Euler equations,
check if
{r c } h − ρ
< ε.
max { gtc }h − t
m,c,t
ψ

for {1975, ..., 1975 + T − 1}. If not, set rtA , rtB
70

h +1
t={1975,...,1975+ T −1}

to interest rates im-

Innovation and Trade Policy in a Globalized World

plied by the Euler equation with
gence.



h
t={1975,...,1975+ T −1}

gtA , gtB

and repeat until conver-


5. Once step 4 converges, use the final interest rates rtA , rtB t={1975,...,1975+T } to compute the
aggregate variables and the model counterparts of the data moments.

6. Minimize R M − Mm θ guess using an optimization routine.

D.2

Additional Figures

No intervention
Protectionism

3.5

Mean technology gap of U.S. firms

Mean technology gap of U.S. firms

Figure A.5 demonstrates the effect of tariff and R&D policies on the model-implied time path of
average technological lead of U.S. firms over their competitors. Increasing unilateral protection
leads to a relatively lower path, while higher subsidies result in a uniformly higher path relative
to the one in the case of no policy intervention.

3

2.5

2

1.5

1

No intervention
Higher subsidy

3.5

3

2.5

2

1.5

1
1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

1985

Years

1990

1995

2000

2005

Years

a) 4 percentage point tariff hike

b) Actual R&D policy

Figure A.5: Average technology lead of the U.S. firms, after policy intervention

Figure A.6 replicates 9b incorporating patents with assignee id “0” in the analysis. The
inclusion of these patents lead to sharper peaks.
Figure A.7 shows optimal R&D policies over policy horizons fixing unilateral import tariffs
at various levels. It illustrates the interaction between optimal R&D subsidies and the level of
tariffs in the model. In a more liberal regime, more firms face stiffer competition, damping the
need for aggressive R&D subsidies.

71

5
4
3
2
1

Patent application per firm, avg.

6

Innovation and Trade Policy in a Globalized World

−15

−10

−5

0

5

10

Technological gaps btw. domestic and foreign firms

15

Figure A.6: Patenting intensity in USPTO data, including assignee id “0”
0.75
0.7

Benchmark
8 ppt reduction
16 ppt reduction

Optimal subsidy rate

0.65
0.6
0.55
0.5
0.45
0.4
0.35
0.3
10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

50

Horizon

Figure A.7: Optimal R&D subsidy over policy horizons for different levels of unilateral tariff policy

Figure A.8 displays the alternative empirical initial technological gap distributions employed
in sensitivity analysis in Sections 7.2 and 7.3. Solid blue lines represent the distribution used in
the baseline analysis.
Figure A.9a compares empirical initial technological gap distributions used in the baseline
analysis (dashed red line) and in the alternative calibration specified in Section 7.4 (solid blue
line). Figure A.9b displays the model-generated distribution in 1981 (circled blue line), in juxtaposition with its empirical counterpart (solid black line) and the baseline calibration result
(dashed red line). The 1981 distribution generated by the alternative calibration is noticeably to

72

Innovation and Trade Policy in a Globalized World

0.09
0.08

0.09
Data US, 1975
Data US, 1975, no UK

0.08

0.07

0.07

0.06

0.06

0.05

0.05

0.04

0.04

0.03

0.03

0.02

0.02

0.01

0.01

0
-20

-15

-10

-5

0

5

10

15

0
-20

20

Data US, 1975
Data US, 1975, citation

-15

-10

-5

Gaps (m)

0

5

10

15

20

Gaps (m)

a) Dropping the U.K.

b) Citation-weighted patents

Figure A.8: Alternative initial technological gap distribution
Notes: The figure contrasts alternative initial technological gap distributions (red dashed lines) with the baseline (solid blue lines).
Panel A depicts the version omitting the U.K., while panel B shows the version based on citation-weighted patents.

the right of the baseline one, in line with a smaller shift in the empirical counterparts, albeit a
tad larger than that.
0.09
0.08

0.09
Data, 1981, cumul.
Data, 1981, baseline

0.08

0.07

0.07

0.06

0.06

0.05

0.05

0.04

0.04

0.03

0.03

0.02

0.02

0.01

0.01

0
-20

-15

-10

-5

0

5

10

15

0
-20

20

Technological gaps btw. domestic and foreign firms

Model US, 1981, cumul.
Model US, 1981
Model US, 1981, baseline

-15

-10

-5

0

5

10

15

Technological gaps btw. domestic and foreign firms

a) Baseline and alternative 1981 distributions (data)

b) Calibrated 1981 distributions

Figure A.9: Calibration and comparison to baseline with the alternative empirical gap distribution
Notes: Panel A contrasts model-generated 1981 technological gap distribution in the alternative calibration (solid blue line) with the
baseline (red dashed line). Panel B displays optimal tariff policy in the robustness experiment. Horizontal dashed line denotes the
calibrated tariff level.

73

20

Innovation and Trade Policy in a Globalized World

E

Robustness with Labor in the Intermediate Goods Sector

Following Akcigit and Kerr (2017), assume that final goods are produced by combining a fixed
factor (again normalized to 1 for both countries), while intermediate goods are produced using
labor:
q̄ct
k jt =
h jt .
η
Here, q̄ct denotes the economy-wide labor productivity in intermediate good production, which
is common across all sectors. Equilibrium profits from domestic sales and exports become
π q jt



1 − β q̄ct
=
h
η wct


 1−β β
βq jt

and

π

∗

q jt



1 − β q̄ct
=
h
(1 + κ ) η wct


 1−β β

βqcjt ,

h denotes wages of workers in intermediate good production.
where wct

We assume that there is a unit measure of workers h supplied inelastically. The market
R1
clearing condition for labor reads as Hc = 0 hcjt dj. Solving for the wage from the labor market
condition, we obtain
h
wct

q̄ct

β



β −1
−β  D
X
X
= χq̄ct  Qct
+ Qct
+ (1 + κ ) β Qct
 .
|
{z
}

denote Q̄ct

where χ ≡ (1 − beta) /η 1−beta . The superscripts D and X refer to sales in domestic and export
markets, respectively. Thus, Q̄ct can be interpreted as the average quality of sales of all active
domestic firms, adjusted for trade costs that exported goods are subject to. In the special case we
are considering—i.e., q̄ct = Q̄ct —we have wct = χ Q̄ct .
Calibration
We recalibrate this model following similar steps as in the baseline version. External parameters
share the baseline values. We also kept the tariff rate at the calibrated baseline value, which
generates about a 7% tariff revenue in equilibrium. Internally calibrated parameters are presented
in Table A.1. As summarized in Table A.2, this model also performs well in matching the data
targets, except some overestimation of R&D-to-GDP ratio and the growth rate of the U.S.63

63 Earnings that accrue to the fixed factor and labor combined makes up about 75 percent of the aggregate income
during the calibration period.

74

Innovation and Trade Policy in a Globalized World
Table A.1: Internally Calibrated Parameters

R&D scale

R&D scale

Step size

Iceberg

F (n)

αA

αB

α̃ A

α̃ B

λ

κ

φ

0.20

0.85

61.1

10.5

0.78%

1.78%

1.15

Table A.2: Model fit

Moment

Estimate

Target

Source

TFP Growth U.S.

1.08%

0.55%

Coe et al. (2009) 1975-81

TFP Growth FN

1.50%

1.73%

Coe et al. (2009) 1975-81

R&D/GDP U.S.

2.15%

1.75%

OECD 1981

R&D/GDP FN

2.05%

1.96%

OECD 1981

Entry Rate U.S.

10%

10%

BDS 1977-81

Export Share U.S.

5.84%

7%

WB 1975-81

Policy Implications
In terms of R&D subsidies, Table A.3 reveals that subsidies lead to larger welfare gains compared
to the baseline model. This is an intuitive result because in this setting, the acceleration in domestic innovation increases the productivity of labor in intermediate good production, in addition
to the effects present in the baseline model. This mechanism also leads to a higher level of optimal R&D subsidy. Figure A.10a confirms that this result holds true across all horizons. Also, it
implies that the policy function for optimal R&D subsidy over different horizons is qualitatively
similar to what has been found in the baseline setting.
Table A.3: Observed and optimal U.S. R&D subsidy: 1981-2016

Subsidy rate

Welfare gains
1981-2016

Observed R&D subsidy

19.2%

2.73%

Optimal R&D subsidy

76%

21.9%

Next, we analyze the effects of protectionist policies. Figure A.11 presents the consumptionequivalent welfare change and the change in optimal innovation effort of incumbent firms following a unilateral 3 percentage-point increase in U.S. tariffs. First, Figure A.11a demonstrates the
decline in innovation efforts of laggard U.S. firms, again due to less foreign competition thanks to
higher protection. Similar to the baseline experiment, protection leads to the loss of better-quality
imports, and domestic innovation is not enough to compensate for this loss. However, in sharp
75

0.78

16

0.76

14

0.74

12

Optimal tariff rate in %

Optimal subsidy rate

Innovation and Trade Policy in a Globalized World

0.72
0.7
0.68
0.66

10
8
6
4

0.64
2
0.62
10

20

30

40

0
10

50

Horizon in years

20

30

40

Horizon in years

a) Over different horizons

b) Optimal tariff policy

Figure A.10: Optimal U.S. R&D subsidy, over different horizons and levels of openness

contrast to the baseline, the protectionist policy leads to welfare gains over all time horizons in
this modified setting, as shown in Figure A.11b. The reason is that now protectionist policies
prohibit not only business stealing, but also “wage stealing”—i.e., the decline in wages due to
the loss of domestic activity to foreign importers. This mechanism strengthens the positive effect
of protectionist policies. Therefore, as depicted in Figure A.10b, the optimal tariff policy is a
constant 11 percent, which essentially implies full protection from imports at all horizons. This
boundary result is very different than its baseline counterpart, which calls for a declining tariff
profile over longer time horizons. This difference is again driven by the protective effect of tariffs
on domestic wage income.
Finally, Figure A.12 shows the optimal joint policy response, in case of bilateral tariff changes.
As in the baseline model, the reversal of the trade policy emerges when the foreign country
retaliates. This result implies that the gains from wider export markets for the home firms
dominate the additional negative effect of import penetration on domestic wages.

76

50

Innovation and Trade Policy in a Globalized World

0.235
Incumbent innovation US
Reduced tariffs

Protection
0.23

2.5

0.22

Percentage

2

1.5

0.215
0.21
0.205
0.2

1

0.195
0.19

0.5

0.185
-15

-10

-5

0

5

10

15

5

10

15

20

Technological gaps btw. domestic and foreign firms

25

30

35

40

Time Periods

a) Consumption equivalent welfare

b) Innovation response of incumbents

Figure A.11: Welfare effects of protectionism: unilateral 3 percent point increase in tariffs

0.85

0.08

0.8

0.06
0.75
0.04
0.7
0.02

Optimal tariff rate (dashed)

0.1

Optimal R&D subsidy (solid)

Innovation effort

0.225

0.65
0
10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

50

Horizon in years

Figure A.12: Optimal joint policy in bilateral tariff change
Notes: The figure compares horizon-dependent optimal joint policy in case of (trade-policy) retaliation to that in the baseline.

77

45

50

