                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




AN ECONOMIC PERSPECTIVE ON MEXICO'S NASCENT DEREGULATION OF RETAIL
                       PETROLEUM MARKETS

                                        Lucas W. Davis
                                         Shaun McRae
                                     Enrique Seira Bejarano

                                      Working Paper 24547
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24547


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2018




We are grateful to Severin Borenstein for helpful comments. None of us have received any
financial compensation for this project, nor do we have any financial relationships that relate to
this research. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Lucas W. Davis, Shaun McRae, and Enrique Seira Bejarano. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
An Economic Perspective on Mexico's Nascent Deregulation of Retail Petroleum Markets
Lucas W. Davis, Shaun McRae, and Enrique Seira Bejarano
NBER Working Paper No. 24547
April 2018
JEL No. L11,L51,Q31,Q48

                                          ABSTRACT

Retail petroleum markets in Mexico are on the cusp of a historic deregulation. For decades, all
11,000 gasoline stations nationwide have carried the brand of the state-owned petroleum
company Pemex and sold Pemex gasoline at federally regulated retail prices. This industry
structure is changing, however, as part of Mexico's broader energy reforms aimed at increasing
private investment. Since April 2016, independent companies can import, transport, store,
distribute, and sell gasoline and diesel. In this paper, we provide an economic perspective on
Mexico's nascent deregulation. Although in many ways the reforms are unprecedented, we argue
that past experiences in other markets give important clues about what to expect, as well as about
potential pitfalls. Turning Mexico's retail petroleum sector into a competitive market will not be
easy, but the deregulation has enormous potential to increase efficiency and, eventually, to reduce
prices.

Lucas W. Davis                                          Enrique Seira Bejarano
Haas School of Business                                 Centro de Investigación Económica
University of California                                ITAM
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900                                 Ave. Santa Teresa # 930
and NBER                                                Mexico, D. F. 10700, Mexico
ldavis@haas.berkeley.edu                                enrique.seira@gmail.com

Shaun McRae
ITAM, Centro de Investigación Económica
Camino a Santa Teresa No. 930
Col. Héroes de Padierna
Ciudad de México
Mexico
shaun.mcrae@itam.mx
1    Introduction

Economists have long studied the impact of government regulation on economic out-
comes. Over the last several decades the trend has been toward deregulation (Joskow,
2005; Peltzman and Winston, 2011) and a substantial literature in economics has de-
veloped aimed at understanding these market changes. Many industries have been
analyzed including airlines (Borenstein, 1992), telecommunications (Olley and Pakes,
1996), trucking (Rose, 1987), natural gas (Davis and Kilian, 2011), and electricity
(Wolfram, 1999). These studies have provided important lessons about regulation,
while also shedding light on broader issues in economics including price competition,
productivity, market entry, and vertical integration.

We use this rich existing economic literature as a lens through which to view Mexico’s
nascent deregulation of retail petroleum markets. For decades all 11,000 gasoline
stations in Mexico have carried the brand of the state-owned petroleum company
Pemex and sold Pemex gasoline at federally regulated retail prices. This industry
structure is now changing. Since April 2016, independent companies can now import,
transport, store, distribute, and sell gasoline and diesel. The deregulation is part
of Mexico’s broader energy reforms aimed at increasing private investment. For
Mexican consumers, no other piece of the energy reforms is as visible as what is
beginning to happen with gasoline stations.

We revisit many of the themes in the existing literature including price competition,
cost-minimization, market power, product differentiation, entry and exit, and verti-
cal integration, and discuss what we can expect and not expect based on historical


                                          1
experience and academic literature. Although in many ways the reforms are unprece-
dented, we argue that past experiences in other markets give important clues about
what to expect, as well as about potential pitfalls.

The market we study has been mostly unexamined in previous research, so we also
provide novel descriptive information about what the market looks like on the eve
of deregulation. We describe the former system by which retail gasoline prices were
set and discuss how this is changing under deregulation. We also present descriptive
information on the retail gasoline sector in Mexico and contrast these results with
relevant statistics from the United States.

In addition, a novel feature of our analysis is that we performed original data collec-
tion, designing and conducting a survey of all gasoline stations in Mexico City. The
results provide insight about the service quality at gasoline stations, for example,
documenting the availability of different products and services. This information
provides baseline information about starting conditions as well as some guidance
on what we think are important metrics for measuring the success or failure of the
transformation moving forward.

The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides background about Mexico’s retail
petroleum market, describes the pending reforms including price deregulation, and
presents descriptive information about the current market. Section 3 discusses eco-
nomic predictions for price competition, cost-minimization, market power, collusion,
product differentiation, entry and exit, and vertical integration. We describe the
relevant economic literature on these topics as they relate to the Mexican context,



                                          2
and make tentative predictions about which themes are likely to be most important.
Finally, Section 4 concludes with a summary and call for patience on all sides. Turn-
ing this sector into a competitive market will not be quick or easy, but deregulation
has enormous potential to increase efficiency and reduce prices. Policymakers need
to be prepared to give the market a chance to work.




2         Background

2.1         The Status Quo

Between 1938 and 2016 every gasoline station in Mexico was branded Pemex, sell-
ing Pemex gasoline and diesel, and at regulated retail prices. By any measure, this
is an extremely long time with little change in market structure: almost 80 years
with a single brand, no price competition, and limited scope or incentive for product
differentiation. The incumbent government-owned firm in this market is deeply en-
trenched, with broad and deep political connections at all levels of government.

Mexican gasoline stations are dealer-owned, dealer-operated (DODOs) franchises.
The franchisees own the stations and pumps, and manage the stations, but sell
gasoline and diesel purchased exclusively from Pemex. The most commonly sold
product is regular unleaded gasoline (known as “Magna”), although most stations
also sell premium unleaded gasoline, and some stations sell diesel. Franchisees receive
a fixed, guaranteed markup for each liter sold.1 Franchisees can also make money
    1
        Pemex franchise agreements are generally confidential, but we have obtained and reviewed


                                                 3
from having a store or offering other services, though as we show later, most stations
provide only minimal services.



2.2        Price Regulation

Until very recently, gasoline and diesel prices in Mexico were not market determined.
Instead, retail fuel prices were set nationally by the Mexican finance ministry. Not
only was there no variation from station to station, but there was also no variation
across Mexican states. In July 2016, for example, all stations nationwide sold regular
unleaded gasoline for $2.84 per gallon (13.2 pesos per liter), premium gasoline for
$3.02 per gallon (14.0 pesos per liter), and diesel for $2.98 per gallon (13.8 pesos per
liter).2

Figure 1 plots prices for regular unleaded gasoline in Mexico with average U.S. retail
gasoline prices for comparison. The panel on the left shows prices in Mexican pesos,
whereas the panel on the right shows prices in U.S. dollars. Whereas U.S. prices
vary monthly with crude oil prices, local currency Mexican retail prices are much
less volatile, following a slow and steady increase. For most of the period, Mexican
retail prices were below average U.S. prices, and thus reflected an implicit subsidy.
This has not always been the case, however. Most recently, since crude oil prices
fell sharply in 2014, Mexican gasoline and diesel prices have been above U.S. retail
selected contracts through the “Federal Law of Transparency and Access to Information” Ley Federal
de Transparencia y Acceso a la Información Pública Gubermental. For example, a 2010 contract
for a station located in Toluca, State of Mexico, (Folio Number 1857600005715), shows that the
retail markup for “Magna” ranges from 5.2% to 6.0%.
    2
      Petroleum prices are from Mexico’s Sistema de Informacióon Energética with information from
Diario Oficial de la Federación (SHCP), accessed November 2017.


                                                4
                 Figure 1: Mexico and U.S. Retail Gasoline Prices, Regular Grade, 2000–2017



                                                   Mexico                        4

                 15                                                                                               Mexico

                                                                                 3




                                                                USD per gallon
 MXN per liter




                 10                                  USA
                                                                                                                    USA
                                                                                 2



                  5
                                                                                 1




                  0                                                              0

                      2000   2004   2008   2012   2016                               2000   2004   2008   2012   2016


Notes: Prices are the national monthly mean retail prices, including tax, for regular gaso-
line (both conventional and reformulated). Sources for Mexican prices: Energy Information
System (before 2017) and Energy Regulatory Commission (2017). Source for U.S. prices:
Energy Information Administration. Exchange rate data from Bank of Mexico.


prices.3 In part, this decision to maintain higher retail prices was a reaction to fiscal
challenges both at Pemex and in the Mexican Federal government.

Figure 2 plots diesel prices for 2000-2017. Overall, the pattern is very similar. As
with gasoline prices, Mexican diesel prices are set administratively and follow a slow
   3
     During this period there was no gasoline price regulation in the United States. This has not
always been the case, however. In particular, the U.S. imposed gasoline price controls during the
1970s, resulting in long queues at gasoline stations during the OPEC oil embargo in 1973-1974 and
again during the Iranian revolution in 1979. Economists have documented large welfare losses from
U.S. gasoline price controls, with scarce fuel supplies “rationed by waiting” rather than to buyers
with the highest willingness-to-pay (Deacon and Sonstelie, 1985; Frech III and Lee, 1987).



                                                            5
                             Figure 2: Mexico and U.S. Retail Diesel Prices, 2000–2017

                                                                                 5
                                                   Mexico


                 15
                                                                                 4
                                                                                                                  Mexico




                                                                USD per gallon
 MXN per liter




                                                     USA                         3
                 10

                                                                                                                    USA
                                                                                 2


                 5
                                                                                 1




                 0                                                               0

                      2000   2004   2008   2012   2016                               2000   2004   2008   2012   2016


Notes: Prices are the national monthly mean retail prices, including tax, for diesel. See
Figure 1 for sources.


and steady increase throughout almost the entire period. Moreover, by 2017 Mexican
diesel prices are well above U.S. diesel prices, albeit with a somewhat smaller gap
compared to the differences for unleaded gasoline in Figure 1.

Before the reforms, Pemex controlled the entire upstream petroleum market. Pemex
produces or imports crude oil and refined products, operates refineries, pipelines,
wholesale terminals, and a network of trucks. Franchisees typically call and order
refined products from Pemex and receive truck deliveries every day or two. Wholesale
prices for these deliveries were the same everywhere in Mexico, regardless of how far
away a station was from the nearest wholesale terminal.


                                                            6
2.3    Mexico’s Energy Reforms

It was against this backdrop that Mexico starting in the 2010s embarked on a cam-
paign of market deregulation. These reforms included telecommunications, banking,
health, and education. But in no sector was deregulation undertaken with as much
fervor as in energy markets, driven by a widely held view that years of monopoly
had led to bloated, inefficient markets that could be improved through exposure to
competition.

Starting April 1, 2016, independent companies were granted the right to import,
transport, store, distribute, and sell petroleum products in Mexico. Companies re-
main subject to Mexico’s environmental regulations (e.g., low-sulfur gasoline), but
there are no restrictions on entry or operations, and, after an interim period, no price
regulations.

The first non-Pemex gasoline station opened in Mexico in July 2016. One of the
most significant groups of franchisees in Mexico is known as Hidrosina, and the first
non-Pemex station to open in Mexico was one of these stations, rebranded from
Pemex to Hidrosina. Another early entrant was “La Gas”. Then, in March 2017,
BP opened the first station with a major international petroleum brand. As of April
2018, BP operates 197 gasoline stations in Mexico. Shell has also announced that it
will be making a significant investment in the sector.

Price controls for retail gasoline and diesel began to be removed starting March 30,
2017. As Figure 3 illustrates, the price liberalization started in Baja California and
Sonora, and then continued to other border states, followed by states farther south.

                                           7
By November 30, 2017, prices were liberalized nationwide.

             Figure 3: Gasoline and Diesel Price Deregulation Schedule




Investment in the upstream petroleum markets is proceeding more slowly. Although
legally open to entry since April 2016, there have thus far been limited investments by
independent companies in wholesale fuels terminals, rail facilities, pipelines, storage,
and other infrastructure necessary to deliver gasoline and other refined products
to gasoline stations. These infrastructure limitations mean that in the short- and
medium-term most gasoline stations in Mexico will continue to sell Pemex fuels.
The ex-refinery price charged by Pemex is set by a regulated formula that uses an
average of international crude oil prices in the previous two months. Regulation of


                                           8
wholesale prices will continue until the wholesale market share of Pemex falls below
70%.4



2.4      Gasoline Station Quality on the Eve of Deregulation

To understand the state of the Mexican market on the eve of deregulation we designed
and conducted a survey of all gasoline stations in Mexico City as of July 2017. We
focused on Mexico City as the high-density of gasoline stations allowed us to survey
a large number of stations at relatively low cost. The results provide information
about product availability, retail offerings, as well as various measures of service
quality.

Table 1 presents mean characteristics for the 332 Pemex stations operating in Mexico
City as of July 2017. We highlight the most pertinent facts below and then use this
as motivation for the economic predictions that follow in Section 3. Our objective is
to both describe a set of forecasts for the market and also begin to think about how
these could be tested.

   • 100% of stations sell regular gasoline, and 97% sell premium, but only 42% of
        stations sell diesel.

   • Stations have an average of 5.7 pumps.

   • Two-thirds of stations (68%) do not have a store attached. Most stores sell
        coffee, beer, and soda. The average store size is 160 square meters.
  4
      CRE Resolution 2508/2017: http://drive.cre.gob.mx/Drive/ObtenerResolucion/?id=14246.



                                              9
   • 98% of stations have bathrooms, but only 21% of stations have a free bathroom.
     Despite most stations charging customers to use the bathroom, less than half
     of stations have basic services (toilet paper 47% and soap 45%).

   • Only 5% of stations offer a car wash, and most have trash (53%) or oil/gasoline
     (71%) on the ground.

   • Stations have an average of 5.8 men working and 1.5 women working.

Without an identical survey, it is impossible to make strong statements about how
these characteristics compare to the United States, for example. As far as the mea-
sures of service quality, it would appear that the average Mexican station offers a
level of service quality that is low compared to stations in the United States. It is
surprising, for example, that only about one-third of stations have a store attached,
whereas in the United States most gasoline stations have stores. Also, the average
bathroom quality seems well below typical U.S. levels.

These results provide baseline data about starting conditions against which we will be
able to compare future outcomes. The information also provides guidance about what
could be relevant metrics for measuring the success or failure of the industry reform.
Fuel prices will likely be the most studied economic outcome from the deregulation,
but our survey highlights that there are other significant dimensions of product
differentiation that affect consumer welfare.




                                         10
3     Economic Predictions

In this section we review the economic literature relevant to understanding the retail
petroleum market in Mexico and its prospects under market reform. We discuss the
following topics: price competition (Section 3.1), cost-minimization (Section 3.2),
market power (Section 3.3), collusion (Section 3.4), product differentiation (Section
3.5), entry and exit (Section 3.6), and vertical structure (Section 3.7). Where possible
we incorporate evidence from deregulation in other markets, and attempt to point
out key similarities and differences.



3.1    Price Competition

We expect prices to be the single most-studied outcome during deregulation. Fuel
prices are of intense public interest. In fact, there is perhaps no price in an economy
as salient as the price of gasoline. In the United States, for example, gasoline prices
are advertised ubiquitously with large, highly-visible signs. Also, consumers buy
gasoline frequently, often with cash, receiving regular feedback about price levels.
Thus consumers know and understand fuel prices, and the public perception about
market reforms will be formed by how these prices evolve.

In addition to being of considerable public interest, economists are interested in prices
because they shed light on firm behavior. Deregulation can be expected to have
two effects on prices, of opposite sign. We first discuss price competition and cost-
minimization, and then later turn to market power (Section 3.3). The net effect of


                                           11
deregulation on retail fuel prices is ambiguous and will depend on the relative size of
these effects. Thus in studying the market reforms, it will be essential to use measures
and predictive approaches that distinguish between these different mechanisms.

Deregulation will make it possible for firms to compete using price. Whereas for
decades price competition was not allowed, firms will now have an incentive to lower
prices to gain market share. Economists have documented price declines from dereg-
ulation in many markets. For example, Morrison and Winston (1986) find that
U.S. airline deregulation yielded significantly lower fares, resulting in $23 billion
(USD 2015) annually in increased consumer surplus. With airlines, the fare de-
creases resulted from both price competition shrinking markups, as well as from
cost-cutting.

In Mexico’s retail petroleum markets there is a reason to believe that there will be
limited price competition, particularly in the short-run. Pemex stations are allowed
only a modest retail markup, leaving little scope for price decreases. That is, even if
an aggressive entrant wanted to cut prices to gain market share, there is not much
room to maneuver without pricing at a loss, which firms will be reluctant to do for
more than a limited period.

Moreover, it may also take time for firms to learn how to engage in price competition.
In related work, Doraszelski et al. (2018) study a new UK electricity market, and
find that when the market first opened there was a period of experimentation during
which firms tried different pricing strategies. After about three years, however, firms
eventually stabilized on behavior that closely approximates Nash equilibrium. We



                                          12
might expect a similar convergence in behavior in our setting. After all, market
prices have been regulated for decades in this market, so it may take time for firms
to learn how to compete.



3.2     Cost-Minimization

Costs are another important outcome which we expect to be widely studied. Cost-
minimization is one of the primary rationales for deregulation in many markets.
However, in Mexico’s retail petroleum sector the scope for cost reductions is likely to
be more limited, particularly in the short-run. The existing Pemex stations already
have a relatively low cost of operation. Under price regulation, stations were not
able to compete based on price, but there was an incentive for franchisees to lower
costs. As is usually the case with franchise relationships, Pemex franchisees were the
residual claimant on any cost reductions, so if a station owner could reduce costs,
they could keep those savings.

In practice, these incentives have resulted in stations making choices to keep oper-
ation costs very low. Although all stations are full-service, station employees often
work for tips, and it is even common for employees to pay their employers for the right
to work.5 Moreover, most stations invest little in their bathrooms or other services, as
we showed before using evidence from the survey we conducted in Mexico City. Thus,
there may well be very little “fat to cut” when it comes to cost-minimization.
   5
    In 1972, 92% of gasoline stations in the United States were full-service, meaning that customers
did not pump their gasoline. Basker et al. (2017) study the transition from full-service to self-service
stations in the United States. They show that this change did not lead to a decline in employment,
because stations became larger, stayed open longer, and added convenience stores.


                                                  13
In contrast, most previous studies of deregulation have examined other contexts in
which there was more scope for cost-minimization. For example, several studies have
documented that U.S. electricity market deregulation resulted in substantial cost
decreases (Rose and Wolfram, 2007; Davis and Wolfram, 2012). However, in these
studies, the firms were transitioning away from rate-of-return regulation which pro-
vides only limited incentives for cost-minimization. With Mexican retail petroleum
markets, the starting point is franchising, not rate-of-return regulation.

Upstream petroleum supply has considerably more scope for cost-minimization. State-
owned Pemex is involved all along the supply chain including production, transporta-
tion, refining, and storage of petroleum. And unlike retail distribution which uses
franchise agreements, these facilities are Pemex-owned and Pemex-operated. In this
paper, we are focused on the retail part of the market, but as competition intensi-
fies, we expect significant cost reductions could occur at these other points along the
chain. In particular, geographical variation in retail and wholesale prices will now
provide price signals to investors for profitable locations to build new transportation
infrastructure.



3.3    Market Power

Deregulation also makes it possible for firms to exercise market power. When firms
face a residual demand curve that is relatively inelastic, they have an incentive to
price above marginal cost. A stark example is California’s initial experience with
electricity deregulation. During the Californian electricity crisis, electricity producers


                                           14
were able to push prices many times higher than marginal cost (Borenstein et al.,
2002; Joskow and Kahn, 2002). This exercise of market power was possible, in part,
because demand for electricity is highly inelastic.

The degree to which firms will be able to exercise market power in Mexico’s deregu-
lated petroleum markets thus depends on the price elasticity of demand for gasoline
and diesel. Most studies have found that demand for gasoline and other fuels is
relatively inelastic, particularly in the short-run (Hughes et al., 2008; Li et al., 2014;
Coglianese et al., 2017; Levin et al., 2017). On the surface, this evidence would ap-
pear to imply a considerable potential for market power in Mexico’s retail petroleum
markets. However, there are a couple of important issues.

First, most existing studies of gasoline and diesel demand have focused on the United
States and other high-income countries. We would expect demand for fuels in a
middle-income country to be more elastic. In high-income countries, the cost of
travel is dominated by the value of time, so the elasticity with respect to fuel prices
is relatively low. In middle-income countries, however, the value of time is lower, so
fuel prices themselves are a larger component of the total cost of travel, and thus
more important for travel demand. If demand is indeed more elastic in Mexico than
in the United States, this will reduce the scope for market power.

Second, and probably more importantly, what matters for market power is the elas-
ticity of demand faced by an individual gas station. In contrast, the vast majority
of existing studies attempt to estimate the overall demand elasticity with respect to
market-wide price variations. The responsiveness of sales at an individual gasoline



                                           15
station depends on how willing customers are to shop around for prices and on the
number and type of nearby stations (Langer and McRae, 2015).

Market competition depends both on the number of nearby stations, as well as on the
ownership structure. Even after price competition begins, the majority of stations
will still be branded Pemex. This is where the franchising becomes important, how-
ever. In locations where there is a single owner that owns a large number of stations,
we would expect this owner to act as a quasi-monopolist, setting price such that
marginal revenue is equal to marginal cost. In other cases, where ownership is more
disperse, we should expect franchise owners to engage in price competition.

It has long been recognized that market power increases with search costs (Stahl,
1989). Again, however, the empirical evidence on consumer search behavior in gaso-
line markets comes mostly from the U.S. and other high-income countries. For ex-
ample, Lewis and Marvel (2011) and Lewis (2011) find that U.S. gasoline consumers
search more when prices rise than when prices fall, and Byrne and de Roos (2017b)
find that Australian consumers search both across stations and over time. In a
middle-income country with a lower value of time, willingness to search may be
higher, reducing the scope for market power.

There is also related literature that shows, perhaps because of this search behavior,
that retail gasoline prices tend to respond more quickly to crude oil price increases
than decreases (Borenstein et al., 1997; Chesnes, 2016). It will be interesting to
see whether Mexican markets follow this “rockets and feathers” pattern, as this
would shed light both on consumer search behavior, as well as on firms’ pricing



                                         16
behavior.

Learning is again potentially interesting. Emerging from almost 80 years of uniform
national pricing, Mexican consumers have no experience of searching for low gasoline
prices. Thus it is not clear how much Mexican gasoline consumers will search, or
how this behavior will change over time. To help consumers search, the regulator
publishes prices for every gasoline station on its website and through a smartphone
app (“Gasoapp”). Understanding consumer search in this new market is a priority
for future research and will be interesting both from a consumer behavior perspective
and because of its implications for market power.



3.4    Collusion

The gasoline retailing industry is particularly susceptible to collusion between firms.
In many local markets, ownership of gasoline stations is highly concentrated, and
wholesale costs are common across firms. These factors mean that the initial trans-
action costs of forming a cartel are low (Levenstein and Suslow, 2006). Moreover,
gasoline price changes are publicly observable, making it impossible to secretly devi-
ate from a coordinated price, thus eliminating the principal threat to cartel stability.
It is interesting that policies to improve price transparency for consumers also make
it easier for cartels to detect cheating behavior by members.

Antitrust authorities in many countries have discovered and punished gasoline car-
tels. In spite of the public visibility of gasoline prices, these cases have shown that
explicit communication between cartel members is often still required. In Australia

                                          17
and Canada, gasoline stations phoned other cartel members to coordinate their price
increases (Wang, 2008; Clark and Houde, 2013). Even a delay of a few hours in
matching the price increase of a fellow conspirator can create large transfers between
firms.

The availability of real-time price information could be used by Mexican regulators
to screen for possible collusive behavior. Empirical screens have been valuable for
the detection of price conspiracies, including the manipulation of LIBOR (Abrantes-
Metz, 2013). In Brazil, screens based on the level and correlation of retail margins
and price dispersion measures were used to prioritize complaints about collusive
behavior in retail gasoline markets (Ragazzo, 2012). Screens were used in Mexico to
detect bid-rigging in the public procurement of medicines (Mena-Labarthe, 2012).
However, it is almost impossible to prove the existence of collusion based on observed
price changes alone, so these measures work best in combination with other antitrust
enforcement mechanisms, such as leniency or whistleblower programs.

The possibility of entry by new competitors is one of the principal challenges faced
by cartels (Levenstein and Suslow, 2006). Mexican authorities should be especially
mindful of attempts by existing stations to restrict the entry of competitors (see
Section 3.6). Of particular concern would be cooperation between local authorities
and existing firms to block entry using municipal zoning restrictions.

Economists have also studied tacit collusion in gasoline markets. This phenomenon
is the apparent coordination by firms of their pricing decisions, without any explicit
cartel agreement or secret communication. Byrne and De Roos (2017a) show how



                                         18
BP used price experiments in Perth, Australia, to communicate pricing intentions to
its competitors and to eventually coordinate on a focal point pricing strategy. Lewis
(2015) shows that U.S. stations tend to charge prices ending in “5” or “9”, and that
fuel prices change less frequently in markets with a higher prevalence of these last
digits. He argues that these odd numbers provide focal points, subtly encouraging
firms to maintain these prices rather than trying to undercut other stations by a cent
or two per gallon.



3.5    Product Differentiation

Another significant economic outcome that will be used to evaluate the success of
Mexico’s market reforms will be the number of non-Pemex gasoline stations. It
will be interesting to see the number and brand of non-Pemex stations that are
opened.

Firm reputation will now matter. For decades, there has been free riding by fran-
chisees. That is, all stations were branded Pemex, reducing the incentive for any
individual station owner to provide memorable service. Exerting effort to improve
service quality was, in part, a “public good” contribution, benefiting the owners of
other stations. This calculation changes under brand differentiation. If BP, for ex-
ample, can establish a reputation for better service quality they can reap benefits
throughout their station network.

Another important form of product differentiation is location. As we discuss in
Section 3.6, perhaps the most consequential decisions taken by firms will be where

                                         19
to enter and exit. We expect firms to strategically target under-served markets, and,
ultimately achieve a more efficient long-run equilibrium with a more efficient number
of stations in different locations.

Beyond brand and location, another form of product differentiation is service quality.
There is scope, for example, for a firm to gain market share by offering higher-quality
service. This could mean stations that are more illuminated, cleaner, with better
bathrooms, and faster service. There could also be overlap between service quality
and locations, with a high-end brand offering a “premium” product in “privileged”
areas. Higher-service stations cost more to operate and would command higher
markups.

There may be a bifurcation of the market in which a set of entrants offer high-
service, high-price stations, while the traditional Pemex stations continue to offer
low-service, low-price stations. Alternatively, this bottom part of the market could
be filled with the rise of “low-cost” competitors as occurred, for example, in U.S.
airline deregulation with the rise of Southwest and other low-price providers (Bailey
et al., 1985; Morrison and Winston, 1986).

There could also be innovation in the number and types of products offered. In the
short- and medium-term most stations will be continuing to source refined products
from Pemex, so stations will have little choice about the type of products they sell.
In the short-run, retailers may attempt to differentiate their product by selling fuels
with proprietary additives. This practice has long been a strategy used by U.S.
gasoline retailers, although in practice the performance benefits of these additives



                                          20
are negligible. Over the longer-run, it may be possible for retailers to offer completely
new products.

Although there are parallels between this market and U.S. airline deregulation, ser-
vice quality in the airline industry fell rather than rose after deregulation (Bailey et
al., 1985; Morrison and Winston, 1986; Borenstein, 1992). When they were regulated,
the major airlines competed on quality, offering frequent flights, low load factors, ex-
pensive meals, and other services. The difference between the two industries was
reputation. United Airlines was able to benefit from reputation investments, in a
way the current Pemex franchisees cannot.



3.6    Entry and Exit

One of the reasons economists like markets is that they encourage firms to make
efficient long-run decisions. If there are too many firms in a market, prices will fall,
and firms will exit. If there are not enough firms, prices will rise, and firms will enter.
Firms are forward-looking and thus will use potential future rents in any market to
guide entry and exit decisions.

These patterns of entry and exit will be some of the most consequential decisions
taken by firms after Mexico’s deregulation of petroleum markets. Future research
will examine the number of stations that enter and exit, how this impacts the spatial
distribution of stations, and how this distribution, in turn, affects short-run pric-
ing and other behaviors. Economists have estimated spatial competition models of
gasoline markets (Netz and Taylor, 2002; Chandra and Tappata, 2011; Houde, 2012),

                                            21
and Mexico’s reform represents a unique opportunity to test these models in a new
environment.

We anticipate some of the most significant efficiency gains from deregulation to come
from better entry and exit decisions. In particular, we expect stations to close in
low-demand locations, and open in high-demand locations. For example, consider
a relatively isolated area with a relatively small number of high willingness-to-pay
buyers. We would expect more entry in such locations. Symmetrically, we would
expect less entry in more competitive regions as price competition pushes down
equilibrium prices.

Figure 4 shows the density of gasoline stations in Mexico before the start of the
price liberalization in 2017, expressed as the population in each state divided by
the number of stations. The state with the highest density of gasoline stations is
Baja California Sur, with one gasoline station for every 4620 residents. At the op-
posite extreme is Mexico City, with one gasoline station for every 24700 residents.
This substantial variation in the baseline level of station density could be due to
demand factors (e.g., number of vehicles) or supply factors (e.g., local political con-
straints).

It is not clear whether the total number of stations in Mexico will increase or decrease.
Just as the price impacts will not be uniform nationwide, nor will entry and exit
patterns, so predicting ex ante the net effect is challenging. Another complicating
factor is station size. In the United States, labor costs and other factors have led to
continued consolidation in retail petroleum, with fewer and fewer gasoline stations,



                                           22
                        Figure 4: Density of Gasoline Stations




Notes: The map shows the population per gas station for each of the 32 Mexican states,
as of the start of 2017. Sources: INEGI Intercensal Survey 2015 (population data) and the
Energy Regulatory Commission (gas station data).


each operating at larger scale with more pumps per station.



3.7    Vertical Integration

Historically, the pattern of vertical integration in Mexico’s petroleum sector has not
been particularly interesting. In particular, state-owned Pemex has done everything,
controlling the entire petroleum supply chain, and then selling refined products to
franchised Pemex stations. All gasoline stations in Mexico were required to buy their

                                           23
gasoline and other refined products from Pemex.

In the short-term, Pemex will continue to dominate these upstream markets. Pemex
has long controlled petroleum production, refining, imports, transport, and storage,
and it will take time for entrants to make the large-scale investments necessary to
participate in these markets. Accordingly, price regulation will be essential for whole-
sale petroleum products for some time. Eventually, however, this price regulation is
going to become less necessary as private investment expands. And moving forward,
these investment decisions will be increasingly driven by market factors, leading to
more efficient choices.

In the short- and medium-term, this vertical structure raises a couple of serious
concerns related to competition. Most importantly, there could be input foreclosure,
that is, Pemex may somehow attempt to favor Pemex-branded stations. Pemex could
try to charge lower prices to Pemex stations or refuse to sell products to non-Pemex
stations. These are mostly franchisee-owned stations, so the incentives here are not
completely clear, but it will be critical for the Mexican regulator to keep a close
watch on this type of non-competitive behavior.

In the long-term, stations will be able to choose alternative suppliers, and the entire
vertical structure may change. In the United States, for example, many gasoline sta-
tions are independently owned, while others are vertically integrated with petroleum
refineries. A broad existing literature in economics on vertical integration examines
the determinants and consequences of various market structures. Previous studies
have looked at gasoline markets (Hastings, 2004; Hastings and Gilbert, 2005) as



                                          24
well as other markets such as cement (Hortacsu and Syverson, 2007) and electricity
(Bushnell et al., 2008). With Mexico’s petroleum sector the starting point is very
different from these other markets, but these studies nonetheless provide valuable
points of comparison.




4    Concluding Comments

Milton Friedman in his book Free to Choose writes about the power of market com-
petition to increase efficiency. He gives the example of U.S. agriculture, which expe-
rienced a 100+ fold increase in labor efficiency during the 19th and 20th centuries.
Market competition has the potential to unleash not only productivity improvements
but also to spur innovation and to reduce prices. At the same time, economists also
continue to be acutely concerned about market power, and the idea that excessive
concentration in a market can lead to prices above their efficient level and large
transfers from consumers to producers.

Thus it is with great excitement but also real trepidation that we await the continued
evolution of Mexico’s retail petroleum market. In this paper, we have argued that the
rich existing economic literature is a valuable lens through which to view this historic
transformation. Mexico’s reforms are different from other deregulation processes,
given the degree of entrenchment by the incumbent firm and the likely continued
dominance of Pemex in upstream markets. Nonetheless, there are many similarities,
which we have attempted to highlight in this paper.



                                          25
However, this paper is a prospective study, and we emphasize that there continues
to be a great deal of uncertainty about how this market will unfold. From the
government side, there will be more course corrections and perhaps even temporary
reversals. From the industry side, there will be periods of growth and optimism, but
also periods of challenge and retrenchment. Whichever direction the market goes,
we expect the transformation to be of considerable interest to economists and policy
analysts interested in market design and optimal regulation.




References

Abrantes-Metz, Rosa M, “Proactive vs reactive anti-cartel policy: The role of
 empirical screens,” 2013.
Bailey, Elizabeth E, David R Graham, and Daniel P Kaplan, Deregulating
 the Airlines, Vol. 10, MIT press, 1985.
Basker, Emek, Lucia Foster, and Shawn Klimek, “Customer-employee substi-
 tution: Evidence from gasoline stations,” Journal of Economics & Management
 Strategy, 2017, 26 (4), 876–896.
Borenstein, Severin, “The Evolution of U.S. Airline Competition,” Journal of
 Economic Perspectives, 1992, 6 (2), 45–73.
  , A Colin Cameron, and Richard Gilbert, “Do Gasoline Prices Respond
  Asymmetrically to Crude Oil Price Changes?,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  1997, 112 (1), 305–339.
  , James B Bushnell, and Frank A Wolak, “Measuring Market Inefficiencies
  in California’s Restructured Wholesale Electricity Market,” American Economic
  Review, 2002, 92 (5), 1376–1405.


                                        26
Bushnell, James B, Erin T Mansur, and Celeste Saravia, “Vertical Arrange-
 ments, Market Structure, and Competition: An Analysis of Restructured U.S.
 Electricity Markets,” American Economic Review, 2008, 98 (1), 237–66.
Busse, M., C. Knittel, and F. Zettelmeyer, “Are Consumers Myopic? Evidence
 from New and Used Car Purchases,” American Economic Review, 2013, 103, 220–
 256.
Byrne, David and Nicolas De Roos, “Learning to coordinate: A study in retail
 gasoline,” 2017.
Byrne, David P and Nicolas de Roos, “Consumer Search in Retail Gasoline
 Markets,” Journal of Industrial Economics, 2017, 65 (1), 183–193.
Chandra, Ambarish and Mariano Tappata, “Consumer Search and Dynamic
 Price Dispersion: An Application to Gasoline Markets,” RAND Journal of Eco-
 nomics, 2011, 42 (4), 681–704.
Chesnes, Matthew, “Asymmetric Pass-Through in US Gasoline Prices.,” Energy
 Journal, 2016, 37 (1).
Clark, Robert and Jean-Fran Houde, “Collusion with Asymmetric Retailers:
  Evidence from a Gasoline Price-Fixing Case,” American Economic Journal: Mi-
  croeconomics, 2013, 5 (3), 97–123.
Coglianese, John, Lucas W Davis, Lutz Kilian, and James H Stock, “An-
 ticipation, Tax Avoidance, and the Price Elasticity of Gasoline Demand,” Journal
 of Applied Econometrics, 2017, 32 (1), 1–15.
Davis, Lucas W, “The Economic Cost of Global Fuel Subsidies,” American Eco-
 nomic Review, 2014, 104 (5), 581–585.
   and Catherine Wolfram, “Deregulation, Consolidation, and Efficiency: Evi-
  dence from US Nuclear Power,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
  2012, 4 (4), 194–225.
  and Lutz Kilian, “The Allocative Cost of Price Ceilings in the U.S. Residential
  Market for Natural Gas,” Journal of Political Economy, 2011, 119 (2), 212–241.
Deacon, Robert T and Jon Sonstelie, “Rationing by Waiting and the Value of
 Time: Results from a Natural Experiment,” Journal of Political Economy, 1985,
 93 (4), 627–647.



                                       27
Doraszelski, Ulrich, Gregory Lewis, and Ariel Pakes, “Just Starting Out:
 Learning and Equilibrium in a New Market,” American Economic Review, 2018,
 108 (3), 565–615.
Hastings, Justine S, “Vertical relationships and competition in retail gasoline mar-
 kets: Empirical evidence from contract changes in Southern California,” American
 Economic Review, 2004, 94 (1), 317–328.
  and Richard J Gilbert, “Market Power, Vertical Integration and the Wholesale
  Price of Gasoline,” Journal of Industrial Economics, 2005, 53 (4), 469–492.
Hausman, Jerry A, Ariel Pakes, and Gregory L Rosston, “Valuing the Ef-
 fect of Regulation on New Services in Telecommunications,” Brookings Papers on
 Economic Activity, 1997, 1997, 1–54.
Hortacsu, Ali and Chad Syverson, “Cementing Relationships: Vertical Integra-
 tion, Foreclosure, Productivity, and Prices,” Journal of Political Economy, 2007,
 115 (2), 250–301.
Houde, Jean-François, “Spatial Differentiation and Vertical Mergers in Retail
 Markets for Gasoline,” American Economic Review, 2012, 102 (5), 2147–2182.
Hughes, Jonathan E, Christopher R Knittel, and Daniel Sperling, “Ev-
 idence of a Shift in the Short-Run Price Elasticity of Gasoline Demand,” The
 Energy Journal, 2008, 29 (1).
III, HE Frech and William C Lee, “The Welfare Cost of Rationing-By-Queuing
  Across Markets: Theory and Estimates from the US Gasoline Crises,” The Quar-
  terly Journal of Economics, 1987, 102 (1), 97–108.
Joskow, Paul L, “Regulation and Deregulation after 25 Years: Lessons Learned for
  Research in Industrial Organization,” Review of Industrial Organization, 2005, 26
  (2), 169–193.
   and Edward Kahn, “A Quantitative Analysis of Pricing Behavior in California’s
  Wholesale Electricity Market during Summer 2000,” Energy Journal, 2002, 23 (4),
  1–1.
Lafontaine, Francine, “Agency Theory and Franchising: Some Empirical Results,”
  RAND Journal of Economics, 1992, 23 (2), 263–283.
    and Kathryn L Shaw, “The Dynamics of Franchise Contracting: Evidence
  from Panel Data,” Journal of Political Economy, 1999, 107 (5), 1041–1080.


                                        28
Langer, Ashley and Shaun McRae, “Fueling Alternatives: Evidence from Real-
  World Driving Data,” 2015.
Levenstein, Margaret C. and Valerie Y. Suslow, “What Determines Cartel
  Success?,” Journal of Economic Literature, March 2006, 44 (1), 43–95.
Levin, Laurence, Matthew S Lewis, and Frank A Wolak, “High Frequency
  Evidence on the Demand for Gasoline,” American Economic Journal: Economic
  Policy, 2017, 9 (3), 314–47.
Lewis, Matthew S, “Price Dispersion and Competition with Differentiated Sellers,”
  Journal of Industrial Economics, 2008, 56 (3), 654–678.
  , “Asymmetric Price Adjustment and Consumer Search: An Examination of the
  Retail Gasoline Market,” Journal of Economics & Management Strategy, 2011, 20
  (2), 409–449.
  , “Odd Prices at Retail Gasoline Stations: Focal Point Pricing and Tacit Collu-
  sion,” Journal of Economics & Management Strategy, 2015, 24 (3), 664–685.
   and Howard P Marvel, “When Do Consumers Search?,” Journal of Industrial
  Economics, 2011, 59 (3), 457–483.
Li, Shanjun, Joshua Linn, and Erich Muehlegger, “Gasoline Taxes and Con-
  sumer Behavior,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2014, 6 (4),
  302–42.
Mankiw, N Gregory and Michael D Whinston, “Free Entry and Social Ineffi-
 ciency,” RAND Journal of Economics, 1986, 17 (1), 48–58.
Mena-Labarthe, Carlos, “Mexican Experience in Screens for Bid-Rigging,” An-
 titrust Chronicle, 2012, 3.
Morrison, Steven and Clifford Winston, The Economic Effects of Airline Dereg-
 ulation, Brookings Institution Press, 1986.
Netz, Janet S and Beck A Taylor, “Maximum or Minimum Differentiation?
 Location Patterns of Retail Outlets,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 2002,
 84 (1), 162–175.
Olley, G Steven and Ariel Pakes, “The Dynamics of Productivity in the Telecom-
 munications Equipment Industry,” Econometrica, 1996, 64 (6), 1263–1297.
Peltzman, Sam and Clifford Winston, Deregulation of Network Industries:
 What’s Next?, Brookings Institution Press, 2011.

                                       29
Ragazzo, Carlos, “Screens in the Gas Retail Market: The Brazilian Experience,”
 Antitrust Chronicle, 2012, 3.
Reforma, “Ofrecen Extranjeras Gasolina de Pemex,” Reforma, October 16, 2017.
Rose, Nancy L, “Labor Rent Sharing and Regulation: Evidence from the trucking
 industry,” Journal of Political Economy, 1987, 95 (6), 1146–1178.
   and Catherine D Wolfram, “Do Markets Reduce Costs? Assessing the Im-
  pact of Regulatory Restructuring on US Electric Generation Efficiency,” American
  Economic Review, 2007, 97 (4), 1250–1277.
Stahl, Dale O, “Oligopolistic Pricing with Sequential Consumer Search,” American
  Economic Review, 1989, pp. 700–712.
Wang, Zhongmin, “Collusive Communication and Pricing Coordination in a Retail
 Gasoline Market.,” Review of Industrial Organization, 2008, 32 (1), 35 – 52.
Winston, Clifford, “U.S. Industry Adjustment to Economic Deregulation,” Jour-
 nal of Economic Perspectives, 1998, 12 (3), 89–110.
Wolfram., C, O. Shelef, and P. Gertler, “How Will Energy Demand Develop in
 the Developing World?,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2012, 26, 119–138.
Wolfram, Catherine D, “Measuring Duopoly Power in the British Electricity Spot
 Market,” American Economic Review, 1999, 89 (4), 805–826.




                                       30
Table 1: Characteristics of Pemex Stations in Mexico City on the Eve of Deregulation


         Petroleum Products
                 Percentage of Stations that Sell Regular Unleaded                        100%
                 Percentage of Stations that Sell Premium Unleaded                        97%
                 Percentage of Stations that Sell Diesel                                  42%
                 Price Regular Unleaded, Pesos Per Liter                                   15.9
                 Price Premium Unleaded, Pesos Per Liter                                   18.1
                 Price Diesel, Pesos Per Liter                                             16.5
                 Average Number of Pumps                                                   5.7
                 Percentage of Pumps that are Working                                     97%

         Retail Offerings
                 Percentage of Stations that Have a Store                                 32%
                 Percentage of Stations that Have a Store that Sells Coffee               28%
                 Percentage of Stations that Have a Store that Sells Beer                 31%
                 Percentage of Stations that Have a Store that Sells Soda                 31%
                 Percentage of Stations that Have a Store that Has Wifi                    1%
                 Average Size of Store For Stations with Stores, Square Meters            160

         Bathrooms
                Percentage of Stations With Bathroom                                      98%
                Percentage of Stations With Free Bathroom                                 21%
                Percentage of Stations With Bathroom with Toilet Paper                    47%
                Percentage of Stations With Bathroom with Soap                            45%
                Restrooms Clean, (1 to 5, 1 very dirty, 5 very clean)                      3.6

         Other
                 Percentage of Stations With Car Wash                                      5%
                 Percentage of Stations With Trash on Ground                              53%
                 Percentage of Stations With Oil or Gasoline on Ground                    71%
                 Average Number of Men Working                                             5.8
                 Average Number of Women Working                                           1.5


         Note: This table reports descriptive statistics from a survey of 332 Pemex stations in Mexico
         City. The survey was designed by Lucas Davis, Shaun McRae, and Enrique Seira Bejarano,
         and conducted by a professional survey firm in July 2017.




                                                     31
