                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     FINANCIAL FRICTIONS AND THE RULE OF LAW

                                      Ashantha Ranasinghe
                                        Diego Restuccia

                                       Working Paper 24546
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w24546


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2018




We thank audiences at several conferences and institutions for comments and suggestions. All
remaining errors are our own. Restuccia gratefully acknowledges the support from the Social
Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada and the Canada Research Chairs program.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Ashantha Ranasinghe and Diego Restuccia. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Financial Frictions and the Rule of Law
Ashantha Ranasinghe and Diego Restuccia
NBER Working Paper No. 24546
April 2018
JEL No. O1,O11,O4,O43,O5

                                         ABSTRACT

Using cross-country micro establishment-level data we document that crime and lack of access to
finance are two major obstacles to business operation in poor and developing countries. Using an
otherwise standard model of production heterogeneity that integrates institutional differences in
the degree of financial development and the rule of law, we quantify the effects of these
institutions on aggregate outcomes and economic development. The model accounts for the
patterns across establishments in access to finance and crime as obstacles to their operation.
Weaker financial development and rule of law have substantial negative effects on aggregate
output, reducing output per capita by 50 percent. Weak rule-of-law institutions substantially
amplify the negative impact of financial frictions. While financial markets are crucial for
development, an essential precondition to reap the gains from financial liberalization is that
property rights are secure.


Ashantha Ranasinghe
501 Fletcher Argue Building,
Department of Economics,
University of Manitoba
Winnipeg, MB, R3T 5V5
Canada
ashantha.ranasinghe@ad.umanitoba.ca

Diego Restuccia
Department of Economics
University of Toronto
150 St. George Street
Toronto, ON M5S 3G7
CANADA
and NBER
diego.restuccia@utoronto.ca
1         Introduction

Understanding the causes of cross-country income differences is a fundamental question in the
macro-development literature. Recent work has emphasized that the allocation of resources
across heterogeneous establishments is important for understanding cross-country productiv-
ity differences (Restuccia and Rogerson, 2008; Hsieh and Klenow, 2009; Bartelsman et al.,
2013).1 What are the frictions, policies, and institutions that create factor misallocation
and hence reduce aggregate productivity in poor countries? In this paper, we focus on two
institutions that are empirically relevant for business operation in poor countries: financial
market development affecting access to credit and the rule of law affecting the potential for
crime. These institutions create idiosyncratic effects across establishments since heteroge-
neous producers are affected differently by them. We evaluate the quantitative relevance
of institutional differences in financial development and the rule of law in accounting for
resource misallocation and aggregate income differences across countries.

        Our focus on the rule of law and financial development as key institutional features is
motivated by their importance for development as highlighted across separate strands in the
literature, (e.g. King and Levine, 1993; Rajan and Zingales, 1998; Shleifer and Vishny, 1998;
Svensson, 1998). The rule of law and financial development are closely linked to crime and
access to credit, two highly relevant distortions in developing countries. While the importance
of access to finance is well documented in the literature, less known is the prevalence of
establishment-level crime across countries. We document that crime is a prevalent and severe
obstacle to business operation in developing countries, at least as prevalent as the lack of
access to finance across a host of countries in several sub-continents. For instance, using data
from the World Bank Enterprise Surveys (WBES), we find that in South America 34 percent
of establishments report crime as a major obstacle to business operation, whereas 23 percent
of establishments report access to finance as a major obstacle. The corresponding percent of
    1
    See also surveys of the misallocation literature in Restuccia and Rogerson (2013), Hopenhayn (2014),
and Restuccia and Rogerson (2017).


                                                   2
establishments in Africa reporting crime and finance as major obstacles to business operation
are 26 and 41 percent. To provide context, in a developed country such as Germany, less
than 5 percent of establishments report crime as a major obstacle to business operation and
15 percent report access to finance as a major obstacle.2

       To study the quantitative importance of institutional differences in the rule of law and
financial development, we consider a unified framework whereby differences in the rule of
law affect the potential for crime at the establishment level and differences in financial mar-
ket development restricts establishment access to credit. The model is a variant of Lucas
(1978) span-of-control framework. Individuals differ along entrepreneurial productivity and
asset holdings, and choose either to operate an establishment as an entrepreneur or supply
labor as a worker. Two market imperfections are central to our analysis. First, economies
differ along financial market development, which is modelled as an endogenous collateral
constraint that restricts access to finance and is proportional to entrepreneur asset holdings.
Entrepreneurs in less developed financial markets face a more stringent collateral constraint
(financial frictions). Second, economies differ in the strength of the rule of law which affects
the potential for crime. We model crime as the proportion of capital that is expropriated from
an entrepreneur post-production, an outcome determined within the model. The potential
for crime is inversely related to the rule of law and how much protection an entrepreneur
is able to purchase. Differences in the rule of law and financial market development affect
occupational choices and the scale operation of entrepreneurs, generating effects on aggre-
gate productivity and output. Moreover, as we elaborate below, these institutions have the
potential to amplify the effects arising from crime or access to finance individually. Our goal
is to quantify these effects and assess their implications for cross-country income differences.
   2
    Crime in the data is defined as theft, robbery, vandalism or arson on the establishment’s premises. This
notion of crime is likely an under-estimate of crime more broadly defined to include corruption in the form
of extortion/bribery by government officials as this is a prevalent form of crime in most poor and developing
countries. In this paper, we focus on the narrow notion of crime because of limited data availability on
corruption at the establishment level. However, the economic insights of our analysis holds for the broader
notion of crime likely corresponding with larger quantitative implications.




                                                     3
    We discipline the quantitative analysis using the WBES dataset, which contains informa-
tion on crime and external finance at the establishment level. The dataset contains detailed
information related to theft, robbery, vandalism, and arson on the establishment’s premises,
which is our notion of crime. For financial market development we use data on whether an
establishment is able to obtain a loan and whether it is financed through internal or external
sources. Key parameters in the model are calibrated to match relevant micro and macro mo-
ments on crime and access to finance in Colombia. In particular, we pin down the parameter
that governs the rule of law in Colombia by targeting the proportion of establishments that
report incidences related to crime in a given year, and pin down the level of financial market
development by targeting the share of capital financed through external sources. Each of
these targets are based on an aggregation of establishment-level observations from the micro
data.3

    We show that the model can broadly capture the disaggregate patterns of crime, pro-
tection, and external finance across establishments in Colombia. In addition, we provide
some evidence that the model generates reasonable quantitative predictions for these vari-
ables in institutional settings that differ from that in Colombia, spanning a portion of the
variation in institutional development across countries. For example, the higher rule of law
in China and India in the model compared to Colombia implies that the share of crime and
protection is much more uniform across establishments than in Colombia, a pattern that is
broadly consistent with the micro data for these countries. The model with lower levels of
institutional development than Colombia, such as in Guatemala and Mozambique, implies
that the across establishment profile of crime and protection is steeper, consistent with the
implications of the micro data for these countries. The evidence suggests that our quan-
titative framework provides a reasonable setting to evaluate the aggregate implications of
institutional development and the relative merits of institutional reform.
   3
     We choose Colombia for the calibration because crime and access finance are equally important obstacles
to business operation in this country.




                                                     4
   Our main findings are as follows. The long-run effects of crime and access to finance
are quantitatively important. The difference in institutional development between Colombia
and the undistorted economy lowers aggregate output by close to 30 percent in Colombia,
lowers TFP by close to 20 percent, and lowers consumption by over 30 percent. In an
economy with the weakest level of institutional development, as implied by the data in our
sample of countries, aggregate output and consumption is about 50 percent lower than in the
undistorted economy. Since institutional development is uniquely identified through separate
parameters in the model, we can assess the relative importance of crime and financial frictions
in generating these effects. Crime lowers aggregate output by 3 percent in Colombia relative
to the undistorted economy—a substantial effect considering that the aggregate losses from
crime is only 0.2 percent of output in Colombia—and financial frictions lower output by 20
percent. Their joint effect exceed the sum of their individual effects implying a substantial
amplification on output. Crime and finance account for about 10 and 70 percent of the total
output losses while the remaining 20 percent is from their joint interaction. Moreover, we find
that including crime into a standard model of financial frictions is quantitatively important;
for instance, including crime generates a doubling of the output losses in the economy with
the weakest level of institutional development.

   The intuition for the amplification effect is straightforward. In models that feature finan-
cial frictions, constrained entrepreneurs can overcome their financing constraint by reinvesting
profits in their business and gradually expanding, the motive to self-finance (Buera and Shin,
2011; Midrigan and Xu, 2014; Moll, 2014). Crime hinders this process. As entrepreneurs
invest and expand, they become a bigger target for crime. Constrained entrepreneurs face
a trade-off: gradual expansion is a necessary condition to alleviate financing constraints but
doing so exposes them to crime. Resources are lost due to crime and/or spent on protection
which slows re-investment and the process of overcoming the financing constraint. Financial
frictions, in turn, increase the potential for crime. This is because financing constraints lower
entrepreneur profit which reduces how much is spent on protection, thus raising the poten-


                                               5
tial for crime. Taken together, financial frictions increase the likelihood of crime, and crime
impedes the motive to self-finance, both of which amplify output losses.

       Our results broadly contribute to the long-standing questions in the macro-development
literature related to institutions and their relevance for development. One strand in the lit-
erature stresses the importance of a strong rule of law for development through its effects on
entrepreneurial investment and expansion (Besley, 1995; Shleifer, 1997; Shleifer and Vishny,
1998; Svensson, 1998; Acemoglu et al., 2001) while a separate strand emphasizes that finan-
cial market development is critical for the efficient allocation of capital (King and Levine,
1993; Levine, 1997; Rajan and Zingales, 1998; Levine et al., 2000). Our framework, which
incorporates these measures of institutional development is able to assess the importance of
each of these factors. Specifically, we use our framework to ask whether improving financial
market development (i.e. access to finance) or the rule of law (i.e. lowering crime) has a
bigger effect on economic development (as measured by aggregate output), and if the impact
of the policy depends on the level of institutional development. We find that when the rule
of law is weak improving it is more important for development, irrespective of the level of
financial market development. However, when the rule of law is above a certain threshold,
improving financial markets become more important for development.4 Hence, while finan-
cial markets are crucial for development, a necessary condition is that property rights are
secure (McMillan, 1997; Johnson et al., 2002). Moreover, we use our framework to inform
which countries are associated with a weak rule of law and financial markets by mapping
relevant moments in the model to the data on crime and access to finance. Based on our
simulations, improving the rule of law is more important for development for about 20 per-
cent of our sample of countries, notably Guatemala, South Africa and Costa Rica, while for
the majority of countries improving financial markets is more important.

       Our paper relates to the broad misallocation literature but more closely to the misalloca-
   4
    Clearly, these considerations must also take into account the cost and implementation of such policies
which we abstract from in this paper.



                                                    6
tion literature emphasizing either financial frictions or crime. The macro literature empha-
sizing financial frictions include Jeong and Townsend (2007), Amaral and Quintin (2010),
Buera et al. (2011), Buera and Shin (2013), Caselli and Gennaioli (2013), Greenwood et al.
(2013), Midrigan and Xu (2014), Moll (2014), among many others. Fewer studies examine
the macro effects of crime, an exception being Ranasinghe (2017) who studies the effects
of extortion in Eastern Europe. Our framework integrates these two relevant institutions
studying their interaction and potential to account for the substantial differences in output
per capita across countries.

    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides micro-level evidence
relating to the prevalence of crime and access to finance across countries. In Section 3 we
present the model which combines the effects of crime and financial frictions. Section 4
describes the calibration of the model and the cross-country calibration of the rule of law
and financial friction institutions. In Section 5, we report our quantitive results. Section 6
concludes.




2     Facts

We use data from the World Bank Enterprise Surveys (WBES) 2006-17 to document the
prevalence of crime and lack of access to finance among establishments across countries at
different levels of development. We use the most recent survey for each country within this
timeframe. The survey contains establishment-level information for a sample of 138 countries,
mostly developing and poor countries. See Table A.1 in Appendix A.1 for a comprehensive
list of countries in this sample.

    While the importance of access to finance is well documented in the literature, less known
are the key patterns related to crime across countries. The micro data contains information
related to obstacles to doing business at the establishment level. There are several questions



                                               7
in the survey devoted to understanding crime. In particular, establishments report whether
they experienced theft, robbery, vandalism or arson on their premises in the past year—which
we interpret as crime against the establishment—and the value of losses from crime as a share
of sales. Establishments also report whether crime is a severe, major, moderate, minor or
non-obstacle to business operation.5 The WBES also contains information on whether an
establishment paid for private security and the amount paid for these services as a share of
sales. Also included in the survey are questions related to financing, specifically the propor-
tion of establishment capital and investment financed through external sources. Relevant to
our analysis is an establishment’s potential to access finance from financial intermediaries.
We use the proportion of working capital financed through banks as a proxy for financial
market development and access to finance. Establishments also report whether access to
finance is a severe, major, moderate, minor or non-obstacle to business operation.6

       Table 1 reports the percentage of establishments that state a given distortion is a severe
or major obstacle to business operation across sub-continents in the world. While our focus
is on crime and access to finance, for comparison we also report two distortions that are
generally viewed as important obstacles for business operation in poor countries: practices
of the informal sector and tax administration. There are two main points that Table 1
highlights. First, access to finance is a major constraint to business operation in many parts
of the world, notably in Sub-Saharan Africa where over 40 percent of establishments report
finance as a major obstacle. Second, crime is also a major obstacle to business operation,
and an equally pressing issue in several sub-continents as the other distortions listed in the
table. For instance, in Central and South America about 30 and 35 percent of establishments
report crime as a major obstacle to business operation.
   5
      Corruption is often listed as the biggest obstacle to business operation in poor countries, and like crime,
is closely connected to a country’s rule of law.
    6
      See Hallward-Driemeier and Pritchett (2015) for a broader discussion of the relevance of establishment-
level data to measure costs associated with doing business in a country. Compared to legal institutional
measures in the World Bank’s Doing Business, measures from establishment-level data paint a more accurate
picture of actual costs of operating in a country.




                                                       8
                  Table 1: Obstacles to doing business across sub-continents

                                             Access       Crime     Informal    Tax
                                           to Finance                Sector Administration
      Africa (Sub-Saharan)                     40.7         26.2       40.7             28.8
      Central America                          32.9         28.8       28.5             22.6
      East Asia and Pacific                    13.2         13.9       17.3             13.2
      Europe and Central Asia                  16.5          9.0       19.5             16.9
      Middle East and North Africa             31.9         21.5       27.7             20.5
      South America                            23.0         34.2       36.8             27.8
      South Asia                               26.5         17.7       20.4             18.8
     Notes: The table documents the percentage of establishments that report a given obstacle (access
    to finance, crime, informal sector, tax administration) is a severe or major obstacle to business
    operation by sub-continents. Possible responses include severe, major, moderate, minor or non-
    obstacle to operation. Sub-continent averages are based on country-level statistics from the most
    recent survey for each country from the WBES 2006-17. The country-level data includes 138
    countries, see Appendix A.1 for a list of countries and more details.


   Next, we examine how measures related to access to finance and crime vary across coun-
tries. These measures are shown in Figure 1. Panel A documents average losses from crime as
a percentage of sales, contingent on establishments facing crime, plotted against log GDP per
capita (PPP prices, 2014). There is a negative correlation between these variables (−0.42)
implying that countries with higher GDP per capita have fewer losses from crime. Average
losses from crime as a share of sales among establishments that face crime exceed 10 percent
in several countries, notably those in Africa. While we have focused on average losses from
crime, other measures related to crime share a similar pattern with GDP per capita. In par-
ticular, countries that have high average losses from crime report crime as a major obstacle
to operation and have a high frequency of crime. For instance, in Chad, Chile, South Africa
and Venezuela over 35 percent of establishments report at least one incident related to crime
in a given year. Figure 1 Panel B documents the proportion of investment financed by banks,
which is a proxy for access to finance, plotted against log GDP per capita (PPP prices, 2014)
across countries. There is a positive correlation between these variables (0.40) implying that
countries with higher GDP per capita feature a larger share of investment financed through
financial institutions. This pattern holds for other measures related to access to finance as

                                                   9
well; percentage of establishments that use banks to finance investment and proportion of
investment financed through external sources (banks and non-bank financial institutions),
among others.

                                                      Figure 1: Crime and access to finance across development

                                                      Panel A: Crime                                                                                                 Panel B: Access to finance
                     25




                                                                                              ρ = −0.4195, N = 136                                                                                                        ρ = 0.4013, N = 138
                                                           AFG




                                                                                                                                                            40
                                                                                                                             % of investment financed by banks
     Losses from crime (% of sales)
                               20




                                                                                                                                                                                                       NIC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      LKA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       PER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          LBN     CHL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            BRA ATGKNA ISR
                                                                 LSO                                                                                                                                            FJI           MUSTUR




                                                                                                                                                    30
                                                                               COG      EGY
                                                                                      JOR                                                                                                                WSM          VCTDOM
                      15




                                                           TLS                                                                                                                                                          GRD
                                                                         PSE                                                                                                                  VUT PNG TON
                                                                                                                                                                                                    HND            NAM ZAF
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PRY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 JOR
                                                                               NGA                                                                                                                                          BWA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           SUR
                                                                                                                                                                                              KEN          CPVMAR BIH
                                                                                                                                                                                                            BOL
                                                                 TJK            AGO   NAM                                                                                                                     GTM     LCA VEN
                                          CAF          SLE                                                                                                                                                   GUYJAM DMACOL AZE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     EST




                                                                                                                                          20
                                                          SSD                                                                                                                                                  SLV
                                                            NPL CIVZMB                          MUS                                                                                   MLI                     BTN                      TTO
               10




                                                                            WSM                                                                                                              LSO         IND    BLZ ECU         URY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 HRV CZE
                                                       GIN                              TUN IRQ                                                                                 TGO                                                   SVN
                                             LBR                                      IDN                                                                                                                                 MNE        SVK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     LTU
                                                 MWI GMB         CMR                                  MYS                                                                          BFA                  VNM      XKX               MYS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   HUN
                                            COD                                                                                                                          BDI                   CIV                      SRB  BGRROU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              BLR
                                                                    MRT
                                                                     GHA                                                                                                   NERMWI   RWA NPL DJI                           CRI  ARG
                                                   TGOUGA
                                                             TZAVUT HND
                                                           TCD          PAK
                                                                                BTN
                                                                                 SWZ
                                                                                           DOMBRA
                                                                                                                                                                                       ZWE
                                                                                                                                                                                        SLB
                                                                                                                                                                                               BGD GHA UZB SWZ       TUN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   IDN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 GEO  MNG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            BRB    POL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  BHS        SWE
                                                                                                                                                                         LBR                             LAOPHL UKR     MKD




                                                                                                                                 10
                                                                              BOL                 PAN
                                                    MDG     SEN                             LBN                                                                                    GMB                          ARM
       5




                                                 MOZ RWA ZWE KEN     YEM
                                                                    PNG                                                                                                                    TZA KGZMRT                     THA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            MEX KAZ
                                               NER               FSM
                                                                DJI   SDN       GTM VCT   GRD        TUR
                                                                                                       LTU                                                                        ETH                  MDA         EGY
                                             BDI    ETH
                                                        MLI     BGD       TON
                                                                         NIC
                                                                           VNM    UKR MNGMNE
                                                                             CPVMAR
                                                                                  ARM
                                                                                  FJI
                                                                                  JAM          VEN KAZ
                                                                                               MEX
                                                                                               GAB
                                                                                               BGR                                                                                        SEN     ZMB                              RUS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  LVA
                                                    GNB
                                                      BFA BEN    KGZ
                                                                 KHM     MDA     SLV
                                                                                   XKX PER BWA        RUS                                                                                            PSE
                                                          SLB              IND GUYPRY             ROU
                                                                                                  ATGKNA                                                             CAF      MOZMDG        TJK FSM         AGO
                                                                           LAO     GEOBIH
                                                                                        ECU
                                                                                       LKA
                                                                                           MKD
                                                                                          ZAF
                                                                                           SRB
                                                                                               AZE
                                                                                              SUR URY
                                                                                                 ARG
                                                                                                BLR   POL CZE                                                                           BEN     CMR       COG
                                                                                                                                                                                                          NGA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ALBCHN
                                                                                         LCACRI     CHL
                                                                                                   HRV
                                                                                                    BHS
                                                                                                    LVASVKTTO                                                                       UGATLS
                                                                                                                                                                                     GIN               MMR                   GAB
                                                                         MMR PHLBLZ ALBCOL   THA       EST
                                                                                                      HUN  ISR
                                                                                                         SVN     SWE
                                                                                                                                                                                        SSD
                                                                                                                                                                                      AFG
                                                                                                                                                                                         TCD        SDN
                                                                                                                                                                                                      PAK                 IRQ PAN
                                                                                           CHN BRB                                                                      COD       GNBSLE        KHMYEM
                     0




                                                                                                                                               0
                                      6           7             8            9                     10              11                                            6            7             8            9                     10              11
                                                              GDP per capita (log)                                                                                                        GDP per capita (log)




Notes: Country-level statistics for crime and access to finance are from the WBES 2006-17, most recent year
for each country. GDP per capita, PPP adjusted 2014, is from the World Bank. The sample is based on
138 countries described in Appendix A.1, where two countries do not report the statistic on crime. Crime
refers to losses from theft, robbery, vandalism or arson in the establishment’s premises in a given year as a
proportion of sales, among the sub-sample of establishments that face crime. Access to finance refers to the
proportion of investment financed through banks. Both variables are weighted averages across establishments
in each country.


    To further assess the effects of crime and access to finance across countries, Figure 2 plots
the relationship between the percentage of establishments that report crime is a major or
severe obstacle to business operation and the percentage of establishments that report access
to finance is a major or severe obstacle. The correlation between these measures of crime
and access to finance is 0.49 implying that in countries where access to finance is particu-
larly acute, so is crime. Notably, for several countries in Africa a substantial proportion of
establishments report that both access to finance and crime are major obstacles to business
operation. Given the importance and correlation of these variables, evaluating the joint inter-
action of these institutions may provide key insights in accounting for differences in income
per capita across countries.

                                                                                                                        10
                                                                                  Figure 2: Crime and access to finance




                                                                       80
                                                                                                                                        ρ = 0.4867, N = 137




                   Crime severe/major obstacle (% of establishments)
                                                                                                                          BRA
                                                                                                                                                      CIV
                                                                                                                 CPV      YEM



                                                                       60
                                                                                    VEN
                                                                                                                             AFG              MLI
                                                                                                                                                    BLZ
                                                                                                SLV
                                                                                                                         JAM XKX
                                                                                                                       KNA      TCD
                                                                                                  GTM                         COG
                                                                                                                                MUS                         BFA
                                                                       40


                                                                              PNG            ZAF                          ATG
                                                                                                CHL            GIN
                                                                                                GUY          VUT
                                                                                          PAK                TTO
                                                                                                               GAB
                                                                                                                 LSO SUR LBN IRQ MOZ
                                                                                           DOM                            COL         PSE
                                                                                                                                    TGO
                                                                                      SWZ                                HND                              GNB
                                                                                                              MEX         CMRARG
                                                                                    PER             URY                AGO
                                                                                                                        COD
                                                                                                                       LBR
                                                                                           BOL             NER                 CAF
                                                                                               KHM
                                                                                              WSM             VCT                  SSD
                                                                                 SLB              UGA BWA         ROU                MRT LCA
                                                                       20




                                                                                               KEN      GRD        MWI     CRI
                                                                                                                             TZA                SLE
                                                                                         BHS            FSMMAR
                                                                                                          KGZ
                                                                                  FJI     ECU                                                  DMA
                                                                                               LTU                    NAM   BEN
                                                                                    PRY MYS IDN                          NPL
                                                                                       NIC                  RUS          GMB        SEN
                                                                                       PHL
                                                                                        DJI        SVNEGY ZMB       RWA                      GHA
                                                                            PAN      KAZ UKRSDN
                                                                                          LVA CZEMKD
                                                                                             POL  BGR  TUN
                                                                                                      TJK
                                                                               SWE TUR BIH   SRB
                                                                                              BLR     HRV
                                                                                                      BGD       MNG
                                                                                                                  NGABDI                ZWE
                                                                                   MDA      TONTLS
                                                                                   MNEMMR
                                                                                     HUN
                                                                                       VNM  IND  GEO          LKA
                                                                                  ALB
                                                                                  EST SVK BTN ETH ARM
                                                                              ISRUZB
                                                                                                                            JOR
                                                                                                                          BRB
                                                                              CHN
                                                                             THA LAO                 AZE
                                                                       0




                                                                            0                  20                   40                   60                       80
                                                                                  Access to finance severe/major obstacle (% of establishments)



Notes: Country-level statistics for crime and access to finance is from the WBES 2006-17, most recent year
in each country. Crime and access to finance refer to the proportion of establishments that report each as
severe or major obstacles to doing business. The sample includes 138 countries as described in Appendix A.1
with one country not reporting the statistic on crime.


    So far, we have documented that lack of access to finance and crime are particularly
severe in poor countries. A key feature in models of production heterogeneity is whether
institutions such as financial development and the rule of law at the country level translate
into effects that are idiosyncratic across establishments (i.e. affect establishments differently).
We now evaluate how access to finance and crime vary across the size distribution of estab-
lishments. Our general finding is that the effects from lack of finance dissipate as the size of
the establishment increases, whereas the effects of crime are non-monotone on establishment
size, being largest for middle size establishments. To highlight these points, we regress mea-
sures related to access to finance and crime on establishment size controlling for industry,
city, country, continent-level and time fixed effects. These regressions are meant to provide
a general pattern and do not have a causal interpretation. To get at the cross-establishment
patterns, we use establishment-level data from the WBES 2006-17 and restrict the sample




                                                                                                               11
to countries that have 500 or more establishments surveyed.7 We consider four dependent
variables: (1) whether access to finance is an obstacle to doing business (0 − 4 scale), (2)
proportion of working capital financed by banks (0−4 scale), (3) whether crime is an obstacle
to doing business (0 − 4 scale), and (4) whether an establishment has faced crime in the past
year (yes/no).8 The independent variable is establishment size, a categorical variable based
on the number of employees.

       We report the results in Table 2 for all establishments, for small establishments (n ≤ 20),
and for non-small establishments (n > 20). There are two main points we highlight. First,
lack of access to finance is negatively related with establishment size. This conclusion arises
from the negative coefficient in column (1), for all, small, and non-small establishments,
implying that as establishment size rises access to finance is less of an obstacle to business
operation—for instance, a categorical increase in the size variable lowers the likelihood of
reporting finance as a major or severe obstacle by over 12 percent for non-small establish-
ments.9 Also, the positive coefficient in column (2) means that the proportion of working
capital financed by banks rises with size, implying that larger establishments are better able
to access credit, at least relative to smaller establishments.10 The estimates in columns (1)
and (2) clearly point to the effects from lack of access to finance falling with size. This
   7
     A well-known issue with the WBES dataset is the limited number of observations in many countries,
which can render noisy statistics, especially for indicators that are not populated by many establishments
or when disaggregating by establishment characteristics such as size. In this context, we restrict the sample
to countries that have 500 or more establishments surveyed, which results in a sample of 40 countries. See
Appendix A.2 and Table A.2 for a documentation of countries in the sample, survey year and number of
observations (establishments) of each crime and finance variable for each country. We note that the resulting
patterns hold when including countries that have fewer than 500 establishments surveyed (e.g. a threshold
of 250 establishments).
   8
     Crime obstacle is our preferred measure for the severity of crime because it captures the broader indirect
consequences of crime among the entire sample of establishments, including non-victims of crime whose
behaviour may yet be adversely affected by its presence. For the same reason we also favour the finance
obstacle variable as an indicator of the severity of access to finance.
   9
     The standard coefficients from the ordered Logit are reported in Table 2 because their signs point to the
direction of the relationship between the dependent and independent variables. Raising the coefficients to
the exponential function (i.e. eβi ) provide the odds-ratio.
  10
     It is worth noting that the percentage of working capital financed by banks is highly correlated with
the percentage of fixed capital purchased in the current year that is financed by banks (with a correlation
coefficient of 0.52). We focus on the working capital variable because there are more than twice as many
observations than for the fixed capital variable. Nevertheless, the estimates reported in Table 2 are similar
under either variable.


                                                      12
                    Table 2: Access to finance and crime across establishment size

                                       (1)                        (2)                         (3)                    (4)
                                 Finance obstacle          Borrow from banks             Crime obstacle          Faced crime
                                     (0 − 4)                    (0 − 4)                     (0 − 4)               (yes/no)
  All establishments:
  Establishment size                  −0.054∗∗∗                    0.136∗∗∗                    0.012∗              0.081∗∗∗
                                        (0.0091)                     (0.0090)                 (0.0068)              (0.0120)

  Observations                           47252                       45132                     47468                 47684

  Establishments with
  ≤ 20 employees:
  Establishment size                  −0.058∗∗∗                    0.188∗∗∗                   0.059∗∗∗             0.070∗∗∗
                                        (0.0213)                     (0.0185)                 (0.0172)              (0.0214)

  Observations                           22569                       21515                     22697                 22816

  Establishments with
  > 20 employees:
  Establishment size                  −0.081∗∗∗                    0.120∗∗∗                   −0.017∗             0.0763∗∗∗
                                        (0.0129)                     (0.0125)                 (0.0092)              (0.0192)

  Observations                           24683                       23617                     24771                 24868
  Notes: The table reports point estimates of an ordered Logit regression for all establishments, small establishments (≤ 20
 employees) and non-small establishments (> 20 employees), based on the WBES definition for small establishments. Size is
 an independent categorical variable based on full-time employees: ≤ 5, 6 − 9, 10 − 14, 15 − 20, 21 − 30, 31 − 40, 41 − 50,
 51 − 100, 101 − 250 and 251 − 5000. The dependent variables in columns (1) and (3) are whether access to finance and crime
 are not an obstacle, a minor, moderate, major or severe obstacle to business operation (0 − 4 scale). The dependent variable
 in column (2) is the percentage of working capital borrowed from banks (0 − 4 scale), and in column (4) is whether an
 establishment faced crime in the last year (yes/no). Categories for percentage of working capital borrowed from banks are
 0%, 1 − 25%, 26 − 50%, 51 − 75% and > 75%. All estimates include industry, city, country, and continent-level fixed effects,
 as well as time fixed effects to account for differences in survey year. Industry-level controls are manufacturing, services and
 core industries, and city-level controls are related to population size. Standard errors are clustered at the country-level. ∗∗∗ ,
 ∗∗ and ∗ denote significance at the 1, 5 and 10 percent level.




does not imply, however, that capital is efficiently allocated across establishments since the
link between establishment size and productivity is tenuous in poor countries (Restuccia and
Rogerson, 2008; Bartelsman et al., 2013).

      Second, the effects of crime are non-uniform across establishment size. The regression
estimate in column (3) is positive for all establishments, positive, larger in magnitude and
strongly significant for small establishments, and negative for non-small establishments, im-
plying that the severity of crime initially rises with establishment size and falls thereafter.11
 11
      In Appendix A.2, we show our estimates across small and non-small establishments in Table 2 are


                                                                13
We also find that losses from crime as a percentage of establishment sales falls with size which
may account for the non-monotone effect across size in column (3). The coefficients for all,
small, and non-small establishments in column (4) are positive implying the likelihood of
facing crime rises with size.




3     Model

Our aim is to evaluate the joint effects of crime and financial frictions on establishment
behaviour and to understand their implications for economic development. To this end,
we consider an otherwise standard span-of-control framework of establishment size as in
Lucas (1978) extended to allow for institutional differences in financial market development
and the rule of law. In the model, individuals differ in entrepreneurial productivity and
asset holdings and choose between operating an establishment as an entrepreneur or being
a worker. We follow a large literature by considering financial market development as a
collateral constraint, which restricts that entrepreneur borrowing is proportional to wealth.
The rule of law influences the potential for crime which affects the returns to entrepreneurship.
Hence, in our framework production and occupation choices are affected by access to finance
and the potential for crime.



3.1     Environment

The economy is populated by a measure one of infinitely-lived individuals who differ in en-
trepreneurial productivity s ∈ S and asset holdings a ∈ A ≡ [0, ∞). Productivity evolves
over time according to an exogenous Markov process M (s, s0 ). The cumulative distribution
over assets and productivity is denoted by G(a, s). There is no market for consumption insur-
ance which implies that individual asset holdings are the only mechanism for self-insurance
consistent with alternative definitions of small establishments (see Table A.3) and also to using number of
employees rather than the categorical size variable as the independent variable (see Table A.4).


                                                    14
                                                                                         P∞
against productivity shocks. Preferences are over streams of consumption,                   t=0   β t u(ct ), are
time separable and β ∈ (0, 1) represents the time discount factor.

       Individuals are endowed with one unit of productive time each period, which is supplied
inelastically, and choose between operating an individual specific production technology (en-
trepreneurship) or working for a wage (worker). Each occupation requires one unit of labor
so that individuals select into one occupation every period. The production technology is
standard, f (s, k, n), which combines the inputs of capital k, labor from workers n, and en-
trepreneur productivity s to produce output. We assume f (s, k, n) is increasing in all inputs
and features decreasing returns to scale in k and n.

       The economy features two distinct distortions. The first is related to financial frictions
arising from underdeveloped financial markets which restricts how much capital entrepreneurs
can borrow. The second is related to crime on entrepreneur capital arising from imperfections
in the rule of law. We describe these in turn.



3.2       Financial frictions

We follow Buera et al. (2011), Midrigan and Xu (2014), and Moll (2014) among others in
modelling financial market development. In particular, financial market imperfections—due
to limited enforcement or monitoring technology—imply that entrepreneurs face a collateral
constraint for borrowing capital given by (1−φ)k ≤ a, where φ ∈ [0, 1] represents the fraction
of capital that can be recouped by financial intermediaries if an entrepreneur defaults. In
this setup, φ serves as a measure of financial market development with higher values of φ
representing more developed financial markets (a higher fraction of capital can be recouped).
This formulation has the intuitive appeal that the amount of capital borrowed depends on
entrepreneur assets a, and is proportional to financial market development φ.12 When φ = 1
  12                                                                    1
    The collateral constraint can be re-written as k ≤ λ̃a, where λ̃ ≡ 1−φ , as is more standard. We use φ for
consistency with our modelling of the rule of law and for easier comparison across measures of institutional
development.



                                                     15
financial markets are fully developed and the collateral constraint is non-binding. Conversely,
when φ = 0 financial markets are non-existent, there is no potential to borrow and capital is
restricted to equal entrepreneur asset holdings. Thus, values of φ ∈ [0, 1] capture differences
in the potential to borrow across economies, and holding φ constant, a captures differences
in the potential to borrow within economies.

       We note that the collateral constraint is the only friction in the financial market. In par-
ticular, we abstract from issues related to irreversibility and adjustment costs on entrepreneur
capital. Also, the collateral constraint we examine is static and on a per-period basis. While
in reality financial contracts are dynamic, a static one-period contract is sufficient to cap-
ture the key features in our analysis—entrepreneur borrowing depends on individual asset
holdings and the level of financial market development in a country.



3.3       Rule of law

The second source of friction arises from the potential for crime against entrepreneurs, which
we model following Ranasinghe (2017). The probability of facing crime depends on two
factors: the rule of law and spending on protection. We think of the rule of law as the
probability with which the state can prevent criminal activity λ ∈ [0, 1], with higher values
of λ representing a stronger rule of law and a lower potential that entrepreneurs face crime.
Entrepreneurs can also reduce the potential of facing crime by buying private protection
                                                                                                            bpψ
p ≥ 0, which supplements the existing rule of law. The cost of private protection p is                       ψ
                                                                                                                ,
where b > 0 is a scale parameter and ψ is an elasticity parameter. Taken together, the
probability an entrepreneur faces crime is 1 − F (λ, p), where F (λ, p) = λ(1 + pθ ) ∈ [0, 1],
θ > 0, is increasing in both arguments.13 In this setup, λ has a similar interpretation for
institutional development as φ. When λ = 1 there is no opportunity for crime and when λ = 0
                                                 θ1
  13
     It follows that p ∈ [0, p̄] where p̄ = 1−λ
                                             λ       , which ensures that F (λ, p) ≤ 1. We also assume protection
is bought post-production and does not require financing. This allows us to isolate the effects of financial
frictions on capital demand and avoid unnecessary complexity.



                                                       16
the rule of law is non-existent and criminal activity occurs un-impeded. Values of λ ∈ [0, 1]
therefore capture institutional differences in the potential for crime across countries, and
holding λ constant, p captures differences in the potential for crime across establishments
within countries due to differences in private protection spending.

       We now discuss the motivation for our modelling and functional form choices for crime.
The functional form for F (λ, p) allows for an economy-wide component—the rule of law
λ—and an idiosyncratic component—private protection p—which capture differences in the
severity of facing crime across establishments within a country as well as differences across
countries, the strength of which depends on two parameters λ and θ. Note that the assumed
functional form has other implications to capture features of reality. First, the likelihood of
facing crime decreases with the rule of law and private protection. Second, the rule of law
and protection are complementary. Protection spending is more effective in lowering crime
when the rule of law is strong. In particular, λ is the minimum level of protection common
to all entrepreneurs (F (λ, 0) = λ) and protection is ineffective in lowering crime when there
is no rule of law (F (0, p) = 0). In the quantitative analysis that follows, the parameters
λ and θ will be disciplined with data on the prevalence of crime in an economy as well as
crime differences across establishments. In addition, data on losses from crime and protection
spending will inform and put discipline on the values for the parameters on the cost of private
protection.

       We model crime as the fraction of entrepreneur capital expropriated by an exogenous
stand-in Crime Group.14 In particular, if an entrepreneur does not face crime, which occurs
with probability F (λ, p), profit from production is


                      π(a, s, k, n) = f (s, k, n) − wn − (1 + r)k + (1 − δ)k,
  14
    We could instead assume that crime is related to output with little consequence to our main results. Since
access to finance is related to capital, for consistency, we also model crime as dependant on entrepreneur
capital.




                                                     17
and if they face crime, which occurs with probability 1 − F (λ, p), profit from production is


                    πc (a, s, k, n) = f (s, k, n) − wn − (1 + r)k + (1 − δ − e)k,


where w is the wage paid to workers, r is the real interest rate, δ ∈ (0, 1) is the depreciation
rate (hence, r + δ is the rental rate of capital), and e ∈ (0, 1) is the fraction of capital lost due
to crime. We use e for notational simplicity but note that it is an endogenous outcome which
in equilibrium depends on assets and productivity (i.e. e(a, s)). In each of these scenarios,
entrepreneur choice of capital is constrained by the collateral constraint, (1 − φ)k ≤ a.15

       The timing is as follows. Entrepreneurs first make decisions related to production. Then
the Crime Group chooses the fraction of capital to expropriate taking into consideration
entrepreneur capital and protection. In what follows, entrepreneur decisions on capital,
labor and protection are made in anticipation of the Crime Group’s best-response to these
choices.

       Note that we focus on crime faced by entrepreneurs, abstracting from crime on indi-
vidual asset holdings. This is because we focus on the distortionary effects of the rule of
law institution on establishment decisions and hence the data we use on crime is at the
establishment-level. Furthermore, individuals in the model that have the most assets tend
to be entrepreneurs, and hence, asset accumulation and capital are closely linked.
  15
     The presence of crime can affect financial intermediary lending to entrepreneurs. We abstract from this
effect because it only plays a quantitatively minor role in our framework. Including this channel implies that
the collateral constraint becomes (1 − φ)(1 − ê)k ≤ a, where (1 − ê)k is end of period capital that can be
recouped and ê ≡ (1 − F (λ, p))e is average expected losses from crime, where the over-line represents the
economy-wide average. We assume that financial intermediaries cannot observe entrepreneur productivity
and therefore how much crime they will face. In the WBES data for Colombia, which we use to calibrate our
model for crime, ê is less than one percent and hence this feature would have a limited effect on the collateral
constraint.




                                                       18
3.4        Decisions

Entrepreneur decisions are the purchase of protection—which reduces the potential of crime—
and capital and labor inputs in production. Since entrepreneurs face crime with probability
F (λ, p), capital, labor, and protection are chosen to maximize expected profit. Specifically,
the problem of an entrepreneur is

                                                                                                       bpψ
                                                                                                            
          π
          e(a, s) =        max                F (λ, p)π(a, s, k, n) + [1 − F (λ, p)] πc (a, s, k, n) −           ,
                      k≥0, n≥0, p∈[0,p]                                                                 ψ

which using the definitions of profit above simplifies to,

                                                                                        bpψ
                                                                                           
                  π
                  e(a, s) =            max           π(a, s, k, n) − [1 − F (λ, p)]ek −       ,                      (1)
                                k≥0,   n≥0, p∈[0,p]                                      ψ

subject to the collateral constraint (1 − φ)k ≤ a. Equation (1) states that with probability
F (·), an entrepreneur does not experience crime and earns profit π(a, s, k, n), and with prob-
ability 1 − F (·) faces crime and earns profit πc (a, s, k, n). This expression simplifies to imply
that an entrepreneur earns full profit from production less the fraction of capital lost due to
crime, ek, which occurs with probability 1 − F (·). Expected profit from entrepreneurship for
an individual of type (a, s) is π
                                e(a, s).

       The Crime Group optimizes by choosing how much capital to expropriate from each
entrepreneur of type (a, s), which determines the fraction of capital lost due to crime, e ∈
(0, 1),
                                                                    heρ
                                                                       
                                 ΠM (a, s) = max [1 − F (λ, p)]ek −       .                                          (2)
                                             e∈[0,1]                 ρ

The Crime Group is successful in expropriating entrepreneur capital with probability 1 −
F (λ, p) earning ek and with probability F (λ, p) is unsuccessful earning zero. We assume the
Crime Group incurs a cost for engaging in crime due to monitoring, collection and ‘flying
                                   heρ
under the radar’ given by           ρ
                                       ,   where h > 0 is a scale parameter and ρ is the elasticity term.16
  16
       The cost functions for protection and crime do not depend on entrepreneur capital. Nevertheless in


                                                             19
    The individual problem of asset accumulation and occupational choice can be written
recursively using the Bellman equation as


                                 v(a, s) = max
                                            0
                                               {u(c) + βEv(a0 , s0 )} ,                                 (3)
                                            c,a ≥0



                              s.t. c + a0 ≤ max{w, π
                                                   e(a, s)} + (1 + r)a,

where the expectation operator is over next period productivity s0 governed by the Markov
process M (s, s0 ). Individuals make a consumption-savings inter-temporal choice and an oc-
cupational choice based on max{w, π
                                  e(a, s)}. Since there is no capital irreversibility or ad-
justment costs, the occupational choice is static which we denote by o(a, s) ∈ {E, W } for an
entrepreneur or worker.



3.5     Stationary competitive equilibrium

A stationary competitive equilibrium consists of an invariant distribution over assets and
productivity G(a, s), policy functions for individuals {c(a, s), a0 (a, s), o(a, s)}, policy functions
for entrepreneurs {k(a, s), n(a, s), p(a, s)}, profits π
                                                       e(a, s), policy function for the Crime Group
e(a, s), and prices {w, r}, such that:


  (i) Given prices, k(a, s), n(a, s) and p(a, s) solve the entrepreneurs problem in (1), deter-
      mining π
             e(a, s).

 (ii) Policy function e(a, s) solves the Crime Group’s problem in (2).

(iii) Given prices and profits, c(a, s), a0 (a, s) and o(a, s) solves the individual’s problem
      described in (3).
equilibrium, spending on protection is increasing with establishment capital, consistent with micro-level
evidence. For crime, it is likely that expropriating from high capital establishments is more costly for the
Crime Group. This feature is captured in our framework since protection expenditure rises with establishment
capital, making it more costly to expropriate from high capital establishments due to a lower probability of
success F (·).



                                                     20
(iv) Markets clear:
                           Z                                          Z
                                       n(a, s)G(da, ds) =                            G(da, ds),
                            o(a,s)=E                                   o(a,s)=W
                                 Z                                            Z
                           K≡                 k(a, s)G(da, ds) =                  aG(da, ds),
                                  o(a,s)=E
                  Z                                                   Z
                      c(a, s)G(da, ds) + δK + P + E =                                f (s, k, n)G(da, ds),
                                                                          o(a,s)=E

                                      ψ
      where P = o(a,s)=E bp(a,s)
                      R
                                   ψ
                                        G(da, ds) is aggregate spending on protection and E =
      R
        o(a,s)=E
                 [1 − F (λ, p(a, s))] e(a, s)k(a, s)G(da, ds) is aggregate losses from crime.

 (v) G is an invariant distribution that satisfies the equilibrium mapping:

                                         ZZ                  Z
                            G(a, s) =                                M (ŝ, ds0 )G(dâ, dŝ),
                                              a0 (â,ŝ)≤a   s0 ≤s



      where â, ŝ, and s0 are indices of elements in the sets for assets and ability.



3.6    Discussion

Prior to evaluating the quantitative implications of crime and financial frictions we discuss
some important insights from the model. In the undistorted economy, when φ = λ =
1, allocations achieve the first-best and productivity is the sole criterion for selection into
entrepreneurship and the scale of production. With lower values for φ and λ, the collateral
constraint tightens and the potential for crime increases, distorting selection and production
decisions. When φ < 1 establishment size depends on both productivity and asset holdings
implying that low asset entrepreneurs operate below the optimal capacity, k(a, s) ≤ k(s).
Likewise, when λ < 1 capital is chosen to maximize expected profit, instead of first-best
profit, which distorts the optimal choice of capital—entrepreneurs who are most vulnerable
to crime choose capital below the optimal scale. Taken together, access to finance restricts
how much capital can be borrowed and crime affects how much capital an entrepreneur wants
to borrow. These distortions affect expected profit from production and have the potential

                                                       21
to alter occupational choices.

   In our framework each distortion can be analyzed jointly or in isolation, which enables
us to understand how these distortions interact and amplify aggregate output losses. While
we evaluate the effects of these institutions numerically, it is convenient to consider special
cases of the model to highlight the underlying mechanisms at work. Consider the case
when crime is the only distortion in the economy (φ = 1 and λ < 1). When ρ = ψ = 2
and θ = 1, a closed-form solution for crime and protection exists and depends solely on
entrepreneur productivity. This is depicted in Figure 3 for selected values of λ. Note that
as λ increases (stronger rule of law), the incidence of crime and losses from crime decreases
overall, and the pattern across entrepreneurs become flatter, illustrating how the extent
of rule of law in a country can generate idiosyncratic effects across establishments with
different productivity. We show in Section 4.4 that this broad pattern of differences in
crime and protection across entrepreneurs in economies with different levels of institutional
development is consistent with micro evidence for individual countries at the corresponding
levels of institutional development.

   In the particular numerical example in Figure 3, protection expenditure is increasing
in productivity and losses from crime—the expropriation of capital—is hump-shaped in en-
trepreneur productivity, especially so for low values of λ. This pattern arises in this case
because high productivity entrepreneurs purchase sufficient protection to induce lower losses
from crime, whereas low productivity entrepreneurs are not a lucrative target since they use
little capital in production and crime is costly. Moderate productivity entrepreneurs face the
most crime, although the magnitude of this effect depends on λ.


   When financial frictions are introduced in the economy (φ < 1 and λ < 1) the potential for
crime rises, especially among high productivity entrepreneurs. To appreciate this point, note
that high productivity entrepreneurs mitigate the effects of crime by spending on protection.
However, when they face financial frictions they choose capital based on their collateral


                                              22
                                                      Figure 3: Crime across entrepreneur productivity (φ = 1)

                                                       Overall Protection                                             0.7
                                                                                                                                      Crime
                                                 1

                                                                                                                            λ=1
                                                                                                                            λ = 0.8
                                                                                                                      0.6
                                                                                                                            λ = 0.6
                                                0.9                                                                         λ = 0.4
        Pr ob. of NOT fac ing c r im e , F( )




                                                                                                                      0.5




                                                                                      Capit al e xpr opr iat e d, e
                                                0.8


                                                                                                                      0.4



                                                0.7

                                                                                                                      0.3




                                                0.6
                                                                                                                      0.2



                                                                       λ=1
                                                0.5                    λ = 0.8                                        0.1
                                                                       λ = 0.6
                                                                       λ = 0.4

                                                                                                                       0
                                                0.4
                                                             Ability                                                                  Ability




constraint, which lowers profit and thus spending on protection, raising the potential for
crime. As such, a higher proportion of entrepreneurs become more vulnerable to crime when
financial frictions are present.

   Crime amplifies the effects from financial frictions as well. To illustrate this, consider
the case when only financial frictions are present (φ < 1, λ = 1). As highlighted in Buera
and Shin (2011), Midrigan and Xu (2014) and Moll (2014), constrained entrepreneurs can
gradually overcome their collateral constraint through self-financing. By re-investing their
profit, entrepreneurs loosen their collateral constraint which enables them to operate on a
larger scale in subsequent periods. When λ < 1, however, the presence of crime can hinder
this process. Since crime initially rises with capital, as capital rises with productivity, an
entrepreneur that has low assets faces increasing crime since they initially start with little cap-
ital in production. While re-investment and gradual expansion is necessary to overcome the
collateral constraint, doing so also increases the potential for crime. As these entrepreneurs

                                                                                 23
expand, more resources are either spent on protection or lost to crime which hinders the
process of relaxing the collateral constraint. These effects are especially severe when the rule
of law is weak (higher potential for crime) magnifying the implied output losses from these
institutions.

    We emphasize that our modelling of crime is flexible and can accommodate a variety of
profiles for crime across establishments. The resulting profiles depend on the effectiveness of
private protection on crime and the shape of the protection cost function. It also depends
on the selection of establishments that operate in equilibrium. In particular, because the
peak of the hump-shaped profile expands out as λ falls, as illustrated in Figure 3, losses from
crime can be decreasing, increasing, or non-monotone across establishments depending on
the ability threshold for selection into entrepreneurship and on the parameters for crime. In
the next sections, we show that the model can account for losses from crime across establish-
ments in the calibrated economy as well as for other countries that differ only in the level of
institutional development.




4     Calibration

To study the effects arising from financial frictions and crime, we take the stance that coun-
tries are identical in every respect except for the level of institutional development reflected
in φ as a measure of financial market development and λ as a measure of rule of law. While
countries clearly differ along many additional dimensions, our abstraction enables us to use
our framework to evaluate the quantitative effects arising from these specific institutional
differences.

    Our calibration strategy is as follows. We calibrate the model in two steps. First, we
consider an undistorted economy with prefect credit markets and no crime and calibrate
this economy to data for the United States. This allows us to assign values to technology



                                              24
and preference parameters that are well established in the literature. Second, holding the
calibrated parameters for preferences and technology constant, we consider an economy with
financial frictions and crime and calibrate this economy to micro data for Colombia.17 This
allows us to calibrate the remaining parameters on crime and access to finance to match
related moments in the data for Colombia.



4.1       Preferences and technologies

                                                                                               c1−ν
We assume per-period utility features constant relative risk aversion u(c) =                   1−ν
                                                                                                      and the
future is discounted at a rate β ∈ (0, 1). The entrepreneurial production technology is
f (s, k, n) = s(k α n1−α )1−v , where 1 − v determines returns to scale at the establishment level
and in a competitive economy also determines the share of income accruing to production
inputs (k, n). Then α represents the share of production inputs’ income accruing to capital
and 1 − α to labor. Capital depreciates at the rate δ every period. We assume shocks to the
log of entrepreneurial productivity follow an AR(1) process with persistence ρ and innovation
variance σ 2 . As a result, there are 7 parameters to calibrate at this stage {ν, δ, α, v, ρ, σ, β}.
We consider an economy with φ = λ = 1 and calibrate this economy to U.S. data, which
allows us to pin down these seven parameters without having to take a stance on parameters
related to crime. When φ = λ = 1 the model reduces to a standard span-of-control framework
where there are no financial frictions and no crime. We take this stance not because we think
the U.S. is a crime-free economy but because data on establishment-level crime is mostly for
developing economies which excludes the United States.18

       We set ν = 1.5, α = 1/3, δ = 0.08, ρ = 0.95 and σ = 0.2 which are fairly standard
  17
      In particular, from the WBES 2006-17, we use the latest year for Colombia which is the 2010 survey. In
the Appendix A.4, we consider alternative calibrations to data for Brazil—where crime is more severe than
in Colombia—and to Peru—where access to finance is more severe than in Colombia. Our main results are
qualitatively similar across these alternative calibrations.
   18
      The data we use is from the WBES which focuses primarily on developing countries and a few developed
countries in Europe. For the most developed countries in Europe, establishment level crime is very small as
is the extent to which establishments face difficulties in obtaining external finance. These facts motivate our
abstraction.


                                                      25
                    Table 3: Calibration of λ = φ = 1 economy to U.S. data

                    Target Moments:         U.S. Data            Model     Parameter
                      Entrepreneurship rate   0.075              0.075      v = 0.22
                      Interest rate           0.05                0.05      β = 0.93


and within the range of values used in the literature. The remaining parameters, v and
β, are calibrated to match two relevant moments in the U.S. data: (a) the proportion of
entrepreneurs in the working population (entrepreneurship rate), which we target to 7.5
percent (Cagetti and DeNardi, 2006); and (b) the real interest rate which we target to 5
percent. Table 3 reports the model fit for the economy with λ = φ = 1 relative to the U.S.
data and the last column documents the resulting parameter values.



4.2     Institutional development and protection technology

We now turn to the parameters related to institutional development and to establishment
crime and protection. There are two parameters related to institutional development {φ, λ}
and five parameters related to crime and protection {ρ, ψ, h, b, θ}. We calibrate (φ, λ) to the
level of institutional development in Colombia and select crime and protection parameters
to match establishment-level observations related to the severity of crime and protection in
Colombia.19 We choose Colombia for our calibration because crime and access to finance
are equally severe obstacles to business operation. Our data from the WBES discussed in
Section 2 indicates that in Colombia 33 percent of establishments report crime as a major
obstacle to business operation, whereas 41 percent of establishments report access to finance
as a major obstacle.20
  19
     Throughout, an entrepreneur represents an establishment unit in the data.
  20
     For other countries in South America the gap between the proportion of establishments that report crime
and access to finance as major obstacles to operation is more spread, or there are too few observations. See
Appendix A.4 for alternative calibrations of the model to data for Brazil and Peru. Even though crime
and the lack of access to finance is equally or more prevalent in Africa than in South America, we do not
calibrate the model to countries in Africa because there are many missing observations for capital at the
establishment-level in these countries.




                                                    26
    We jointly calibrate the remaining seven parameters by solving the stationary equilibrium
of the model in order to minimize the distance between seven statistics in the model and the
corresponding data moments. While the procedure involves solving all the parameters simul-
taneously, because each parameter has a first-order effect on some statistic, we discuss them
in turn to motivate the relevance of each data target. We determine φ, the level of finan-
cial market development, by targeting the proportion of capital financed through external
sources (bank and non-bank financial intermediaries) which is 35 percent in Colombia (see
Appendix A.3 for details). This target closely mimics the collateral constraint in the model
where higher values of φ imply that a higher proportion of capital is financed through exter-
nal sources. We determine λ, the rule of law, by targeting the percentage of establishments
that report facing crime in Colombia, which is 24 percent.21 Recall that the probability an
establishment faces crime is 1 − F (λ, p) where λ has a first-order effect on the probability of
crime. Hence, the fraction of establishments that face crime is informative of λ.

    Data on crime is used to determine the parameters for the cost function of crime, ρ and h.
The parameter ρ is the elasticity term for engaging in crime with higher values implying that
stealing a larger share of entrepreneur capital is increasingly costly. Hence, ρ is informative of
the share of crime occurring across the establishment size distribution; we target the share of
crime among the top decile of establishments (based on employees), which is 28 percent. The
parameter h is a scale which is useful to target aggregate losses from crime relative to output,
which is 0.2 percent. We pin down parameters for the private protection cost function, ψ and
b, similar to the approach used for the crime cost function. The parameter ψ is the elasticity
term where higher values imply that buying additional protection is increasingly costly and
b is the scale parameter. Therefore, ψ is chosen to target the share of protection spending
among the top decile of establishments, which is 54 percent in the data; and b is chosen to
  21
     As discussed earlier, our analysis is likely understating the importance of the rule of law since we focus on
a narrow notion of crime by abstracting from corruption. This abstraction is motivated by data limitations
as there is heavy under-reporting and non-response in questions related to corruption and bribe payments.
For example, in Colombia over 50 percent of establishments report corruption is a major obstacle to business
operation but only 3 percent report having to bribe public officials “to get things done”.



                                                       27
                 Table 4: Calibration of crime and external finance in Colombia

   Target Moments                                                      Colombian        Model     Parameter
                                                                         Data
   External finance to capital                                             0.346        0.343      φ = 0.369
   Prevalence of crime                                                     0.237        0.232      λ = 0.496
   Crime share (top emp. decile)                                           0.281        0.271      ρ = 1.174
   Crime loss to output                                                    0.002        0.002      h = 19.35
   Protection share (top emp. decile)                                      0.542        0.502      ψ = 1.985
   Protection spending to output                                           0.010        0.010      b = 7.422
   (protection+crime)/output (top 50% of emp. decile)                      0.012        0.014      θ = 0.228

  Notes: External finance to capital is capital less assets summed across entrepreneurs and divided by
 aggregate capital, and prevalence of crime is the percentage of entrepreneurs that face crime. Crime share
 is losses from crime in the top employment decile relative to aggregate losses from crime, and crime loss
 to output is aggregate losses from crime relative to aggregate output. Protection share and protection
 spending to output are defined in like manner. (protection+crime)/output is the sum of protection
 spending and losses from crime divided by the sum of output among the top 50 percent of establishments,
 by employment decile.


target aggregate spending on protection relative to output, which is 1 percent. Finally, the
parameter θ affects the returns to protection spending and is chosen to target the cost of
protection and crime (total cost associated with crime) relative to output among the top 50
percent of establishments.22

    Table 4 reports the target moments from data, the corresponding statistics in the model,
and resulting parameter values associated with a moment. To target the share of capital
financed through external sources the model implies φ = 0.37, which means an entrepreneur
can borrow close to 1.6 times their asset holdings.23 The parameter for the rule of law is
λ = 0.5. In the absence of protection the probability of facing crime is 50 percent (1 − λ),
however, after accounting for protection expenditure, close to 23 percent of entrepreneurs
   22
      While choosing specific deciles in the distribution of establishments to target ρ, ψ and θ is arbitrary,
we show below that the model with the resulting calibrated parameters does well in matching crime and
protection shares across employment deciles. Our focus on the top decile of the establishment distribution
is motivated by the fact that establishments in this group account for the bulk of production. Similarly,
establishments in the middle of the distribution account for the bulk of protection and crime.
   23
      Recall that the collateral constraint is k ≤ [1/(1 − φ)]a, where 1/(1 − φ) is the proportion factor of assets
that can be used for borrowing.




                                                        28
actually face crime. It is important to note that this average masks considerable heterogeneity
across establishment’s productivity and wealth: crime rates are hump-shaped in productivity
and decreasing in asset holdings. The elasticities for the cost function for crime and protection
are greater than one, ρ, ψ > 1, implying that stealing a larger share of capital and buying
additional protection is increasingly costly. The scale parameters on the cost functions are
high, especially for crime, to ensure the share of output going to crime and protection is in
line with the evidence.

   It is worth noting that the elasticity and scale parameters for the crime and protection
cost functions are non-standard in the literature and there are no direct estimates we can rely
on to gauge whether their values are reasonable. Nevertheless, as we show in Figure 4, panel
(a) and (b), the model does well matching the share of losses from crime and protection
expenditure across employment deciles, despite that we target only the top deciles in our
calibration (and aggregate moments). Furthermore, Figure 4, panel (c), shows that the model
does well matching the share of external finance across employment deciles even though we
target only the aggregate external finance to capital ratio as is common in the literature.
While the model does not match the top decile well, it accounts for the general pattern
that external finance is primarily concentrated among large establishments and negligible
among small establishments. That the model captures closely these features of crime and
external finance across the size distribution of establishments give us confidence in using our
quantitative framework to study the implications of the rule of law for economic development.
Furthermore, in Section 4.4, we show that the disaggregate implications of the model for
economies with different levels of institutional development are consistent with micro evidence
across countries, providing further confidence on the aggregate implications of the model.




                                               29
 Figure 4: Model fit—non-targeted moments across establishments by employment deciles



            0.3
                      Data
                      Model


            0.2




            0.1




             0
                  1     2      3        4        5        6       7       8        9       10




            0.6
                      Data
                      Model


            0.4




            0.2




             0
                  1     2      3        4        5        6       7       8        9       10




            0.8
                      Data
                      Model
            0.6



            0.4



            0.2



             0
                  1     2      3        4        5        6       7       8        9       10




Notes: The figure reports the shares of losses from crime, protection spending, and external finance, across
establishments by employment deciles.




                                                     30
4.3       Financial development and the rule of law across countries

In our quantitative analysis in the next section, we consider cross-country variations in the
two parameters describing institutional development: financial development φ and the rule
of law λ. What are the plausible ranges for these parameters across countries? In the model,
financial market development maps to the proportion of capital financed through external
sources and the rule of law maps into the prevalence of crime. We therefore, holding all
parameters in the model fixed, re-calibrate φ and λ to replicate these statistics based on the
WBES 2006-17 for countries that have at least 100 observations for both external finance
and crime.24

       Figure 5 reports the implied values of φ and λ based on this sample. The proportion of
capital financed through external sources range from 2 to 50 percent and the percentage of
establishments facing crime range from 0 to just over 45 percent. The implied values for φ
and λ given the above ranges are φ ∈ (0.02, 0.55) and λ ∈ (0.35, 0.99). We think the lower
range for λ is conservative. For example, expanding the sample of countries to include all
countries that have over 100 observations for crime (dropping the requirement on observations
for external finance), the proportion of establishments facing crime range from 0 to over 50
percent, where close to 20 percent of the countries in the sample have crime rates in excess
of 30 percent. Accounting for these additional countries implies values of λ as low as 0.3.



4.4       Model outside validation

We have shown that the model calibrated to data for Colombia can broadly capture the
disaggregate patterns of crime, protection, and external finance across establishments. Since
the analysis that follows consists of studying the aggregate implications of variations in the
degrees of crime and financial frictions across countries as reported in the previous section,
  24
    This renders a sample of 34 countries. See Appendix A.3 and Table A.5 for a list of countries, the number
of observations per country, and the implied values of φ and λ for each country.



                                                     31
                 Figure 5: Financial frictions φ and rule of law λ across countries

                                              MUS

            .5
                                                          GHA


                                                               VNM
                                 BRA
            .4



                                       KEN
                                          COL
                                                                                                   IND

                             CHL
            .3




                                        MYS
                                                                                 LKA
                                                    PHL                                                  JOR
        φ




                                                                             TUN
                                                                               BGD
                                   ARG
            .2




                                                                                             LBN
                                                                                                         THA
                      GTM                                                                       CHNTUR
                           CRI                            RUS
                          ZAF                 PER                          NPL
                                                    MDG
            .1




                                       MEX
                                                        TZA
                                                          KHM                             IDN
                                                                NGA
                                                  ZMB
                                 MOZ
                                                                                       IRQ
            0




                 .3         .4               .5           .6          .7             .8             .9         1
                                                                 λ


Notes: The figure shows the values of φ and λ that generate the external finance to capital ratio and the
percentage of establishments facing crime for a sample of 34 countries in the WBES 2006-17, holding all other
parameters in the model fixed. The sample is restricted to countries that have at least 100 observations on
incidence of crime and external finance. See Appendix A.3 for details of the resulting sample.


we would like to provide some evidence that the model generates reasonable quantitative
predictions for key variables in institutional settings that differ from that in Colombia.

    Based on the evidence for φ and λ in Figure 5, we study the implications of the model
in four countries that span a portion of the variation in institutional development across
countries. We study India and China that have a much higher rule of law (higher λ) than
Colombia; and Guatemala and Mozambique with a lower rule of law than Colombia. These
countries also span similar or higher financial frictions (lower φ) than Colombia. In each case,
we modify the values of λ and φ keeping all the other calibrated parameters the same. As
suggested by our discussion in Section 3.6, we expect that the pattern of crime and protection
across establishments becomes flatter for economies with high λ compared to economies with

                                                           32
low λ. If so, the key question is whether these patterns are consistent with the micro evidence
for countries with high and low levels of institutional development.

   We report the results of these experiments in Figures 6 and 7, along with the correspond-
ing data statistics for each country. These figures are analogous to Figure 4 for Colombia
discussed earlier. The figures show that the patterns implied by the model for differences
in institutional development are broadly consistent with the establishment-level implications
in the corresponding countries. For example, the higher λ in China and India compared to
Colombia implies that the incidence of crime is much lower in these countries, the prevalence
of crime is 3.8 percent of the establishments in China and 3.2 percent in India, whereas it is
23.7 percent in Colombia. Importantly, the higher λ in China and India in the model implies
that the share of crime and protection is much more uniform across establishments than
in the case of Colombia, a pattern that is broadly consistent with the micro data for these
countries, as illustrated in Figure 6. The model with lower levels of institutional development
than Colombia, such as Guatemala and Mozambique, implies that the across establishment
profile of crime and protection is steeper, again consistent with the implications of the micro
data for these countries, as illustrated in Figure 7. In particular, for the level of institutional
development in Guatemala, the model implies that the total cost of crime among the above
median establishment is 3.7 percent of output compared to 3.9 percent in the model, whereas
in the Colombian data this statistic is only 1.2 percent.

   We conclude that our quantitative framework provides a reasonable setting to evaluate
the aggregate implications of institutional development in the next section and in particular
to evaluate the relative merits of institutional reform we purse in Section 5.3.




                                                33
 Figure 6: Differences in institutional development (φ, λ)—moments across establishments

                             Panel A: India                                                          Panel B: China

                                  (a) Losses from Crime                                                   (a) Losses from Crime
       0.3                                                                     0.3
                 Data                                                                    Data
                 Model                                                                   Model


       0.2                                                                     0.2




       0.1                                                                     0.1




        0                                                                       0
             1       2   3    4     5        6           7   8   9   10              1      2    3    4     5        6           7   8   9   10



                                  (b) Protection Spending                                                 (b) Protection Spending
       0.6
                 Data                                                          0.6       Data
                 Model                                                                   Model


       0.4
                                                                               0.4




       0.2                                                                     0.2




        0                                                                       0
             1       2   3    4     5        6           7   8   9   10              1      2    3    4     5        6           7   8   9   10



                                   (c) External Finance                                                    (c) External Finance
       0.8                                                                     0.8
                 Data                                                                    Data
                 Model                                                                   Model
       0.6                                                                     0.6



       0.4                                                                     0.4



       0.2                                                                     0.2



        0                                                                       0
             1       2   3    4     5        6           7   8   9   10              1      2    3    4     5        6           7   8   9   10
                                    Employment deciles                                                      Employment deciles




Notes: The figure reports the shares of losses from crime, protection spending, and external finance across
establishments by employment deciles for each country. Model refers to the calibrated economy for values of
λ and φ corresponding to each country according to Figure 5.




                                                                          34
 Figure 7: Differences in institutional development (φ, λ)—moments across establishments

                        Panel A: Guatemala                                      Panel B: Mozambique


      0.6                                                     0.8
                Data                                                    Data
                Model                                                   Model
                                                              0.6
      0.4

                                                              0.4

      0.2
                                                              0.2



       0                                                       0
            1     2     3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10              1     2      3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10




                                                              0.8
      0.6       Data                                                    Data
                Model                                                   Model
                                                              0.6

      0.4
                                                              0.4


      0.2
                                                              0.2



       0                                                       0
            1     2     3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10              1     2      3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10




      0.6                                                     0.8
                Data                                                    Data
                Model                                                   Model
                                                              0.6
      0.4

                                                              0.4

      0.2
                                                              0.2



       0                                                       0
            1     2     3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10              1     2      3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10




Notes: The figure reports the shares of losses from crime, protection spending and external finance across
establishments by employment deciles for each country. Model refers to the calibrated economy for values of
λ and φ corresponding to each country according to Figure 5.




                                                         35
5     Results

We evaluate the implications of crime and financial frictions by studying economies that are
otherwise identical to our calibrated economy except on the parameters φ and λ representing
differences in the level of institutional development. We study the effects on aggregate out-
comes of these institutions jointly and in isolation to assess the importance of each institution
and their amplification effects. We also evaluate the importance for economic development of
policy reforms that improve the rule of law or financial market development across economies
that differ along the level of institutional development.



5.1    Quantitative effects

Table 5 reports relevant statistics such as aggregate output, capital, consumption, and total
factor productivity (TFP) for two economies: an economy with (λ = .5, φ = .37) which was
calibrated to institutional levels and establishment crime and protection data for Colombia,
and an economy with (λ = 0.35, φ = .15), one of the weakest levels of institutional develop-
ment observed in the cross-country data documented earlier (Guatemala in Figure 5). All
results are reported relative to the undistorted economy (φ = λ = 1) which was calibrated
to U.S. data.

    The main result from Table 5 is that institutional differences in the rule of law and
financial market development have substantial negative effects on aggregate variables. In the
Colombia economy, output is 28 percent below the undistorted economy, TFP is 17 percent
lower, and aggregate capital and consumption are 35 and 32 percent lower. These aggregate
effects are magnified in the economy with the weakest level of institutional development where
aggregate output is about half that of the undistorted economy. Hence, for this economy, an
improvement in institutional development alone to levels in the undistorted economy would
increase output by close to a two-fold factor. Consumption is more than 50 percent below



                                               36
the undistorted economy.25 The reduction in these aggregate variables are attributed to
effects along the intensive and extensive margins of production. Along the intensive margin,
entrepreneur capital demand falls both due to the collateral constraint and anticipated losses
from crime. This translates to effects along the extensive margin lowering the number of
entrepreneurs (entrepreneurship rate) and raising average establishment size. Nonetheless,
the average capital to labor ratio used in production—or capital intensity—is lower; relative
to the undistorted economy, capital intensity in production is about five times lower in the
Weakest economy. Importantly, these effects are despite lower equilibrium prices for capital
and labor in the distorted economies.
                    Table 5: Quantitative effects of crime and access to finance

                                                         Colombia                Weakest
                                                         Economy                 Economy
                                                     (λ = .50, φ = .37)      (λ = .35, φ = .18)
             Output (Y )                                     0.72                    0.51
             Total factor productivity (TFP)                 0.83                    0.91
             Capital (K)                                     0.65                    0.18
             Consumption (C)                                 0.68                    0.45
             Entrepreneurship rate                           0.94                    0.91
             Wage                                            0.72                    0.51
             Avg. capital-labor ratio (k/n)                  0.65                    0.18
            Notes: All statistics are reported relative to the undistorted economy, λ = φ = 1.


       Next, we isolate the effects attributable to crime and financial frictions. We decompose
the effects of crime and finance in the Colombia economy and the Weakest economy. Table
6 reports the results relative to the undistorted economy. The columns labelled “Crime”
present the scenario where each economy maintains its rule of law and adopts the level
of financial market development in the undistorted economy. In this scenario, differences
between the distorted economies and the undistorted economy are solely attributable to
differences in the rule of law, thereby isolating the quantitative importance of crime. In
the Weakest economy, crime alone reduces output by 24 percent, capital by more than 60
  25
    TFP in the Weakest economy is higher than in the Colombia economy due to lower equilibrium prices
which allow the most productive high-asset entrepreneurs to operate close their optimal scale.

                                                     37
percent, and consumption by 30 percent. In the Colombia economy, crime reduces output by
3 percent, capital by 10 percent, and consumption by 5 percent. These effects are substantial
considering that the aggregate losses from crime represent only 0.2 percent of output in
Colombia. Protection plays an important role in accurately accounting for the importance
of crime across establishments by for example ensuring that the share of crime for the top
employment decile of establishments is in line with the evidence.26

                   Table 6: Isolating the effects of crime and access to finance

                                              Colombia Economy                  Weakest Economy
                                               (λ = .50, φ = .37)               (λ = .35, φ = .18)
                                            Total Crime Finance              Total Crime Finance
                                                   (φ = 1) (λ = 1)                  (φ = 1) (λ = 1)
  Output (Y )                               0.72       0.97        0.80      0.54       0.76        0.74
  Total factor productivity (TFP)           0.83       1.01        0.87      0.90       1.05        0.84
  Capital (K)                               0.65       0.90        0.76      0.22       0.37        0.69
  Consumption (C)                           0.68       0.95        0.80      0.48       0.70        0.75
  Entrepreneurship rate                     0.94       0.96        1.32      0.93       1.27        1.42
  Wage                                      0.72       0.97        0.82      0.54       0.77        0.77
  Avg. capital-labor ratio (k/n)            0.65       0.89        0.78      0.22       0.38        0.71
  Notes: Statistics are reported relative to the undistorted economy, λ = φ = 1. Total reports the effects of
 access to finance and crime in each economy. Crime reports the effects if only crime is present (i.e. φ = 1)
 and Finance reports the effects if only weak access to finance is present (i.e. λ = 1).


       The columns “Finance” isolate the effects arising from financial frictions by considering
the case where each economy maintains its level of financial market development and adopts
the rule of law of the undistorted economy. We find that in the Colombia economy, access to
finance has substantially larger effects on aggregate output, capital and consumption than
crime. Aggregate output falls by 20 percent, capital and consumption by 24 and 20 percent.
In the Weakest economy, the effects of access to finance are similar to those for crime, lowering
output and consumption by about 25 percent. Our results also imply that TFP losses arise
primarily from frictions in access to finance.

       It is worth noting that the difference between “Total” and “Finance” represents the ad-
  26
    Excluding protection from the model would imply that crime rises with establishment size, producing
substantially larger effects on aggregate variables.

                                                     38
ditional quantitative effects of including crime in a standard model of financial frictions with
collateral constraints.27 The quantitative effects of adding crime to the Colombia economy
with financial frictions generates an additional 40 percent reduction in output, 45 percent
lower aggregate capital, and 60 percent lower consumption. These negative effects are much
larger in the Weakest economy where adding crime roughly doubles the negative impact
output, capital, and consumption.



5.2       Amplification

We now turn to the amplification effects that arise from evaluating crime and financial fric-
tions together. As presented in Table 6, the joint effects from these distortions are greater
than the sum of their individual effects. For instance, when examined in isolation crime low-
ers output by 3 percent and financial frictions lower output by 20 percent in the Colombia
economy; when examined jointly they account for a 28 percent reduction in output—a more
than 20 percent bigger effect on output than the sum of their individual components. Simi-
larly for consumption—examined in isolation crime and financial frictions lower output by 5
and 20 percent respectively, but when evaluated together consumption falls by 32 percent.28
Put differently, about 63 percent of the drop in consumption is accounted for by financial
frictions, about 15 percent by crime and the remaining 22 percent is due to the interaction
of these distortions.

       The model provides a simple intuition for the amplification mechanism. As already dis-
cussed, in models that feature financial frictions, entrepreneurs can self-finance and overcome
collateral constraints. Crime hinders this process because as constrained entrepreneurs ex-
pand they become a bigger target for crime. In equilibrium, the proportion of individuals with
  27
     Setting λ = 1 and re-calibrating φ to match the proportion of capital financed through external sources
generates a value almost identical to the one in Table 4. Hence, the results reported in column “Finance” in
Table 6 represents the quantitative effects from a model that only features financial frictions.
  28
     We find similar patterns for alternative calibrated economies to data in Brazil and Peru, see Appendix
A.4.



                                                    39
  Figure 8: Crime across entrepreneur productivity and wealth in the Colombia economy


                                                        1



                                                                                                                                                          0.02
          P r ob . of n ot f ac i n g c r i me , 1-F




                                                                                                                             e x p r op r i at i on , e
                                                       0.9




                                                                                                                                                          0.01




                                                                                                                ahigh
                                                       0.8
                                                                                                                amed
                                                                                                                a
                                                                                                                 low

                                                                                                                                                            0
                                                             E nt r e p r e n e u r p r o d u c t i v i ty, s                                                    E nt r e p r e n e u r p r o d u c t i v i ty, s




low wealth rises and the wealth distribution becomes positive skewed amplifying aggregate
losses.

    Financial frictions magnify the severity of crime as well. In the model, high productivity
entrepreneurs buy protection to limit their exposure to crime. Financial frictions restrict
establishment size and spending on protection which raises the potential for crime. Figure 8
shows overall protection, 1 − F (λ, p), and the fraction of capital lost due to crime across
entrepreneur productivity in the Colombian economy. The solid line in the left panel shows
overall protection for high asset (or relatively unconstrained) entrepreneurs, and the corre-
sponding line on the right panel shows the fraction of capital expropriated, contingent on
facing crime. High productivity entrepreneurs, who account for the bulk of aggregate out-
put, face minimal losses from crime (the curve is hump-shaped in productivity). In contrast,
low/moderate asset–high productivity entrepreneurs face a higher probability of crime and
lose a larger share of capital (dashed and dotted lines in the figure). For these entrepreneurs,
financial frictions limit their scale of operation, spending on protection and increase the
severity of crime.

    Taken together, crime limits entrepreneur self-financing and financial frictions raise the


                                                                                                                        40
probability of crime. These channels are reinforcing, and account for the amplification effects
on output, capital and consumption.



5.3       Policy reform

A long standing question in economic development surrounds which institutional factors are
most crucial for development. A strand of the literature stresses that a strong rule of law is
critical to incentivize investment and business expansion, thereby spurring development (e.g.,
Besley, 1995; Shleifer and Vishny, 1998; Svensson, 1998). Another strand of the literature
emphasizes that financial markets are essential for the efficient allocation of resources across
establishments and is a key component for economic development (e.g., King and Levine,
1993; Levine, 1997; Rajan and Zingales, 1998). While the underlying mechanisms in both
literatures are important, it remains elusive which institutional factor is most relevant for
development. Our framework allows us to provide some insight into this question by assessing
the relative importance of each institutional factor for development, side-stepping issues
related to identification often encountered in empirical work in this area.29

       We ask, do comparable improvements in financial market development (φ) or the rule of
law (λ) have differential effects on aggregate output? If so, how do the differences depend
on the level of institutional development of the country (e.g., the level of φ and λ)? Our
approach is to evaluate the long-run effects on aggregate outcomes of a hypothetical policy
reform that improves either financial markets (φ) or the rule of law (λ). Our analysis focuses
on the long-run benefits associated with a given reform, abstracting from important issues
such as the cost of the reform, the transition to long-run outcomes, the source of reform
or political viability, and the important details of implementation, among others. For this
  29
     Determining the relative importance of rule of law and financial frictions for development empirically
is challenging since improvements in one source of institutional measure often triggers an improvement in
another institutional measure, preventing identification. An exception is Johnson et al. (2002) who use an
exogenous policy change in post-Communist Europe to evaluate the effects of improved access to finance
across six countries.



                                                    41
reason, we refrain from making statements on welfare from these reforms. We assume only
one of these reforms is implemented at a time. Reforms that improve the rule of law can
be interpreted as policies that lower crime and reforms that improve financial markets are
policies that increase access to finance.30

       Table 7 reports values for steady-state aggregate output across economies that differ in
the rule of law and financial market development, based on the range of calibrated parameters
from Section 4.3. The numbers reported in the table are relative to aggregate output in the
economy with λ = φ = 0.3. We begin with financial market reform, studying the effects of
improving access to finance from φ = 0.3 across economies that differ in the rule of law λ.
Improving access to finance raises output in each case, with the largest effects in economies
that have a weak rule of law. For example, improving access to finance from φ = 0.3 to
0.9 (roughly equivalent to a policy that raises external finance to capital ratio from 21 to 62
percent) increases aggregate output by 36 percent in the economy with a weak rule of law
λ = 0.3, whereas 28 percent in the economy with λ = 0.9.31 Improving access to finance in
low λ economies not only improves the allocation of resources across entrepreneurs, but also
enables them to negate the potential of crime by spending on protection, amplifying output
gains. We now focus on the reform of the rule of law, evaluating the effects of improving
the rule of law from λ = 0.3 across economies that differ in financial market development
φ. Output increases substantially in each case with the largest gains in economies that have
weak financial markets. For example, a reform that increases λ from 0.3 to 0.9 (roughly
equivalent to a policy that lowers incidence of crime from 55 to 3 percent) generates an
increase in output of 52 percent for the φ = 0.3 economy and 42 percent in the φ = 0.9
economy.

       Our results indicate that when the rule of law is relatively weak, i.e. λ < 0.4, improving
  30
      There are many examples of large-scale economy-wide reforms. Related to access to finance, recent
examples include a major reform in India in 1998 (Banerjee and Duflo, 2014) and in Mexico in 2014. Mexico’s
stance on the drug war in 2010 is an example of a policy reform that aims to improve the rule of law.
   31
      In the undistorted economy with λ = φ = 1, the crime rate is zero percent and external finance to capital
is 77 percent.


                                                      42
                    Table 7: Effects of policy reform on aggregate output

                                                 Access to finance φ:
                           Rule of law λ:       0.3 0.5 0.7 0.9
                                0.3            1.00    1.11   1.24    1.36
                                0.5            1.38    1.54   1.71    1.89
                                0.7            1.48    1.62   1.77    1.93
                                0.9            1.52    1.65   1.79    1.94
                           Notes: Aggregate output across economies that
                          differ in institutional development (φ, λ) relative
                          to aggregate output in the economy with φ = λ =
                          0.3.


the rule of law is more important for development than improving financial markets, and when
the rule of law is above this threshold, improving financial markets becomes more important
for development. Within the context of the model, in countries where the probability an
establishment faces crime exceeds 33 percent and crime as percentage of output is close to
2 percent, improving the rule of law has larger effects on output than improving access to
finance. To appreciate this point note in Table 7 that the output gains from improvements
in the rule of law mostly occur from 0.3 to 0.5, whereas for financial market development
the gains are spread more evenly over the increase in access to finance. These results imply
that when the rule of law is weak, improving it should take priority over financial market
development; beyond this, improving financial market development becomes more important.
Of course, the costs of improving these institutions could be vastly different and hence these
findings should be interpreted with this in mind.

   These results relate to the empirical literature on why access to finance programs can have
muted effects, see for instance Berge et al. (2015) and Karlan et al. (2014). Our framework
emphasizes that in environments where other factors are more pressing concerns, such as
crime, policies that improve access to finance are likely to have smaller effects. In other words,
the rule of law is a precondition to reap the benefits from financial market development. We
note that our results imply that in several countries in the world (for instance, Guatemala,
South Africa, Costa Rica and Chile, where crime rates exceed 35 percent) improving the rule

                                                  43
of law (lowering crime) is essential for development, whereas for most countries, improving
financial markets is the most relevant institution for development.




6     Conclusion

We developed an integrated framework to evaluate the effects of two highly relevant insti-
tutions that are prevalent in developing countries: weak access to finance and crime. The
framework is an otherwise standard model of occupational choice and entrepreneurship ex-
tended to incorporate financial frictions and the rule of law. A calibrated version of this
framework revealed several key insights. First, weak access to finance and rule of law have
strong negative effects on aggregate outcomes, reducing output by close to two-fold factor
relative to a undistorted economy. Second, we find strong complementarities among the two
institutions we consider, that is we find the amplification effects of crime and access to fi-
nance on macro variables to be substantial. In our model output losses are amplified because
weak access to finance lowers the ability of an entrepreneur to buy protection against crime,
thereby raising the possibility for crime. Likewise, crime deters the self-finance motive which
exacerbates the effects on output from financial frictions. Third, we studied the effects of
policy reforms in our framework. When both financial market development and the rule of
law are weak, policies that improve the rule of law have a bigger positive impact on aggregate
output than those that improve financial market development. However, at reasonable levels
of rule of law, polices that liberalize financial markets increase output more than further
improvements in rule of law. An interpretation of our result is that financial markets are
crucial for development, but a necessary condition is that property rights are secure.

    Recent empirical studies on micro-finance programs show mixed results and a lack of
consensus whether these programs are an effective tool for promoting development (e.g Karlan
et al., 2014; Berge et al., 2015). Our results highlight that expropriation can influence whether
micro-finance programs have viable long-run effects. In particular, our results indicate that

                                               44
polices that liberalize financial markets have large aggregate output effects in economies
where the rule of law is at least moderate, but much smaller effects when the rule of law
is weak. A relevant extension of our analysis would be to incorporate the rule of law in
macroeconomic studies of micro-finance programs such as the quantitative study in Buera
et al. (2014).

   We have focused on the misallocation effects created by weak access to finance and rule
of law. A weak rule of law and the prevalence of crime can help account for why managers
in less developed countries do not utilize the best management practices as emphasized in
Bloom and VanReenen (2010), Bloom et al. (2010), and Bloom et al. (2013). We leave this
potentially useful exploration for future research.




                                              45
References

Acemoglu, D., Johnson, S., Robinson, J., 2001. The Colonial Origins of Comparative Devel-
  opment: An Empirical Investigation. American Economic Review 91 (9), 1369–1401.

Amaral, P., Quintin, E., 2010. Limited Enforcement, Financial Intermediation and Economic
  Development: A Quantitative Analysis. International Economic Review 51 (3), 785–811.

Banerjee, A., Duflo, E., 2014. Do Firms Want to Borrow More? Testing Credit Constraints
  Using a Directed Lending Program. Review of Economic Studies 81 (2), 572–607.

Bartelsman, E., Haltiwanger, J., Scarpetta, S., 2013. Cross Country Differences in Produc-
  tivity: The Role of Allocative Efficiency. American Economic Review 103 (1), 305–334.

Beck, T., Demirguc-Kunt, A., Levine, R., 2000. A New Database on the Structure and
  Development of the Financial Sector. World Bank Economic Review 14: 597605.

Berge, L., Bjorvatn, K., Tungodden, B., 2015. Human and financial capital for microenter-
  prise development: Evidence from a field and lab experiment. Management Science 61 (4),
  707–722.

Besley, T., 1995. Property Rights and Investment Incentives: Theory and Evidence from
  Ghana. Journal of Political Economy 103 (5), 903–937.

Bloom, N., Eifert, B., Mahajan, A., McKenzie, D., Roberts, J., 2013. Does Management
  Matter? Evidence from India. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 128 (1), 1–51.

Bloom, N., Mahajan, A., McKenzie, D., Roberts, J., May 2010. Why Do Firms in Developing
  Countries Have Low Productivity? American Economic Review 100 (2), 619–23.

Bloom, N., VanReenen, J., Winter 2010. Why Do Management Practices Differ across Firms
  and Countries? Journal of Economic Perspectives 24 (1), 203–24.




                                           46
Buera, F., Kaboski, J., Shin, Y., 2011. Finance and Development: A Tale of Two Sectors.
  American Economic Review 101 (5), 1964–2002.

Buera, F., Shin, Y., 2011. Self-Insurance vs. Self-Financing: A Welfare Analysis of the Per-
  sistence of Shocks. Journal of Economic Theory 146, 845–862.

Buera, F., Shin, Y., 2013. Financial Frictions and the Persistence of History: A Quantitative
  Exploration. Journal of Political Economy 121 (2), 221–272.

Buera, F. J., Kaboski, J. P., Shin, Y., 2014. The Macroeconomics of Microfinance.
  Manuscript, University of Washington, St. Louis.

Cagetti, M., DeNardi, M., 2006. Entrepreneurship, Frictions and Wealth. Journal of Political
  Economy 114 (5), 835–870.

Caselli, F., Gennaioli, N., 2013. Dynastic Management. Economic Inquiry 51 (1), 971–996.

Greenwood, J., Sanchez, J., Wang, C., 2013. Quantifying the Impact of Financial Develop-
  ment on Economic Development. Review of Economic Dynamics 16 (1), 194–215.

Hallward-Driemeier, M., Pritchett, L., 2015. How Business is Done in the Developing World:
  Deals versus Rules. The Journal of Economic Perspectives 29 (3), 121–140.

Hopenhayn, H. A., 2014. Firms, misallocation, and aggregate productivity: A review. Annu.
  Rev. Econ. 6 (1), 735–770.

Hsieh, C.-T., Klenow, P. J., 2009. Misallocation and Manufacturing productivity in China
  and India. Quarterly Journal of Economics 124 (4), 1403–1448.

Jeong, H., Townsend, R. M., 2007. Sources of TFP Growth: Occupational Choice and Fi-
  nancial Deepening. Economic Theory 32, 179–221.

Johnson, S., McMillan, J., Woodruff, C., 2002. Property Rights and Finance. American
  Economic Review 92 (5), 1335–1356.

                                             47
Karlan, D., Knight, R., Udry, C., 2014. Consulting and Capital Experiments with Micro and
  Small Tailoring Enterprises in Ghana. Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization.

King, R., Levine, R., 1993. Finance and growth: Schumpeter might be right. Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 108 (3), 717–737.

Levine, R., 1997. Financial Development and Economic Growth: Views and Agenda. Journal
  of Economic Literature 35 (2), 688–726.

Levine, R., Loazya, N., Beck, T., 2000. Financial intermediation and growth: Causality and
  causes. Journal of Monetary Economics 46, 31–77.

Lucas, R., 1978. On the Size Distribution of Business Firms. The Bell Journal of Economics
  9 (2), 508–523.

McMillan, J., 1997. Markets in Transition. In: Advances in economics and econometrics:
  Theory and applications. Cambridge University Press, pp. 210–239.

Midrigan, V., Xu, D. Y., 2014. Finance and Misallocation: Evidence from Plant-Level Data.
  American Economic Review 104 (2), 422–458.

Moll, B., 2014. Productivity Losses from Financial Frictions: Can Self-Financing Undo Cap-
  ital Misallocation. American Economic Review 104 (1), 3186–3221.

Rajan, R. G., Zingales, L., 1998. Financial Dependance and Growth. American Economic
  Review 88 (3), 559–586.

Ranasinghe, A., 2017. Property Rights, Extortion and the Misallocation of Talent. European
  Economic Review 98, 86–110.

Restuccia, D., Rogerson, R., 2008. Policy distortions and aggregate productivity with het-
  erogeneous establishments. Review of Economic Dynamics 11 (4), 707–720.




                                            48
Restuccia, D., Rogerson, R., 2013. Misallocation and productivity. Review of Economic Dy-
  namics 16 (1), 1–10.

Restuccia, D., Rogerson, R., 2017. The causes and costs of misallocation. Journal of Economic
  Perspectives 31 (3), 151–74.

Shleifer, A., 1997. Government in Transition. European Economic Review 41, 385–410.

Shleifer, A., Vishny, R. W., 1998. The grabbing hand: Government pathologies and their
  cures. Harvard University Press.

Svensson, J., 1998. Investment, Property Rights and Political Instability: Theory and Evi-
  dence. European Economic Review 42 (7), 1317–1341.




                                             49
A     Appendix

A.1     Data sources and countries
The descriptive statistics presented in Table 1 are based on the most recent country-level data
from the World Bank Enterprise Surveys 2006-17 (enterprisesurveys/data). Table A.1
reports country-level statistics on the percentage of establishments that report finance and
crime as severe/major obstacles to business operation. Countries in the sample with year of
survey are grouped by sub-continents. There are 138 countries in our sample.
    Statistics reported in Table 1 are simple averages based on the number of countries in a
sub-continent. These statistics differ from the sub-continent averages reported in the WBES
website because we include all countries to calculate averages, whereas the WBES does not
include high-income countries. Also reported are country-level statistics on the proportion
of investment financed by banks and average losses from crime as a share of sales among
establishments that face crime. Figures 1 and 2 are based on the sample of countries reported
in Table A.1 as well. The statistic for crime as an obstacle to doing business is not reported
for Madagascar, and losses from crime as a percentage of sales among establishments that
face crime is not reported for Dominica and Uzbekistan, which accounts for the slight sample
size differences in Figures 1 and 2.

                  Table A.1: Country-level statistics for crime and finance

 Country                                ISO      Major obstacles     Investment     Losses
                                        code    to doing business:   financed by from crime
                                                Finance Crime         banks (%) (% of sales)
 Sub-Saharan Africa
 Angola (2010)                          AGO         38.4    28.1         5.2           12.4
 Benin (2016)                           BEN         43.2    16.0          3.6           3.1
 Botswana (2010)                        BWA         25.5    22.6         24.7           3.1
 Burkina Faso (2009)                    BFA         75.0    42.2         15.6           3.1
 Burundi (2014)                         BDI         36.7     8.0         14.8           3.8
 Cabo Verde (2009)                      CPV         36.7    62.3         23.9           3.9
 Cameroon (2016)                        CMR         41.1    28.3          4.1           8.9
 Central African Republic (2011)        CAF         46.0    25.6          4.8          12.0
 Chad (2009)                            TCD         46.5    45.8          2.3           6.5
 Congo, Dem. Rep. (2013)                COD         39.1    27.8          0.9           8.3
 Congo, Rep. (2009)                     COG         44.8    44.1          4.0          16.9
 Côte d’Ivoire (2016)                  CIV         69.1    64.4         14.9          10.1
 Ethiopia (2015)                        ETH         20.3     2.4          7.8           3.4
 Gabon (2009)                           GAB         30.4    34.1          3.2           3.5
 Gambia, The (2006)                     GMB         40.3    12.3          9.8           8.6
 Ghana (2013)                           GHA         62.2     9.9         12.6           7.8
 Guinea (2016)                          GIN         30.4    36.4          2.8           9.6


                                               50
               Table A.1: Country-level statistics for crime and finance

Country                             ISO      Major obstacles     Investment     Losses
                                    code    to doing business:   financed by from crime
                                            Finance Crime         banks (%) (% of sales)
Guinea-Bissau (2006)               GNB          71.6    29.6         0.8        3.3
Kenya (2013)                       KEN          17.2    21.2        23.9         5.0
Lesotho (2016)                     LSO          32.8    33.2        18.8        17.3
Liberia (2017)                     LBR          38.8    27.3        10.9         9.3
Madagascar (2013)                  MDG          12.6      -          4.3         5.3
Malawi (2014)                      MWI          34.9    20.7        13.8        8.5
Mali (2016)                        MLI          63.5    57.1        19.0         4.0
Mauritania (2014)                  MRT          52.4    21.4         9.0         7.8
Mauritius (2009)                   MUS          46.3    41.5        30.8        10.5
Mozambique (2007)                  MOZ          50.1    33.6         4.7         5.0
Namibia (2014)                     NAM          37.2    16.4        25.6        12.5
Niger (2017)                       NER          27.4    25.8        14.1         4.5
Nigeria (2014)                     NGA          33.1     7.0         3.4        13.6
Rwanda (2011)                      RWA          35.1    10.7        13.5         4.6
Senegal (2014)                     SEN          51.6    12.7         6.6         5.3
Sierra Leone (2017)                SLE          65.1    20.6         1.3        11.7
South Africa (2007)                ZAF          15.5    38.0        25.8         2.4
South Sudan (2014)                 SSD          50.0    23.6         2.4        10.8
Swaziland (2016)                   SWZ          10.0    30.8        12.7        7.1
Tanzania (2013)                    TZA          43.9    21.1         8.8         6.8
Togo (2016)                        TGO          51.2    32.0        17.6         7.3
Uganda (2013)                      UGA          19.6    22.0         3.1         7.2
Zambia (2013)                      ZMB          27.4    10.5         6.6        10.5
Zimbabwe (2016)                    ZWE          55.9     7.4        11.7         4.6
Central America
Antigua and Barbuda (2010)         ATG          41.1    38.9        32.3         2.6
Bahamas (2010)                     BHS          12.9    19.5        11.7         1.7
Barbados (2010)                    BRB          41.1     1.2        12.8         0.6
Belize (2010)                      BLZ          66.8    52.3        18.1         1.0
Costa Rica (2010)                  CRI          41.8    21.3        14.2         1.3
Dominica (2010)                    DMA          64.2    17.8        22.1          -
Dominican Republic (2016)          DOM          14.3    32.4        28.3         6.6
El Salvador (2016)                 SLV          20.7    48.5        20.0         3.3
Grenada (2010)                     GRD          24.4    20.3        27.6         4.6
Guatemala (2010)                   GTM          19.6    43.8        22.4         4.3
Honduras (2016)                    HND          40.7    29.7        26.1         7.2
Jamaica (2010)                     JAM          40.4    46.1        21.8         3.4
Mexico (2010)                      MEX          29.6    29.1         8.8         3.6
Nicaragua (2016)                   NIC          11.0    11.6        36.4         3.5

                                           51
              Table A.1: Country-level statistics for crime and finance

Country                            ISO      Major obstacles     Investment     Losses
                                   code    to doing business:   financed by from crime
                                           Finance Crime         banks (%) (% of sales)
Panama (2010)                     PAN           1.0     8.2         0.8         5.6
St. Kitts and Nevis (2010)        KNA          38.8    46.6        32.3         2.7
St. Lucia (2010)                  LCA          57.1    21.8        22.7         1.6
St. Vincent and Grenadines (2010) VCT          29.9    24.0        28.8         4.7
Trinidad and Tobago (2010)        TTO          29.2    34.2        19.1         1.7
East Asia and Pacific
Cambodia (2016)                   KHM          16.9    24.2         0.9        3.2
China (2012)                      CHN          2.9      0.8        4.5         0.5
Fiji (2009)                        FJI          6.7    17.6        30.9        3.6
Indonesia (2015)                  IDN          16.5    14.2        12.8        9.2
Lao PDR (2016)                    LAO          5.7      0.2        10.6        1.9
Malaysia (2015)                   MYS          12.0    13.3        15.7        8.5
Micronesia (2009)                 FSM          24.2    19.1         5.4         4.6
Mongolia (2013)                   MNG          31.7     7.8        11.6         3.6
Myanmar (2016)                    MMR           9.9     5.2        3.2         1.1
Papua New Guinea (2015)           PNG           3.2    38.7        26.6        4.8
Philippines (2015)                PHL          10.7    10.9        10.1         1.3
Samoa (2009)                      WSM          16.1    23.0        29.2        10.3
Solomon Islands (2015)            SLB           5.8    22.0        11.6         2.6
Thailand (2016)                   THA           2.4     0.6        8.9         0.8
Timor-Leste (2015)                TLS          18.4     5.7         2.8        15.2
Tonga (2009)                      TON          14.8     6.7        26.5        4.0
Vanuatu (2009)                    VUT          29.0    35.6        26.3        6.4
Vietnam (2015)                    VNM          10.8     4.1        15.4         3.5
Europe and Central Asia
Albania (2013)                    ALB           6.4     3.8        4.5          1.4
Armenia (2013)                    ARM          25.9     3.0        9.5          3.6
Azerbaijan (2013)                 AZE          22.1     0.3        21.9         2.3
Belarus (2013)                    BLR          16.3     7.4        14.3         1.9
Bosnia and Herzegovina (2013)     BIH          14.1     7.2        23.9         2.5
Bulgaria (2013)                   BGR          19.3     8.3        15.0         3.4
Croatia (2013)                    HRV          22.7     8.0        18.6         1.7
Czech Republic (2013)             CZE          16.4     8.8        18.5         1.8
Estonia (2013)                    EST           6.6     2.4        20.8         1.0
Georgia (2013)                    GEO          18.3     4.8        12.1         2.2
Hungary (2013)                    HUN           9.1     4.1        15.5         0.8
Kazakhstan (2013)                 KAZ           8.8     8.4         8.8         3.7
Kosovo (2013)                     XKX          44.9    46.6        16.1         3.1
Kyrgyz Republic (2013)            KGZ          26.1    18.3        8.7          3.3

                                          52
               Table A.1: Country-level statistics for crime and finance

Country                             ISO      Major obstacles     Investment     Losses
                                    code    to doing business:   financed by from crime
                                            Finance Crime         banks (%) (% of sales)
Latvia (2013)                      LVA          13.2     9.0         6.2        1.6
Lithuania (2013)                   LTU          17.3    15.7        16.7         4.3
Macedonia (2013)                   MKD          19.3     9.0        11.1        2.5
Moldova (2013)                     MDA           7.2     5.6         7.7        3.1
Montenegro (2013)                  MNE           7.6     4.1        16.6        4.1
Poland (2013)                      POL          15.6     8.2        12.1        2.2
Romania (2013)                     ROU          33.5    22.3        14.6        2.8
Russian (2012)                     RUS          28.0    12.4         6.3         3.0
Serbia (2013)                      SRB          15.7     7.4        14.6        1.8
Slovak Republic (2013)             SVK          10.6     3.6        16.9        1.6
Slovenia (2013)                    SVN          20.0    10.4        17.8         0.7
Sudan (2014)                       SDN          15.3     9.3         2.4        4.5
Sweden (2014)                      SWE           3.3    6.9         12.0        0.8
Tajikistan (2013)                  TJK          22.6     8.3         5.1        12.8
Turkey (2013)                      TUR           8.7     5.7        31.4        4.7
Ukraine (2013)                     UKR          12.5    8.3         11.0        3.8
Uzbekistan (2013)                  UZB           5.2     2.5        12.0          -
Middle East and North Africa
Djibouti (2013)                    DJI          11.8    10.2        13.8         4.4
Egypt (2016)                       EGY          23.4    10.3         7.9        17.0
Iraq (2011)                        IRQ          46.2    35.2        1.5         10.0
Israel (2013)                      ISR           3.0     1.7        31.6         1.2
Jordan (2013)                      JOR          42.8    3.4         25.0        15.8
Lebanon (2013)                     LBN          41.5    33.0        32.9         5.4
Morocco (2013)                     MAR          27.7    18.4        23.4         4.0
Tunisia (2013)                     TUN          23.9     8.8        12.9         9.8
West Bank and Gaza (2013)          PSE          53.3    32.2        6.0         14.8
Yemen (2013)                       YEM          45.5    61.8        1.2          4.9
South America
Argentina (2010)                   ARG          43.5    29.4        13.9         2.0
Bolivia (2017)                     BOL          14.0    26.1        23.5         5.9
Brazil (2009)                      BRA          45.2    68.6        32.3         6.9
Chile (2010)                       CHL          17.6    37.5        32.5         1.7
Colombia (2010)                    COL          41.4    32.5        21.2         1.1
Ecuador (2017)                     ECU          13.3    18.0        18.2         2.3
Guyana (2010)                      GUY          18.2    35.7        21.6         2.5
Paraguay (2017)                    PRY           8.1    14.1        25.3         2.3
Peru (2010)                        PER           8.5    27.6        34.7         2.8
Suriname (2010)                    SUR          36.2    34.2        24.3         2.2

                                           53
                   Table A.1: Country-level statistics for crime and finance

 Country                                 ISO      Major obstacles     Investment     Losses
                                         code    to doing business:   financed by from crime
                                                 Finance Crime         banks (%) (% of sales)
 Uruguay (2017)                         URY          20.6    27.4        18.8           2.1
 Venezuela (2010)                       VEN          9.2     59.4        22.8           3.6
 South Asia
 Afghanistan (2014)                     AFG          47.6    57.5         1.5           24.2
 Bangladesh (2013)                      BGD          22.8     8.0        12.4           3.9
 Bhutan (2015)                          BTN          16.4    1.2         18.9           7.1
 India (2014)                           IND          15.1     4.6        18.1            2.7
 Nepal (2013)                           NPL          40.1    13.8        12.8           10.2
 Pakistan (2013)                        PAK          13.2    34.1         2.0           6.5
 Sri Lanka (2011)                       LKA          30.2     4.5        35.4            1.8



A.2     Access to finance and crime by establishment size
Table A.2 documents the sample characteristics for the results reported in Table 2 where we
regress measures of access to finance and crime on establishment size. The table reports the
number of observations for each variable by country and also the proportion of establishments
that are small (less than or equal to 20 employees). The WBES classifies establishment
responses to subjective questions, broadly defined, as truthful, somewhat truthful and not
truthful, and for more objective questions as reliable and unreliable. In generating our
sample, we exclude establishments whose responses are deemed not truthful and unreliable
(about 8 percent of the initial sample), as well as establishments that do not report number
of full-time employees. We then drop countries that survey fewer than 500 establishments,
which leaves a sample of 40 countries from the WBES 2006-17.
    Table 2 shows that the adverse effects of limited access to finance falls with establishment
size, the likelihood of facing crime rises with size, and that crime as an obstacle to doing
business is non-monotone across size. Specifically, crime as an obstacle to doing business
rises with size for small establishments (n ≤ 20 employees) and falls among non-small es-
tablishments (n > 20 employees), where we use the definition for small establishments from
the WBES. We investigate whether the pattern that crime as an obstacle to doing business
rises with size for small establishments and falls with non-small establishments hold under
alternative definitions of small establishments. We consider two alternate definitions of small
establishments: n ≤ 15 and n ≤ 40. Table A.3 shows the results. The general pattern
highlighted in Table 2 that crime as an obstacle to doing business rises with size for small
establishments, and falls with size for non-small establishments (to an extent), holds for these
alternative definitions of small establishments.
   Table A.4 documents that the patterns highlighted in Table 2 also hold when we use the
number of full-time employees as a regressor instead of a categorical variable for establishment

                                                54
Table A.2: Sample information on establishment-level observations for access to finance and
crime by country

       Country        Year         Number of observations for:         Percentage
                             Finance    Borrow      Crime Faced          of small
                             obstacle from banks obstacle crime        estabs. (%)
       Argentina      2010      984         991         994     992        34.8
       Bangladesh     2013     1385        1382        1390     1390       38.9
       Brazil         2009     1635        1625        1649     1651       40.9
       Chile          2010     1001         994        1010     1007       32.8
       China          2012     2591        2562        2610     2613       26.3
       Colombia       2010      900         901         905     905        40.7
       Egypt          2016     1666        1663        1659     1657       41.9
       El Salvador    2016      642         648         655      652       53.9
       Ethiopia       2015      797          0          746      811       53.6
       Ghana          2013      659         655         663      662       68.9
       India          2014     8742        8293        8713     8751       37.7
       Iraq           2011      649         655         651      650       86.3
       Kazakhstan     2013      536         550         554     557        56.3
       Kenya          2013      714         693        722      720        52.4
       Malaysia       2015      783         783         783      779       36.3
       Mexico         2010     1329        1345        1342     1345       36.0
       Myanmar        2016      575         581         582      587       64.5
       Namibia        2014      531         457         534      533       77.9
       Nigeria        2014     2270        2100        2302     2312       71.0
       Pakistan       2013     1151        1014        1187     1162       47.5
       Peru           2010      963         958         963      964       36.6
       Philippines    2009     1257        1199        1290     1297       39.4
       Poland         2013      514         439         504      515       59.3
       Romania        2013      520         520         518      524       60.8
       Russia         2012     3865        3890        3883     3958       58.6
       Senegal        2014      547         538         551      548       74.1
       South Africa   2007      934        934          934      932       43.2
       South Sudan    2014      652         651         657     656        90.7
       Sri Lanka      2011      551         527         565      568       54.6
       Sudan          2014      594         586         594      577       68.0
       Sweden         2014      580         552         585      585       36.8
       Tanzania       2013      642         467         642      658       68.1
       Thailand       2016      933         948         946      943       45.2
       Tunisia        2013      571         566         571     571        39.4
       Turkey         2013     1217        1211        1203     1240       45.8
       Uganda         2013      620         604        637      630        72.3
       Ukraine        2013      864         744         862      863       55.2
       Vietnam        2009     1,010       1024        1028     1038       29.6
       Zambia         2013      656         648         666      670       65.1
       Zimbabwe       2016      566         560         567      566       61.4
                                            55
Table A.3: Access to finance and crime by size, alternative definitions of small establishments

                                        (1)                        (2)                         (3)                   (4)
                                  Finance obstacle          Borrow from banks             Crime obstacle         Faced crime
                                      (0 − 4)                    (0 − 4)                     (0 − 4)              (yes/no)
  Establishments with
  ≤ 15 employees:
  Establishment size                    −0.043                     0.255∗∗∗                    0.056∗∗               −0.005
                                        (0.0298)                     (0.0341)                  (0.0284)             (0.0368)
  Observations                           16637                       15814                      16731                 16837

  Establishments with
  > 15 employees:
  Establishment size                  −0.061∗∗∗                    0.126∗∗∗                    −0.010               0.075∗∗∗
                                        (0.0103)                     (0.0114)                  (0.0081)             (0.0137)
  Observations                           30615                       29318                      30737                 30847


  Establishments with
  ≤ 40 employees:
  Establishment size                  −0.045∗∗∗                    0.159∗∗∗                   0.040∗∗∗              0.079∗∗∗
                                        (0.0129)                     (0.0143)                  (0.0114)             (0.0181)
  Observations                           30500                       29123                      30673                 30804

  Establishments with
  > 40 employees:
  Establishment size                  −0.140∗∗∗                    0.133∗∗∗                   −0.041∗               0.097∗∗∗
                                        (0.0251)                     (0.0285)                  (0.0216)             (0.0299)
  Observations                           16752                       16009                      16795                 16880

  Notes: The table reports point estimates of an ordered Logit regression for alternate definitions of small and non-small
 establishments. Establishment size is an independent categorical variable based on full-time employees: ≤ 5, 6 − 9, 10 − 14,
 15 − 20, 21 − 30, 31 − 40, 41 − 50, 51 − 100, 101 − 250 and 251 − 5000. Dependent variables in columns (1) and (3) are
 whether access to finance and crime are not an obstacle, a minor, moderate, major or severe obstacle to business operation
 (0 − 4 scale). The dependent variable in column (2) is the percentage of working capital borrowed from banks (0 − 4 scale),
 and in column (4) is whether an establishment faced crime in the last year (yes/no). Categories for percentage of working
 capital borrowed from banks are 0%, 1 − 25%, 26 − 50%, 51 − 75% and > 75%. All estimates include industry, city, country,
 and continent-level fixed effects, as well as time fixed effects to account for differences in survey year. Industry-level controls
 are manufacturing, services and core industries, and city-level controls are related to population size. Standard errors are
 clustered at the country-level. ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ and ∗ denote significance at the 1, 5 and 10 percent level.




                                                                56
         Table A.4: Access to finance and crime across establishment size (employees)

                                        (1)                        (2)                         (3)                   (4)
                                  Finance obstacle          Borrow from banks             Crime obstacle         Faced crime
                                      (0 − 4)                    (0 − 4)                     (0 − 4)              (yes/no)
   Establishments with
   ≤ 500 employees:
   Establishment size                −0.00143∗∗∗                  0.00306∗∗∗                   0.00005             0.00181∗∗∗
                                       (0.00025)                   (0.00022)                  (0.00015)             (0.00034)

   Observations                          45238                       43248                      45444                 45665

   Establishments with
   ≤ 20 employees:
   Establishment size                −0.0133∗∗∗                    0.0402∗∗∗                 0.0122∗∗∗             0.0151∗∗∗
                                       (0.00461)                   (0.00356)                  (0.00345)             (0.00450)

   Observations                          22569                       21515                      22697                 22816

   Establishments with
   > 20 employees:
   Establishment size                −0.00118∗∗∗                  0.00174∗∗∗                −0.00031∗∗             0.00099∗∗∗
                                       (0.00022)                   (0.00018)                  (0.00014)             (0.00029)

   Observations                          22669                       21733                      22747                 22849
  Notes: The table reports point estimates of an ordered Logit regression for establishments with 0 ≤ n < 500, n ≤ 20 and
 20 < n ≤ 500, where number of full-time employees is the independent variable. Dependent variables in columns (1) and
 (3) are whether access to finance and crime are not an obstacle, a minor, moderate, major or severe obstacle to business
 operation (0 − 4 scale). The dependent variable in column (2) is the percentage of working capital borrowed from banks
 (0 − 4 scale), and in column (4) is whether an establishment faced crime in the last year (yes/no). Categories for percentage
 of working capital borrowed from banks are 0%, 1−25%, 26−50%, 51−75% and > 75%. All estimates include industry, city,
 country, and continent-level fixed effects, as well as time fixed effects to account for differences in survey year. Industry-level
 controls are manufacturing, services and core industries, and city-level controls are related to population size. Standard
 errors are clustered at the country-level. ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ and ∗ denote significance at the 1, 5 and 10 percent level.



size.


A.3       Data moments
In Section 4.2 we use the most recent year from the WBES 2006-17 for Colombia, which
is the 2010 Survey, to obtain relevant moments in the data to discipline our quantitative
analysis. Here we provide more detail on how these moments are calculated. We exclude
establishments that report negative values for number of full-time employees and sales (value-
added), and set losses from crime and external finance equal to zero for non-responses. We
also exclude establishments whose responses to subjective questions are deemed not truthful
and for objective questions that are deemed unreliable, as reported in the WBES. To ensure
our moments are not sensitive to outliers, particularly for the crime and protection shares


                                                                57
we target, we exclude the top one percent of establishments in sales, employees, protection
and crime. We are left with a sample of 803 establishments for Colombia.
    Establishments report whether they experienced losses as a result of crime (yes or no,
question i3 in the Surveys). Summing over establishments that report yes relative to all
establishments gives us the percentage of establishments that face crime.32 Also reported
are annual losses from crime as a percentage of sales (i4a) and sales (d2); the product of
these two variables determines monetary losses from crime. Similarly the product of annual
spending on security as a percentage of sales (i2) and sales determines annual protection
expenditure. The aggregate crime to output ratio is the sum of monetary losses from crime
across establishments divided by the sum of value-added sales across establishments. Value-
added sales is calculated as annual sales less intermediate inputs in production (n2b, n2e, n2f ,
n2j and n2i). Following a similar approach, we use establishment spending on security to
obtain aggregate spending on protection relative to output. To target the share of monetary
losses from crime among the top decile of the distribution, we take the sum of losses from
crime in the top decile (by employees) and divide by aggregate losses from crime; similarly
for the share of protection expenditure across the top decile. The sum of losses from crime
and spending on protection, relative to value added sales, among the top 50 percent of
establishments (by employees) is calculated in a similar manner. For value of capital, we use
the replacement cost of machinery/equipment and land/buildings (n7a and n7b). The WBES
also reports the percentage of working capital financed by external sources (commercial banks,
state-owned banks and non-bank financial institutions; k3bc + k3e). We assume that all
establishment capital is financed based on this percentage. Hence, the product of capital
and percentage of capital financed by external sources, summed across all establishments
and divided by aggregate capital is the external finance to capital ratio. Using fixed assets
financed instead of working capital financed by external sources, generates a slightly higher
external finance to capital ratio (0.385). We also note here that our calibrated economy for
Colombia generates an external finance to output ratio that is very close to what is reported
by the World Bank (Beck et al., 2000).
    In Section 4.3 we follow the same procedure described above to determine the probability
of facing crime and the external finance to capital ratio across countries. The sample is
restricted to countries that have at least 100 observations for external finance and crime,
and we exclude countries whose implied external finance to capital ratio is below 1 percent
(Congo, Ethiopia and Pakistan), as well as Sweden which is the only high income country
in the sample. After applying this criteria, we are left with 34 countries. We then find the
values of φ and λ that generate external finance to capital ratios and probability of facing
crime in these 34 countries. Table A.5 reports information for this sample of countries.


A.4      Robustness
We calibrate our model to the Brazil and Peru economies to evaluate the sensitivity of our
quantitative results. We choose Brazil because it has a similar external finance to capital
  32
    Since we clean the data and drop outliers, each observation is weighted equally for consistency. Using
weights generates a slightly higher target value for incidence of crime.


                                                   58
                      Table A.5: Country level values for φ and λ

                             Observations for
Country        ISO    Year   External Faced Ext. Finance       Prob. of    Value of   Value of
               Code          Finance Crime    to Capital        Crime         φ          λ
Argentina      ARG    2010     413       799        0.22            0.31     0.22       0.45
Bangladesh     BGD    2013     937      1277        0.22            0.09     0.24       0.76
Brazil         BRA    2010     985      1402        0.33            0.31     0.41       0.42
Cambodia       KHM    2016    105        231        0.03            0.20     0.20       0.60
Chile          CHL    2010    584        910        0.27            0.37     0.32       0.41
China          CHN    2012    1155      2482        0.17            0.04     0.17       0.86
Colombia       COL    2010    489        803        0.35            0.24     0.37       0.50
CostaRica      CRI    2010     139      332         0.11            0.40     0.16       0.39
Ghana          GHA    2013     105      458         0.44            0.15     0.48       0.60
Guatemala      GTM    2010     186      338         0.14            0.47     0.18       0.35
India          IND    2014    2515      7926        0.34            0.03     0.36       0.88
Indonesia      IDN    2009     115      290         0.09            0.05     0.07       0.82
Iraq           IRQ    2011     393      612         0.02            0.07     0.02       0.80
Jordan         JOR    2013     200       433        0.26            0.01     0.27       0.98
Kenya          KEN    2013     224       585        0.34            0.27     0.38       0.47
Lebanon        LBN    2013    105        415        0.19            0.05     0.20       0.84
Madagascar     MDG    2013     114      304         0.09            0.15     0.11       0.55
Malaysia       MYS    2015     238       591        0.29            0.21     0.30       0.48
Mauritius      MUS    2009     122      356         0.44            0.21     0.53       0.51
Mexico         MEX    2010    974       1242        0.11            0.31     0.09       0.46
Mozambique     MOZ    2007     332      466         0.02            0.35     0.03       0.43
Nepal          NPL    2013     163      425         0.14            0.09     0.14       0.72
Nigeria        NGA    2014    308       1661        0.05            0.18     0.07       0.63
Peru           PER    2010     348       837        0.13            0.25     0.14       0.51
Philippines    PHL    2009     271       865        0.26            0.21     0.27       0.55
Russia         RUS    2012     302      2606        0.17            0.17     0.16       0.60
South Africa   ZAF    2007     652       907        0.12            0.42     0.14       0.38
Sril Lanka     LKA    2013    226        496        0.27            0.09     0.29       0.77
Tanzania       TZA    2013     113      377         0.08            0.19     0.08       0.58
Thailand       THA    2016     505       771        0.19            0.01     0.19       0.97
Tunisia        TUN    2013     248       522        0.22            0.09     0.24       0.76
Turkey         TUR    2013     292       713        0.17            0.03     0.17       0.89
Vietnam        VNM    2009     480      901         0.39            0.16     0.42       0.62
Zambia         ZMB    2013     129       552        0.03            0.24     0.04       0.52




                                          59
             Table A.6: Calibration parameters for Brazil and Peru Economies

                                                                    Brazil
 Target Moments                                    Data          Model Parameter
 External finance to capital                        0.33          0.34     φ = 0.376
 Prevalence of crime                                0.31          0.29     λ = 0.479
 Crime share (top emp. decile)                      0.42          0.37     ρ = 1.092
 Crime loss to output                              0.003         0.001 h = 18.97
 Protection share (top emp. decile)                 0.59          0.57     ψ = 1.932
 Protection spending to output                     0.010         0.014 b = 7.361
 (protection+crime)/sales (top 50% of emp. decile) 0.014         0.018 θ = 0.244
                                                                    Peru
 Target Moments                                    Data          Model Parameter
 External finance to capital                        0.13          0.15   φ = 0.151
 Prevalence of crime                                0.25          0.25   λ = 0.496
 Crime share (top emp. decile)                      0.40          0.29   ρ = 1.19
 Crime loss to output                              0.002         0.002 h = 19.42
 Protection share (top emp. decile)                 0.46          0.47   ψ = 2.03
 Protection spending to output                     0.015         0.011    b = 7.72
 (protection+crime)/sales (top 50% of emp. decile) 0.017         0.014 θ = 0.238
                                                                 Colombia
 Target Moments                                    Data          Model Parameter
 External finance to capital                        0.35          0.34 φ = 0.369
 Prevalence of crime                                0.24          0.23 λ = 0.496
 Crime share (top emp. decile)                      0.28          0.27  ρ = 1.174
 Crime loss to output                              0.002         0.002 h = 19.35
 Protection share (top emp. decile)                 0.54          0.50 ψ = 1.985
 Protection spending to output                      0.01          0.01  b = 7.422
 (protection+crime)/sales (top 50% of emp. decile) 0.012         0.014 θ = 0.228



ratio as Colombia but higher probability of crime; Peru has a similar probability of crime
as Colombia but a lower external finance to capital ratio. Target moments for Brazil and
Peru are calculated similarly to those for Colombia. Table A.6 reports target moments from
the data, corresponding moments in the model and parameter values for the Brazil and Peru
economies. The Colombia economy in Section 4.2 is included for comparison. The calibrated
parameters imply a lower value for φ in Peru, relative to Colombia, and a lower value of
λ in Brazil (though the model under-predicts the probability of facing crime and aggregate
crime relative to output in Brazil). Table A.7 reports the quantitative effects from the lack of
finance and crime for the calibrated economies of Brazil and Peru. For Brazil, adding crime
to a model with financial frictions generates an additional 50, 42 and 84 percent reduction
in output, TFP and consumption; in Peru these values are 30, 29 and 50 percent.



                                              60
            Table A.7: Isolating the effects of crime and access to finance

                                  Brazil Economy                  Peru Economy
                                 (λ = .48, φ = .38)              (λ = .5, φ = .15)
                              Total Crime Finance            Total Crime Finance
                                     (φ = 1) (λ = 1)                (φ = 1) (λ = 1)
 Relative   output Y           0.70      0.96       0.80      0.65     0.96        0.73
 Relative   TFP                0.83      1.01       0.88      0.78     1.00        0.83
 Relative   capital K          0.61      0.87       0.76      0.56     0.89        0.68
 Relative   consumption C      0.65      0.94       0.81      0.61     0.95        0.74
 Relative   FOE                0.88      0.88       1.30      0.94     0.97        1.43
 Relative   wage               0.69      0.95       0.82      0.64     0.97        0.76
 Relative   avg. k/n ratio     0.60      0.86       0.78      0.56     0.90        0.70
 Notes: Statistics are reported relative to the undistorted economy. Total reports the
effects of access to finance and crime in each economy. Crime reports the effects if only
crime is present (i.e. φ = 1) and Finance reports effects if only weak access to finance is
present (i.e. λ = 1).




                                            61
