                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            WAGE GAPS VS. OUTPUT GAPS:
                              IS THERE A COMMON STORY
                                 FOR ALL OF EUROPE?




                                 Robert j. Gordon




                              Working Paper No. 2454




                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 1987




This research has been supported by the National Science Foundation and the German
Marshall Fund. Discussions with Gregory Chow were helpful in developing the tests
of aggregation across national boundaries in Europe.  I am particularly grateful
to Daniel Shiman for tireless ad talented research assistance in creating the
data bank, running the regressions, and converting piles of computer printout
into legible tables. The research reported here is part of the NBER's research
programs in International Studies and Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed
are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
Support from the Lynde and Harry Bradley Foundation is gratefully acknowledged.
                                                     NBER Working Paper #2454
                                                     December 1987


                           Wage Gaps and Output Gaps:
                   Is There a Common Story for All of Europe?


                                    ABSTRACT

      This paper studies the relationship between real wages and unemployment in
 Europe. It finds no evidence that high real wages are responsible for the
 differing behavior of unemployment in Europe as contrasted with the U. S., and
 across European countries finds patterns of real wage behavior that are the
 opposite of what would be required to link high real wages and high unemploy—
 ment. Among the specific results are:
     (1) After adjustment for the income of the self—employed, there is no
evidence of excessive real wages in Europe. "Wage gap" (i.e., labor's share)
indexes on a 1972 base were almost identical in Europe and the U. S. in 1963
and 1984. The slight bulge in the European wage gap between 1974 and 1978
amounts to only about five percentage points over the U. S. values.
      (2) There was indeed a real wage explosion between 1966 and 1975 in
three small high—unemployment countries (Belgium, Denmark, Netherlands). But
the wage gap barely moved in the four large high-unemployment countries
(France, Germany, Italy, U. K.), and in fact increased substantially less than in
low—unemployment Austria. Thus the wage gap concept is almost useless in
providing an explanation of differences in unemployment experience within
Europe.
      (3) Further skepticism regarding the relevance of wage and price adjust-
ment for the European unemployment problem is provided by aggregation tests.
Tests for pooling of wage change equations across national boundaries in Europe
are accepted universally. There are no significant differences in wage behavior
within Europe, except for country—specific instances of wage push or incomes
policies.
      (4) The paper does not explain high unemployment in Europe, and it does
not deny that the natural unemployment rate compatible with a constant inflation
rate has increased substantially since 1972 in every European country.
However, output gaps in Europe are not zero. The econometric estimates imply
that the unemployment rate could be pushed down by three percentage points,
particularly in France and Germany, without causing an acceleration of inflation.
     (5) Some might argue that wage gaps in Europe in the 1980s have been
pushed down by economic slack and would bounce back if unemployment fell
substantially. However, the claim that wage gaps have been held down by high
unemployment and low output in the 1980s amounts to an acceptance of one of
the major conclusions of this paper: Europe has experienced a substantial
Keynesian output gap in the 1980s, and not all of the increase in European
unemployment is "structural" or "classical" in nature.
                                               Robert J. Gordon
                                               Department of Economics
                                               Northwestern University
                                               Evanston IL 60208
                                               (312) 491—3616
                                           Wage and Output Gaps, Page 1

                                I. INTRODUCTION

The Issues

     Books and papers attempting to explain high European unemployment have
become a growth industry of their own. For almost every country in Europe,
estimates are available that decompose the post—1970 rise in unemployment
between demand and supply factors. Several ambitious studies attempt such a
decomposition for a large number of countries (especially Bean—Layard---Nickell
(1986), Bruno—Sacha (1981, 1985), Sachs (1979, 1983), and Bruno (1986)). Many
others (especially those assembled in Econornica 1986) carry out this task for a
single country. The consensus of this literature is that much of the rise in
unemployment in Europe has been caused by supply factors, in the sense that the
natural rate of unemployment or "NAIRU" has increased by half or more of the
total percentage point rise in actual unemployment. There is much less
consensus regarding the nature of the supply problem. Several papers by Bruno
and Sachs blame an increase in the "wage gap", that is, an index of labor's
income share, while other authors (especially Bean-Layard-Nickell) go beyond the
endogenous wage gap to deeper structural factors, such as an increasing
generosity of unemployment benefits, increasing skill and location mismatch in
the labor market, "labor militancy" due to increased union power, an increasing
tax "wedge," an absence of "corporatism", and other factors.
     As its title suggests, this paper is about two aspects of the supply—demand
dichotomy, wage gaps and output gaps, for eleven European countries both
individually and collectively (for comparative purposes the U. S., Canada, and
Japan are included as well). For each country we calculate new measures of the
wage gap and ask whether, even if one is willing to waive the theoretical
                                                Wage and Output Gaps, Page 2



objections   to the   concept, there is   any evidence that wage gaps in individual
European countries have increased enough to explain higher unemployment.
Further, we develop new measures of the output gap for each country, u8ing
econometric wage and price adjustment equations, and employing the two
hypotheses that "natural output" evolves as a trend between benchmark years and
alternatively according to the "hysteresis" hypothesis as a moving average of
actual output.
     The case for supply—side unemployment in Europe has often been based on
alleged differences in the dynamics of wage and price adjustment between Europe
and the U. S. Since Sachs (1979) and Branson-Rotemberg (1980), Europe has
been said to exhibit "real wage rigidity", leading to an increase in the wage gap
in the wake of a productivity growth slowdown, while the U. S. has been said to
exhibit "nominal wage rigidity" that makes its aggregate supply curve relatively
flat and opens the way for vigorously stimulative aggregate demand policies.
The present paper builds on a companion study (Gordon, 1987) that rejected the
transatlantic real vs. nominal rigidity distinction in light of econometric evidence
that, for Europe as a whole (an aggregate of 11 countries), nominal wage and
price adjustment coefficients are similar to those in the U. S. and that,
furthermore, Europe's uniqueness consists not of real wage rigidity but rather
too much real wage flexibility at the time of the famous wage "explosions" of
the late 1960s.



     That study looked at the behavior of an 11-country aggregate called
 "Europe" but did not ask whether its bold aggregation was legitimate. This
paper takes the next essential step and inquires into differences among the Ii
                                            Wage and Output Gaps, Page 3

 countries. Does the apparent similarity of dynamic wage and price behavior in
 Europe and the U. S. extend to all 11 countries, or are there systematic
 differences between the four low—unemployment countries (Austria, Belgium,
 Sweden, and Switzerland) and the remaining high—unemployment nations? The
 common approach of other comparative studies is to estimate equations for each
 country, one at a time, without ever inquiring whether differences among
 countries are statistically significant. This paper makes a start at asking a new
 and interesting question: is it necessary to divide econometric wage and price
 equations into compartments corresponding to national boundaries, or rather can
the 11 countries be aggregated into a small number of subsets or even into one
grand European aggregate? And if there are subsets of countries that accept
aggregation or, more formally, "pooling" in a statistical sense, do the pooled
subsets have any common features along the dimensions of high unemployment,
hysteresis, or corporatisna?
     The companion paper (1987) treated only a European aggregate in order to
allow space to investigate differences in behavior between the manufacturing and
nonmanufacturing sectors in the European aggregate, the U. S., and Japan. This
paper goes further by treating the 11 European countries individually at the
sacrifice of dropping the manufacturing_nonmanufacturing distinction, treating
only the entire economy without any sectoral disaggregatjon. Like the other
study, this paper not only estimates new wage and price equations but also, in
light of the central role of productivity growth in the interpretation of wage
gaps and real wage behavior, estimates new econometric productivity equations
that decompose ob8erved productivity behavior among cyclical effects, real—wage
substitution effects, and underlying secular trend effects. The estimated secular
                                          Wage and Output     Gaps, Page 4

trends, in turn, are not forced to be constant over the postwar period but rather
are allowed to change both after 1972 and after 1979.
     While wage, price, and productivity equations have been estimated by
numerous authors, the research undertaken here is unique in its data base,
econometric specification, and testing of aggregation across European national
boundaries. Almost all previous studies in this area have used data that are
inconsistent by sector, leading to regressions in which the wage rate in the
manufacturing sector is related to employment or unemployment in the aggregate
economy.' Yet in 1984 manufacturing value added was only 24 percent of total
output in the U. S. and 29 percent in Europe. In contrast, this study is based
on a consistent data base in which time series for 14 countries over the 1961—84
interval have been developed for the aggregate economy. The data series
available for all 14 countries include such variables as real value added, the
value added deflator, compensation per hour, employment, and hours per
employee.2
     A further innovation in the data base corrects an error in previous
measures of the wage gap or "labor's share." While employment and person—
hours data include not only employees but also the self—employed, the income of
the self-employed is included in the official OECD national accounting system as
part of capital's toporating surplus" rather than as part of the income of labor.
When the income of the self-employed, which the OECD calls "household
entrepreneurial income" is added to the compensation of employees and treated
as part of labor's income share, the secular increase in labor's share in Europe
and Japan, to which Bruno and Sachs have previously called attention, disappears
almost entirely.3 Rather than criticizing the concept of the wage gap upon
                                            Wage and Output Gaps,      Page   5


 which previous investigators have based their claim that much European
 unemployment is "classical," this paper shows that the properly measured wage
 gap shows little if any secular increase not just in the U. S., but also in Japan
 and in most European countries.
      The econometric specification builds on my own past research for the U. S.
 and differs markedly from most other work on these issues. Since observed
 unempioymert rates incorporate both cyclical demand fluctuations and a secular
 increase due to some variety of supply factors, raw unadjusted unemployment
 rates are an illegitimate measure of demand pressure. Or, stated another way, it
 is inconsistent to start out a study treating the raw unemployment rate as a
 measure of cyclical pressure, which implies that the natural rate of
unemployment is constant, and finish up a study concluding that the natural rate
of unemployment has risen substantjafly'4 Yet to impose some decomposition
between the demand and supply components of unemployment ox ante in order to
construct an unemployment—based cyclical measure presupposes an answer to the
basic question that all such studies are attempting to address. To avoid this
pitfall, in this paper the measure of cyclical variability that enters the
productivity, wage, and price equations is not the level of unemployment but
rather sectoral output detrended by the "trends-through-benchmarks" method (the
"output gap"). All equations are estimated in first differences rather than levels
in order to avoid spurious correlations among variables (especially productivity
and the real wage) that display common changes in trend. Special attention is
given to the response of real wage changes to the productivity growth slowdown
that has occurred everywhere, an issue that is ignored in the majority of studies
that include only a single constant term in equations explaining wage changes,
                                         Wage and Output Gaps, Page 6


and yet is essential in testing the hypothesis that real wage growth in Europe
was too "rigid" to respond to the post-1973 productivity growth slowdown. Wage
and price equations are based on the assumption of disequilibrium labor market
adjustment, in contrast to some work (especially Newell—SymonS 1985) based on a
market—clearing interpretation.
     This paper takes the "output gap" (the log ratio of actual real GDP to
"natural." real GDP) as the basic measure of cyclical demand pressure and
measures "naturalt' real GNP by trends through the benchmark years 1961, 1972,
and 1979, with the 1972-79 rate of growth extrapolated to 1984. By taking 1979
as a benchmark year in which natural real GNP is assumed to be equal to actual
real GNP (with a zero output gap), this paper


at all for this i. This is evident in Table 1, which displays standardized
unemployment rates for each country for the benchmark years 1961, 1972, and
l979. Since we assume that cyclical demand pressure was zero for all countries
in 1979, we assume that between 1972 and 1979 there were major unexplained
 increases in the natural unemployment rate for France, Germany, Belgium,
 Denmark, and the Netherlands. Lesser but nontrivial increases in the rate
 occurred in Canada, Japan, Italy, the U. K., and Austria. The natural rate
 assumed in 1984 cannot be read from this table; in the concluding section of the
 paper a calculation is provided that works backward from our measure of the
 output gap to arrive at a measure of the natural. rate of unemployment for each
 country in 1984.

 Themes T.rg
      The most interesting new result in this paper is that national boundaries
                                           Wage and Output Gaps, Page 7

 within Europe are no longer relevant in studying wage behavior. In a step—by—
 step test of pooling across pairs of European countries, and then alternative
 pairs of country—groups, we find no single case in which a regression pooled
across country boundaries fits worse (using the usual 5 percent significance
criterion) than regressions estimated for separate members of each pair. These
results raise serious doubts about a large segment of the literature on high
European unemployment, particularly those papers which attribute low
unemployment in some countries to "corporatist" wage—setting institutions, and
those which blame excess real wage increases in some countries for their high
unemployment.
     Confirming my recent work, the results cast doubt on most of the contrasts
between the U. S. and Europe that have received heavy emphasis in previous
research, not only for the aggregate of 11 European countries studied in Gordon
(1987), but also for most individual European countries. With the single
exception of the U. K., there is no evidence to support Sachs' (1983) claim that
productivity in Europe is "classical," varying countercylically. Further, there is
remarkably little evidence of greater nominal wage flexibility in Europe than in
the U. S., or of greater real-wage rigidity in Europe.
     The apparent consensus that European real wages are excessive is simplistic;
in 1984 the wage gap (an index of labor's share on a 1972 base) for an
aggregate of 11 European countries was as low as the U. S. wage gap and lower
in Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, and Norway. There is absolutely no relation
across European countries between those that have high unemployment in the
1980s and those that exhibit high wage gaps. The highest wage gaps adjusted
for estimated productivity trends are all in low—unemployment countries, Japan,
                                           Wage and Output Gaps, Page 8

Austria, and Switzerland.
     The wage and price equations estimated in the paper address the common
distinction between real wage rigidity in Europe and nominal wage rigidity in the
U. S. (see especially Branson-Rotemberg 1980).    We find that the bulge in the
wage gaps of Europe and Japan in the 1970s is not due primarily to a failure of
real wages to decelerate in response to the post—1973 productivity growth
slowdown, but rather results in large part from episodes of autonomous "wage
push" in Europe in the late 1960s and in Japan during 1973—74. In this sense,
real wages in Europe and Japan were too flexib1 rather than too rgid.
     The paper also reveals an interesting dichotomy between large and small
countries within Europe. There is little degenerate behavior evident in the
statistical evidence for the large countries —— no countercyclical productivity
behavior that would suggest a deterioration in productivity gains in reponse to a
future output stimulus (except in the U. K.); no evidence of substantial excessive
real wage changes between the mid-1960s and mid- or late-1970s; and no
evidence of a substantially steeper aggregate supply curve that would inhibit
policymakers from administering a demand stimulus. But several small countries
exhibit signs of excessive real wage increases through the late 1970s, followed by
a rapid readjustment since then. The paper points to, but does not solve, a
puzzle in the high "wage gap" indexes of some small countries that have
relatively low unemployment (especially Austria and Switzerland) in contrast to
the relatively low level of wage gap indexes in other high—unemployment
countries, especially Germany, Italy, and the Netherlands.
                                            Wage and Output Gaps, Page 9

   II.      THE PA TA BA SE, THE PROD (ICTI VITY TREND, A ND THE WA GE GA P


 The Data Base for 14 Countries

        Most comparative econometric studies of wage and employment equations
have indiscriminately mixed data on the hourly wage rate for the manufacturing
sector with economy—wide data on unemployment and/or output.6 The work of
Artus (1984) is almost unique in developing a consistent data base for
manufacturing, and this paper builds on his research by developing an analogous
data base for the aggregate economy. The aim of the data compilation is to
develop consistent series on value added, the value added deflator, compensation,
employment, and hours per employee. These series allow the calculation of all of
the variables that matter for a study of productivity, wage, and price behavior.
Average labor productivity is real value added per labor hour, the wage rate is
compensation per labor hour, and the wage gap is the nominal wage rate, divided
by the value added deflator, divided in turn by average labor productivity.
Because the real product wage relevant for the hiring decisions of business firms
is expressed at factor cost, i.e., net of indirect taxes, special care has been
taken to achieve a consistent set of net—of—tax product price deflators at factor
cost.
        The aggregate data are developed here from published OECD series,
together with a crucial unpublished series on aggregate hours per employee.7
A unique feature of the data base is the explicit treatment of self—employment
income. Previous studies have included in indexes of labor's income share and
the "wage gap" only the compensation of employees. But the income of the self—
employed consists mainly of labor income and should also be included rather than
                                         Wage and Output Gaps, Page 10

being hidden, as at present, in the OECD's umbrella capital income measure
called "the operating surplus." This is particularly important in this study, which
measures the wage rate as compensation per hour. Since measures of
employment and total hours include the self—employed, so should the measure of
compensation. Thus our measure of total compensation adds the OECD measure
of "household entrepreneurial income" to employee compensation.
         Potential defects in these procedures may be enumerated briefly. The
use of compensation per hour to represent the wage rate has the advantage that
separate wage rate series can be developed for the aggregate, manufacturing, and
nonmanufacturing sectors, but has the disadvantage that any compensation per
hour series displays cyclical fluctuations created not by changes in the "pure"
wage itself, but also by changes in the fraction of hours paying overtime rates,
and by changes in the interindustry mix between high and low wage activities.
While my past work on U. S. wage behavior has been based on an hourly
earnings index adjusted for shifts in overtime and the iriterindustry employment
mix, such indexes are not available for other countries, and thus the need for
consistency requires use of an unadjusted compensation per hour series for each
country and each sector. The addition of self—employment income to employee
compensation also raises issues that require further research, including the
separation of the labor and capital components of entrepreneurial income.



     We need to identify secular trends in productivity growth for five purposes.
First, measures of the 'wage gap" should be corrected for cyclical variations in
productivity, relating the level of real wages to the secular trend in productivity.
Second, identifying the concept of "real wage rigidity" in a dynamic wage—change
                                                      Wage and Output Gaps, Page 11


 regression   cannot be accomplished without some measure of "rigid relative to
what?" Third, most evidence for the U. S. suggests that prices are set relative
to "trend unit labor cost," that is, wages divided by the trend in labor's average
product, rather than relative to actual unit labor cost. Fourth, the cyclical
productivity regressions developed in this section also allow us to assess the
effect of real wage movements on the demand for labor and on labor's average
product. Fifth, our equations allow us to assess the claim by Sachs that "in
Europe (but not in Japan) the overall effect of a sustained rise in unemployment
is to raise productivity relative to trend" (1983, p. 281). His claim that labor
productivity varies countercyclically in Europe contrasts with the standard
assumption in the U. S. that productivity varies procyclically.



       The basic specification relates the log ratio of hours to trend output (Ni —
Q*t)   to the log output ratio (Qt -   Q*t),    representing the cyclical effect of
output on hiring decisions; to the real wage rate defined relative to the
underlying productivity trend [(Wt -           Pt)   -   e*t], which could differ from zero as
a result of excess growth in the real wage; and to the productivity trend itself
(e*t). Defining all upper—case letters as logs of levels, we can write:


       (1)    (Nt — Q*t)    A + +(Qt — Q*t)          —
                                                         a(Wt   —   Pt   —
                                                                             e*t)   —
                                                                                        eat,

where A is a constant. Note that (1) adds a cyclical effect to a standard static
labor demand function in which labor hours depend on the real wage and labor—
augmenting technical progress. The trend in (1) picks up the effects of growth
in the capital-labor ratio and of changes in other inputs.
                                                Wage and Output Gaps, Page 12

    When (1) is rewritten as an equation for the average product of labor
(Q/N), we can interpret the parameter • as indicating the effect of cyclical
movements in the output ratio on labor productivity:

     (2)     (Qt — Nt)       —A +   (1—)(Qt    —
                                                   Q*t) + cs(Wt    —   Pt   —
                                                                                eat) + e*t,


If the parameter 4 is unity, then a permanent increase in the output ratio has no
impact on actual labor productivity, whereas a value of $ below unity implies a
permanent productivity gain ("short—run increasing returns") and a value of $
above unity implies a permanent productivity loss ("short—run diminishing
returns"). Thus the Sacha phenomenon of countercyclical productivity movements
in Europe requires an estimated value of •          >    1.0.




     We note that (1) allows us to define a wage gap concept adjusted not just
for cyclical effects but for the endogenous reponse of productivity growth to
excess growth in the real wage. Defining 6 as the log level of labor's actual
average product and 6* as the growth rate of the trend in labor's average
product, we can write the actual wage gap index (WGt) as Wt - Pt 6t and the           —



adjusted wage gap index (WG*t) as Wt — Pt          —    e*t.    Using these definitions, we
can rearrange (2) to obtain:

     (3)      WGt        A — (1—4)(Qt   —
                                            Q*t) + (1cs)(WGtt).


This expression places an interesting perspective on the interrelationships
between real wage behavior, productivity growth, and the wage gap index. If
the elasticity of labor input with respect to the excess real wage (cs) in (1) is
unity, then (3) shows that the excess real wage growth "pays for itself" by
                                                                 Wage and Output Qaps, Page 13


 boosting actual productivity enough to keep the actual wage gap index (WGt.
 Wt — Pt —      et)                         Only i.f
                         unaffected.                   the elast:icity         (a)     is less than unity is

 excess      real   wage growth manifested in an increase in the observed actual wage

 gap   index.



       (1)    could be estimated either in levels or in growth rates. Initial

testing indicated that the growth rate specification is superior, avoiding the

serial correlation that occurs with the level specification for some

countries. Allowing for lags and a post—1972 break in the productivity growth

trend, (1) becomes:


                                            1                            1             1                 1
       (4)          (n -- q*)t     =        E •j(q—q*)t-j        —       E (w--p   —
                                                                                       E    i)t—k        Z     &i,
                                        jO                           k:0               i0               j:;0




where e'o is the 1964—72 productivity trend and ei is the 1973—84 produc-

tivity trend. To unscramble the productivity trends from the estimated

regression, run:


                                        1                            1                      1
       (5)          (0   —              Z                   --
                                                                          c(w—p)t-i         E   c    + Ct,
                                       j=0                       k=O                       i=0

where c is the constant term (=1.0 1964—84) and i                               is     a dummy variable (=0
1964—72 and         1.O      1973—84). Thenthe productivity trend terms                             are defined as:
       (6)                     =                                         =



In   preliminary tests an additional productivity term (                                     1.0 during 1980—84)
was entered to test for the significance of a second growth slowdown after
                                          Wage and Output Gaps, Page 14


1979, but this term was uniformly insignificant in the presence of the real wage
variable. With the real wage variable omitted,     was significant for several
countries, as discussed below in connection with Table 4.




      Results for the productivity regression equations are presented in Table 2
for the fourteen countries, with countries listed in the same order as Table I
(North America and Japan at the top, followed by the four large European
countries and then the seven small European countries). All sums of coefficients
on the output ratio are between zero and unity except for the U. K, indicating
almost uniformly procyclical behavior of productivity. Only the U. K. exhibits a
countercyclical effect; the U. S., Canada, France, Germany, and Switzerland
exhibit a mildly procyclical effect; and there are strongly procyclical effects in
Japan, Italy, and all of the small European countries except Switzerland. The
bottom line for a GNP-weighted aggregate of all 11 European countries displays
the interesting result that the labor hoarding (or procyclical productivity)
phenomenon is somewhat more important in Europe than in the U. S., directly
contradicting Sachs' (1983) results.
     The real wage elasticities have the correct negative sign and are
statistically significant in all the countries but the U. S., U. K., Norway, and
Sweden.    Most of the elasticities are in the vicinity of —0.5, indicating that an
increase in wages relative to the productivity trend, for whatever reason, boosts
productivity by enough to offset about half but not all of the resulting upward
pressure on the wage gap (recall that an elasticity of 1.O would be required for
the wage gap to be unaffected by an acceleration of wage growth relative to
                                           Wage and Output Caps, Page 15

 trend productivity growth). It seems ironic, in light of the emphasis placed on
 real—wage substitution in the labor market by British authors, including Bean-
 Layard—Nickell (1986) and Newell—Symons (1985), that the country with the least
 evidence of a real wage effect is the U. l{. There seems to be no connection
 between the real wage elasticity and the post-1970 rise in unemployment.
 Relatively high elasticities are found for countries with high unemployment rates
in the 1980s (France, Germany, Italy, Belgium, Denmark) and low unemployment
rates in the 1980s (Japan, Austria, Switzerland). Interestingly, the elasticity for
Europe as a whole is almost identical to that in Japan.
     The productivity trend terms displayed in Table 2 are the      coefficients
that must be unscrambled, using equation (6), to reveal the underlying structural
productivity trends (e*). As displayed in Table 2, the productivity coefficients
are useful mainly as an indication of the statistical significance of the post—1972
slowdown in productivity growth. Somewhat surprisingly, the slowdown terms in
column (4) of Table 2 are significant only for Japan, Austria, Sweden, and
Switzerland. For all the other countries but Norway, the slowdown terms have
the correct positive sign but are insignificant at the 5 percent level.
     Table 3 presents an extremely interesting decomposition of the fitted values
of actual growth rate of productivity in three periods (1964—72, 1972-79, and
1979-84), subdividing the growth rate that the Table 2 equations explain into
three sources, (a) underlying trend, (b) contribution of real wage changes (the
w—p - E e* term in equation (4)), and (c) the contribution of changes in the

output ratio. The total shown in columns (4), (8), and (12) is for the fitted
value of the equations from Table 2. Recall that the post1972 trend effect is
the sum of columns (3) and (4) in Table 2, with the signs reversed, as written
                                          Wage and Output Gaps, Page 16



out   in equation (6).
       The countries can be divided into groups, according to the main sources of
changes in observed productivity growth. The first group consists of those
countries in which the observed slowdown in productivity growth after 1972 is
mainly explained by the underlying trend term: the U. S., Japan, the U. K.,
Austria, Sweden, and Switzerland. For the second group of countries the 1972—
79 slowdown is mainly explained by the trend term, but a further large slowdown
in 1979—84 is explained by a slowdown in real wage growth (Canada, France,
Germany, Italy, Belgium, Denmark, the Netherlands, Norway, and Sweden).
Further large contributions of the output ratio after 1979 occur in Italy, Austria,
the Netherlands, and Norway.
       For Europe as a whole, aLl of the slowdown in productivity growth after
1979 is attributed to the real wage and cyclical effects. The U. S. has less of a
real—wage effect after 1979, both because the coefficient on real wages is smaller
in Table 2, and because the slowdown in real wage growth was less dramatic
than in Europe. For Japan the dominant fact is the slower post-1972 trend, and
the real—wage effect is relatively minor, contributing a positive half percentage
point in 1972—79 which was reversed in 1979—84.



       Table 4 brings together the assumed trend growth rates of output (based on
the benchmark years 1961, 1972, and 1979, as explained on p. 6 above) with
estimated trend growth rates of productivity. Unlike those displayed in Table 3,
the   productivity trends in Table 4 are obtained from estimates of equation (4) in
which the real wage effects are omitted. These trends can be interpreted as
incorporating a cyclical adjustment but no decomposition of the portion of the
                                          Wage and Output Gaps, Page 17


productivity   trend attributable to real wage movements. When (4) is reestimated
without the real wage variable, the third dummy variable representing the post—
1979 slowdown becomes significant only for Germany, the Netherlands,
Switzerland, and the aggregate of ii European countries. (Tables showing these
regression results with the third dummy variable are omitted to save space).
     The purpose of Table 4 is to shed some light on the sources of the
divergent movements of European unemployment rate from the unemployment
rates of the U. S. and Japan. The counterpart of rising unemployment is, of
course, slow or negative growth in labor hours. Obviously some part of the
European unemployment problem results froth output falling below trend, with log
output ratios in Europe for 1984 of -8.8 percent, as compared with —5.3 percent
in the U. S. and an assumed ratio of zero for Japan. Within Europe, the largest
negative output ratios were for the Netherlands (-13.2 percent) and France
(—11.5 percent).
     Leaving aside questions of utilization, however, it is also possible to look at
the implications for labor hours of the underlying trends in output and
productivity. Taken together, the output and productivity growth trends imply
trends for labor input, shown in columns (3), (6), and (9) of Table 4. Aggegate
European trend hours fell in both periods before 1979 and actually rose slightly
in the 1980s, but at a much slower rate than in the U. S. and a slightly slower
rate than in Japan. However, the European aggregate disguises divergent hours
trends among the 11 countries for 1979—84, ranging from +1.68 percent in the
Netherlands to -1.43 percent in neighboring Belgium. in the four large European
countries, the hours trend after 1979 was close to zero ——not far from the
Japanese trend in Germany and Italy, and somewhat less in France and the U. K.
                                           Wage and Output Gaps, Page 18

       Table 4 places an interesting perspective on the U. S. phenomenon of rapid
hours growth. Part of the U. S. difference from Europe stems from a lower
decline in hours per employee (at a rate of about —0.25 percent per year as
contrasted with —0.9 percent per year since 1972). However, most stems from
faster employment growth. One can view the U. S. success in achieving rapid
employment growth, however, as the counterpart of its dismal productivity
record. One can calculate that if the U. S. had achieved the existing growth
rate of output in 1979-84 but had combined it with European trend productivity
growth, the U. S. would have had 8 percent fewer hours of labor input, or 9
million addiionalunemploy (ignoring effects on labor force participation and
hours per employee).



       We now turn to the estimates of the wage gap. For this purpose we return
to the productivity growth trends from equation (4), which includes changes in
the real wage as a determinant of the growth rate of hours relative to output.
In Table 5a we display the actual wage gap index (WGt), or Wt -    Pt   -   Ott   which
is simply a calculation from the data of an index of labor's share (including self--
employment income) and which does not rely on any regression estimates. This
is compared in Table 5b with the adjusted wage gap index (WG*t), or Wt — Pt          —




e*t,   that is, the real wage divided by the productivity trend estimated in Table 2
and displayed in Table 3.
       The raw data in Table 5a will astonish readers of previous studies by
Bruno—Sachs and others. Since the European unemployment problem emerged
after 1972, the wage gap index is expressed as 1972      1.0 (as compared to a base
of 1965-69 for Bruno-Sacha). Of the 112 wage gap indexes displayed in Table 5a,
                                         Wage and Output Qaps, Page 19

only two are greater than 1.10, and these are both for Austria, one of the low—
unemployment countries. Such high—unemployment countries as the U. K.,
Belgium, Denmark, and the Netherlands display relatively small increases in the
actual wage gap (WGt) index in Table 5a. Of particular interest are the 1984
data: only three countries have 1984 wage gap indexes on a 1972 base equal to
or greater than 1.01, and these are all low—unemployment countries, Japan,
Austria, and Switzerland!
     The adjusted wage gap (WG*t) in Table 5b displays the familiar "hump-
shaped" time path, with a peak for most countries in 1976 or 1978, and a marked
decline from 1978 to 1984. The only three countries with a 1984 wage gap index
greater than 1.00 are the same three low—unemployment nations, Japan, Austria,
and Switzerland. While the adjusted indexes support the previous research of
Bruno and Sachs that has shown a substantial increase in wage gaps between the
mid—1960s and mid—1970s, there are numerous interesting differences with the
Bruno—Sacha estimates. These are summarized in the following in—text table,
which compares the 1966-75 wage gap increases from Tables 5a and 5b with the
most recent adjusted wage gaps published by Michael Bruno (1986, p. S40). The
following table compares Bruno's adjusted wage gap indexes in 1976 with ours in
1975, both unadjusted and adjusted:
                              (see next page)
                                        Wage and Output Gaps, Page 20


                          Gordon Unadj. Gordon Adjusted     Bruno Adjusted
                                            _LP).
    United   States             1.004            0.967            1.027
    Canada                      1.030            0.985            1.053
                                1.064            1.073            1.157
    Japan

    France                      1.038            1.032             1.079
                                1.012            1.041             1.108
    Germany
                                1.081            1.043             1.168
    Italy
    United Kingdom              1.091            1.067             1.132
    Austria                     1.061            1.105
                                1.035            1.185             1.275
    Belgium
    Denmark                     1.079            1.210             1.157
    Netherlands                 1.085            1.273             0.908
                                1.109            1.135             1.168
    Norway
    Sweden                      0.965            0.970             1.010
    Switzerland                 1.035            1.067

    Europe Average              1.046            1.056             1.115

Looking first just at the comparison of the unadjusted and adjusted wage gap
indexes from Tables 5a and Sb, we note that the productivity adjustment does
not make much difference except for the three small European high—
unemployment countries, Belgium, Denmark, and the Netherlands. Here there are
huge increases in the wage gap during 1966-75 once the productivity adjustment
is applied. We note in Table 2 that these countries all have relatively large
elasticities of labor hours to excess growth in the real wage, and so the
relatively small increases in the unadjusted wage gap (WGi) occur because excess
wage increases "pay for themselves," raising productivity enough to create only a
minimal increase in the wage gap.
     The differences between our adjusted wage gap indexes in Table Sb and
Bruno's measures of the same concept display an important difference. For
North America, Japan, and all the large European countries our 1966—75 increases
are all lower than his 1965—76 differences. Our average index for North America
                                             Wage and Output Gaps, Page 21

 and Japan is 1.008 compared to his 1.079; our average for the four large
 European countries is 1.046 compared to his 1.122. Only for the small European
 countries are his estimated 1965—76 differences larger; our average index of 1.155
 can be compared to his of 1.104. This discrepancy is almost entirely due to the
 Netherlands. If our estimate for the Netherlands is substituted for his, his
estimated 1965—76 index becomes 1.177.
        It is beyond the scope of this paper to search in detail for the sources of
the discrepancy between these estimates and Bruno's. 1. would speculate that the
sources involve three areas: (1) Bruno and Sachs in the past have used data
from a secondary source, the U. S. BLS, rather than creating their own series
from primary national accounts data; (2) we include self—employment income as
part of labor's share, and it is not clear than Bruno and Sachs do so; and
finally (3) our post-1972 estimated productivity growth rate trends may be more
rapid than those used by Bruno.9
        Table 5b raises difficult substantive questions for proponents of the
hypothesis that European unemployment is classical, in the sense that real wages
are excessive as measured by the adjusted wage gap index. None of the four
large European countries seems to have experienced a marked increase in the
real wage relative to the underlying productivity trend, yet all have experienced
high unemployment in the 1980s. As early as 1981, before wage rates could have
been held down substantially by negative demand pressure, all four large
European countries exhibited adjusted wage gap indexes below 1.00 on a 1972
base.
     The most promising evidence in Table Sb for the wage gap proponents is
the very large 1966-75 increases exhibited by the three European countries which
                                          Wage and Output Gaps, Page 22



are   both relatively small and which have experienced relatively high
unemployment in the 1980s, Belgium, Denmark, and the Netherlands. But in
itself this is puzzling. Why should high unemployment be caused by high real
wages in small countries, when unemployment is almost as high in large European
countries without excessive real wages?
     Further questions are raised by the dramatic nose—dive of the wage gap
indexes from 1978 to 1984 in every country, on both an adjusted and unadjusted
basis. As our estimated wage equations suggest below in Table 7, there are
positive effects of demand pressure on real wages, so that much of the decline
in the wage gap in the 1980s can be attributed to negative output gaps (i.e., an
actual unemployment rate above the natural unemployment rate). But then this
interpretation is completely inconsistent with the "hysteresis" hypothesis recently
advanced by Blanchard-Summers (1986) and others. If the natural unemployment
rate has marched upward in tandem with the actual unemployment rate, as
suggested by the hysteresis hypothesis, then there was little orioutçj
in1984, and hence noexplanoji for the rapid downward adjustment of real
wages relative to productivity that has occurred in the 1980s. Our
interpretation, developed more formally below, is that there has been plenty of
slack, and that wage gaps have collapsed as a direct result of output gaps.
       Looking just at the wage gap indexes for the U. S., Japan, and the
aggregate of all 11 European countries, it is hard to see how the minor
differences in these indexes could be responsible for the substantial differences
among the three economies in the evolution of unemployment rates since the
 1960s. Comparing 1963 and 1984, the U. S. and European adjusted wage gap
 indexes in Table 5b are basically identical, and the 1979—84 decline of 6.3
                                           Wage and Output Gaps, Page 23

 percentage points in the U. S. was actually less than the 9.6 percentage-point
 decline in Europe. The Japanese story seems to have been one of a jump in the
 wage gap index as a result of the 1973-74 wage push, followed by moderation
 that returned the index almost to its 1972 value by 1984.


                      III. WAGE AND PRICE EQUATIONS



      In previous research (Gordon 1985, 1987) I have shown how a dynamic
 disequilibrium wage adjustment equation of the expectational Phillips curve type
can be derived from static labor supply and demand equations, together with the
hypothesis that wages adjust to eliminate any gap between labor demand and
supply at a speed that is proportional to the size of the gap.'° The wage
change equation based on this formulation is joined by a price mark—up equation
that sets the level of the product price equal to a weighted average of trend
unit labor cost and import prices, with an allowance for a cyclically sensitive
mark—up. A third equation, called the "reduced—form", is specified as the
solution when the wage change equation is substituted into the first—difference
form of the mark-up equation. The model is specified without any lagged wage
terms in the wage equation, and so the rate of wage change is "solved out" in
the reduced—form, which includes lagged price change terms as well as all the
other variables that appear in either the wage change or mark—up equations.
     Rather than repeat that theoretical analysis, this paper moves directly to
the econometric specification, based on a dynamic theoretical equation that
relates the change in wages relative to trend productivity to (a) the expected
rate of product price inflation, (b) the log output ratio, (c) the change in import
                                          Wage and Output Gaps, Page 24


prices relative to the domestic GNP deflator, (d) the total rate of change in
three tax rates (indirect, income, and payroll), and (e) a "wage push" factor
defined in the theoretical analysis as the difference between the rate of change
of the "aspiration" wage demanded by workers and the growth rate of
productivity relevant for price-setting (the e* term estimated in Table 2 above).
The following section sets out the main decisions that are made in converting
the theoretical model into an econometric specification.
     1. Basic fornat. All equations express every variable (other than the log
output ratio variable) as first differences of logs.
     2. Expc                        The expected inflation term is proxied by two
lags on the annual change in the value—added deflator. Two lags appear to be
sufficient to explain the wage changes without including a third or further lags,
while the "zero" lag (current price change) is excluded to avoid simultaneity and
identify the wage and price equations (i.e., the current change in unit labor cost
is entered into the price mark—up equations, but the current change in price is
not entered into the wage equations). This treatment reflects the (structural)
assumption that wages can influence prices within the current year more than
prices can influence wages, and the high degree of simultaneity between annual
changes in wages and prices is attributed to the price—setting process.11 The
theoretical wage equation calls for the expected price change term to enter with
a unitary coefficient; the wage equations are estimated below with the sum of
coefficients on the two lagged price change terms both estimated freely and also
constrained to equal unity.
     3•                                It has been customary in previous studies
to designate the unemployment rate or its inverse as the sole demand pressure
                                           Wage and   Output Gaps, Page 25

 variable. However, in theory it is not the level of the unemployment rate that
 matters, but rather the excess demand for labor, which should be measured as
 the deviation of the actual from the natural unemployment rate. If the natural
 unemployment rate has risen, as seems to have occurred in most countries, the
 use of the unemployment rate to measure excess demand introduces measurement
 error. The procedure used here is to take advantage of the regular "Okun's
 Law" relationship observed in many countries (Gordon, 1984; Hamada—Kurosaka,
 1983) in the form of a high negative correlation between the log ratio of actual
to "natural" output (log Q - log Q*) and the deviation of the actual from the
natural unemployment rate. The required natural output series consists of
exponential trends running between the benchmark years of 1961, 1972, and 1979,
with the 1972—79 trend extended to 1984 on the assumption that most countries
were operating below natural output after 1979 and hence that no benchmark
year is available for the 1980s.12
     4. Tax Rates. Three tax rates are available for each country, indirect,
payroll, and income. There are insufficient degrees of freedom to include all
three tax change terms in annual equations for the short 1964—84 interval.
Instead, the rate of change of the total indirect, payroll, and personal tax rates
is entered as a single variable. The change in the total tax rate (tT) is
calculated at an annual rate over two years, rather than one year, to allow for
lags without using up an extra degree of freedom.
     5. Wage Push or Real Wage Rgidity. The theoretical wage change
equation allows for the possibility that the "aspiration" real wage rate rises more
rapidly than the rate of productivity growth (0*) relevant for price setting; this
could reflect either real wage stickiness in response to a slowdown in
                                          Wage and Output Gaps, Page 26


productivity growth, or an autonomous episode of "wage push" that is not
captured by the other terms in the wage equation.
    The real—wage rigidity or wage push effect, which we can call the "excess
change" in the real wage, is measured by a set of dummy variables. These
appear in the specification of the wage equation below in (7), designated by the
notation Dt. The first such dummy variables (Dit) is simply a constant term for
the full sample period. The theoretical specification contains no constant term
(since the log output ratio is defined to be zero when there is flO demand
pressure that would make trend unit labor cost——the dependent variable——differ
from expected product price inflation). Thus a significant positive value for the
constant term would indicate that, on average over the sample period, the
change in the real wage rate is larger than the trend growth rate of
productivity, after taking account of the effect of the other variables in the
equation (the log output ratio, the relative import price change, and tax
changes). Additional dummy variables are also entered for the    1973—84 (D2t) and

1980—84 (Dat) periods to test for the excess change in the real wage during
different intervals of the sample period. The sum of the constant and the 1973-
84 dummy indicates for the 1973-79 period the excess change in the real wage
(measured as an annual rate of change), while the sum of the constant, the
1973-84 dummy, and the 1980-84 dummy indicates the excess change for the
1980—84 interval. This interpretation of the excess change in the real wage
requires that the sum of coefficients on the lagged product price change terms
(pt-i and pt-2) is constrained to equal unity.   The wage equations are estimated
both with and without the set of constants and dummy variables
     In previous research on European wage setting behavior Nordhaus (1972)
                                          Wage and Output Gaps, Page 27

 identified a "wage explosion" in the late 1960s, and this episode of autonomous
 wage push was confirmed later by Perry (1975) and Gordon (1977a). To isolate
this episode, an additional dummy variable is included in the European wage
equations, defined as 1.0 for the years 1968—70 and zero otherwise. While there
have been no wage explosions in the U. S., the time paths of wages and prices
were displaced by the Nixon wage and price controls period in 1971-72 and
subsequent post-controls "rebound" in 1974—75. This displacement is captured by
a single dummy variable defined as 1.0 in 1971—72, —1.0 in 1974—75, and zero
otherwise. The fit of the Japanese wage equations is markedly improved when
the period 1973—74 is treated as a period of wage explosion in that country,
captured by a dummy variable equal to 1.0 for 1973—74 and zero otherwise.
     For Europe, wage—push and controls dummy variables have been defined as
follows. For Germany and Italy, there is a single dummy variable equal to 1.0 in
1970 and 0.0 otherwise, to take account of the wage push that occurred during
the 1969—70 period (often described as the 1969 "hot autumn" in Italy). In
France there is one dummy variable defined as 1.0 during 1968, the year of the
general strike and the Grenelle Agreement (and 0.0 otherwise), and a second
dummy variable defined as 1.0 during 1982, the year most affected by the
Mitterand wage-push policies. The U. K. is by far the most complicated to
handle, particularly in annual data. Following our previous work, we treat the
1970 wage explosion as a rebound from the previous period of "restraint" andn
define a dummy variable equal to +1/3 in 1967—69 and —1 in 1970; the second U.
K. dummy variable required at the time of the 1976—78 "social contract" is
defined as +1/2 in 1976—77 and —1/2 in 1978—79.
                                            Wage and Output Gaps, Page 28

     The preceding discussion suggests the following wage equation, in which the
dependent variable is the rate of change of trend unit labor cost:

     (7)   wt —   Ot       ciipt—i + i2pt2 + £X2OQt + 21Qt—1 + C3(P'—P)t
                             + c4(t)t + c5D't + coDot + ciDit + c2D2t.


Here t is the output ratio, tTt is the change in the total tax rate, D"t is the
wage push or controls dummies, and the dummy variables designated Dt measure
the presence of excess real wage change for the periods 1964-84, 1972—84, and
1980—84. The inclusion of the lagged as well as current output ratio term allows
the effect of aggregate demand to enter either as a level effect, rate of change
effect, or both. In Table 7 below, this specification of the wage change
equation is estimated first with the Dit terms omitted and with the coefficients
on the lagged price terms freely estimated, and then a second time with the Dt
terms included and the constraint imposed that ii + 12          1.0.

     The wage change equation is supplemented by an equation that explains
changes in the value—added deflator, based on the mark—up hypothesis, which can
be estimated in the straightforward form:

     (8)     Pt        io(w._e*)t + ti(w—e)t-i + 2Ot + 21Qt-1
                        + a(p"—p)t + 4tTt + 5D't.

The wage—push/controls dummy variables are entered exactly as in the wage
equations. In the case of Europe and Japan, the coefficient            might be
negative if an autonomous wage push squeezed profit margins, while in the U. S.
that coefficient could have either sign since, since the 1971—72 controls program
applied to price mark-ups as well as wage rates.
                                             Wage and Output Gaps, Page 29

       The final equation to be estimated is the reduced—form that results when
 the theoretical wage—change equation is substituted into the price—mark—up
 equation. To simplify the presentation of the reduced form, the complex set of
 lagged coefficients is relabelled (e.g., Vii ioaii), and several lagged terms
 that are indicated by the substitution are dropped to save degrees of freedom:

       (9)    pt     Viipt—i + Vi2pt—2 + V2OQt + V2iQt-j + Va(pF_p)t

                            + V4tTt + V5D't + oDot + iDjt + 2D2t.

 Notice that the productivity trend term (6*t) drops out of the reduced—form, but
 included are the three dummy variables (Dt) that measure the presence of excess
 real wage change for the periods 1964-84, 1972—84, and 1980—84. The reduced—
form price change equation (9) is estimated first with the Dt terms omitted and
with the coefficients on the lagged price terms freely estimated, and then a
second time with the D1t terms included and the constraint imposed that Vu +
V12    1.0.
          If any of the three & coefficients are significantly positive, this
would indicate that excess real wage change created an acceleration of inflation,
and indirectly an increase in the natural rate of unemployment.

Means and Standard Deviations

      As a preliminary to presenting the estimates of the wage and price mark-
up equations, Table 6 presents sample means and standard deviations of the main
variables for the periods before and after 1972. Without describing all the
figures in detail, several generalizations are evident from an inspection of the
table. First, rates of change of trend unit labor cost and of the GNP deflator
are relatively similar in each period for each country, reflecting the absence of
any major change in the adjusted wage gap indexes. Second, both wage changes
                                          Wage and Output Gaps, Page 30


(net of productivity growth) and inflation rates are higher in the second period
than the first, with the notable exceptions of Germany (for wage change), the
Netherlands, and Switzerland (for inflation).
     The third observation is that the log output ratio for most countries is
positive in the first period and negative in the second (with a close similarity
between the U. S. and the European aggregate). Fourth, the relative price of
imports was strongly negative in the first period for all countries, helping to
contribute to low inflation and low unemployment, while the reverse was true
everywhere but in Austria, Norway, and Switzerland in the second period.



     We now turn to estimates of the equation for wage change, specified as in
(7) above. For variables where a string of lagged values is entered, only the
sum of coefficients is exhibited in Table 7, as in Table 2 above. Asterisks
designate the significance of coefficients or sums of coefficients.
    Two estimates of the wage equation are presented in Table 7 for each
country. The first omits the "excess real wage growth" dummy variables and
freely estimates the coefficients on lagged price change. The second includes
the dummy variables and constrains the sum of coefficients on lagged price
change to be unity, so the dependent variable is in the form of real wage
growth adjusted for the estimated productivity trend.
      In the first unrestricted version of the wage equation, presented as the
first line of each pair, some of the coefficients on lagged inflation are below
unity and some are above. If "excess real wage growth" occurs but no dummies
are included, then the excess growth in the nominal wage rate relative to price
change is likely to be picked up by a coefficient of greater than unity on the
                                           Wage and Output Gaps, Page 31

 price change variable. This occurs in the U. S., France, Austria, Belgium,
 Denmark, and the European aggregate.
      The coefficients on the output ratio are generally positive and highly
significant, supporting the Phillips curve hypothesis of a relation between the
charige in the wage rate and the level of a cyclical variable. Note that, because
the current and one lagged output ratio term are included, the specification
could reveal either a "level effect" (a positive sum of coefficients) or a "rate of
change effect" (a positive current coefficient followed by an equal and negative
lagged coefficient, with a zero sum of coefficients). The sum of coefficients on
the output ratio is insignificant in both versions of the wage equation only in
Canada, the Netherlands, Norway, and Switzerland. For all countries, however,
the coefficient has the expected positive sign.
     An important finding is that the slope of the Phillips curve for the U. S. is
very similar to that for the European aggregate. The countries with the most
flexible wages in response to business—cycle fluctuations in output (when one
examines the average output ratio coefficient in the two lines of Table 7) are
France, Italy, the U. K., Belgium, and Denmark. The theme in the literature
supporting a greater degree of wage rigidity in the U. S. than in Europe or
Japan is not supported here. The output response of wage rates is actually
greater in the U. S. than in either Japan or Germany.
     The wage equations also include the change in the real import price and in
the total tax rate. The import price terms have the correct positive sign more
often than not but are generally insignificant, except in Austria and the
European aggregate. The tax terms often have the incorrect (negative) sign,
with no significant positive coefficients. There are significant negative
                                           P/age and Output Gaps, Page 32

coefficients in France and in the restricted version for Belgium. Thus these
results deny the existence of a significant "tax push" effect that is responsible
for driving up real wage rates and in this sense conflict with the hypothesis
advanced by Tullio (1987) and with results of Knoester and van der Windt (1985).
     Column (8) of Table 7 displays the coefficients on the wage push, controls,
and "incomes policy" dummy variables. Where blanks are shown, no such
dummies are defined. Two dummies are defined for France and the U. K., as
indicated in the footnotes to Table 7. The dummies are significant and have the
correct sign for Japan, France (except first dummy in the restricted equation),
Germany, and Europe. Only the second U. K. ("social contract") dummy is
significant, and then only in the unrestricted version. To interpret these
coefficients, they imply as an example in 1973—74 wage rates in Japan increased
14 percent more per lear than can be explained by the other variables. The
U. S. wage controls dummy variables have the right sign and magnintude
suggested by previous research but are not significant.
     The second line of each pair of results displays a version of the wage
equation in which the sum of coefficients on lagged inflation is constrained to
be unity, and the "excess real wage growth" dummy variables are included (see
columns (5), (6), and (7)).13 These coefficients are almost all insignificant,
except for a large positive coefficient for 1964—84 in Austria and Belgium, and a
large negative coefficient in Belgium for 1979—84. These results suggest that
there is no statistical evidence to support any generalization that European real
wage increases were excessive over the post—1972 period when unemployment
increased, except for the isolated wage—push episodes isolated in column (8),
most of which refer to the pre—1972 period. Also important for the
                                           Wage and Output Gaps, Page 33

 interpretation of the European unemployment problem is the absence of a
 significantly positive coefficient for I 980—84, as would be required to confirm the
 hypothesis that high unemployment in Europe did not hold down wage changes as
 much as would have been predicted from pre—1980 behavior. The interpretation
 of the 1980—84 period receives more attention in our discussion of the
 'thysteresi&' hypothesis below.

AggeationTesth:IsEuropeOneooury?
      Throughout its history, Europe has been plagued by national boundaries.
The Common Market and the EMS have made important progress in knocking
down national boundaries in the economic, if not the political, sphere. Table 8
suggests that national boundaries within Europe also play little role in one
specific area of economics, the dynamics of wage behavior.
      Each aggregation test consists of a comparison of the fit of separate wage
equations (corresponding to the unrestricted wage equations displayed as the first
line for each country in Table 7) for a pair of countries with a pooled wage
equation containing all of the same observations for each country but forcing all
coefficients in each country (except on country—specific wage—push variables) to
be the same.'4 Each aggregation test results in a F—test which indicates
whether there is any significant deterioration in fit when two countries are
pooled.
     24 lines are displayed in Table 8, the first 23 for various combinations of
European countries and the 24th for a comparison of Europe and the U. S. For
every combination within Europe, there is no significant deterioration in fit when
two countries or groups of countries are pooled. We start by grouping the small
European countries, Austria plus Switzerland ("ASs'), Denmark plus Norway
                                          Wage and Output Gaps, Page 34



("DN"),   and Belgium plus the Netherlands ("BN"). Further groupings in lines 4
through 6 suggest that all seven countries can be aggregated into one country
called "Small". Lines 7 through 9 achieve a grouping of the four large countries
called "Large", and line 10 indicates that the two pseudo—nations "Small" and
"Large" may be grouped together into "Europe."
    Several alternative schemes for aggregating the countires are presented in
the bottom section of the table. Lines 11 and 12 indicate that the four low—
unemployment small countries (Austria, Norway, Sweden, and Switzerland) may be
successfully aggregated into a country called "Low", and line 13 suggests that
the three high—unemployment countries (Belgium, Denmark, and the Netherlands)
may be aggregated into a country called "High." Further, "Low" and "High" may
be aggregated together.
     Alternative combinations of the large countries are presented in lines 15—
19. Together with the combinations on line 7, all possible permutations of the
four large countries pass the aggregation test. Similarly, the group of smal.l
countries can be aggregated with any one of the four large countries, as shown
on lines 20—23, or with the group of large countries, as shown on line 10. Of
all these tests, only that for France plus Germany (line 7)   and   for Italy plus the
U. K. (line 19) come close to failing the aggregation test at the five percent
significance level.
     While these tests "knock down" national boundaries within Europe, they do
not manage to span the Atlantic Ocean, for the final aggregation test of Western
Europe and the U. S. fails at almost the one percent level. This occurs, despite
the apparent similarity of the U. S. and Europe equations in Table 7, because of
the higher import price coefficient for Europe and, more important, because of a
                                          Wage and Output Qaps, Page 35

different pattern of lag coefficients on inflation and the output ratio.



     An unusual feature of this paper is the use of detrended output (the "log
output ratio") as the only measure of demand pressure on wage and price
changes. How would the wage equations be affected if the log output ratio were
replaced by the unemployment rate? Since the definition of the output ratio
involves defining the amount of demand pressure in a benchmark year as equal
to zero, the specification of the wage equation requires excluding a constant
term. The dummy variables in columns (5)—(7) of Table 7 test the explicit
hypothesis that, relative to the output ratio, real wages increased faster during
specified periods than is justified by productivity growth. However, when the
unemployment rate replaces the log output ratio, the value of the unemployment
rate is positive rather than zero in a benchmark year, requiring that a constant
term be included.
     Table 9 exhibits four columns of results for the wage equations of Table 7,
estimated alternatively with the current and lagged value of the log output ratio
and of the unemployment rate. For each version Table 9 displays the sum of
coefficients on the demand variable, the significance level of the sum of
coefficients, the significance level on a test that excludes the demand variable
entirely from the equation, and the standard error of estimate of the overall
wage equation. The specification of the wage equation used for these tests
includes the three constants of Table 7, columns (5)—(7), but omits the restriction
that the sum of the lagged price terms equals unity. The inclusion of three
constants allows the natural unemployment rate to increase over time and thus
satisfies the previously stated objection to the use of the "raw" unemployment
                                                Wage and Output Gaps, Page 36

rate as a measure of demand pressure. As shown in Table 9, for several
countries the standard error of estimate of the wage equation is lower (i.e.,
better) with the unemployment variable than the log output ratio variable
(Canada, France, Austria, Denmark, the Netherlands, Switzerland, and the
European aggregate).
     Interestingly, this test again reveals a difference between the large and
_11I J U iipeaz 1
J!L1                1A..IUII   'J V e LIL 4L...
                                          U11 laL-g                    4-.J.III
                                                      LLJU11 1,1 Ia am b'J  .L4IJL ..Q I QJ.J
degree of significance for either demand variable than do the smaller countries,
where none of the significance levels in columns (3) and (7) falls below (i.e., is
better than) the 0.05 level. The very strong significance of both the output
ratio and unemployment variables for the European aggregate suggests that the
insignificance of either demand variable for the small European countries may
reflect noi8y data. Perhaps the most important result is that for the European
aggregate, the coefficients and significance levels of both the output ratio and
unemployment rate are basically identical to the equivalent figures for the U. S.



     To complete the estimation of the wage—price model, Table 10 reports
estimates of the price mark—up equation in the form (8) above. To review, the
mark—up equation is specified in first difference form. The inflation rate is
regressed on the change in trend unit labor cost (current and one lag), the
output ratio (current and one lag), the current rate of change of relative import
prices, the two—year change in the total tax rate, and the single dummy variable
for wage push or controls. To validate the theoretical specification for the
price equation in levels of a procyclically sensitive mark-up in levels, in an
equation for the first difference of prices as in Table 10 the output ratio should
                                          Wage and Output Gaps, Page 37

enter as a first difference, that is, the coefficient on the current output ratio
should be positive and on the lagged output ratio should be equal in absolute
value and negative in sign.
     The results appear to contradict the hypothesis of a procyclical price mark-
up. Of the 14 lines in Table 10, seven indicate a significantly negitive sum of
coefficients on the output ratio (plus an eighth, the European aggregate),
indicating a perverse Phillips curve phenomenon that offsets part of the positive
Phillips curve effect in the wage change equations. This result can be explained
by some combination of measurement error and a substantive explanation. The
measurement error, emphasized in part II above (p. 10), arises from the use of a
wage index (compensation per hour) which reflects not just changes in wage
rates but also the procyclical effects of overtime pay and of the changing mix of
employment toward higher wage industries in boom times. If the measurement
error is all that is involved, then the cyclical responsiveness of wages is
overstated in Table 7 and of price markups is understated in Table 10. Only the
reduced—form equations in Table 11 provide an accurate indication of cyclical
responses.
     The substantive explanation suggests that in an open economy in which
competition from abroad limits the short—run flexibility of prices, a demand
expansion that raises the output ratio and the rate of wage change is reflected
only partly in price change, resulting in a positive growth rate of the reaL wage.
Such a result implies procyclical rather than countercyclical real wage behavior,
but refers to the rate of change of the real wage rather than its level. Seven
sums of coefficients in column (2) of Table 10 are insignificantly different from
zero, and in no case does this reflect any significant zig—zag from a positive to
                                         Wage and Output Gaps, Page 38

a negative coefficient, as would be implied by a rate-of—change effect of the
business cycle on the change in the mark-up.
     The other coefficients in Table 10 imply that the elasticity of price change
to the change in trend unit labor cost is close to unity within the current and
subsequent year. Import price changes are insignificant and/or have the wrong
sign, except in Belgium. A positive and significant tax push effect occurs only
for Japan and Belgium. Finally, the wage—push and controls dummies are
uniformly insignificant, indicating that for Japan and Europe the wage-push
episodes raised wages but did not squeeze profits, leaving the mark—up
unaffected.



     Together the wage and price mark—up equations imply the reduced—form
equation for price change written above as (9). This relates the current
inflation rate to two lags of the inflation rate, the current and lagged output
ratio, the current change in the import price, the two-year change in the tax
rate, and the same wage—push and control dummies discussed before. Table ii
presents the results of estimating (9).
     The reduced—form equation is critical for determining its natural rate of
unemployment, as well as the overall nominal flexibility of an economy. Upward
"wage—push" pressure working through positive coefficients on the Dt or Dt
dummy   variables in the wage equation do not create inflation or imply an
increase in the natural rate if the equivalent coefficients on Dt or D't are
negative in the price mark—up equation. What matters are the net coefficients in
the reduced—form equation. We return to the issue of the natural rate of
unemployment below.
                                          P/age and Output Gaps, Page 39


     The reduced—form also is the final arbiter of nominal flexibility, since

flexibility in the form of a high positive coefficient on the output ratio in the
wage change equation means little if it is offset by a high negative coefficient
on the output ratio in the price mark—up equation. Column (2) of Table 11
indicates that there are significant Phillips curve effects of the level of the
output ratio in the reduced—form inflation equation (for the either the first or
second line of each pair) in eight of the 14 countries, PIUS the European
aggregate. The only countries exhibiting wrongly-signed negative coefficients in
either equation are Austria and Belgium. Comparing the U. S. with Japan and
the European aggregate, the sum of coefficients in the U. S. is lower than in
Japan and Europe for the unrestricted version, while both the U. S. and Japan
have lower sums of coefficients than Europe in the restricted version. Thus
these results support the view that inflation is more responsive to demand
shocks in Europe than in the U. S., but provide only mixed support to the
common view that inflation is more responsive to demand shocks in Japan than
in the U. S.   In light of current policy debates, it is interesting that the
results provide j92LvJewjiofljsrnoreresjyeto
     The other coefficients displayed in Table 11 can be compared with the
parallel coefficients in Table 7 for the wage change equations. The coefficients
on the relative import price change term are significantly positive only for the
U. S., Belgium, and the European aggregate. The insignificance of the import
price coefficients for Japan may reflect the much—discussed absence of
manufactured imports.
     The estimated controls coefficients in column (8) for the U. S. aggregate
                                           Wage and Output Gaps, Page 40

economy are similar to those in my recent paper (1985) on the behavior of the
U. S. inflation rate in quarterly data, but in the present annual data are not
significant. For Japan the 1973-74 wage-push phenomenon was mostly but not
entirely reflected in faster inflation, leaving the rest to be absorbed by a profit
squeeze. In Europe the only significant wage-push coefficient in Table 11 is in
the unrestricted equation for Germany, suggesting that in the other countries the
significant wage push effects caused a profit squeeze and did not cause faster
inflation (when wages are solved out as in Table 11).

     I V.     "HYSTERESIS" AND THE NATURAL RATE OF UNEMPLO YMENT




     The    last set of regression results in the paper test the "hysteresis" hypo-
thesis, which states that the natural rate of unemployment is "path dependent,"
that is, is not independent of the evolution of the actual unemployment rate but
rather responds with a lag to the path of the actual unemployment rate. In this
paper, which focusses on the equivalent concepts of the natural level of output
and the log output ratio, the hysteresis hypothesis states that the natural level
of output evolves not along a log—linear trend but with a lagged response to the
actual path of output. If valid, this hypothesis would have the important policy
implication that the output slump in Europe in the 1980s has reduced the natural
level of output, gradually eliminating slack to the point that there is no longer
any further downward pressure on wage changes.
     Our test of the hysteresis approach can be illustrated in a simplified
version of the wage equation included here for expository purposes only:
                                                       Wage and Output Gaps, Page 41


      (10)       wt — pt—i            o + xii(Qt —    Q*t) + cc12(Qt—1 — Q*t_i),

                                          + xnA(Qt — Q*t) + (cXil+G(12)(Qt_i       —




where     once again upper—case letters designate logs of levels, and both the
current and one lagged value of the output ratio are included in the wage
equation to accord with our basic specification reported in Table 7. The second
line of (10) restates the role of the output ratio as entering through the current
difference (A) and the lagged level.
     Let us assume that the unobservable natural output level (Q*t) is some
unknown weighted average of the linear trends of Table 4 (QTt) and a hysteresis
term (Q11t) equal to a four—year moving average of actual output:

      (11)       Qt         4'QHt +   (1—P)Qt.

To identify the 4' parameter, we substitute (ii) into the                                 term in
(10), while assuming that in the difference term Q*t                   QTt. Rearranging, we
obtain:

     (12)              —
                           p—       ao + aijA(Qt —     QTt)   + (aii+cii)(Qt—i — QTt_i)
                                —
                                       (ccil+c12)4'(Q11t_i — QTt_i)


     The hysteresis coefficients (4') listed in columns (1) and (3) of Table 12 are
obtained by running the wage change equations from Table 7 and the reduced—
form price change equations from Table 11 again with the addition of the lagged
(QHt — QTt)   term. The term QHt is defined as a trend-adjusted four—year
moving average:

     (13)       Q'1t        [Qt + (1iqTt_i)Qt_i + (1+2qTt_2)Qt_2
                                               Wage and Output Gaps, Page 42

                        + (1+3qTt_3)Qt_3]/4,


where a lower—case q refers to the growth rate of the output trend for the year
in question. The most important finding in Table 12 is that the hysteresis
coefficients are insignificant at the five—percent level in the wage change
equation in column (1), except for Austria, Belgium, and Switzerland, and in the
reduced—form price change equation in column (3), except in Austria, Belgium,
Sweden, and Switzerland. The fact that the hysteresis hypothesis is validated
only for small European countries having both high unemployment (Belgium) and
low unemployment (Austria, Sweden, Switzerland) seems to remove much of the
"credibility" of the hysteresis hypothesis as an explanation of high European
unemployment, particularly in the four large countries.
     Another less formal test of the hysteresis hypothesis is implied by the
dummy variables (Dt) in the reduced—form price equation. If the constant term
for the 1980—84 period is significantly positive, this means that the existing
trend—based measure of the log output ratio predicts too little inflation during
that interval, and that the "true" output gap is smaller. The statistical
significance of such a shift effect cannot be read from the coefficients reported
in Table 11, since all three Dt terms cover the 1980—84. Instead, the identical
equation was rerun with an alternative set of four dummy shift terms covering,
respectively, 1963—69, 1970—74, 1975—79, and 1980—84.
     The coefficients and t—ratios on these 1980—84 dummy shift variables are
shown for each country in columns (5) and (6) of Table 12. Positive coefficients
are significant at the 5—percent level only for Canada, Norway, and Sweden, and
for no other country even at the 10—percent level. Only for Sweden do the two
tests of hysteresis concur. We conclude that evidence supporting the hysteresis
                                            Wage and Output Gaps, Page 43


hypothesis   is exceedingly weak, and that our trend-based output ratio series
provides the most reliable basis on which to base an estimate of the natural rate
of unemployment.



     The estimates of hysteresis effects in Table 12 should be viewed as testing
a very special and limited version of the hysteresis hypothesis. A hysteresis
coefficient equal to or close to unity means that wage and price behavior is best
explained by assuming that natural output follows actual output with a short lag
(i.e., the output gap disappears when actual output grows at its trend rate,
regardless at how low or high a level). However, a hysteresis coefficient equal
to or close to zero 9_jj_çonstantriaturaIunernp1ojrnentrate.
Instead, the null hypothesis of no hysteresis effect assumes that natural output
grows after 1979 at its 1972—79 rate. Since the actual unemployment rate rose
from 1972 to 1979, the null hypothesis of rio hysteresis allows the natural
unemployment rate to increase from 1972 to 1979 and, for most countries, from
1979 to 1984 as well.
     Any output gap estimate for 1984 (or any other year) can be translated into
an implied natural rate of unemployment by using Okun's Law, which states that
there is a regular relationship between the log output gap (Qt - Qt) and the
unemployment gap (Ut — U*t), where Ut and UZi are the usual percentage rates,
not logs:
                        4       2
     (14)     Ut        E    + E Q_Q*)t_j
                        il     jO
                                            + Ct.



The first summation indicates that the level of the natural unemployment rate
                                              Wage and Output Gaps, Page 44

(U*t) associated in a given time interval with the natural output level (that is, a
situation in which Qt     Q*j)   is estimated by the value of one of four constants
(ii) applying to the intervals 1963—69, 1970—74, 1975—79, and 1980—84. The second
summation allows deviations of the actual unemployment rate from the natural
unemployment rate to be explained by the current and two lagged values of the
log output ratio. The natural unemployment rate corresponding to a given value
of Q*t (whether estimated by the trend or "hysteresIs" moving—average method)
can be calculated from (14) as:

     (15)     Ut        Ti,.


     Table 1.3 compares the actual 1984 unemployment rate with the two
alternative definitions of the natural unemployment rate. The first, labelled
"trend output," assumes that natural output grows from 1979 to 1984 at its 1972—
79 trend. The second, "hysteresis output," assumes that natural output is a
trend-adjusted four-year moving average of actual output. The 1984 output gap
is translated into an unemployment gap by running the regression in (14) above
and then by using (15) to calculate the natural unemployment rate (Wi).
     The most important conclusion in Table 13 is that the trend unemployment
gaps are relatively large in France, Germany, and the U. K. Combined with the
low statistical significance of the hysteresis coefficient in Table 12 for these
countries, this result suggests that there is substantial room for policymakers to
stimulate aggregate demand without causing an accelerating inflation. The
marginal significance of the U. K. hysteresis term in the reduced—form price
equation suggests that some weight should be given to the Ut estimate based on
hysteresis output (12.7 percent), which indicates virtually no slack, and no room
                                           Wage and Output Gaps, Page 45

 for demand expansion.
     Another interesting result is that for all the seven small European
countries, with the exception of Denmark, the trend and hysteresis versions of
the unemployment gap are close to zero. Thus the low unemployment countries
 (Austria, Norway, Sweden, and Switzerland> have low natural unemployment rates
by either the trend or hysteresis definition, and the high unemployment countries
(particularly Belgium and the Netherlands) have high natural unemployment, rates
by either definition. For the small countries, then, not only are the hysteresis
oefficients of Table 12 strongly significant for several countries, but the
hysteresis hypothesis is supported in the broader sense that the

to be.

Wage Gps With ZeroOutputGapa
     An important conclusion of this paper is that wage gaps in Europe have
declined substantially since 1978 and are no greater than in the U. S. Some
readers may react, "yes, but the wage gaps are low only because unemployment
is high and has held down wages; with lower unemployment the problem of
excessive real wages would return." jyiijpJ lj_                     that the actual


                                              Its quantitative significance can be
assessed by using the wage change equations of Table 7 (second line of each
pair) to calculate counterfactual rates of wage change on the assumption that
the trend—based output gap was zero in every year from 1980 to l984 The
difference between wage changes calculated with the actual output gap and with
the counterfactual zero output gap can be cumulated and converted into a
                                           Wage and Output Gaps, Page 46

counterfactual wage gap, as in Table 14.
     For every country but Switzerland, the counterfactual wage gap is
substantially higher than the actual wage gap in 1984. For Europe as a whole,
the wage gap is raised from 0.94 to 1.06. The difference is greatest for Italy,
amounting to 28 percentage points. However, the calculation does not serve to
reveal a "real wage problem" in Europe as contrasted with the United States.
The counterfactual 1984 wage gap in the U. S. of 1.10 is actually higher than
the figure of 1.06 for Europe. Further, within Europe there is little relation
between the counterfactual wage gaps and 1984 unemployment rates. Low—
unemployment Austria's counterfactual wage gap of 1.15 contrasts with high—
unemployment Netherland's counterfactual wage gap of 0.81.

                              IV. CONCLUSION

     This paper provides no explanation of high European unemployment.
Instead, its results throw cold water on explanations in the previous literature
based on high real wages in Europe, or on alleged differences in cyclical
productivity, wage and price adjustment between Europe arid the U. S. This dose
of cold water comes in seven containers:
          (1) There is no evidence of countercyclical productivity movements in
     Europe, except in the U. K. Actual productivity would temporarily increase
     faster than the underlying trend rate, rather than increasing slower than
     trend, in response to a demand expansion.
          (2) After adjustment for the income of the seIf--employed, there is flO
     evidence of excessive real wages in Europe. "Wage gap" indexes on a 1972
     base computed with either actual productivity or estimated trend
                                     Wage and Output Gaps, Page 47

 productivity were almost identical in Europe to the values for the U. S. in
 1963 and 1984. The slight bulge in the European wage gap that occurred
 between 1974 and 1978 amounts to only about five percentage points over
 the U. S. values.
      (3) There was indeed a real wage explosion between 1966 and 1975 in
 three small high—unemployment countries (Belgium, Denmark, Netherlands).
But the wage gap barely moved in the four large high-unemployment
countries (France, Germany, Italy, U. K.), and in fact increased
substantially less than in low—unemployment Austria. Thus the wage gap
concept is almost useless in providing an explanation of differences in
unemployment experience within Europe.
      (4) Further skepticism regarding the relevance of wage and price
adjustment for the European unemployment problem is provided by
aggregation tests. Tests for pooling of wage change equations across
national boundaries in Europe are accepted universally. There are no
significant differences in wage behavior within Europe, except for country—
specific instances of wage push or incomes policies. Of 24 aggregation
tests that are run and reported in Table 8, there is one single failure: the
U. S. wage equation cannot be aggregated with the pooled Western
European equation. This result supports the view that the Atlantic Ocean
is a valid boundary for comparative macroeconomic analysis while national
borders within Europe are not, at least for dynamic wage behavior.
     (5) While the U. S. and European wage equations cannot be
aggregated, most coefficients in the European wage equation are quite close
to their counterparts in the U. S. wage equation. In particular, there is no
                                      Wage and Output Qaps, Page 48

support for the proposition that the U. S. is characterized by nominal wage
rigidity and Europe by real wage rigidity. The degree of nominal wage
flexibility in Europe is about the same as in the U. S., and far from being
too rigid, real wages in Europe were too flexible, jumping at the time of
autonomous wage push episodes in the late 1960s in France, Germany, and
Italy.
         (6> Just as the paper does not explain high unemployment in Europe,
it does not deny that the natural unemployment rate compatible with a
constant inflation rate has increased substantially since 1972 in every
European country. However, output gaps in Europe are not zero. The
econometric estimates imply that the unemployment rate could be pushed
down by three percentage points, particularly in France and Germany,
without causing an acceleration of inflation (holding constant real import
prices). With falling real import prices in Europe, as has occurred and will
continue to occur with a falling U. S. dollar, there is even less reason to
be concerned that an inflationary spiral would follow a stimulus to
aggregate demand.
         (7) Some might argue that wage gaps in Europe in the 1980s have
been pushed down by high unemployment and would bounce back if
unemployment fell substantially. Indeed, we show that for Europe as a
whole the wage gap index would be 12 percentage points higher if output
had continued to grow at its 1972—79 trend rate. However, the claim that
wage gaps have been held down by high unemployment and low output in
the 1980s amounts to an acceptance of one of the major conclusions of this
paper, as emphasized in the previous paragraph: Europe has experienced a
                                    Wage and   Output Gaps, Page 49

substantial Keynesian output gap in the 1980s, and not all of the increase
in European unemployment is "structural" or "classical" in nature.
                                          Wage and Output     Gaps, Page 50

                                  REFERENCES



Bean, C. R., Layard, P. R. 0., and Nickell, S. J. (1986). "The Rise in
     Unemployment: A Multi—Country Study." Economica, vol. 53 (No. 210,
     supplement), pp. S1-S22.
Blanchard, Olivier J. (1986). "Empirical Structural Evidence on Wages, Prices,
     and Employment in the U. S.," M.I.T. working paper, May.
             and Lawrence H. Summers (1986). "Hysteresis and the European
     Unemployment Problem," NBER Macroeconomics Annual          6, vol. 1, pp. 15-
     77.

Branson, William H., and Rotemberg, Julio (1980). "International Adjustment with
     Wage Rigidity," Eupean Economic Review, vol. 13 (May), pp. 309-32.
Bruno, Michael. "Aggregate Supply and Demand Factors in OECD Unemployment:
     An Update." Econornica, vol. 53 (no. 210, supplement), pp. S35—S52.
Bruno, Michael, and Sachs, Jeffrey (1981). "Supply versus Demand Approaches to
     the Problem of Stagflation." In H. Giersch, ed., Macroeconomic Policies for
     Growth arid Stability. Kiel: Institut fur Weltwirtschaft an der Universitat
     Kiel.
__(I985). The Economics of Worldwide Stagflatiori. Cambridge:
     Harvard University Press.
Gordon, Robert 3. (1977). "World Inflation and Monetary Accommodation in Eight
     Countries,"                                          vol. 8 (no. 2), pp. 409-
     68.

             (1984). "IJnemploymerit and Potential Output in the l980s,"
     okingconomicActiviy, vol. 15 (no. 2), pp. 537-64.
                                            Wage and Output Gaps, Page 51


              (1985). "Understanding Inflation in the 1980s," Brookingsperson
     Economic Activity, vol. 16 (no. 1), pp. 263-99.
              (:1987). "Productivity, Wages, and Prices Inside and Outside of
     Manufacturing in the U. S., Japan, and Europe." Ejpp Economic
     Review, vol. 30, no. 2, pp. 000-00.
Grubb, David (1986). "Topics in the OECD Phillips Curve," Economic Journal,
     VOL.       MarCfl), pp. D—f.
Ramada,     Koichi, and Kurosaka, Yoshio (1984). "The Relationship Between
     Production and Employment in Japan: Okun's Law in Comparative Perspec-
    tive," European Economic Revi, vol. 21 (no. 1/2, June), pp. 71-94.
Knoester, A., and N. van der Windt (1985). "Real Wages and Taxation in Ten
     OECD Countries," Erasmus University Discussion Paper 8501/GM.
McCallum, B. T. (1974a). "Money Wage Changes and the Excess Demand for
     Labour: International Evidence on a New Approach," pplied Economics,
     vol. 6, pp. 205—13.
              (1974b). "Wage Rate Changes and the Excess Demand for Labour:
     An Alternative Formulation," Economica, vol. 41 (August), pp. 269-77.
Newell, A, and Symons, J. S. V. (1985). "Wages and Employment in the O.E.C.D.
     Countries," University College London, Department of Political Economy,
     Discussion Paper 85—24, September.
Nordhaus, William (1972). "The Worldwide Wage Explosion," Brookings Papers on
     Economic Activity, vol. 3 (no. 2), pp. 431—64.
Perry, George L. (1975). "Determinants of Wage Inflation around the World,"
     Brookings Papers on Economic ActivIty, vol. 6 (no. 2), pp. 403-35.
Sachs, Jeffrey (1979). "Wages, Profits, and Macroeconomic Adjustment: A
                                          Wage and Output Gaps, Page 52


     Comparative Study,t' Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, vol. 10 (no. 2),
     pp. 269—319.
           (1983). "Real Wages and Unemployment in the OECD Countries,"
     Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, vol. 14 (no. 1), pp. 255-89.
Tullio, Giuseppe (1987). "Long-run Implications of the Increase in Taxation and
    Public Debt for Employment and Economic Growth in Europe," European
     Jconomic tevIe5 vol. iiI, no. i Apr1I), pp. (41—('l.
                                         Wage and Output Gaps, Page 53

                                 FOOTNOTES



      1. All studies using the LSE Center for Labour Economics data bank,
including Newell--Symons (1985), Grubb (1986), and Bean—Layard—Nickell (1986),
are guilty of mixing manufacturing wage data with data on aggregate employment
or unemployment. That data bank contains no data at all on wages for the
aggregate economy, only for the manufacturing sector.
     2. The 14 countries are (in the order listed in Table I below)
U. S., Canada, Japan, France, Germany, Italy, the U. K., Austria, Belgium,
Denmark, Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, and Switzerland. Countries included in
the L.S.E. Centre for Labour Economics data bank, but excluded here, are Aus-
tralia, Finland, Ireland, New Zealand, and Spain.
      3. As far as I can tell, only Sachs (1979> makes an explicit adjustment
for self—employment income. Since he does not present estimates of labor's
share with and without the adjustment, it is not clear whether his adjustments
are larger or smaller than mine.
     4. The studies that erroneously treat unadulterated unemployment rates
as cyclical variables in wage or productivity equations include Sacha (1983),
Bruno—Sachs (1985), Blanchard—Summers (1986), and Bean—Layard—Nickell (1986).
     5. Because of recessions in the U. S. and Canada in 1961, and a dip in
French output in the early 1960s, 1964 is chosen as the benchmark year for
these three countries.
     6. The LSE data base, as described by Grubb (1986), contains hourly
earnings only for manufacturing, and not always on a consistent base. Data
for Australia arid Norway are for males only, data for the U. S. include
production workers only, data for Austria, Belgium, Denmark, and Sweden
include mining, data for Belgium includes transport, and data for Spain
include all industries.
     7. This unpublished series was provided by John Martin of the OECD. All
other series for the aggregate sector were obtained from an OECD PC data
diskette. rfhe manufacturing data were transcribed manually from printouts
provided by the IMF in May, 1985 and include manufacturing value-added
deflators, output, compensation, employment, and hours for the fourteen
countries identified in footnote 2. The compilation of the manufacturing data
is described in the data appendix of Artus (1984). A critical step in the
development of the data base was the location of data on the absolute value of
each variable (particularly nominal output, nominal compensation, and labor
hours) for the aggregate economy in 1972, in order to allow subtraction of
manufacturing values from aggregate values to obtain the needed residual
values.
                                         Wage and Output Gaps, Page 54

     8. As noted above, there is a reference to the issue of self—employment
income in Sachs (1979), but the description is too vague to determine whether
his procedures are comparable to ours. The topic is not addressed in Bruno
(1986).
     9. My published comments on Sachs (1983) contain a critique of the
methods used to estimate cyclical productivity effects and productivity
trends.
    10. For an alternative formulation that derives a Phillips—curve wage
equation based on the hypothesis that the rate of change of wages is a linear
function of the gap between lagged labor demand and supply, see McCallurn
(1974a, 1974b).
     11. For a discussion of alternative methods of imposing structure on wage
and price equations within this context, see Blanchard (1986). In some of his
quarterly wage equations Blanchard imposes the structural assumption that the
coefficient on the current price change in the wage equation cannot be higher
than a specified amount, e.g., 0.3.
     12. Exceptions to this procedure are that 1984 is used as a benchmark
year for Japan to take account of highly different growth rates of output during
1979—84 in manufacturing versus nonmanufacturing. Also, since 1961 was a
recession year in North America, the first benchmark is 1964 in Canada and the
U. S., and also in France. The 1961—64 growth rate of natural output for these
countries is assumed to be equal to the observed 1964—72 growth rate.
     13. In the wage equation with the constant terms of columns (5)—(7)
excluded, the restriction is accepted by a conventional significance test at
the 5 percent level for all countries but Japan and Denmark. in the reduced—
form equations presented in Table 11, the restriction is accepted for all
countries but Japan.
      14. If there are 21 observations for Austria and 21 observations for
Switzerland, then the pooled regression contains 42 observations. However, care
is taken to ritake sure that lagged values for observation 22, Switzerland in 1964,
refer to Switzerland in 1963 and not Austria in 1984! Note that the Dit dummy
variables are not included, since the wage equation used in the aggregation tests
is the unrestricted version from Table 7, while the Dt dummy variables are
meaningful only in the restricted version.
                               TABLE 1

                   Standardized Unemployment Rates
                           Selected Years


                             1961        1972   1979   1984



United States                6.4         5.5    5.8     7.4

Canada                       6.5         6.2    7.4    11.2

Japan                         1.2         1.4   2.1     2.7

  France                     1.4         2.7    6.0     9.7

  Germany                    0.3         0.8    3.2     8.6

  Italy                      5.1         6.3    7.5    10.2

  United Kingdom             2.2         4.3    5.6    13.2

  Austria                    1.9         1.2    2.1     4.1

  Belgium                    2.1         2.7    8.2    14.0

  Denmark                    2.0         0.9    6.1    10.1

  Netherlands                0.5         2.2    5.4    14.0

  Norway                     1.8         1.7    2.0     3.0
  Sweden                     1.4         2.7    2.1     3.1

  Switzerland                0.0         0.0    0.4     1.1

Eleven European
Countries                    1.7         2.7    4.9    9.6



Source:     Switzerland and Denmark, 1972 and 1979 from OECD _____
                                                             Labor
            Force Statistics. 1984: OECD Economic   Outlook,
                                           ________________
            December 1985, p. 28.
            Other countries for 1972, 1979, and 1984: OECD
            Economic Outlook, June 1985, Table R12.
            All countries for 1961: Yearbook of Labor Statistics,
            1971, Table 10, linked to OECD Series in 1964.
                                              TABLE 2

                       Equations    Explaining Annual Change in Hours
                       Relative    to Trend Output Growth (ht - q*t)
                                           1964 — 84

                  (* indicates significant at 5 percent, **        at     1 percent)


                       Sum of Coefficients
                       on Current and One             Constant
                       Lagged Change in             (trend) terms
                        Output    Real               1963      1973               2
                        Ratio     Wage              —1984    —1984               R     S.E.E.   D.-W.

                          (1)         (2)                (3)       (4)          (5)     (6)     (7)

United States            0.86**     —0.22               —1.70*     0.92         0.82    0.78    2.17

Canada                   O.86**     —0.62**             —1.33*     0.51         0.84    0.84    2.50

Japan                    0.36*      —0.46**             —4.98**    3.11**       0.91    0.78    2.36


 France                  0.86**     —0.68**             —1.71**    0.42         0.92    0.53    1.33

 Germany                 0.91**     —0.53**             —2.31*     0.51         0.81    0.78    2.47

  Italy                  0.58**     —0.47**             —3.10*     1.37         0.81    0.92    2.06

 United Kingdom           1.13**    —0.01               —3.39**    1.11         0.71    1.29    2.66


 Austria                 0.71**      —0.41*             —3.62**    1.75**       0.75    0.94    2.25

 Belgium                 0.79**      —0.63**            —1.79**    0.34         0.87    0.80    1.81

  Denmark                0.75*       —0.77**            —0.73      0.095        0.60    1.60    2.05

  Netherlands             0.60*      —0.51**            —2.17      0.23         0.68    1.04    2.15

  Norway                  0.40       —0.22              —3.31**   —0.13         0.02    1.50    1.83

  Sweden                 0.69**      —0.24              —3.76**    2.36**       0.79    0.89    2.11

  Switzerland             0.89**     —0.59**            —1.81**    1.28**       0.95    0.55    2.33


Eleven European
Countries                 0,78**     —0.44**            —2.81**    0.99**       0.92    0.37    2.20
                                                                              TABLE 3

                                                 Contribution     to Fitted Values of Productivity Growth
                                             of Trends, Peal    Wage Effect, and Cyclical Output Patio Effect,
                                                                  Selected Intervals, 1964—84



                                   —
                            1964     72                              1972 -- 79                       1979 — 84
                         Real      Output                           Real Output                      Real Output
                   Trend Wage      Ratio  Total            Trend    Wage Ratio Total        Trend    Wage Ratio Total
                   TIY                 (3)     (4)          (5)      (6)     (7)     (8)     (9)     (10)     (11)     (12)

 United States      2.18    0.04       0.00    2.22         1.00    —0.05   —0.03    0.92    1.00    —0.27    —0.06     0.66
Canada              3.52    0.19    —0.01      3.69         2.18   —0.81    —0.02    1.34    2.18    —0.72    —0.23    1.22
 Japan              9.25 —0.56      —0.39      8.29         3.47     0.48   —0.03    3.92    3.47    —0.54    —0.01    2.91
  France            5.40 —0.04      —0.01      5.35         4.08    0.19    —0.02    4.25    4.08    —0.87    —0.39    2.82
  Germany           4.91    0.17    —0.04      5.04         3.66    0.10     0.02    3.78    3.66    —1.36    —0.18    2.11
  Italy             5.81   0.32    —0.10      6.02         3.23    —0.08     0.03    3.18    3.23    —1.09    —0.89    1.26
  United Kingdon    3.76   0.08    —0.08      3.76         2.53    —0.05     0.02   2.50     2.53    —0.07     0.19    2.65

  Austria           6.09   0.06        0.06   6.20         3.14     0.76    0.00    3.90    3.14    —0.78    —0.55     1.80
  Belgium           4.90   0.55    —0.04      5.41         3.97     0.57    0.50    4.55    3.97    —1.24    —0.34     2.40
  Denmark          3.11    1.70    —0.26      4.55         2.70     0.82    0.02    3.54    2.70    —1.63    —0.15    0.93
  Netherlands      4.46    0.92    —0.04      5.34         3.99     0.43    0.01    4.43    3.99    —3.08    —1.07    —0.16
  Norway           4.27    0.35    —0.05      4.58        4.43     —0,13    0.00    4.3Cr   4.43    —1.06    —1.25    2.13
  Sweden           4.96 —0.27      —0.39      4.30         1.85    0.16     0.17    2.17    1.85    —0.78    —0.23    0.84
 Switzerland       4.39 —0.14      —0.08      4.17        1.29     0.89     0.43    2.22    1.29     0.20     0.15    1.64

Eleven Europp
countries          4.98    0.17    —0.06      5.08        3.22     0.14     0.01    3.38    3.22    —0.77    —0.41    2.04
                                                  TABLE 4

                          Growth Rates in Trend Output, Output per Hour, and Hours
                                          Selected Intervals, 1960—84




                               1960 — 72                    1972   —   79               1979=84
                                  Output                         Output                         Output
                   Output    Per Hour    Hours    Output      Per Hour        Hours   Output       Per     Hours


                    (1)        (2)       (3)       (4)                 (5)     (6)      (7)         (8)      (9)
United States       3.66       2.11      1.55      3.00            0.88        2.12     3.00        1.73     1.27

Canada              5.28       3.49      1.78      3.89            1.35        2.54     3.89       3.44      0.44

Japan               4.34       8.91      0.43      4.11            3.82        0.29     3.92        3.06     0.86




  France            5.23       5.30     —0.07      3.37            4.16       —0.79     3.37       5.24 —1.87

  Germany           4.26       5.16     -0.90      2.62            4.04       —1.43     2.62        3.55    —0.93

  Italy             5.02       6.41     —1.39      3.17            3.07        0.10     3.17        3.26     0.10

  United Kingdom    2.73       3.75     —1.02      2.31                2.22    0.09     2.31        4.39    —2.08

  Australia         4.75       6.03     —1.28      3.16                3.62   —0.46     3.16        3.41    —0.25

  Belgium           4.73       5.13     —0.40      2.68                4.40   —1.72     2.138       4.22    —1.54

  Denmark           4.29       4.32     —0.03      2.11                3.13   —1.01     2.11        2.32    —0.20

  Netherlands       4.73       5.33     —0.60      2.92                4.50   —1.58     2.92        2.28     0.64

  Norway            4.21       4.41     —0.20      4.67            4.30        0.37     4.67        4.21     0.45

  Sweden            4.05       4.59     —0.55      2.07                2.09   —0.02     2.07        1.53     0.54

  Switzerland       4.44       4.12      0.32      0.11                2.21   —2.10     o.:ii       0.25    —0.15




    ______
p_European          4.35       5.09     —0.73      2,74                3.39   —0.65     2.74        3.74    —1.00
Countries
                                             TABLE 5a


                            Wage Gap Based on Actual Productivity
                                            1972 =    1.0




                   1963    1966      1969            1972    1975    1978    1981    1984
                    (1)     (2)       (3)             (4)     (5)     (6)     (7)     (8)




United States      0.979   0.983     1.009           1.000   0.987   0.987   0.963   0.948

Canada             0.996   0.987     1.003           1.000   1.017   0.984   0.971   0.954

Japan              1.040   1.016    0.974            1.000   1.081   1.050   1.008   1.010

  France           1.008   0.990    0.991            1.000   1.028   1.024   1,024   1.007

  Germany          0.981   0.991    0.974            1.000   1.003   0.999   0.990   0.949

  Italy            0.960   0.957    0.964            1.000   1.035   0.999   0.990   0.983

  United Kingdom   0.976   0.980    0.966            1.000   1.069   0.990   0.974   0.950

  Austria          1.006   1.020    1.011            1.000   1.082   1.116   1.115   1.066

  Belgium          0.982   0.996    0.975            1.000   1,031   1.041   1.037   1.005

  Denmark          0.950   0.988    0.993            1.000   1.066   1.043   1.060   0.990

  Netherlands      0.936   0.972    0.984            1.000   1.055   1.015   1.000   0.943

 Norway            0.927   0.934    0.970            1.000   1.036   1.040   0.896   0.860

  Sweden           1.025   1.029    1.018            1.000   0.993   1.061   0.991   0.915

  Switzerland      1.012   1.003    0.985            1.000   1.038   1.033   1.037   1.041


Eleven European
Countries          0.985   0.987    0.979        1.000       1.032   1.018   1.011   0.985
                                           TABLE 5b


                          Wage Gap Based on Trend Productivity
                                       1972 = 1.0




                  1963    1966     1969         1972    1975     1978    1981    1984

                   (1>     (2)      (3)          (4)     (5)      (6)     (7)     (8)




United States     0.976   1.015    1.024        1.000   0.981    0.989   0.959   0.926

Canada            1.001   0.997    0.998        1.000   0.982    0.949   0.885   0.861

Japan             1.107   1.044    1.029        1.000   1.120    1.079   1.033   1.014


  France          1.018   1.016    1.001        1.000   1.049    1.041   0.978   0.957

  Germany         0.957   0.976   0.980         1.000   1.016    1.026   0.973   0.891

  Italy           0.958   0.965   0.979         1.000   1.007    0.980   0.952   0.879

  United Kingdom 0.959    0.955   0.936         1.000   1.019    0.982   0.964   0.935


 Austria          0.998   1.000    1.000        1.000   1.105    1.130   1.128   1.035

 Belgium          0.913   0.936   0.921         1.000   1.110    1.098   1.073   0.996

 Denmark          0.826   0.870   0.964         1.000   1.053    1.103   1.069   0.969

 Netherland       0.836   0.876   0.942         1.000   1.115    1.057   0.916   0.786

 Norway           0.909   0.911    1.007        1.000   1.034    1.024   0.840   0.759

  Sweden          1.070   1.051    1.051       1.000    1.019    1.067   0.988   0.891

  Switzerland     1.039   1.012   0.982         1.000   1.080    1.086   1.126   1.130


Eleven European
Countries         0.972   0.978   0.976         1.000   1.033    1.032   0.995   0.936
                                                     TABLE 6

                                Sample Means and (Standard Deviations) for
                                        Selected Series and Periods



                   ____________     1962 — 72                  ______          1973 — 84
                   Trend Unit      Infla-    Output Import     Trend Unit     Infla-   Output Import
                   Labor Cost      tion      Ratio   Def1      Labor Cost     tion     Ratio     Defi
                       (1)         (2)       (3)       (4)         (5)        (6)      (7)       (8)

United States          3.65        3.43      1.06    —0.85         6.16       6.81    —3.20     3.65
                      (1.38)      (1.51)    (2.34)    (2.08)      (1.69)     (1.89)   (3.60) (11.19)
canada                 3.38        3.35      0.24    —1.83         7.49       8.74    —2.50      0.48
                      (1.90)      (1.16)    (1.30)    (1.34)      (3.40)     (2.99)   (5.72>    (5.70)

Japan                  4.37        5.14      3.10    —5.02         5.86       5.73     1.82     3.49
                      (1.44)      (1.00)    (2.36)    (3.17)      (7.11)     (5.25)   (1.82) (17.92)
  France               4.61        4.65     —0.83    —2.55         9.51       9.86    —2.78     1.69
                      (1.96)      (1.37)    (0.68)    (3.14)      (2.76)     (1.74)   (4.45) (10.07)

  Germany              4.44        4.04      0.13    —4.15         3.41       4.35    —3.08     2.15
                      (2.53)      (1.98)    (1.68)   (2.50)       (2.55)     (1.37)   (3.40)    (7.14)

  Italy               6.19         4.95      2.80    -3.12        14.06      15.17    -2.02      3.56
                      (3.43)      (2.12)    (1.90)   (1.74)       (2.70)     (2.65)   (4.60)   (13.81)

  United Kingdom      5.15         4.93      0.93    —1.53        11.26      11.81    —2.87     2.22
                      (3.59)      (2.17)    (1.10)   (3.31)       (5.69)     (5.67)   (4.80)   (9.84)

  Austria             4.10         4.16     —2.60    —3.81         5.99       5.73    —1.74    —0.61
                     (1.72)       (1.52)    (1.51)   (3.78)       (3.89)     (1.49)   (3.33)   (4.99)

  Belgium             4.53         3.99     —0.20    —3.52         6.44      6.69     —0.82     2.97
                     (3.51)       (1.31)    (1.24)   (2.29)       (5.09)     (2.62)   (3.96)   (6.87)

  Denmark             8.25         6.74      1.76    —4.61         8.86      9.18     —2.33     1.68
                     (3.09)       (1.15)    (1.78)   (2.52)       (4.22)     (1.89)   (2.27)   (8.14)

  Netherlands         7.79         5.69     —0.56    —4.54         4.04      6.02     —2.98     2.05
                     (2.67)       (2.30)    (1.81)   (2.67)       (6.10)     (2.56)   (5.75)   (8.20)

  Norway              6.26        5.08      0.61     —3.83         6.86      8.81     —2.87    —1.18
                     (2.40)       (2.48)    (1.12>   (1.51)       (3.34)     (2.50)   (4.24)   (5.59)

  Sweden              4.05        4.76      2.83     —2.77         8.44      1.86     —0.53     2.75
                     (1.69)       (1.58)    (1.65)   (1.97)       (3.27)     (1.86)   (2.61)   (7.65)

  Switzerland         4.75         5.15      1.69    —2.71         5.38      4.37      1.70    —1.56
                     (2.76)       (2.13)    (1.91)   (2.49)       (3.18)     (2.50)   (4.12)   (9.54)

Eleven European       5.02         4.67      0.54    -3.13         8.21       8.78    —2.44     2.07
Countries            (1.79)       (1.45)    (0.72)   (1.23)       (2.70)     (1.97)   (3.74)   (8.19)
                                                                     TABLE    7
                                                        Equations   for   Annual. Change       in
                                                   Trend Unit 1,abor Cost (wt.    -    O-t),    1964—84
                                       (*   indicates significant at 5 percent,              **  at 1 percent)




                   Sum of Coefficients                              Constant (trend) terms                   Control &
                     Infla—   Output                                1964—    1973—    1980                   Wage Push
                     tion     Ratio                        tT       1984     1984     1984                    Dummies     R     S.E.E.   D.—W.
                                             pF'_p

                      (1)       (2)          (3)          (4)         (5)          (6)              (7)         (8)      (9)     (10)    (11)




United States         1.06**    0.50**       0.04        0.03         —S——                          —.——        2.47     0.77    0.93    2.59
                                0.59**       0.02       —0.29         0.28        0.63              0.42       —2.24     0.77    0.93    2.78
                      1.00(a)

Canada                0.87**    0.25        —0.07        0.53         —.——        —•--—             —.——        —.——     0.63    2.09    2.15
   .                  1.00(a)   0.43        —0.09        0.37        —0.47        —0.68             1.85        —.——     0.56    2.27    2.15

                      0.70**    0,31**      —0.00        0.69         —.——        —.——              —.——       13.84**   0.95    1.17    2.56
Japan
                                0.40        --0.01      —0.31        —2.01        --0.93          —1.54        14.78**   0.92    1.49    2.37
                      1.00(a)

                      1,16**    0.77**      —0.03       —1.13*        —.——         —.—-            —.——         4.43*    0.72    1.85    1.78
  France
                                0.61*        0.03       —1.24*       —0.80        —1.32           —2.00         3.64'    0.76    1.74    1.86
                      1.00(a)

                      0.91**    0.37**       0.00         0.35        —.——         —.——             —.——        5.52**   0.66    1.50    2.06
  Germany
                                0.22         0.05        —0.04        0.11         0.01           —1.72         6.28**   0.64    1.55    2.26
                      1.00(a)

                      1.0l**    0.54*        0.60       —0.05         —.——         —.——             -.----      1.01     0.70    2.83    1.96
  Italy
                                0.88         0.01       —0.12        —1.21            1.82          1.72        0.61     0.68    2.91    1.67
                      1.00(a)

  United Kingdom      0.90**    0.59*        0.10         0.29        —.               .             .          4.24d    0.63    3.39    1.94
                                0.77         0.10        —0.14        0.37        —0.72             1.46                 0.56    3.74    1.93
                      1.00(a)
                                                                   TABLE   7 (continued)
                                                                      Annual Change in
                                                           Equations for
                                                   Trend Unit Labor Cost (wt   Oat), 1964—84
                                            (* indicates significant at 5 percent, ** at T percent)




                       Sum of Coefficients                             Constant (trend) terms        Control &
                         Infla—   Output                               1964—    1973—    1980        wage Push    _2
                         tion     Ratio        pF_p          tT        1984     1984     1984         Dummies     B     S.E.E.   D.—W.

                          (1)       (2)         (3)         (4)            (5)       (6)     (7)        (8)      (9)     (10)    (11)




 Austria                  l.l1**   0.37*       0.18         0.87           —.——     —.——     —.——      —.——      0.67    1.83    1.98
                          1.OOa    0.51        0.25*        0.48           2.19*    —1.32   —0.76      —,——      0.73    1.65    2.24
 Belgium                  l.l7**   O.72** —0.03            —1.06           —,——     —.—--    —,——                0.67    2.46    1.76
                          1.OOa    0.59*       0.02        —4.58**         5.86**   —1.30   —5.37*               0.86    1.58    0.91

 Denmark                  l.22**   l.14**      0.06        —2.51           —,——     —.——     —.——                0.25    3.23    1.54
                          l.OOa    0.64        0.09        —2.72           2.70     —0.70   —2.75                0.19    3.35    1.60

 Netherlands              O.78**   0.39       —0.08         1.48           —,——     —.——     —.——                0.53    3.55    1.24
                          1.OOa    —0.04       0.12         0.03           3.23     —3.25   —6.11                0.57    3.37    1.67

 Norway                   0.76**   0.21        0.08         1.37        —.——        —.——     —.——                0.27    2.51    1.53
                          1.OOa    0.31        0.08         0.99       —0.50        —0.48   —0.99                0.05    2.86    1.68

 Sweden                   0.75**   0.30        0.09         0.42            —.——    —.—-     —.——                0.53    2.37    2.00
                          1.00     0.83*      —0.04        —0.20           —2.60     3,39   —1.45                0.65    2.05    2.96

 Switzerland              O.89**   0.22       —0.07         0.02           —,—-     —•——     —.——                0.05    2.93    1.53
                          1.OOa    0.36       —0.05        —2.07           0.44      2.56   —4.88                0.11    2.83    1.54



Eleven European
Countries                 1.10**   O.65**      0.10*       —0.84           —,-—      —.-—    —.——      2.61**    0.82    1.19    1.72
                          1,00a    0.60*       0.09        —1.09           0.46      1.06   —094       2.80**    0.83    1.15    1.67



Notes: (a)   Sum of coefficients constrained to equal unity
       (b)   Coefficient of second control dummy     5,62*
                                                      is
       (c)   Coefficient of second control dummy is 6.14**
       (d)   Coefficient of second control dummy     —9,40*
                                                      is
       (e)   Coefficient of second control dummy is --8.68
                                                    TABLE 8




                         Chow Tests of Aggregating European Countries
                           Using Separate and Pooled Wage Equations




Countries or Aggregated                  Resulting                      (degrees    Significance
Groups compared in tests                Aggregation           F—test of fdm.)           Level

  1.    Austria + Switzerland              >   AS                1.13      (6,32)        0.37
  2.    Denmark + Norway                   >   DN                1.88      (6,32)        0.11
  3.    Belgium + Netherlands              >   BN                1.88      (6,32)        0.12

  4.    DN +    SD                        =>   SC               1.20       (6,32)        0.33
  5.    AS +    BN                       =>    TT               0.44       (6,32)        0.84
  6.    TT +    SC                         >   Small            2.02       (6,32)        0.09

  7.  France + Germany                     >   PG               2.33       (6,29)        0.06
  8.  PG +      Italy                      >   CE               0.75       (6,28)        0.61
  9.  CE + UnitedKingdom                  =>   Large            0.96       (6,28)        0.47
  10. Small + Large                       =>   West Europe      1.86       (6,29)        0.12


  11.   AS + NO                          =>    Li                1.03      (6,32)        0.43
  12.   Ll + SD                            >   Low              1.99       (6,32)        0.10
  13.   BN + DK                          =>    High             1.96       (6,32)        0.10
  14.   Low + High                        =>   Small            2.07       (6,32)        0.08

  15.   France + Italy                     >   Fl                1.87     (6,29)         0.12
  16.   France ÷ United Kingdom          >     PU               0.77      (6,28)         0.60
  17.   Germany + Italy                    >   GI               0.50      (6,30)         0.80
  18. Germany +      United   Kingdom    =>    GU                1.89     (6,29)         0.12
  19. Italy +        United   Kingdom      >   IU               2.35      (6,29)         0.06

  20.   Small   + France                 =>    SF               2.08      (6,30)         0.09
  21.   Small   + Italy                  =>    SI               0.38      (6,31)         0.88
  22.   Small   + Germany                  >   SG               1.39      (6,31)         0.25
  23.   Small   + United Kingdom          ->   SU               1.56      (6,30)         0.19
  24.   West Europe +     US             =>    NA               3.11      (6,30)         0.017
                                             TABLE 9

                            Comparison of using Output Ratio vs.
                               Unemployment in Wage Equations
                                          1963 — 84

                   (* indicates significant at 5 percent, **   at   1 percent)




                             Output Ratio                               Unemployment

                   Sum of       Sig level                 Sum of           Sig Level
                   Coeffs    Sum     Exclude    S.E.E.    Coeffs        Sum      Exclude   S.E.E.

                    (1)       (2)      (3)       (4)        (5)          (6)       (7)      (8)


United States       0.55     0.00     0.00       0.83     -1.43         0.00       0.00       0.91

Canada              0.50     0.09     0.17       2.09     —1.57         0.05       0.13       2.05

Japan               0.28     0.26     0.35       1.30      0.12         0.98       0.86       1.40

  France            0.46     0.05     0.01       1.39     —2.02         0.00       0.00       1.09

  Germany           0.29     0.18     0.21       1.46     —0.48         0.18       0.30       1.50

  Italy             0,77     0.06     0.07       2.68     —2.52         0.08      0.11      2.77

  United Kingdom    0.50     0.35     0.01       2,76     —1.06         0.14      0.26      3.78

  Austria           0.51     0.10     0.24       1.71     —1.90         0.07      0.17      1.66

  Belgium           0.58     0.03     0.09       1.61     —0.63         0.09      0.13      1.65

  Denmark           0.27     0.77     0.85       3.44     —0.59         0.30      0.07     2.84

  Netherlands       0.04     0.91     0.97       3.16     —0.27         0.58      0.71     3.07

  Norway           —0.02     0.94     0.97       2.54     —0.44         0.85      0.96     2.54

  Sweden            0.61     0.19     0.40       2.07     —0.41         0.78      0.89     2.20

  Switzerland       0.67     0.08     0.17       2.68     —6.33         0.10      0.10     2.57


Eleven European
Countries           0.57     0.01     0.01       1.03     —1.23         0.00      0.01     1.01
                                                TABLE 10

                                  Mark—up Equations for Annual
                                      Change in Prices (pt)
                     (* indicates significant at 5 percent, ** at 1 percent)




                 Sum of Coefficients
                 on Current and One                         Control
                  Laggejgjj_                                 Wage
                                                             Push
                Trend Unit   Output
                Labor Cost   Ratio      p''p        tT      Dummies    R       S.E.E.   D.—W.

                    (1)      (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)      (6)      (7)      (8)



United States       1.0l** —0.15**      0.04     —0.06        0.45     0.94     0.58     2.29

Canada              L11** —0.05         0.18      —0.22       —.——     0.75     1.76     2.00

Japan               0.79**   0.22      —0.02       1.48**     0.63     0.86     1.45     2.05


  France            0.98** —0.09        0.04       0.29      _l.67a    0.79     1.42     1.20

 Germany            0.93** —0.27**      0.05      —0.08       1.61     0.63     1.02     1.17

  Italy             1.00** —0.26**      0.06       0.18       1.11     0.95     134      0.94

  United   Kingdom 1.O0** —0.05        —0.04       0.03       2.46b    0.89     1.84     2.03


  Austria           0.80** —0.38** —0.03          —0.05                0.39     1.33     1.50

  Belgium           0.67** —0,40**      0.23**     1.74**              0.83     1.00     2.00

  Denmark           0.84** —0.47**      0.02       0.72                0.42     1.53     0.91

  Netherlands       0.81** —0.30*       0.03       0.10                0.29     1.82     1.63

  Norway            0.93** —0.19       —0.01      —0.26               —0.16     3.36     1.42

  Sweden            1.34** —0.02       —0.11      —0.83                0.47     2.10     0.96

  Switzerland       0.83**   0.09      —0.12*     —0.20                0.80     1.06     1.07


Eleven European
Countries           0.97** —0.22**      0.01       0.07                0.94     0.67     169

                                                                         —_________________
Notes: (a) Coefficient of second control dummy is —1.52.
        (b) Coefficient of second control dummy is 1.67.
                                                                     TABLE 1.1


                                                        Equations for Annual Change in
                                                      Value—Added   Deflator (pt),       1963—84
                                          (* indicates significant at 5 percent, ** at             1   percent)



                      Sum   of Coefficients                         Constant (trend) terms               Control &
                       Infla—    Output                             1964—    1973—    1980               Wage Push
                       tion      Ratio        pF_p        tT        1984     1984     1984                Dummies     R     S.E.E.   D.—W,
                        (1)       (2)         (3)        (4)          (5)         (6)        (7)            (8)      (9)     (10)    (11)

United States          1.04**     0.26*       0.08*    —0.06         —,——         —.——       —.——          —1.49     0.86   0.88     2.50
                       1.OOa      0.33*       0.07     —0.28          0.30        0.22       0.54          —1.55     0.85   0.90     2.68
Canada                 O.98**     0.21        0.09      0.27         —.——         —C——                      —.——     0.54   2.36     2.00
                       l.OOa      0.51        0.04     —0.43         0.79        —0.76       2.59           —.--—    0.52   2.43     2.02
Japan                  0.63**     0.45**      0.00      0.53         —.——        —,——        —.——          10.24**   0.88   1.32     2.56
                       l.OOa      0.32        0.00      0.96        —1.38        —2.67       2.25          l1.91**   0.77   1.86     2.05


  France               1.08**     0.38*       0.02     —0.48         —.——        —.——        —,——           1,20'    0.74   1.57     2.11
                       1.OOa      0.44        0.01     —0.67         0.90         0.22       0.36           0.58C    0.75   1.55     2.12

 Germany               O.93**     0.09       0.01       0.15         —.—--       —.——        —.——           3.18*    0,52   1.18
                       1.OOa      0.27      —0.02       0.64        —0.27        0.39        1.15           2.75     0.48   1.22     2.14

  Italy                1.01**     0.27       0.12       0.18         —.——        —.——                       1.79     0.87            2.44
                  •
                       1.OOa      0.75*      0.07       0.23        —2.10*       2.91*                      1.90     0.90   1.82     2.15
 United Kingdom        0.91**     0.55*      0.04       0.04         —.——        —.--—       —.——                    0.58   3.57     2.11
                       1.OOa      0.95      —0.01       0.08        —0.47
                                                                          TABLE 11   (con t inUe(i)
                                                                  Equations for Annual Change in
                                                                 Value—Added Deflator      (pt), 1963-84
                                                 (* indicates significant         at.   5 percent, ** at 1 percent)




                             Sum   of Coefficients                              Constant (trend) terms        Control &
                              Infla—    Output                                  1964—       1973—     1980    Wage    Push        2
                              tion      Ratio        p'—p            tT         1984        1984      1984     Dummies        R       S.E.E.   D.—W.
                               (1)       (2)         (3)            (4)          (5)          (6)      (7)       (8)         (9)       (10)    (11)

  Austria                     0.93** —0.55           0.08          0.41         —.——         —.——     —.——       —.——        0.29     1.42     2.06
                               1.OOa     0.33        0.05          0.40          1.16       —2.20*     2.42      —.—         0.42     1.29     2.22

  Belgium                     O.85**     0.09        0.18*         0.87         —.——         —.—--    —.——       —.——        0.49     1.70     1.88
                              1.OOa     —0.05        0.25*        —1.57         2.72*       —1.51     —3.58      —.——        0.63     1.46     2.34
  Denmark                      1.04**    0,33*       0.00         —1.15         —.——         —.——     —.——       —.——        0.55     1.34     1.75
                               l.OOa     0.41      —0.01          —1.21         0.14         0.38      0.29      —.——        0.51     1.41     1.77
 Netherlands                  0.84**     0.04        0.00          0.67         —.——         —.——     —.——       —.——        0.13     2.01     1.56
                              1.OOa      0.21        0.01         —0.15          1.32       —2.23      2.36      —.——        0.11     2.04     1.80

 Norway                       0.93**     0.35        0.09          0.33         —.——         —.——     —.——       —.——        0.03     3.07     2.03
                              1.OOa      0.88*       0.17          0.07         0.10        —0.03     4.42       —.——        0.05     3.04     1.99

  Sweden                       1.18**    0.48*     —0.03          —0.69         —.——         —.——     —.——       —.——        0.61     1.80     2.03
                               1.OOa     O.93**    —0.09          —0.68         —1.16        2,93*     1.38      —.——        0.70     1.58     2.13

  Switzerland                 0.85**     0.18      —0.14          —0.49         —.——         —.——     —.——       —.——        0.25     2.04     1.30
                              1.OOa      0.07      —0.12          —1.79         0,86        —0.15     —1.29      —.——        0.20     2.11     1.38


Eleven Europenean
Countries                     1.06**     0.38**      0.09*        —0.58         —.——         —.——     —.——       2.12*       0.83     1.11     2.33
                              1.OOa      0.51*       0.06         —0.71         0.07         0.82     0.63       2.25*       0.83     1.10     2.12



Notes:   (a) Sum of coefficients constrained to equal unity
         (b) Coefficient of second control dummy is 1.96
         (c)   Coefficient   of second control dummy is 1.91
         (d) Coefficient     of second control dummy is —6.74
         (e)   Coefficient   of second control dummy    —5.61
                                                            is
                                              TABLE 12

                                    "Hysteresis" Effects in
                                Reduced--Form Price Equation and
                                       in Wage Equation




                        -—

                        Wag     p__ __E
                   q' Coefficient {t ratio]
                                                                   -
                                                           Reduced—form

                                                   4' Coefficient [t ratio]
                                                                                Coefficient
                                                                                on 1980—84
                                                                                  Dummy [t ratio]
                                                                                                -
                        (1)             (2)               (3)           (4)        (5)


United States           0.48           [1.57]             0.57         [1.13]      1.32     [1.321

Canada                  0.94           [0.98]             1.12         [1.97]      3.98     [2.22]

Japan                   0.24           [0.321             0.36         [0.70]     —1.83    [—1.27]

  France                0.58           [0.94]             0.86         [1.32]      3.56     [1.50]

  Germany               0.23           [0.20]             1.16         [1.441      1.0€;    [0.94]

  Italy               —0.66           [0.31]              0.36         [0.26]      2.14     [1.39]

  United Kingdom       0.84           [1.37]              0.94         [1.81]      2.83     [0.45]

  Austria              0.94           [3.36]              1.28         [3.02]     0.08      [0,09]

  Belgium              0.99           [2.57]              1.35         [2.52]    —1.53     [—1.07]

  Denmark            --:32.11         [1.55]             —1.50         [0.59]     0.64      [0.40]

  Netherlands          1.00           [1.41]              1.19         [0.78]     1.95      [0.78]

  Norway               1.19           [1.85]              1.02         [0.97]     6.21     [2.36]

  Sweden               0.17           [0.08]             0.81          [2.50]     3.43     [3.483

  Switzerland          1.34           [4.60]              1.28         [3.74]     0.21     [0.123

E 1evenEuroan
Countries              0.58           [0.98]             0.94          [1.78]     2.04     [1.26]
                            TABLE 13


                   Alternative Unemployment
                       Concepts for 1984




                                         Natural Rate of Unemployment
                                         Based on          Based on
                   Actual              Trend Output    Hysteresis Output



United States        7.4                   4.0              6.8

Canada              11.2                    7.5             9.7

Japan                2.7                    2.7              2.8


  France             9.7                    6.7              8.6

 Germany             8.5                    4.5              7.3

  Italy             10.2                    9.3             10.1

  United Kingdom    13.0                    8.2             12.7


  Austria            3.8                    3.3              3.5

  Belgium           14.0                   14.1             12.9

  Denmark           10.5                    7.0              9.7

  Netherlands       14.0                   14.9             11.4

  Norway             3.0                    2.8              2.9

  Sweden             3.1                    2.8              3.5

  Switzerland        1.2                    1.5              1.2



Countries            9. 9                   6.2              8.9
                                    TABLE 14


            Alternative Wage Gaps in 1984, with Actual Output Gap
                   and with Counterfactual Zero Output Gap




                         Wage Gap based on         Wage Gap based on
                         Trend Productivity        Trend Productivity
                         with Actual Outputa        with Q/QN = 0.0
                            (1972   1.0)              for 1980—84


United States                   0.93                     1.10

Canada                          0.86                     1.03

Japan                           i.oi                     1.02

  France                        0.96                     1.05

  Germany                       0.89                     1.08

  Italy                         0.88                     1.16

  United Kingdom                0.94                     1.12

  Austria                       1.04                     1.15

  Belgium                       i.oo                     1.10

  Denmark                       0.97                     1.11

  Netherlands                   0.79                    0.81

  Norway                        0.76                    0.83
  Sweden                        0.89                    1.00

  Switzerland                   1.13                    1.01

Eleven European
Countries                      0.94                     1.06




(a) Taken from Table 5b, column 8
