NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CHARACTERISTICS ARE COVARIANCES:
A UNIFIED MODEL OF RISK AND RETURN
Bryan Kelly
Seth Pruitt
Yinan Su
Working Paper 24540
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24540

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2018

We thank Svetlana Bryzgalova (discussant), John Cochrane, Kent Daniel (discussant), Rob
Engle, Wayne Ferson, Stefano Giglio, Lars Hansen, Andrew Karolyi, Serhiy Kozak, Toby
Moskowitz, Andreas Neuhierl, Dacheng Xiu and audience participants at AQR, ASU, Chicago,
Cornell, Duke, FRA, UMass Amherst, Minnesota, SoFiE, St. Louis Federal Reserve, and Yale for
helpful comments. We are grateful to Andreas Neuhierl for generously sharing data with us. A
previous draft was circulated under the name “Some Characteristics Are Risk Exposures, and the
Rest Are Irrelevant.” AQR Capital Management is a global investment management firm, which
may or may not apply similar investment techniques or methods of analysis as described herein.
The views expressed here are those of the authors and not necessarily those of AQR or the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Bryan Kelly, Seth Pruitt, and Yinan Su. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Characteristics Are Covariances: A Unified Model of Risk and Return
Bryan Kelly, Seth Pruitt, and Yinan Su
NBER Working Paper No. 24540
April 2018
JEL No. G1,G11,G12,G17
ABSTRACT
We propose a new modeling approach for the cross section of returns. Our method, Instrumented
Principal Components Analysis (IPCA), allows for latent factors and time-varying loadings by
introducing observable characteristics that instrument for the unobservable dynamic loadings. If
the characteristics/expected return relationship is driven by compensation for exposure to latent
risk factors, IPCA will identify the corresponding latent factors. If no such factors exist, IPCA
infers that the characteristic effect is compensation without risk and allocates it to an "anomaly"
intercept. Studying returns and characteristics at the stock-level, we find that four IPCA factors
explain the cross section of average returns significantly more accurately than existing factor
models and produce characteristic-associated anomaly intercepts that are small and statistically
insignificant. Furthermore, among a large collection of characteristics explored in the literature,
only eight are statistically significant in the IPCA specification and are responsible for nearly
100% of the model's accuracy.
Bryan Kelly
Yale School of Management
165 Whitney Ave.
New Haven, CT 06511
and NBER
bryan.kelly@yale.edu
Seth Pruitt
Department of Finance
W.P. Carey School of Business
Arizona State University
Tempe, AZ 85287-3906
seth.pruitt@asu.edu

Yinan Su
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
yns@uchicago.edu

One of our central themes is that if assets are priced rationally, variables that are
related to average returns, such as size and book-to-market equity, must proxy for
sensitivity to common (shared and thus undiversifiable) risk factors in returns.
Fama and French (1993)
We have a lot of questions to answer: First, which characteristics really provide
independent information about average returns? Which are subsumed by others?
Second, does each new anomaly variable also correspond to a new factor formed
on those same anomalies? ... Third, how many of these new factors are really
important?
Cochrane (2011)

1

Introduction

The greatest collective endeavor of the asset pricing field in the past 40 years is the search for
an empirical explanation of why different assets earn different average returns. The answer
from equilibrium theory is clear—differences in expected returns reflect compensation for
different degrees of risk. But the empirical answer has proven more complicated, as some
of the largest differences in performance across assets continue to elude a reliable risk-based
explanation.
This empirical search centers around return factor models, and arises from the Euler equation
for investment returns. With only the assumption of “no arbitrage,” a stochastic discount
factor mt+1 exists and, for any excess return ri,t , satisfies the equation
Et [mt+1 ri,t+1 ] = 0

⇔

Et [ri,t+1 ] =

Covt (mt+1 , ri,t+1 ) V art (mt+1 )
.
V art (mt+1 )
Et [mt+1 ]
|
{z
}|
{z
}
0
βi,t

(1)

λt

The loadings, βi,t , are interpretable as exposures to systematic risk factors, and λt as the
risk prices associated with those factors. More specifically, when mt+1 is linear in factors
ft+1 , this maps to a factor model for excess returns of the form1
0
ri,t+1 = αi,t + βi,t
ft+1 + i,t+1

(2)

where Et (i,t+1 ) = Et [i,t+1 ft+1 ] = 0, Et [ft+1 ] = λt , and, perhaps most importantly, αi,t = 0
for all i and t. The factor framework in (2) that follows from the asset pricing Euler equation
1

Ross (1976), Hansen and Richard (1987).

2

(1) is the setting for most empirical analysis of expected returns across assets.
There are many obstacles to empirically analyzing equations (1) and (2), the most important
being that the factors and loadings are unobservable.2 There are two common approaches
that researchers take.
The first pre-specifies factors based on previously established knowledge about the empirical
behavior of average returns, treats these factors as fully observable by the econometrician,
and then estimates betas and alphas via regression. This approach is exemplified by Fama
and French (1993). A shortcoming of this approach is that it requires previous understanding
of the cross section of average returns. But this is likely to be a partial understanding at
best, and at worst is exactly the object of empirical interest.3
The second approach is to treat risk factors as latent and use factor analytic techniques, such
as PCA, to simultaneously estimate the factors and betas from the panel of realized returns, a
tactic pioneered by Chamberlain and Rothschild (1983) and Connor and Korajczyk (1986).
This method uses a purely statistical criterion to derive factors, and has the advantage
of requiring no ex ante knowledge of the structure of average returns. A shortcoming of
this approach is that PCA is ill-suited for estimating conditional versions of equation (2)
because it can only accommodate static loadings. Furthermore, PCA lacks the flexibility
for a researcher to incorporate other data beyond returns to help identify a successful asset
pricing model.

1.1

Our Methodology

In this paper, we use a new method called instrumented principal components analysis, or
IPCA, that estimates market risk factors and loadings by exploiting beneficial aspects of
both approaches while bypassing many of their shortcomings. IPCA allows factor loadings
to partially depend on observable asset characteristics that serve as instrumental variables
for the latent conditional loadings.4
2

Even in theoretical models with well defined risk factors, such as the CAPM, the theoretical factor of
interest is generally unobservable and must be approximated, as discussed by Roll (1977).
3
Fama and French (1993) note that “Although size and book-to-market equity seem like ad hoc variables
for explaining average stock returns, we have reason to expect that they proxy for common risk factors
in returns. ... But the choice of factors, especially the size and book-to-market factors, is motivated by
empirical experience. Without a theory that specifies the exact form of the state variables or common
factors in returns, the choice of any particular version of the factors is somewhat arbitrary.”
4
Our terminology is inherited from generalized method of moments usage of “instrumental variables”
for approximating conditioning information sets. See Hansen (1982), or Cochrane (2005) for a textbook
treatment in the context of asset pricing.

3

The IPCA mapping between characteristics and loadings provides a formal statistical bridge
between characteristics and expected returns, while at the same time remaining consistent
with the equilibrium asset pricing principle that risk premia are solely determined by risk
exposures. And, because instruments help consistently recover loadings, IPCA is then also
able to consistently estimate the latent factors associated with those loadings. In this way,
IPCA allows a factor model to incorporate the robust empirical fact that stock characteristics
provide reliable conditioning information for expected returns. By including instruments, the
researcher can leverage previous, but imperfect, knowledge about the structure of average
returns in order to improve their estimates of factors and loadings, without the unrealistic
presumption that the researcher can correctly specify the exact factors a priori.
Our central motivation in developing IPCA is to build a model and estimator that admits the
possibility that characteristics line up with average returns because they proxy for loadings on
common risk factors. Indeed, if the “characteristics/expected return” relationship is driven
by compensation for exposure to latent risk factors, IPCA will identify the corresponding
latent factors and betas. But, if no such factors exist, the characteristic effect will be ascribed
to an intercept. This immediately yields an intuitive intercept test that discriminates whether
a characteristic-based return phenomenon is consistent with a beta/expected return model,
or if it is compensation without risk (a so-called “anomaly”). This test generalizes alphabased tests such as Gibbons, Ross, and Shanken (1989, GRS). Rather than asking the GRS
question “do some pre-specified factors explain the anomaly?,” our IPCA test asks “Does
there exist some set of common latent risk factors that explain the anomaly?” It also provides
tests for the importance of particular groups of instruments while controlling for all others,
analogous to regression-based t and F tests, and thus offers a means to address questions
raised in the Cochrane (2011) quote above.
A standard protocol has emerged in the literature: When researchers propose a new characteristic that aligns with future asset returns, they build portfolios that exploit the characteristic’s predictive power and test the alphas of these portfolios relative to some previously
established pricing factors (such as those from Fama and French, 1993 or 2015). This protocol is unsatisfactory as it fails to fully account for the gamut of proposed characteristics in
prior literature. Our method offers a different protocol that treats the multivariate nature
of the problem. When a new anomaly characteristic is proposed, it can be included in an
IPCA specification that also includes the long list of characteristics from past studies. Then,
IPCA can estimate the proposed characteristic’s marginal contribution to the model’s factor
loadings and, if need be, its anomaly intercepts, after controlling for other characteristics in
a complete multivariate analysis.
4

Additional IPCA features make it ideally suited for state-of-the-art asset pricing analyses.
One is its ability to jointly evaluate large numbers of characteristic predictors with minimal computational burden. It does this by building a dimension reduction directly into the
model. The cross section of assets may be large and the number of potential predictors
expansive, yet the model’s insistence on a low-dimension factor structure imposes parameter
parsimony. Our approach is designed to handle situations in which characteristics are highly
correlated, noisy, or even spurious. The dimension reduction picks a few linear combinations of characteristics that are most informative about patterns in returns and discards the
remaining uninformative high dimensionality. Another is that it can nest traditional, prespecified factors within a more general IPCA specification. This makes it easy to test the
incremental contribution of estimated latent IPCA factors while controlling for other factors
from the literature.

1.2

Findings

Our analysis judges asset pricing models on two criteria. First, a successful factor model
should excel in describing the common variation in realized returns. That is, it should
accurately describe systematic risks. We measure this according to a factor model’s total
0
fˆt , where
panel R2 . We define total R2 as the fraction of variance in ri,t described by β̂i,t−1
β̂i,t−1 are estimated dynamic loadings and fˆt are the model’s estimated common risk factors.
The total R2 thus includes the explained variation due to contemporaneous factor realizations
and dynamic factor exposures, aggregated over all assets and time periods.
Second, a successful asset pricing model should describe differences in average returns across
assets. That is, it should accurately describe risk compensation. To assess this, we define a
0
λ̂, which is the modelmodel’s predictive R2 as the explained variation in ri,t due to β̂i,t−1
based conditional expected return on asset i given t − 1 information, and where λ̂ is the
vector of estimated factor risk prices.5
Our empirical analysis uses data on returns and characteristics for over 12,000 stocks from
1962–2014. For example, in the specification with four factors and all stock-level intercepts
restricted to zero, IPCA achieves a total R2 for returns of 19.4%. As a benchmark, the
matched sample total R2 from the Fama-French five-factor model is 21.9%. Thus, IPCA is
a competitive model for describing the variability and hence riskiness of stock returns.
5

We discuss our definition of predictive R2 in terms of the unconditional risk price estimate, λ̂, rather
than a conditional risk price estimate, in Section 4.

5

Perhaps more importantly, the factor loadings estimated from IPCA provide an excellent
description of conditional expected stock returns. In the four-factor IPCA model, the esti0
λ̂) delivers a predictive R2 for returns of 1.8%.
mated compensation for factor exposures (β̂i,t
In the matched sample, the predictive R2 from the Fama-French five-factor model is 0.3%.
If we instead use standard PCA to estimate the latent four-factor specification, it delivers a
29.0% total R2 , but produces a negative predictive R2 and thus has no explanatory power
for differences in average returns across stocks. In summary, IPCA is the most successful
model we analyze for jointly explaining realized variation in returns (i.e., systematic risks)
and differences in average returns (i.e., risk compensation).
The model performance statistics cited above are based on in-sample estimation. If we
instead use recursive out-of-sample estimation to calculate predictive R2 ’s for stock returns,
we find that IPCA continues to outperform alternatives. The four-factor IPCA predictive
R2 is 0.7% per month out-of-sample, still more than doubling the Fama-French five-factor
in-sample R2 .
By linking factor loadings to observable data, IPCA tremendously reduces the dimension
of the parameter space compared to models with observable factors and even compared to
standard PCA. To accommodate the more than 12,000 stocks in our sample, the FamaFrench five-factor model requires estimation of 57,260 loading parameters. Four-factor PCA
estimates 53,648 parameters including the time series of latent factors. Four-factor IPCA
estimates only 2,688 (including each realization of the latent factors), or 95% fewer parameters than the pre-specified factor model or PCA, and incorporates dynamic loadings without
relying on ad hoc rolling estimation. It does this by essentially redefining the identity of a
stock in terms of its characteristics, rather than in terms of the stock identifier. Thus, once
a stock’s characteristics are known, only a small number of parameters (which are common
to all assets) are required to map observed characteristic values into betas.
IPCA’s success in explaining differences in average returns across stocks comes solely through
its description of factor loadings—it restricts intercept coefficients to zero for all stocks. The
question remains as to whether there are differences in average returns across stocks that
align with characteristics and that are unexplained by exposures to IPCA factors.
By allowing intercepts to also depend on characteristics, IPCA provides a test for whether
characteristics help explain expected returns above and beyond their role in factor loadings.
Including alphas in the one-factor IPCA model improves its ability to explain average returns and rejects the null hypothesis of zero intercepts. Evidently, with a single factor, the
specification of factor exposures is not rich enough to assimilate all of the return predictive

6

content in stock characteristics. Thus, the excess predictability from characteristics spills
into the intercept to an economically large and statistically significant extent.
However, when we consider specifications with K ≥ 2, the improvement in model fit due
to non-zero intercepts becomes small and statistically insignificant. The economic conclusion is that a risk structure with two or more dimensions coincides with information in
stock characteristics in such a way that i) risk exposures are exceedingly well described by
stock characteristics, and ii) the residual return predicability from characteristics, above
and beyond that in factor loadings, falls to effectively zero, obviating the need to resort to
“anomaly” intercepts.
The dual implication of IPCA’s superior explanatory power for average stock returns is
that IPCA factors are closer to being multivariate mean-variance efficient than factors in
competing models. We show that the tangency portfolio of factors from the four-factor
IPCA specification achieves an ex ante (i.e., out-of-sample) Sharpe ratio of 2.6, versus 1.3
for the five Fama-French factors. We also demonstrate that the performance of IPCA is very
similar when we restrict the sample to large stocks and when modeling annual rather than
monthly returns.
Lastly, IPCA offers a test for which characteristics are significantly associated with factor
loadings (and, in turn, expected returns) while controlling for all other characteristics, in
analogy to t-tests of explanatory variable significance in a regression model. In our main
specification, we find that eight of the 36 firm characteristics in our sample are statistically
significant at the 5% level, and five of these are significant at the 1% level. These include
essentially three types of variables: size (e.g., market capitalization and total book assets),
recent stock trends (e.g., short-term reversal and momentum), and market beta. Notably absent from the list of significant characteristics are measures of value such as book-to-market
and earnings-to-price. If we re-estimate the model using the subset of eight significant regressors, we find that the model fit is nearly identical to the full 36-characteristic specification.
The fact that only a small subset of characteristics is necessary to explain variation in
realized and expected stock returns shows that most characteristics are statistically irrelevant
for understanding the cross section of returns, once they are evaluated in an appropriate
multivariate context. Furthermore, that we cannot reject the null of zero alphas using
only two or more IPCA risk factors leads us to conclude that the few characteristics that
enter significantly do so because they help explain assets’ exposures to systematic risks, not
because they represent anomalous compensation without risk.

7

1.3

Literature

Our works builds on several literatures studying the behavior of stock returns. Calling this
literature large is a gross understatement. Rather than attempting a thorough review, we
briefly describe three primary strands of literature most closely related to our analysis and
highlight a few exemplary contributions in each.
One branch of this literature analyzes latent factor models for returns, beginning with Ross’s
(1976) seminal APT. Empirical contributions to this literature, such as Chamberlain and
Rothschild (1983) and Connor and Korajcyzk (1986, 1988), rely on principal component
analysis of returns. Our primary innovation relative to this literature is to bring the wealth
of characteristic information into latent factor models and, in doing so, make it possible to
tractably analyze latent factor models with dynamic loadings.
Another strand of literature models factor loadings as functions of observables. Most closely
related are models in which factor exposures are functions of firm characteristics, dating at
least to Rosenberg (1974). In contrast to our contributions, Rosenberg’s analysis is primarily
theoretical, assumes that factors are observable, and does not provide a testing framework.6
Ferson and Harvey (1991) allow for dynamic betas as asset-specific functions of macroeconomic variables. They differ from our analysis by relying on observable factors and focusing
on macro rather than firm-specific instrumental variables. Daniel and Titman (1996) directly
compare stock characteristics to factor loadings in terms of their ability to explain differences
in average returns, an approach recently extended by Chordia, Goyal, and Shanken (2015).
IPCA is unique in nesting competing characteristic and beta models of returns while simultaneously estimating the latent factors that most accurately coincide with characteristics as
loadings, rather than relying on pre-specified factors.
A third literature models stock returns as a function of many characteristics at once. This
literature has emerged only recently in response to an accumulation of research on predictive
stock characteristics, and exploits more recently developed statistical techniques for highdimensional predictive systems. Lewellen (2015) analyzes the joint predictive power of up to
15 characteristics in OLS regression. Light, Maslov, and Rytchkov (2016) and Freyberger,
Neuhierl, and Weber (2017) consider larger collections of predictors than Lewellen and address concomitant statistical challenges using partial least squares and LASSO, respectively.
These papers take a pure return forecasting approach and do not attempt to develop an
asset pricing model or conduct asset pricing tests.
6

Also see, for example, the documentation for BARRA’s (1998) risk management and factor construction
models.

8

Kozak et al. (forthcoming) show that a small number of principal components from 15
anomaly portfolios (from Novy-Marx and Velikov, 2015) are able to price those same portfolios with insignificant alphas. Our results illustrate that while that model works well for
pricing their specific anomaly portfolios, the same model (and the PCA approach more
generally) fails with other sets of test assets. We show that IPCA solves this problem by
allowing assets’ loadings to transition smoothly as its characteristics evolve. As a result,
IPCA successfully prices individual stocks as well as anomaly or other stock portfolios. In
follow on work, Kozak et al. (2017) use shrinkage estimation to select a subset of characteristic portfolios with good out-of-sample explanatory power for average returns. They directly
model risk prices as functions of average portfolio returns then use shrinkage to identify a
model with non-mechanical out-of-sample explanatory power for returns. Our findings differ
in a few ways. First, our IPCA method selects pricing factors based on a factor variance
criterion, then subsequently and separately tests whether loadings on these factors explain
differences in average returns. Second, our approach derives formal tests and emphasizes
statistical model comparison in a frequentist setting. Our tests i) differentiate whether a
characteristic is better interpreted as a proxy for systematic risk exposure or as an anomaly
alpha, ii) assess the incremental explanatory power of an individual characteristic against a
(potentially high dimension) set of competing characteristics, and iii) compare latent factors
against pre-specified alternative factors. The results of these tests conclude that stock characteristics are best interpreted as risk loadings, that most of the characteristics proposed
in the literature contain no incremental explanatory power for returns, and that commonly
studied pre-specified factors are inefficient in a mean-variance sense.
We describe the IPCA model and our estimation approach in Section 2. Section 3 develops
asset pricing and model comparison tests in the IPCA setting. Section 4 reports our empirical
findings and Section 5 concludes.

2

Model and Estimation

The general IPCA model specification for an excess return ri,t+1 is
ri,t+1 = αi,t + βi,t ft+1 + i,t+1 ,

(3)

0
βi,t = zi,t
Γβ + νβ,i,t .

0
αi,t = zi,t
Γα + να,i,t ,

The system is comprised of N assets over T periods. The model allows for dynamic factor
9

loadings, βi,t , on a K-vector of latent factors, ft+1 . Loadings potentially depend on observable
asset characteristics contained in the L×1 instrument vector zi,t (which includes a constant).
The specification of βi,t is central to our analysis and plays two roles. First, instrumenting
the estimation of latent factor loadings with observable characteristics allows additional data
to shape the factor model for returns. This differs from traditional latent factor techniques
like PCA that estimate the factor structure solely from returns data. Anchoring the loadings
to observable instruments can make the estimation more efficient and thereby improve model
performance. This is true even if the instruments and true loadings are constant over time
(see Fan, Liao, and Wang, 2016). Second, incorporating time-varying instruments makes it
possible to estimate dynamic factor loadings, which is valuable when one seeks a model of
conditional return behavior.
The matrix Γβ defines the mapping between a potentially large number of characteristics
and a small number of risk factor exposures. Estimation of Γβ amounts to finding a few
linear combinations of candidate characteristics that best describe the latent factor loading structure.7 Our model emphasizes dimension reduction of the characteristic space. If
there are many characteristics that provide noisy but informative signals about a stock’s
risk exposures, then aggregating characteristics into linear combinations isolates the signal
and averages out the noise.8 Any behavior of dynamic loadings that is orthogonal to the
instruments falls into νβ,i,t . With this term, the model recognizes that firms’ risk exposures
are not perfectly recoverable from observable firm characteristics.
The Γβ matrix also allows us to confront the challenge of migrating assets. Stocks evolve
over time, moving for example from small to large, growth to value, high to low investment
intensity, and so forth. Received wisdom in the asset pricing literature is that stock expected
returns evolve along with these characteristics. But the very fact that the “identity” of the
stock changes over time makes it difficult to model stock-level conditional expected returns
using simple time series methods. The standard response to this problem is to dynamically
form portfolios that hold the average characteristic value within the portfolio approximately
constant. But if an adequate description of an asset’s identity requires several characteristics, this portfolio approach becomes infeasible due to the proliferation of portfolios. IPCA
7

The model imposes that βi,t is linear in instruments. Yet it accommodates non-linear associations
between characteristics and exposures by allowing instruments to be non-linear transformations of raw characteristics. For example, one might consider including the first, second, and third power of a characteristic
into the instrument vector to capture nonlinearity via a third-order Taylor expansion, or interactions between
characteristics. Relatedly, zi,t can include asset-specific, time-invariant instruments.
8
Dimension reduction among characteristics is a key differentiator between IPCA and BARRA’s approach
to factor modeling.

10

provides a natural and general solution: Parameterize betas as a function of the characteristics that determine a stock’s expected return. In doing so, migration in the asset’s identity is
tracked through its betas, which are themselves defined by their characteristics in a way that
is consistent among all stocks (Γβ is a global mapping shared by all stocks). Thus, IPCA
avoids the need for a researcher to perform an ad hoc preliminary dimension reduction that
gathers test assets into portfolios. Instead, the model accommodates a high-dimensional
system of assets (individual stocks) by estimating a dimension reduction that represents the
identity of a stock in terms of its characteristics.9
We examine the null hypothesis that characteristics do not proxy for alpha: this corresponds
to restricting Γα to zero in (3). The unrestricted version of (3) allows for non-zero Γα ,
representing the alternative hypothesis that conditional expected returns have intercepts that
depend on stock characteristics. The structure of αi,t is a linear combination of instruments
mirroring the specification of βi,t . IPCA estimates αi,t by finding the linear combination of
characteristics (with weights given by Γα ) that best describes conditional expected returns
while controlling for the role of characteristics in factor risk exposure. If characteristics align
with average stock returns differently than they align with risk factor loadings, then IPCA
will estimate a non-zero Γα , thus conceding anomalous compensation for holding stocks in
excess of their systematic risk.
We focus on models in which the number of factors, K, is small, imposing a view that
the empirical content of an asset pricing model is its parsimony in describing sources of
systematic risk. At the same time, we allow the number of instruments, L, to be potentially
large, as literally hundreds of characteristics have been put forward by the literature to
explain average stock returns. And, because any individual characteristic is likely to be a
noisy representation of true factor exposures, accommodating large L allows the model to
average over characteristics in a way that reduces noise and more accurately reveals true
exposures.

2.1

Restricted Model (Γα = 0)

In this section we provide a conceptual overview of IPCA estimation. Our description here
introduces two identifying assumptions and discusses their role in estimation. Kelly, Pruitt,
9
This structure also makes it easy to calculate a firm’s cost of capital as a function of observable characteristics. This avoids reliance on CAPM betas or other factor loadings that may be difficult to estimate with
time series regression, or may rely on a badly misspecified model. Once Γβ is recovered from a representative
set of asset returns, it can be used to price other assets that may lack a long history of returns but at least
have a snapshot of recent firm characteristics available.

11

and Su (2017) derive the IPCA estimator and prove that, together with the identifying
assumptions, IPCA consistently estimates model parameters and latent factors as the number
of assets and the time dimension simultaneously grow large, as long as factors and residuals
satisfy weak regularity conditions (their Assumptions 2 and 3). We refer interested readers
to that paper for technical details and present a practical summary here.
We first describe estimation of the restricted model in which Γα = 0L×1 , ruling out the
possibility that characteristics capture “anomalous” compensation without risk. This restriction maintains that characteristics explain expected returns only insofar as they proxy
for systematic risk exposures. In this case, equation (3) becomes
0
Γβ ft+1 + ∗i,t+1
ri,t+1 = zi,t

(4)

where ∗i,t+1 = i,t+1 + να,i,t + νβ,i,t ft+1 is a composite error.10
We derive the estimator using the vector form of equation (4),
rt+1 = Zt Γβ ft+1 + ∗t+1 ,
where rt+1 is an N ×1 vector of individual firm returns, Zt is the N ×L matrix that stacks the
characteristics of each firm, and ∗t+1 likewise stacks individual firm residuals. Our estimation
objective is to minimize the sum of squared composite model errors:
min
Γβ ,F

T −1
X

(rt+1 − Zt Γβ ft+1 )0 (rt+1 − Zt Γβ ft+1 ) .

(5)

t=1

The values of ft+1 and Γβ that minimize (5) satisfy the first-order conditions
fˆt+1 = Γ0β Zt0 Zt Γβ

−1

Γ0β Zt0 rt+1 ,

and
vec(Γ0β ) =

T
X

!−1
[Zt ⊗

0
ft0 ]

[Zt ⊗ ft0 ]

t=1

T
X

∀t

(6)

!
[Zt ⊗

0
ft0 ] rt

.

(7)

t=1

Condition (6) shows that factor realizations are period-by-period cross section regression
coefficients of rt+1 on the latent loading matrix βt . Likewise, Γβ , is the coefficient of returns
10

That is, our data generating process has two sources of noise that affect estimation of factors and loadings.
The first comes from returns being determined in large part by idiosyncratic firm-level shocks (i,t+1 ) and
the second from the fact that characteristics do not perfectly reveal the true factor model parameters (να,i,t
and νβ,i,t ). There is no need to distinguish between these components of the residual in the remainder of
our analysis.

12

regressed on the factors interacted with firm-specific characteristics. This system of firstorder conditions has no closed-form solution and must be solved numerically. Fortunately,
the numerical problem is solvable via alternating least squares in a matter of seconds even
for high dimension systems. We describe our numerical method in Appendix A and discuss
a special case that admits an exact analytical solution in Appendix C.2.
As common in latent factor models, IPCA requires one further assumption for estimator
identification. Γβ and ft+1 are unidentified in the sense that any set of solutions can be rotated into an equivalent solution Γβ R−1 and Rft+1 for a non-singular K-dimensional rotation
matrix R. To resolve this indeterminacy, we impose that Γ0β Γβ = IK , that the unconditional
covariance matrix of ft is diagonal with descending diagonal entries, and that the mean of ft
is non-negative. These assumptions place no economic restrictions on the model and solely
serve to pin down a uniquely identified solution to the first-order conditions.11

2.1.1

A Managed Portfolio Interpretation of IPCA

To help develop intuition for IPCA factor and loading estimates, it is useful to compare with
the estimator for a static factor model such as rt = βft + t (e.g., Connor and Korajczyk,
1988). The objective function in the static case is
min
β,F

T
X

(rt − βft+1 )0 (rt − βft+1 )

t=1

and the first-order condition for ft+1 is ft+1 = (β 0 β)−1 β 0 rt+1 . Substituting this into the
original objective yields a concentrated objective function for β of
!
max tr
β

X

−1

(β 0 β)

0
β 0 rt+1 rt+1
β

.

t

This objective maximizes a sum of so-called “Rayleigh quotients” that all have the same
denominator, β 0 β. In this special case, the well-known PCA solution for β is given by the
P
0
first K eigenvectors of the sample second moment matrix of returns, t rt+1 rt+1
.
Naturally, dynamic betas complicate the optimization problem. Substituting the IPCA first11

Our identification is a dynamic model counterpart to the standard PCA identification assumption for
static models (see, for example, Assumption F1(a) in Stock and Watson, 2002a).

13

order condition (6) into the original objective yields
max tr
Γβ

T −1
X

!
Γ0β Zt0 Zt Γβ

−1

0
Γ0β Zt0 rt+1 rt+1
Zt Γβ

.

(8)

t=1

This concentrated IPCA objective is more challenging because the Rayleigh quotient denominators, Γ0β Zt0 Zt Γβ , are different for each element of the sum and, as a result, there is no
analogous eigenvector solution for Γβ .
Nevertheless, the structure of our dynamic problem is closely reminiscent of the static problem. While the static PCA estimator applies the singular value decomposition to the panel
of individual asset returns ri,t , our derivation shows that the IPCA problem can be approximately solved by applying the singular value decomposition not to raw returns, but to
returns interacted with instruments. Consider the L × 1 vector defined as
xt+1 = Zt0 rt+1 .

(9)

This is the time t + 1 realization of returns on a set of L managed portfolios. The lth element
of xt+1 is a weighted average of stock returns with weights determined by the value of lth
characteristic for each stock at time t. Stacking time series observations produces the T × L
matrix X = [x01 , ..., x0T ]0 . Each column of X is a time series of returns on a characteristicmanaged portfolio. If the first three characteristics are, say, size, value, and momentum,
then the first three columns of X are time series of returns to portfolios managed on the
basis of each of these.
If we were to approximate the Rayleigh quotient denominators with a constant (for example,
P
replacing each Zt0 Zt by their time series average, T −1 t Zt0 Zt ), then the solution to (8) would
be to set Γβ equal to the first K eigenvectors of the sample second moment matrix of managed
P
portfolio returns, X 0 X = t xt x0t .12 Likewise, the estimates of ft+1 would be the first K
principal components of the managed portfolio panel. This is a close approximation to the
exact solution as long as Zt0 Zt is not too volatile. More importantly, because we desire to
find the exact solution, this approximation provides an excellent starting guess to initialize
the numerical optimization and quickly reach the exact optimum.
As one uses more and more characteristics to instrument for latent factor exposures, the
number of characteristic-managed portfolios in X grows. Prior empirical work shows that
there tends to be a high degree of common variation in anomaly portfolios (e.g. Kozak et al.,
12

To P
be more precise, Γβ is estimated by a rotation of xt ’s second moment, where the rotation is a function
of T −1 t Zt0 Zt .

14

forthcoming). IPCA recognizes this and estimates factors and loadings by focusing on the
common variation in X. It estimates factors as the K linear combinations of X’s columns,
or “portfolios of portfolios,” that best explain covariation among the panel of managed portfolios. These factors differ from principal components of X in that the explained covariation
is re-weighted across time and across assets to emphasize observations associated with the
most informative instruments (this is the role of the Zt0 Zt denominator).
IPCA can also be viewed as a generalization of period-by-period cross section regressions
as employed in Fama and MacBeth (1973) and Rosenberg (1974). When K = L there
is no dimension reduction—the estimates of ft+1 are the characteristic-managed portfolios
themselves and are equal to the period-wise Fama-MacBeth regression coefficients (and Γβ =
IL ). This unreduced specification is close in spirit to the BARRA model. But when K < L,
IPCA’s ft+1 estimate is a constrained Fama-MacBeth regression coefficient. The constrained
regression not only estimates return loadings on lagged characteristics, but it must also
choose a reduced-rank set of regressors—the K < L combinations of characteristics that
best fit the cross section regression.
The asset pricing literature has struggled with the question of which test assets are most
appropriate for evaluating models (Lewellen, Nagel, and Shanken, 2010; Daniel and Titman,
2012). IPCA provides a resolution to this dilemma. On one hand, IPCA tests can be
viewed as using the set of test assets with the finest possible resolution—the set of individual
stocks. At the same time, the discussion regarding equation (8) shows that IPCA’s tests
can equivalently be viewed as using characteristic-managed portfolios, xt , as the set of test
assets, which have comparatively low dimension and average out a substantial degree of
idiosyncratic stock risk.13

2.2

Unrestricted Model (Γα 6= 0)

The unrestricted IPCA model allows for intercepts that are functions of the instruments,
thereby admitting the possibility of “anomalies” in which expected returns depend on characteristics in a way that is not explained by exposure to systematic risk. Like the factor
specification in (4), the unrestricted IPCA model assumes that intercepts are a linear com13

A further convenience of the managed portfolio representation is that avoids issues with missing observations in stock-level data. In particular, when constructing managed portfolios in equation (9), we evaluate
this inner product as a sum over elements of Zt and rt+1 for which both terms in the cross-product are
non-missing. Thus (9) is a slight abuse of notation.

15

bination of instruments with weights defined by the L × 1 parameter vector Γα :
0
0
Γβ ft+1 + ∗i,t+1 .
Γα + zi,t
ri,t+1 = zi,t

(10)

Model (10) is unrestricted in that it admits mean returns that are not determined by factor
exposures alone.
0
Estimation proceeds nearly identically to Section 2.1. We rewrite (10) as ri,t+1 = zi,t
Γ̃f˜t+1 +
0
∗i,t+1 , where Γ̃ ≡ [Γα , Γβ ] and f˜t+1 ≡ [1, ft+1
]0 . That is, the unrestricted model is mapped to
the structure of (4) by simply augmenting the factor specification to include a constant.

The first-order condition for Γ̃ is the same as (7) except that f˜t replaces ft . The ft+1 firstorder condition changes slightly to
ft+1 = Γ0β Zt0 Zt Γβ

−1

Γ0β Zt0 (rt+1 − Zt Γα ) ,

∀t.

(11)

This is a cross section regression of “returns in excess of alpha” on dynamic betas, and
reflects the fact that the unrestricted estimator decides how to best allocate panel variation
in returns to factor exposures versus anomaly intercepts.

3

Asset Pricing Tests

In this section we develop three hypothesis tests that are central to our empirical analysis.
The first is designed to test the zero alpha condition that distinguishes the restricted and unrestricted IPCA models of Sections 2.1 and 2.2. The second tests whether observable factors
(such as the Fama-French five-factor model) significantly improve the model’s description of
the panel of asset returns while controlling for IPCA factors. The third tests the incremental significance of an individual characteristic or set of characteristics while simultaneously
controlling for all other characteristics.

3.1

Testing Γα = 0L×1

When a characteristic lines up with expected returns in the cross section, the unrestricted
IPCA estimator in Section 2.2 decides how to split that association. Does the characteristic
proxy for exposure to common risk factors? If so, IPCA will attribute the characteristic
0
to beta via β̂i,t = zi,t
Γ̂β , thus interpreting the characteristic/expected return relationship
16

as compensation for bearing systematic risk. Or, does the characteristic capture anomalous
differences in average returns that are unassociated with systematic risk? In this case, IPCA
will be unable to find common factors for which characteristics serve as loadings, so it will
0
attribute the characteristic to alpha via α̂i,t = zi,t
Γ̂α .
In the restricted model, the association between characteristics and alphas is disallowed. If
the data truly call for an anomaly alpha, then the restricted model is misspecified and will
produce a poor fit compared to the unrestricted model that allows for alpha. The distance
between unrestricted alpha estimates and zero summarizes the improvement in model fit
from loosening the alpha restriction. If this distance is statistically large (i.e., relative to
sampling variation), we can conclude that the true alphas are non-zero.
We propose a test of the zero alpha restriction that formalizes this logic. In the model
equation
ri,t+1 = αi,t + βi,t ft+1 + i,t+1 ,
we are interested in testing the null hypothesis
H0 : Γα = 0L×1
against the alternative hypothesis
H1 : Γα 6= 0L×1 .
Characteristics determine alphas in this model only if Γα is non-zero. The null therefore
states that alphas are unassociated with characteristics in zi,t . Because the hypothesis is
formulated in terms of the common parameter, this is a joint statement about alphas of all
assets in the system.
Note that Γα = 0L×1 does not rule out the existence of alphas entirely. From the model
definition in equation (3), we see that αi,t may differ from zero because να,i,t is non-zero.
That is, the null allows for some mispricing, as long as mispricings are truly idiosyncratic
and unassociated with characteristics in the instrument vector. Likewise, the alternative
hypothesis is not concerned with alphas arising from the idiosyncratic να,i,t mispricings.
Instead, it focuses on the more economically interesting mispricings that may arise as a
regular function of observable characteristics.
In statistical terms, Γα 6= 0L×1 is a constrained alternative. This contrasts, for example, with
the Gibbons, Ross, and Shanken (1989, GRS henceforth) test that studies the unconstrained

17

alternative αi = 0 ∀i. In GRS, each αi is estimated as an intercept in a time series regression.
GRS alphas are therefore residuals, not a model. Our constrained alternative is itself a
model that links stock characteristics to anomaly expected returns via a fixed mapping that
is common to all firms. If we reject the null IPCA model, we do so in favor of a specific model
for how alphas relate to characteristics. In this sense our asset pricing test is a frequentist
counterpart to Barillas and Shanken’s (forthcoming) Bayesian argument that it should take
a model to beat a model. This has the pedagogical advantage that, if we reject H0 in
favor of H1 , we can further determine which elements of Γα (and thus which characteristics)
are most responsible for the rejection. By isolating those characteristics that are a wedge
between expected stock returns and exposures to aggregate risk factors, we can work toward
an economic understanding of how the wedge emerges.14
We construct a Wald-type test statistic for the distance between the restricted and unrestricted models as the sum of squared elements in the estimated Γα vector,
Wα = Γ̂0α Γ̂α .
Inference, which we conduct via bootstrap, proceeds in the following steps. First, we estimate
the unrestricted model and retain the estimated parameters
Γ̂α , Γ̂β , and {fˆt }Tt=1 .
A convenient aspect of our model from a bootstrapping standpoint is that, because the
objective function can be written in terms of managed portfolios xt , we can resample portfolio
residuals rather than resampling stock-level residuals. Following from the managed portfolio
definition,
xt+1 = Zt0 rt+1 = (Zt0 Zt )Γα + (Zt0 Zt )Γβ ft+1 + Zt0 ∗i,t+1 ,
we define the L × 1 vector of managed portfolio residuals as dt+1 = Zt0 ∗i,t+1 and retain their
fitted values {dˆt }Tt=1 .
14

Our test also overcomes a difficult technical problem that the GRS test faces in large cross sections such
as that of individual stocks. It is very difficult to test the hypothesis that all stock-level alphas are zero as it
amounts to a joint test of N parameters where N potentially numbers in the tens of thousands. The IPCA
specification reduces the joint alpha test to a L × 1 parameter vector. Contrast this with recent advances
in alphas tests such as Fan, Liao, and Wang (2016) who illustrate the complications of the large N testing
problem and resort to a complicated thresholded covariance matrix estimator. Even with that advance, they
look at only the stocks in the S&P 500, which is an order of magnitude smaller than the cross section we
consider.

18

Next, for b = 1, ..., 1000, we generate the bth bootstrap sample of returns as
x̃bt = (Zt0 Zt )Γ̂β fˆt + d˜bt ,

d˜bt = q1b dˆq2b .

(12)

The variable q2b is a random time index drawn uniformly from the set of all possible dates.
In addition, we multiply each residual draw by a Student t random variable, q1b , that has
unit variance and five degrees of freedom. Then, using this bootstrap sample, we re-estimate
the unrestricted model and record the estimated test statistic W̃αb = Γ̃b0α Γ̃bα . Finally, we draw
inferences from the empirical null distribution by calculating a p-value as the fraction of
bootstrapped W̃αb statistics that exceed the value of Wα from the actual data.
3.1.1

Comments on Bootstrap Procedure

The method described above is a “residual” bootstrap. It uses the model’s structure to
generate pseudo-samples under the null hypothesis that Γα = 0. In particular, it fixes
the explained variation in returns at their estimated common factor values under the null
model, Zt Γ̂β fˆt+1 , and randomizes around the null model by sampling from the empirical
distribution of residuals to preserve their properties in the simulated data. The bootstrap
dataset xbt satisfies Γα = 0 by construction because a non-zero Γ̂α is estimated as part of
the unrestricted model but excluded from the bootstrap data. This approach produces an
empirical distribution of W̃αb designed to quantify the amount of sampling variation in the
test statistic under the null. In Appendix B, we report a variety of Monte Carlo experiments
illustrating the accuracy of the test in terms of size (appropriate rejection rates under the
null) and power (appropriate rejection rates under the alternative).
Premultiplying the residual draws by a random t variable is a technique known as the “wild”
bootstrap. It is designed to improve the efficiency of bootstrap inference in heteroskedastic
data such as stock returns (Goncalves and Killian, 2004). Appendix B also demonstrates
the improvement in test performance, particularly power for nearby alternatives, from using
a wild bootstrap.
Equation (8) illustrates why we bootstrap datasets of managed portfolios returns, xt , rather
than raw stock returns, rt . The estimation objective ultimately takes as data the managed
portfolio returns, xt = Zt0 rt , and estimates parameters from their covariance matrix. If
we were to resample stock returns, the estimation procedure would anyway convert these
into managed portfolios before estimating model parameters. It is thus more convenient
to resample xt directly. Bootstrapping managed portfolio returns comes with a number of

19

practical advantages. It resamples in a lower dimension setting (T × L) than stock returns
(T × N ), which reduces computation cost. It also avoids issues with missing observations
that exist in the stock panel, but not in the portfolio panel.
Our test enjoys the usual benefits of bootstrapping, such as reliability in finite samples
and validity under weak assumptions on residual distributions. It is important to point
out that our bootstrap tests are feasible only because of the fast alternating least squares
estimator that we have derived for IPCA. Estimation of the model via brute force numerical
optimization would not only make it very costly to use IPCA in large systems—it would
immediately take bootstrapping off the table as a viable testing approach.

3.2

Testing Observable Factor Models Versus IPCA

Next, we extend the IPCA framework to nest commonly studied models with pre-specified,
observable factors. The encompassing model is
ri,t+1 = βi,t ft+1 + δi,t gt+1 + i,t+1 .

(13)

The βi,t ft+1 term is unchanged from its specification in (3). The new term is the portion of
returns described by the M × 1 vector of observable factors, gt+1 . Loadings on observable
factors are allowed to be dynamic functions of the same conditioning information entering
into the loadings on latent IPCA factors:
0
δi,t = zi,t
Γδ + νδ,i,t ,

where Γδ is the L × M mapping from characteristics to loadings. The encompassing model
imposes the zero alpha restriction so that we can evaluate the ability of competing models
to price assets based on exposures to systematic risk (though it easy to incorporate αi,t in
in (13) if desired).
We estimate model (13) following the same general tack as Section 2.2. We rewrite (13)
0
0
0
as ri,t+1 = zi,t
Γ̃f˜t+1 + ∗i,t+1 , where Γ̃ ≡ [Γβ , Γδ ] and f˜t+1 ≡ [ft+1
, gt+1
]0 . That is, the model
with nested observable factors is mapped to the structure of (4) by augmenting the factor
specification to include the observable gt+1 . The first-order condition for Γ̃ the same as (7)
except that f˜t replaces ft . The ft+1 first-order condition changes slightly to
ft+1 = Γ0β Zt0 Zt Γβ

−1

Γ0β Zt0 (rt+1 − Zt Γδ gt+1 ) ,

20

∀t.

This is a cross section regression of “returns in excess of observable factor exposures” on
βt , and reflects the fact that that nested specification decides how to best allocate panel
variation in returns to latent IPCA factors versus observable pre-specified factors.
We construct a test of the incremental explanatory power of observable factors after controlling for the baseline IPCA specification. The hypotheses for this test are
H0 : Γδ = 0L×M

vs.

H1 : Γδ 6= 0L×M .

Γ̂δ denotes the estimated parameters corresponding to gt+1 , from which we construct the
Wald-like test statistic
Wδ = vec(Γ̂δ )0 vec(Γ̂δ ).
Wδ is a measure of the distance between model (13) and the IPCA model that excludes
observable factors (Γδ = 0L×M ). If Wδ is large relative to sampling variation, we can conclude
that gt+1 holds explanatory power for the panel of returns above and beyond the baseline
IPCA factors.
Our sampling variation estimates, and thus p-values for Wδ , use the same residual wild
bootstrap concept from Section 3.1. First, we construct residuals of managed portfolios,
dˆt+1 = Zt0 ˆ∗i,t+1 , from the estimated model. Then, for each iteration b, we resample portfolio
returns imposing the null hypothesis. Next, from each bootstrap sample, we re-estimate
Γδ and construct the associated test statistic W̃δb . Finally, we compute the p-value as the
fraction of samples for which W̃δb exceeds Wδ .

3.3

Testing Instrument Significance

The last test that we introduce evaluates the significance of an individual characteristic while
simultaneously controlling for all other characteristics. We focus on the model in equation
(4) with alpha fixed at zero and no observable factors. That is, we specifically investigate
whether a given instrument significantly contributes to βi,t .
To formulate the hypotheses, we partition the parameter matrix as
Γβ = [γβ,1 , ... , γβ,L ]0 ,
where γβ,l is a K × 1 vector that maps characteristic l to loadings on the K factors. Let the

21

lth element of zi,t be the characteristic in question. The hypotheses that we test are
H0 : Γβ = [γβ,1 , ... , γβ,l−1 , 0K×1 , γβ,l+1 , ... , γβ,L ]0

vs. H1 : Γβ = [γβ,1 , ... , γβ,L ]0 .

The form of this null hypothesis comes from the fact that, for the lth characteristic to have
zero contribution to the model, it cannot impact any of the K factor loadings. Thus, the
entire lth row of Γβ must be zero.
We estimate the alternative model that allows for a non-zero contribution from characteristic l, then we assess whether the distance between zero and the estimate of vector γβ,l is
statistically large. Our Wald-type statistic in this case is
0
Wβ,l = γ̂β,l
γ̂β,l .

Inference for this test is based on the same residual bootstrap concept described above. We
define the estimated model parameters and managed portfolio residuals from the alternative
model as
{γ̂β,l }Ll=1 , {fˆt }Tt=1 , and {dˆt }Tt=1 .
Next, for b = 1, ..., 1000, we generate the bth bootstrap sample of returns under the null
hypothesis that the lth characteristic has no effect on loadings. To do so, we construct the
matrix
Γ̃β = [γ̂β,1 , ... , γ̂β,l−1 , 0K×1 , γ̂β,l+1 , ... , γ̂β,L ]
and re-sample characteristic-managed portfolio returns as
x̃bt = Zt Γ̃β fˆt + d˜bt
with the same formulation of d˜bt used in equation (12). Then, for each sample b, we re-estimate
b
the alternative model and record the estimated test statistic W̃β,l
. Finally, calculate the test’s
b
p-value as the fraction of bootstrapped W̃β,l
statistics that exceed Wβ,l . This test can be
extended to evaluate the joint significance of multiple characteristics l1 , ..., lJ by modifying
0
0
the test statistic to Wβ,l1 ,...,lJ = γ̂β,l
γ̂ + ... + γ̂β,l
γ̂ .
1 β,l1
J β,lJ

22

4
4.1

Empirical Findings
Data

Our stock returns and characteristics data are from Freyberger, Neuhierl, and Weber (2017).
The sample begins in July 1962, ends in May 2014, and includes 12,813 firms. For each firm
we have 36 characteristics. They are market beta (beta), assets-to-market (a2me), total assets (log at), sales-to-assets (ato), book-to-market (beme), cash-to-short-term-investment
(c), capital turnover (cto), capital intensity (d2a), ratio of change in PP&E to change in
total assets (dpi2a), earnings-to-price (e2p), fixed costs-to-sales (fc2y), cash flow-to-book
(free cf), idiosyncratic volatility (idio vol), investment (investment), leverage (lev),
log lagged market equity (size), lagged turnover (lturnover), net operating assets (noa),
operating accruals (oa), operating leverage (ol), price-to-cost margin (pcm), profit margin
(pm), gross profitability (prof), Tobin’s Q (q), closeness to relative high price (rel high),
return on net operating assets (rna), return on assets (roa), return on equity (roe), momentum (mom 12 2), intermediate momentum (mom 12 7), short-term reversal (mom 2 1),
long-term reversal (mom 36 13), sales-to-price (s2p), SG&A-to-sales (sga2s), bid-ask spread
(spread), and unexplained volume (suv). We restrict attention to i, t observations for which
all 36 characteristics are non-missing. For further details and summary statistics, see Freyberger, Neuhierl, and Weber (2017).
These characteristics vary both in the cross section and over time. The two dimensions
potentially aid IPCA’s estimation of the factor model in different ways. For example, the
average level of a stock characteristic may be helpful for understanding a stock’s unconditional factor loadings, while time variation around this mean may help understand the
stock’s conditional loadings, and the relevance of the two components for asset pricing may
differ in magnitude. To allow for this possibility, we separate characteristics into their time
series mean and their deviation around the mean. We denote the vector of characteristics
on stock i at time t as ci,t . The vector of IPCA instruments includes a constant, as well as
means and deviations of each characteristic:
zi,t = [1, c̄0i , (ci,t − c̄i )0 ]0 , where c̄i ≡

T
1X
ci,t .
T t=1

When we perform out-of-sample analyses, we replace the full sample mean c̄i with the historP
ical mean c̄i,t ≡ 1t tτ =1 ci,τ . We cross-sectionally standardize instruments period-by-period.
In particular, we calculate stocks’ ranks for each characteristic, then divide ranks by the
23

number of non-missing observations and subtract 0.5. This maps characteristics into the
[-0.5,+0.5] interval and focuses on their ordering as opposed to magnitude. We use this
standardization for its insensitivity to outliers, then show in robustness analyses that results
are qualitatively the same without characteristic standardization.

4.2

The Asset Pricing Performance of IPCA

We estimate the K-factor IPCA model for various choices of K, and consider both restricted
(Γα = 0) and unrestricted versions of each specification. Two R2 statistics measure model
performance. The first we refer to as the “total R2 ” and define it as
2
P 
0
ˆ
i,t ri,t+1 − zi,t (Γ̂α + Γ̂β ft+1 )
P 2
.
Total R2 = 1 −
i,t ri,t+1

(14)

It represents the fraction of return variance explained by both the dynamic behavior of conditional loadings (and alphas in the unrestricted model), as well as by the contemporaneous
factor realizations, aggregated over all assets and all time periods. The total R2 summarizes how well the systematic factor risk in a given model specification describes the realized
riskiness in the panel of individual stocks.
The second measure we refer to as the “predictive R2 ” and define it as
P 
Predictive R2 = 1 −

i,t

2
0
ri,t+1 − zi,t
(Γ̂α + Γ̂β λ̂)
P 2
.
i,t ri,t+1

(15)

It represents the fraction of realized return variation explained by the model’s description
of conditional expected returns. IPCA’s return predictions are based on dynamics in factor
loadings (and alphas in the unrestricted model). In theory, expected returns can also vary
because risk prices vary. One limitation of IPCA is that, without further model structure, it
cannot separately identify risk price dynamics. Hence, we hold estimated risk prices constant
and predictive information enters return forecasts only through the instrumented loadings.
When Γα = 0 is imposed, the predictive R2 summarizes the model’s ability to describe risk
compensation solely through exposure to systematic risk. For the unrestricted model, the
predictive R2 describes how well characteristics explain expected returns in any form—be it
through loadings or through anomaly intercepts.
Panel A of Table I reports R2 ’s at the individual stock level for K = 1, ..., 6 factors. With

24

Table I
IPCA Model Performance
Note. Panel A and B report total and predictive R2 in percent for the restricted (Γα = 0) and unrestricted (Γα 6= 0) IPCA model. These are calculated with respect to either individual stocks (Panel A) or
characteristic-managed portfolios (Panel B). Panel C reports bootstrapped p-values for the test of Γα = 0.

K
1
2

Γα = 0
Γα 6= 0

Pred. R2

Γα = 0
Γα 6= 0

Total R

2

3

4

5

6

15.1
16.6

Panel A: Individual Stocks (rt )
17.0
18.5
19.4
19.9
18.2
19.2
19.8
20.2

20.3
20.4

0.44
1.89

1.64
1.87

1.82
1.86

1.82
1.85
98.7
98.8

1.70
1.87

1.83
1.86

2

Γα = 0
Γα 6= 0

91.6
92.6

Panel B: Managed Portfolios (xt )
93.6
96.7
97.7
98.3
96.2
97.6
98.2
98.6

Pred. R2

Γα = 0
Γα 6= 0

2.06
3.14

2.84
3.11

2.98
3.08

2.97
3.07

0.00

Panel C: Asset Pricing Test
15.4
32.9
38.2
59.4

13.0

Total R

Wα p-value

2.75
3.10

2.97
3.11

a single factor, the restricted (Γα = 0) IPCA model explains 15.1% of the total variation
in stock returns. As a reference point, the total R2 from the CAPM and Fama-French
three-factor model is 11.9% and 18.9%, respectively, in our individual stock sample.
The predictive R2 in the restricted one-factor IPCA model is 0.4%. This is for individual
stocks and at the monthly frequency. To benchmark this magnitude, the predictive R2 from
the CAPM or the Fama-French three-factor model is 0.3% in a matched individual stock
sample.
Allowing for Γα 6= 0 increases the total R2 by 1.5 percentage points to 16.6%, while the
predictive R2 rises dramatically to 1.9% per month for individual stocks. The unrestricted
IPCA specification attributes predictive content from characteristics to either betas or alphas. The results show that with K = 1, IPCA can only capture about one-fifth of the
return predictability embodied by characteristics while maintaining the Γα = 0 constraint.
This represents a failure of the restricted one-factor IPCA model to explain heterogeneity in
conditional expected returns. This failure is statistically borne out by the hypothesis test of
Γα = 0 in Panel C, which rejects the null with a p-value below 0.01%.

25

When we allow for multiple IPCA factors, the gap between restricted and unrestricted models
shrinks rapidly. At K = 2, the total R2 for the restricted model is 17.0%, achieving more
than 93% of the explanatory power of the unrestricted model. The predictive R2 rises to
1.6%, capturing 88% of the characteristics’ predictive content while imposing Γα = 0. Our
test fails to reject the null hypothesis that Γα = 0 when K = 2 (p-value of 15.4%). For
K > 2, the distance between the restricted and unrestricted models shrinks even further. At
K = 4, the restricted and unrestricted models behave nearly identically.
The results of Table I show that IPCA explains essentially all of the heterogeneity in average
stock returns associated with stock characteristics if at least two factors are included in the
specification. It does so by identifying a set of factors and associated loadings such that
stocks’ expected returns align with their exposures to systematic risk—without resorting to
alphas to explain the predictive role of characteristics. In other words, IPCA infers that
characteristics are risk exposures, not anomalies.
Note that, because IPCA is estimated from a least squares criterion, it directly targets total
R2 . Thus the risk factors that IPCA identifies are optimized to describe systematic risks
among stocks. They are by no means specialized to explain average returns, however, as
estimation does not directly target the predictive R2 . Because conditional expected returns
are a small portion of total return variation (as evidenced by the 1.9% predictive R2 in
the unrestricted model), it is very well possible that a misspecified model could provide an
excellent description of risk yet a poor description of risk compensation (in results below,
the traditional PCA model serves as an example of this phenomenon). Evidently, this is
not the case for IPCA, as its risk factors indirectly produce an accurate description of risk
compensation across assets.
The asset pricing literature is accustomed to evaluating the performance of pricing factors
in explaining the behavior of test portfolios, such as the 5×5 size and value-sorted portfolios
of Fama and French (1993), as opposed to individual stocks. The behavior of portfolios
can differ markedly from individual stocks because they average out a large fraction of
idiosyncratic variation. As emphasized in Section 2.1.1, IPCA asset pricing tests can be at
once interpreted as tests of stocks, or as tests of characteristic-managed portfolios, xt . In
this spirit, Panel B of Table I evaluates fit measures for managed portfolios.15 The xt vector
includes returns on 73 portfolios, one correspond to each instrument (the means and time
15

Fit measures for xt are
P 
Total R2 = 1 −

t

0 

xt+1 − Zt0 Zt (Γ̂α + Γ̂β fˆt+1 )
xt+1 − Zt0 Zt (Γ̂α + Γ̂β fˆt+1 )
P 0
,
t xt+1 xt+1

26

series deviations of 36 characteristics plus a constant).
With K = 4 factors, the total R2 ’s for the restricted and unrestricted models are 96.7%
and 97.6%, respectively. The reduction in noise via portfolio formation also improves predictive R2 ’s to 3.0% and 3.1% for the restricted and unrestricted models, respectively. As in
the stock-level case, the unrestricted IPCA specification performs almost identically to the
unrestricted specification when K ≥ 2.

4.3

Comparison with Existing Models

The results in Table I compare the performance of IPCA across specification choices for K
and with or without the imposition of asset pricing restrictions. We now compare IPCA to
leading alternative modeling approaches in the literature. The first includes models with prespecified observable factors. We consider models with K = 1, 3, 4, 5, or 6 observable factors.
The K = 1 model is the CAPM (using the CRSP value-weighted excess market return as
the factor), K = 3 is the Fama-French (1993) three-factor model that includes the market,
SMB and HML (“FF3” henceforth). The K = 4 model is the Carhart (1997, “FFC4”) model
that adds MOM to the FF3 model. K = 5 is the Fama-French (2015, “FF5”) five-factor
model that adds RMW and CMA to the FF3 factors. Finally, we consider a six-factor model
(“FFC6”) that includes MOM alongside the FF5 factors.
We report two implementations of observable factor models. The first is a traditional approach in which factor loadings are estimated asset-by-asset via time series regression. In
this case, loadings are static and no characteristic instruments are used in the model. The
second implementation places observable factor models on the same footing as our IPCA
latent factor model by parameterizing loadings as a function of instruments, following the
definition of δi,t in equation (13).
The last set of alternatives that we consider are static latent factor models estimated with
PCA. In this approach, we consider one to six principal component factors from the panel
of individual stock returns.16
and
P 
Predictive R2 = 1 −

t

0 

xt+1 − Zt0 Zt (Γ̂α + Γ̂β λ̂)
xt+1 − Zt0 Zt (Γ̂α + Γ̂β λ̂)
P 0
.
t xt+1 xt+1

16

In calculating PCA, we must confront the fact that the panel of returns is unbalanced. We estimate PCA
using the alternating least squares option in Matlab’s pca.m function. As a practical matter, this means that
PCA estimation for individual stocks bears a high computational cost. It also highlights the computational
benefit of IPCA, which side steps the unbalanced panel problem by parameterizing betas with characteristics

27

Table II
IPCA Comparison With Other Factor Models
Note. The table reports total and predictive R2 in percent and number of estimated parameters (Np ) for
the restricted (Γα = 0) IPCA model (Panel A), for observable factor models with static loadings (Panel
B), for observable factor models with instrumented dynamic loadings (Panel C), and for static latent factor
models (Panel D). Observable factor model specifications are CAPM, FF3, FFC4, FF5, and FFC6 in the
K = 1, 3, 4, 5, 6 columns, respectively.

Test
Assets

Statistic

1

3

K
4

5

6

15.3
0.46
672

Panel A: IPCA
18.6
19.5
20.0
1.64
1.77
1.76
2016
2688
3360

20.4
1.76
4032

91.6
2.06
672

96.7
2.75
2016

98.7
2.97
4032

rt

2

Total R
Pred. R2
Np

xt

Total R2
Pred. R2
Np

rt

2

Total R
Pred. R2
Np

xt

Total R2
Pred. R2
Np

rt

2

Total R
Pred. R2
Np

Panel C: Observable
10.7
14.7
0.35
0.57
73
219

xt

Total R2
Pred. R2
Np

65.8
1.70
73

rt

Total R2
Pred. R2
Np

16.8
<0
13412

xt

Total R2
Pred. R2
Np

87.9
2.00
672

97.7
2.97
2688

98.3
2.98
3360

Panel B: Observable Factors (no instruments)
11.9
18.9
20.9
21.9
23.7
0.31
0.29
0.28
0.29
0.23
11452
34356
45808
57260
68712
34.3
0.97
73

51.0
1.63
219

84.4
2.10
219

56.4
1.48
292

55.3
1.92
365

Factors (with instruments)
15.7
15.3
16.2
0.54
0.71
0.66
292
365
438
86.5
2.02
292

85.7
2.16
365

Panel D: Principal Components
26.2
29.0
31.5
<0
<0
<0
40236
53648
67060
93.9
2.04
2016

60.4
1.70
438

95.3
2.59
2688

96.4
2.60
3360

87.7
2.08
438
33.8
<0
80472
97.1
2.60
4032

and, as a result, is estimated from managed portfolios that can always be constructed to have no missing
data.

28

We estimate all models in Table II restricting intercepts to zero. We do so by imposing
Γα = 0 in specifications relying on instrumented loadings, and by omitting a constant in the
static (time series regression) implementation of observable factor models.
Table II reports the total and predictive R2 as well as the number of estimated parameters
(Np ) for each model.17 For ease of comparison, Panel A re-states model fits for IPCA with
Γα = 0.18
Panel B reports fits for static (i.e., excluding instruments) observable factor models. In the
analysis of individual stocks, observable factor models generally produce a slightly higher
total R2 than the IPCA specification using the same number of factors. For example, at
K = 5, FF5 achieves a 1.9 percentage point improvement in R2 relative to IPCA’s fit of
20.0%. To accomplish this, however, observable factors rely on vastly more parameters than
IPCA. The number of parameters in an observable factor model is equal to the number
of loadings, or Np = N K. For IPCA, the number of factors is the dimension of Γβ plus
the number of estimated factor realizations, or Np = LK + T K. In our sample of 11,452
stocks with 72 instruments over 599 months, observable factor models therefore estimate
17 times (≈ 11452/(72 + 599)) as many parameters as IPCA. In short, IPCA provides a
similar description of systematic risk in stock returns as leading observable factors while
using almost 85% fewer parameters.
At the same time, IPCA provides a substantially more accurate description of stocks’ risk
compensation than observable factor models, as evidenced by the predictive R2 . Observable
factor models’ predictive power never rises beyond 0.3% for any specification, compared with
a 1.8% predictive R2 from IPCA with K = 4.
Among characteristic-managed portfolios xt , the explanatory power from observable factor
models’ total R2 suffers in comparison to IPCA. For K ≥ 3, IPCA explains over 96% of total
portfolio return variation, while FFC6 explains 60.4%. IPCA also achieves at least a 55%
17

The R2 ’s for alternative models are defined analogously to those of IPCA. In particular, for individual
stocks they are
P
Total R2 = 1 −

i,t



ri,t − β̂i fˆt
P
2
i,t ri,t

2

2
r
−
β̂
λ̂
i,t
i
i,t
P
,
2
i,t ri,t

P
, Predictive R2 = 1 −



and are similarly adapted for managed portfolios xt . In all cases, model fits are based on exactly matched
samples with IPCA.
18
These differ minutely from Table I results because, for the sake of comparability in this table, we drop
stock-month observations with insufficient data for time series regression on observable factors. We require
at least 60 non-missing months to compute observable factor betas, which filters out slightly more than a
thousand stocks compared to the sample used in Table I, and leaves us with just under 1.4 million stockmonth observations.

29

improvement in predictive R2 (1.9% at best among observable factor models, versus 3.0%
for IPCA). In sum, when test assets are managed portfolios, IPCA dominates in its ability
to describe systematic risks as well as cross-sectional differences in average returns.
Panel C investigates the performance of observable factor models when loadings are allowed
to vary over time in the same manner as IPCA. In this case, loadings are instrumented
with the same characteristics used for the IPCA analysis, following the definition of δi,t in
equation (13). Because the intercept and latent factor components in (13) are restricted
to zero, the the estimation of Γδ reduces to a panel regression of ri,t+1 on zi,t ⊗ gt+1 . For
individual stocks, allowing for dynamic loadings decreases the total R2 compared to the
static model, but roughly doubles the predictive R2 for K ≥ 2. At the portfolio level, the
dynamic loadings sharply increase total R2 , while at the same time improving the predictive
R2 . This is an interesting result in its own right and, to the best of our knowledge, is new
to the literature.
In Panel D we report the performance of models latent factors with static and uninstrumented
loadings (estimated via PCA). At the individual stock level, PCA’s total R2 exceeds that of
IPCA and observable factor models for all K. PCA, however, provides a dismal description
of expected returns at the stock level; the predictive R2 is negative for each K. On the other
hand, when the model is re-estimated using data at the managed portfolio level, PCA fits in
terms of both total and predictive R2 are generally excellent and only exceeded by IPCA.
Table III formally tests whether the inclusion of observable factors improves over a given
IPCA specification in the matched individual stock sample. The tests, described in Section
3.2, nest the various sets of observable factors studied in Table II (represented by rows)
with different numbers of latent IPCA factors (represented by columns). Panels A and B
show total and predictive R2 ’s for these joint models. For ease of comparison, we restate
fits from the baseline IPCA specification in the rows showing zero observable factors. When
K = 1, adding observable factors improves the model fit. The total R2 rises from 15.1% for
the IPCA-only model to 18.3% with the FFC6 factors. The predictive R2 rises from 0.4%
to 1.1%. Hypothesis test results show that RMW and CMA offer a statistically significant
improvement over the K = 1 IPCA model (with p-values below 1%).
With more IPCA factors, however, observable factors become redundant. At K = 2, none
of the FFC6 factors are statistically significant after controlling for IPCA factors. The
predictive R2 rises only 0.2% from 1.6% with IPCA alone to 1.8% with the addition of FFC6
factors, and the total R2 rises from 17.0% to 19.4%. With three or more IPCA factors, the
incremental explanatory power from observable factors is negligible.

30

Table III
IPCA Fits Including Observable Factors
Note. Panels A and B report total and predictive R2 from IPCA specifications with various numbers
of latent factors K (corresponding to columns) while also controlling for observable factors according to
equation (13). Rows labeled 0, 1, 4, and 6 correspond to no observable factors or the CAPM, FFC4, or
FFC6 factors, respectively. Panel C reports tests of the incremental explanatory power of each observable
factor model with respect to the IPCA model.

Observ.
Factors
0
1
4
6
0
1
4
6
MKT–RF
SMB
HML
RMW
CMA
MOM

4.3.1

K
1
15.1
16.2
18.0
18.3
0.44
0.43
0.91
1.08
29.1
29.8
20.1
0.40
0.40
12.7

2

3

4

5

6

17.0
17.9
19.2
19.4

Panel A: Total R2
18.5
19.4
18.8
19.5
19.6
20.0
19.8
20.1

19.9
20.0
20.3
20.4

20.3
20.4
20.6
20.7

1.64
1.71
1.81
1.82

Panel B: Predictive R2
1.70
1.83
1.83
1.83
1.82
1.82
1.82
1.83

1.82
1.82
1.83
1.81

1.82
1.82
1.81
1.81

Panel C: Individual Significance Test p-value
33.8
94.4
79.1
71.0
50.2
81.5
64.3
52.4
3.80
6.30
72.7
89.1
22.1
50.9
46.2
82.8
29.5
16.4
25.0
18.3
8.10
9.90
28.2
67.1

61.8
61.0
82.6
95.0
23.4
63.7

Discussion

Table II offers a synthesis of IPCA vis-à-vis existing cross-sectional pricing models. The
spectrum of factor models can be classified on two dimensions. First, are factors latent or
observable? Second, are loadings static or parameterized functions of dynamic instruments?
Table II clearly differentiates the empirical role of each ingredient.
The empirical performance of traditional cross section pricing models is hampered in both
model dimensions. First, they rely on pre-specified observable factors that are not directly
optimized for describing asset price variation. Second, they rely on static loadings estimated
via time series regression. The superior performance of IPCA shows that, by allowing the
data to dictate factors that best describe common sources of risk, and by freeing loadings to
vary through time as a function of observables, model fits are unambiguously improved.
31

Which of these dimensions is more important? Panel C shows that dynamic betas—particularly
ones that are parameterized functions of observable stock-characteristics—are responsible for
large improvements in predictive R2 . By tying loadings to characteristics, the no-arbitrage
connection between loading and expected returns is substantially enhanced, even when factors are pre-specified outside the model. At the same time, this pulls down the total R2 .
This is perhaps unsurprising, given the massive e xpansion in parameter count when one
moves to regression-based beta estimates for each asset. It is likely that higher total R2 in
static models is merely an artifact of statistical overfit from over-parameterization.
Panel D shows that it is possible for a latent factor model to succeed in describing returns
even when betas are static. However, this conclusion depends crucially on the choice of
test assets—are they individual stocks or managed portfolios? The glowing performance of
static IPCA among managed portfolios is closely in line with the findings of Kozak et al.
(forthcoming). Yet at the stock level, static PCA leads to egregious model performance.
This divergence suggests an inherent misspecification in the static latent factor model.
In contrast, IPCA is successful in describing returns for both individual stocks and for
managed portfolios—and it does so using the exact same set of model parameters for both
sets of assets. In short, the incorporation of both latent factors and dynamic betas are the
key model enhancements that allow IPCA to achieve a unique level of success in describing
the cross section of returns.

4.4

Out-of-sample Fits

Thus far, the performance of IPCA and alternatives has been based on in-sample estimates.
That is, IPCA factors and loadings are estimated from the full panel of stock returns. Next,
we analyze IPCA’s out-of-sample fits.
To construct out-of-sample fit measures, we use recursive backward-looking estimation and
track the post-estimation performance of estimated models. In particular, in every month
t ≥ T /2, we use all data through t to estimate the IPCA model and denote the resulting
backward-looking parameter estimate as Γ̂β,t . Then, based on equation (6), we calculate

−1
the out-of-sample realized factor return at t + 1 as fˆt+1,t = Γ̂0 Z 0 Zt Γ̂β,t
Γ̂0 Z 0 rt+1 .
β,t

t

β,t

t

That is, IPCA

−1factor returns at t + 1 may be calculated with individual stock weights
0
0
Γ̂β,t Zt Zt Γ̂β,t
Γ̂0β,t Zt0 that require no information beyond time t, just like the portfolio
sorts used to construct observable factors.
The out-of-sample total R2 compares rt+1 to Zt Γ̂β,t fˆt+1,t and xt+1 to Zt0 Zt Γ̂β,t fˆt+1,t . The out32

Table IV
Out-of-sample Fits
Note. The table reports out-of-sample total and predictive R2 in percent with recursive estimation scheme.

Test
Assets

K
Statistic

1

2

3

4

5

6

rt

Total R2
Pred. R2

14.6
0.32

16.0
0.31

16.9
0.52

17.6
0.57

18.1
0.56

18.5
0.56

xt

Total R2
Pred. R2

88.7
2.44

93.7
2.39

95.7
2.66

97.0
2.88

98.0
2.83

98.3
2.83

of-sample predictive R2 is defined analogously, replacing fˆt+1,t with the factor mean through
t, denoted λ̂t .
Table IV reports out-of-sample R2 statistics. The main conclusion from the table is that the
strong performance of IPCA is not merely an in-sample phenomenon driven by statistical
overfit. IPCA delivers nearly the same out-of-sample total R2 that it achieves in-sample.
And while the predictive R2 is somewhat reduced, it remains economically large and outperforms even the in-sample predictions from observable factors, both for individual stocks
and managed portfolios.

4.5

Unconditional Mean-Variance Efficiency

Zero intercepts in a factor pricing model are equivalent to multivariate mean-variance efficiency of the factors. This fact is the basis for the Gibbons, Ross, and Shanken (1989)
alpha test and bears a close association with our Wα test. The evidence thus far indicates
that IPCA loadings predict asset returns more accurately than competing factor models
both in-sample and out-of-sample, suggesting that IPCA factors achieve higher multivariate
efficiency than competitors. In this section, we directly investigate factor efficiency.
An important, if subtle, fact to bear in mind is that ours is a conditional asset pricing
model—factor loadings are parameterized functions of conditioning instruments. A conditional asset pricing model is attractive because it often maps directly to decisions of investors,
who seek period-by-period to hold assets with high conditional expected returns relative to
their conditional risk. At the same time, conditional models are more econometrically challenging than unconditional models because they typically require the researcher to estimate
a dynamic model and take a stand on investors’ conditioning information. These complica33

Figure 1: Alphas of Characteristic-Managed Portfolios
Note. The left and middle panels report unconditional alphas for characteristic-managed portfolios (xt ),
relative to FFC6 factors and four IPCA factors, respectively, estimated from time series regression. The
right panel reports the time series averages of conditional alphas in the baseline four-factor IPCA model.
Alphas are plotted against portfolios’ raw average excess returns. Alphas with t-statistics in excess of 2.0
are shown with filled squares, while insignificant alphas are shown with unfilled circles.

FFC6

IPCA4 (Uncond.)

3

IPCA4 (Cond.)
3

3

2.5

2.5
2

1.5
1
0.5
0

Alpha (% p.a.)

2

Alpha (% p.a.)

Alpha (% p.a.)

2

1

0

1.5
1
0.5

-1
0

-0.5
-1

-1

0

1

Raw return (% p.a.)

2

3

-2

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

-0.5

Raw return (% p.a.)

-1

0

1

2

3

Raw return (% p.a.)

tions lead the factor model literature to focus predominantly on unconditional estimation
and testing.19
Our findings of small and insignificant Γα suggests that estimated IPCA factors are multivariate mean-variance efficient, conditionally. This result does not necessarily imply unconditional efficiency of our factors, and therefore our results are not directly comparable to the
existing analysis that revolves around unconditional models. To bridge this gap, we conduct
two sets of analyses that assess the unconditional efficiency of IPCA factors and thereby link
our analysis with the large empirical literature on unconditional factor models.

4.5.1

Does IPCA “Price” Anomalies Unconditionally?

First, we investigate whether IPCA factors and observable factors accurately “price” anomaly
portfolios unconditionally. To do so, we estimate unconditional alphas in a full-sample time
series regression of portfolio returns onto each set of factors.
The anomaly portfolios that we study are the 73 characteristic-managed portfolios, xt , discussed in Section 4.2. For comparability, we re-sign portfolios to have positive means and
scale them to 10% annualized volatility. The mean and median annualized Sharpe ratios
19

For an excellent treatment of conditional versus unconditional asset pricing models and mean-variance
efficiency, see chapter 8 of Cochrane (2005).

34

among these portfolios are 0.50 and 0.74, respectively, with 17 portfolios having a Sharpe
ratio in excess of 1.50.20
Figure 1 reports unconditional alpha estimates for each portfolio. The left-hand figure plots
portfolios’ anomaly alphas from the FFC6 model against their raw average excess returns,
overlaying the 45-degree line. Alphas with t-statistics in excess of 2.0 are depicted with
filled squares, while insignificant alphas are shown with unfilled circles. With only a few
exceptions, characteristic-managed portfolios appear anomalous with respect to the FFC6
model. Their alphas are mostly statistically significant and clustered around the 45-degree
line, indicating that their average returns are essentially unexplained by observable factors.
The middle figure shows unconditional alphas for the same portfolios with respect to the fourfactor IPCA model.21 Specifically, we first estimate the four IPCA factors from the baseline
conditional specification, then we regress portfolios on these estimated factors in full sample
time series regressions (i.e., with static betas) to recover unconditional alphas. In this case,
alphas are clustered around the zero line. Only four of the 73 alphas are significantly greater
than zero, and even these are small in magnitude compared to the distribution of average
anomaly returns. Lastly, for comparison, the right-hand figure reports time series averages of
conditional alphas from the four-factor IPCA specification (i.e, averages of period-by-period
residuals from the main conditional IPCA model). Figure 1 supports the conclusion that,
not only are IPCA factors close to conditionally multivariate mean-variance efficient, they
appear to be unconditionally efficient as well.

4.5.2

Factor Tangency Portfolios

Second, we analyze out-of-sample unconditional Sharpe ratios for IPCA factors.22 We report
univariate annualized Sharpe ratios to describe unconditional efficiency of individual factors,
and we report the ex ante unconditional tangency portfolio Sharpe ratio for a group of factors
to describe multivariate efficiency. We calculate out-of-sample factor returns following the
20
The performance of xt portfolios is broadly comparable to anomaly portfolios studied in the literature.
For example, within the dataset of 41 anomaly portfolios posted by Novy-Marx in conjunction with NovyMarx and Velikov (2015), the mean and median Sharpe ratios during the same time period are 0.47 and
0.57, respectively, with one having a Sharpe ratio over 1.50.
21
We report the (Γα = 0) K = 4 specification rather than including plots for all specifications due to
space constraints. This analysis helps assess IPCA factor efficiency, and K = 4 is the point at which both
the in-sample and out-of-sample predictive R2 peak for the Γα = 0 model. Other values of K ≥ 1 produce
similar results.
22
Kozak, Nagel, and Santosh (forthcoming) emphasize that higher-order principal components of
“anomaly” portfolios tend to suffer from in-sample overfit and generate unreasonably high in-sample Sharpe
ratios. In light of this, we focus our analysis on out-of-sample IPCA factor returns.

35

Table V
Out-of-Sample Factor Portfolio Sharpe Ratios
Note. The table reports out-of-sample annualized Sharpe ratios for individual factors (“univariate”) and
for the mean-variance efficient portfolio of factors in each model (“tangency”).

K
1

2

Univariate
Tangency

0.48
0.48

0.17
0.50

Univariate
Tangency

0.46
0.46

0.33
0.51

3

4

5

6

1.31
3.54

0.79
3.60

Panel B: Observable Factors
0.41
0.46
0.62
0.78
1.01
1.29

0.51
1.37

Panel A: IPCA
0.69
1.25
2.22
2.55

same recursive estimation approach from Section 4.3. The tangency portfolio return for a
set of factors is also constructed on a purely out-of-sample basis by using the mean and
covariance matrix of estimated factors through t and tracking the post-formation t + 1
return.23
Out-of-sample IPCA Sharpe ratios are shown in Panel A of Table V. The K th column reports
the univariate Sharpe ratio for factor K as well as the tangency Sharpe ratio based on factors
1 through K. For comparison, we report Sharpe ratios of observable factor models in Panel
B.24 The first IPCA factor produces a Sharpe ratio of 0.48, versus 0.46 for the market over
the same out-of-sample period.25 The fourth IPCA factor has an individual out-of-sample
Sharpe ratio of 1.25, and boosts the Sharpe ratio for the four-factor tangency portfolio to
2.55. Adding additional factors increases the tangency Sharpe ratio further, reaching as
high as 3.60 for K = 6. The out-of-sample Sharpe ratios of IPCA factors exceed those
of observable factor models such as the FFC6 model, which itself reaches an impressive
tangency Sharpe ratio of 1.37.
The high unconditional Sharpe ratio statistics in Panel A of Table V provide a succinct
summary of the fact that IPCA captures extensive comovement among assets while success23

We scale the tangency weights each period by targeting 1% monthly portfolio volatility based on historical
estimates.
24
A difference between IPCA and observable factors is that observable factors are pre-constructed on an
out-of-sample basis. We construct observable factor tangency portfolios using historical mean and covariance
estimates, following the same approach as for IPCA.
25
The second half of our sample, which corresponds to our out-of-sample evaluation period, was an especially good period for the market in terms of Sharpe ratio. In the full post-1964 sample, the market Sharpe
ratio is 0.37.

36

Table VI
IPCA Performance for Large versus Small Stocks
Note. Panel A and B report in-sample and out-of-sample total and predictive R2 for subsamples of large
and small stocks. We evaluate fits within each subsample using the same parameters (estimated from the
unified sample of all stocks). All estimates use the restricted (Γα = 0) IPCA specification.

K
1

2

3

4

5

6

24.1
0.88

Panel A: Large Stocks
25.9
28.7
30.0
30.8
1.43
1.59
1.70
1.72

31.6
1.71

22.4
0.84

25.3
0.65

28.1
0.59

28.8
0.57

In-Sample

2

Total R
Pred. R2

12.8
0.33

Panel B: Small Stocks
14.6
15.9
16.6
17.1
1.69
1.73
1.86
1.85

17.3
1.85

Out-of-Sample

Total R2
Pred. R2

12.0
0.21

13.1
0.23

15.2
0.60

In-Sample

2

Total R
Pred. R2

Out-of-Sample

Total R2
Pred. R2

26.4
0.71

14.0
0.52

27.1
0.70

14.6
0.58

15.0
0.59

fully aligning their factor loadings with differences in average returns. These results are not
a statement about implementability of the factor tangency portfolio as a trading strategy.
The analysis of Table V is designed to describe the mean-variance efficiency of IPCA factors irrespective of practical frictions such as trading costs, and in doing so is consistent
with prior literature on testing factor models, all of which test models with returns gross of
transaction costs. From a trading perspective, the tangency portfolio that we estimate has
high turnover, implying high implementation costs. This is unsurprising given that, as we
show in Section 4.8, the IPCA model is driven to a significant extent by fast-moving characteristics like momentum and short-term reversal. Table V raises an interesting question
for follow-on research: How can IPCA be used for developing practical strategies to exploit
the mean-variance tradeoff that it identifies? And, relatedly, how may IPCA be adapted to
incorporate net-of-costs returns into its notion of factor efficiency?

4.6

Large Versus Small Stocks

Returns of large and small stocks tend to exhibit different behavior in terms of their covariances, liquidity, and expected returns. In particular, the fact that small stocks are much
more volatile than large stocks raises a question of whether the high explained variation
37

Table VII
IPCA Cross-Validation for Large Versus Small Stocks
Note. The table reports total and predictive R2 for large and small stock subsamples using parameters
estimated separately in each subsample. Rows correspond to the sample from which parameters are estimated
and columns represent the sample in which fits are evaluated. In particular, when row and column labels
differ, we are using fits in one sample (e.g., small stocks) to cross-validate the reliability of parameters
estimated in the other sample (e.g., large stocks). All estimates use the four-factor restricted (Γα = 0) IPCA
specification.

Fit Sample
Estimation
Sample
Large
Small

Total R2
Large
Small
32.1
24.3

11.4
16.9

Predictive R2
Large
Small
1.72
1.49

1.55
1.97

from the IPCA model occurs through an especially good description of small stock behavior
at the expense of large stocks. To better understand the role of large and small stocks in
IPCA fits, Table VI breaks out model R2 ’s for each group. These results are not based
on separate model re-estimation for the two groups, which would mechanically allow IPCA
to fit both subsamples but with potentially different parameters. Instead, these fits hold
the model parameters fixed at their estimates from the unified sample, and we recalculate
corresponding R2 ’s among each subsample.
We define the “large” group as the 1,000 stocks with the highest market capitalization each
month, and “small” as all remaining stocks. Overall, the performance of IPCA is broadly
similar for large and small stocks, and similar to our earlier results for the unified sample. If
anything, IPCA offers an especially accurate description of large stock variation, with total
R2 ’s exceeding 25% both in-sample and out-of-sample.
Next, to investigate the stability of model estimates for the two groups, we re-estimate the
K = 4 IPCA model for large and small stocks separately. When IPCA is estimated using
large stocks alone, the fits are strikingly similar to those from the unified sample. The 30.0%
total R2 among large stocks from Table VI increases slightly to 32.1% when the model is
re-optimized on the large stock subsample, and the 1.7% predictive R2 from the unified
estimation is unchanged when estimated from large stocks only. The same pattern holds
for small stocks. The total R2 from unified sample estimates and small-only estimates are
16.6% and 16.9%, respectively, and the predictive R2 ’s are 1.9% and 2.0%.
Perhaps more impressively, when we cross-validate the fits by computing R2 ’s in one group
using ft and Γβ parameters estimated from the other group, fits suffer only mildly. When
38

Table VIII
Out-of-sample Tangency Sharpe Ratios, Large Versus Small Stocks
Note. The table repeats the analysis of Table V for large and small stocks using parameters estimated
separately in each subsample.

K
Large
Small

1
0.53
0.43

2
0.43
0.56

3
1.24
1.85

4
2.64
2.05

5
2.95
2.90

6
2.87
3.23

we use large stock parameter estimates to fit small stocks, the small stock total R2 drops
to 11.4%, and the predictive R2 drops to 1.6%. Likewise, when small stock parameters are
used to fit large stocks, the total R2 is 24.3% and the predictive R2 is 1.5%. These crossvalidated R2 ’s represent a further out-of-sample evaluation of the IPCA model: None of the
information in small stock data enters directly into the large stock estimates, and vice versa
(there are only indirect spillovers due to cross-correlation between large and small stocks).
Like our other out-of-sample tests, the large/small sample split demonstrates remarkable
stability of IPCA model fits.
Finally, Table VIII reports Sharpe ratios for out-of-sample tangency portfolios constructed
from IPCA factors estimated separately from the large and small stock subsamples. Large
stock Sharpe ratios remain high, though are somewhat muted compared to the unified sample. In both size categories, the overall Sharpe ratio patterns are quantitatively similar to
estimates from the unified sample, suggesting that small stocks are not the sole drivers of
baseline IPCA tangency results in Table V.

4.7

Annual Returns

Our analysis has thus far focused on the one-month return horizon. As an extension and
robustness assessment, we re-analyze the IPCA model using annual stock returns. For many
investors, the annual frequency represents a more realistic investment horizon. And, because
our empirical analysis works with data at the individual stock level, it is possible that monthly
return patterns identified by IPCA in part capture short lived fluctuations among illiquid
individual stocks, and these effects are less influential at the annual frequency.
The basic structure of this analysis is unchanged from above with the exception that the
left-hand-side return is aggregated over months t + 1 through t + 12. Time t characteristics
now describe conditional loadings on annual factor returns from month t + 1 through t + 12.
39

Table IX
Annual Returns
Note. The table repeats the analysis of Table I using annual rather than monthly returns.

Test
Assets

Statistic

1

2

K
3

4

5

6

29.0
10.9

29.4
10.9

98.6
20.9

98.9
20.8

Panel B: Out-of-sample
18.5
19.2
19.7
3.44
3.33
3.14

20.0
3.09

Panel A: In-sample
27.5
28.4
11.0
10.9

rt

2

Total R
Pred. R2

21.3
9.20

25.5
11.0

xt

Total R2
Pred. R2

83.6
17.3

92.9
20.7

rt

Total R2
Pred. R2

15.1
2.85

17.6
3.16

xt

Total R2
Pred. R2

89.8
18.6

95.1
19.3

98.7
18.3

99.0
18.4

Wα p-value

0.60

Panel C: Asset Pricing Test
70.3
49.4
86.9
77.4

47.2

96.5
20.8

97.1
20.0

97.9
20.9

98.2
20.2

Panel A of IX reports the in-sample fits from re-estimating the restricted (Γα = 0) model
with annual returns. For individual stocks and K = 4, the total R2 rises from 19.5% monthly
to 28.4% with annual returns, and the predictive R2 rises from 1.8% to 10.9%, respectively.
Among characteristic-managed portfolios, the total R2 rises from 97.7% to 97.9% and the
predictive R2 rises from 3.0% to 20.9%. These improvements are only partially due to
re-estimating the model. Even if we hold parameter values fixed from the monthly data
estimates of Table I, the total R2 is 17.9% and 64.2% for rt and xt , respectively, and the
predictive R2 ’s are 8.2% and 19.9%, respectively.
Panel B reports out-of-sample fits from the annual model. Out-of-sample fits somewhat attenuate at the individual stock level. The out-of-sample total R2 is 19.2% and the predictive
R2 is 3.3%. In contrast, portfolio-level R2 ’s are essentially unchanged from their in-sample
values. Panel C assesses improvement in fit for the (Γα 6= 0) via the Wα statistic of Section
3.1. We cannot reject the null hypothesis that Γα = 0 as long as K > 1.26
The primary conclusion from Table IX is that IPCA continues to provide an excellent de26
Our analysis of annual returns uses overlapping monthly data. This overlap is accounted for via block
bootstrap in our p-value calculation.

40

Table X
Individual Characteristic Contribution
Note. The table reports the contribution of each individual characteristic to overall model fit, defined as the
reduction in total R2 from setting all Γβ elements pertaining to that characteristic to zero (in the restricted
IPCA specification with K = 4). ∗∗ and ∗ denote that a variable significantly improves the model at the 1%
and 5% levels, respectively.

size
mom 12 2
mom 1 0
mom 12 7
beta
rel high
ol
at
cto
idio vol
lturnover
spread mean

2.18
1.71
0.83
0.69
0.65
0.61
0.49
0.44
0.39
0.21
0.16
0.14

**
**
**
*
**
**
*

a2me
s2p
pcm
fc2y
roe
roa
sga2m
suv
mom 36 13
pm
beme
ato

0.13
0.12
0.10
0.08
0.08
0.08
0.07
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.03
0.03

*

e2p
c
d2a
dpi2a
q
free cf
rna
investment
prof
lev
oa
noa

0.03
0.03
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01

scription of risk and compensation among annual returns. Its conditional factor loadings
successfully explain cross-sectional differences in expected returns with alphas that are small
and insignificant. This suggests that our monthly findings are unlikely to be dominated by
illiquidity or other sources of very short-lived predictability.

4.8

Which Characteristics Matter?

Our statistical framework allows us to address questions about the incremental contribution
of characteristics to help address Cochrane (2011)’s quotation in our preface. We test the
statistical significance of an individual characteristic while simultaneously controlling for all
other characteristics. Each characteristic enters the beta specification through two rows of
the Γβ matrix: one row corresponding to the average level of the characteristic and the other
to deviations around this level. A characteristic is irrelevant to the asset pricing model if all
Γβ elements in these two rows are zero. Our tests of characteristic l’s significance are based
on the Wβ statistic, described in Section 3.3, that measures the distance of these two Γβ
rows from zero.
Table X reports the contribution to overall model fit due to each characteristic. We define
this contribution as the reduction in total R2 from setting all Γβ elements pertaining to that
41

Table XI
IPCA Fits Excluding Insignificant Instruments
Note. IPCA percentage R2 at the individual stock level including only the eight characteristics from Table
X that are significant at the 5% level.

K
1

2

3

4

5

6

Total R2

Γα = 0
Γα 6= 0

14.8
16.1

16.5
17.7

18.1
18.7

18.9
19.2

19.4
19.5

19.6
19.6

Pred. R2

Γα = 0
Γα 6= 0

0.41
1.67

0.62
1.66

1.50
1.66

1.63
1.66

1.63
1.65

1.62
1.65

characteristic to zero while holding the remaining model estimates fixed. ∗∗ and ∗ denote
that a variable significantly contributes to the model at the 1% and 5% levels, respectively.
Of the 36 characteristics in our sample, only five are significant at the 1% level: market beta,
short-term reversal, size, momentum (the 12 2 version), and trailing 52-week high. Three
more (long-term reversal, 12 7 momentum, and total assets), are significant at the 5% level.
Two characteristics stand out in the magnitude of their model contribution. These are size
and momentum (12 2), with each contributing roughly 2% to the restricted model’s total
R2 .
The insignificance of so many characteristics begs the question of whether the small subset
of significant characteristics produces a factor model with similar explanatory power to the
36 characteristics dataset. Table XI repeats the IPCA model fit analysis of Table I but
instead uses only the eight characteristics that are significant at the 5% level. The eightcharacteristic model performs very similarly to the model with all 36 characteristics. For
example, with K = 4, the total R2 in the Γα = 0 model is 18.9% with eight characteristics
versus 19.4% with 36 characteristics, and the predictive R2 is 1.6% versus 1.8%.
The results of Table I show that characteristics align with expected returns through their
association with risk exposures rather than alphas. Additionally, Table XI suggests that
the success of IPCA is obtainable using only a few characteristics, with the others being
statistically irrelevant for the model’s fit.
We gauge stability of this set of selected characteristics in Table XII by conducting the same
characteristic tests in a number of alternative settings. First, holding the specification fixed
(restricted IPCA with K = 4), we re-estimate the model separately for large and small stocks

42

Table XII
Characteristic Significance Comparison
Note. Significance levels for individual characteristic contribution to overall model fit in various subsamples
and model specifications. “Baseline” refers to the restricted IPCA specification with K = 4 using the full
sample of monthly returns. Also reported are results from the large and small stock subsamples, using annual
returns, and from the K = 3 and K = 5 specifications. ∗∗ and ∗ denote variable significance at the 1% and
5% levels, respectively.

size
mom 12 2
mom 1 0
mom 12 7
beta
rel high
ol
at
cto
idio vol
lturnover
spread mean
a2me
s2p
pcm
fc2y
roe
roa
sga2m
suv
mom 36 13
pm
beme
ato
e2p
c
d2a
dpi2a
q
free cf
rna
investment
prof
lev
oa
noa

Baseline

Large

Small

Annual

K=3

K=5

**
**
**
*
**
**

*
*
**
*
**
**
*
*

**
**
**
*
**
**

**
**
**
*
**
**
**

*
*
**
*
**
**
*

**
**
**

*

*

**
**
**

*
*

**

*
*
*

*
*

*
*
*
*
*

43

Figure 2: Parameter Stability
Note. Panel A plots Γβ parameter estimates element-wise from the small stock sample against those from
the large stock sample. Panel B likewise compares estimates from annual and monthly returns. All estimates
use the four-factor restricted (Γα = 0) IPCA specification.

Panel A: Large Versus Small Stocks
0.8
Corr. = 40%
0.6

Small

0.4
0.2
0
-0.2
-0.4
-0.6
-0.6

-0.4

-0.2

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

Large

beta
e2p
beme
q
mom-36-13
a2me
mom-1-0
size
cto
oa
roe
mom-12-2
lturnover
noa
rel-high
idio-vol
ato
dpi2a
investment
pm
rna
suv
roa
free-cf
ol
c
mom-12-7
spread-mean
at
lev
prof
s2p
sga2m
d2a
fc2y
pcm
45

o

Panel B: Monthly Versus Annual Returns
0.8
Corr. = 59%
0.6

Annual

0.4
0.2
0
-0.2
-0.4
-0.6
-0.6

-0.4

-0.2

0

0.2

Monthly

44

0.4

0.6

0.8

beta
e2p
beme
q
mom-36-13
a2me
mom-1-0
size
cto
oa
roe
mom-12-2
lturnover
noa
rel-high
idio-vol
ato
dpi2a
investment
pm
rna
suv
roa
free-cf
ol
c
mom-12-7
spread-mean
at
lev
prof
s2p
sga2m
d2a
fc2y
pcm
45 o

and report characteristic significance in each subsample. The large and small stock results
disagree on only four of the 36 characteristics in terms of statistical statistical significance
at the 5% level. Of the eight characteristics that are significant in the unified sample, seven
are also significant in both the large and small stock samples. Annual return tests agree on
six of the eight significant characteristics from the baseline monthly tests. Finally, when we
alter the specification from the K = 4 baseline to either K = 3 or K = 5, the tests again
agree on six of the eight significant characteristics.
Next, in Figure 2, Panel A plots Γβ parameter estimates element-wise from the small stock
sample against those from the large stock sample. Each characteristic appears in eight
elements of Γβ , as it enters into the specification of each loading twice (once via c̄i and once
via ci,t − c̄i ). The correlation of Γβ elements across large and small stock estimates is 40%.
Panel B plots Γβ estimates from monthly returns to those from annual returns. In this case,
the correlation in parameter estimates between the two return frequencies is 59%. In both
panels, estimates cluster around the 45-degree line, and no characteristic shows a systematic
difference in its parameter values between the two samples.
In summary, Tables XI and XII and Figure 2 demonstrate a high degree of stability in
characteristics’ influence on factor loadings across subsamples, data frequencies, and model
specifications.

4.9

Other Robustness

Appendix C reports a number of additional empirical analyses. We summarize them here
and refer interested readers to the appendix for further detail.
Our definition of zi,t splits each characteristic into two instruments: its mean and its time
series deviation from the mean. In Appendix C.1, we analyze the relative contribution of
average characteristic levels (c̄i ) versus time series fluctuations around those levels (ci,t − c̄i ).
We find that, for the purposes of describing asset riskiness (total R2 ), the unconditional
levels of characteristics c̄i are nearly as informative as our main specification and there is
little incremental contribution from ci,t − c̄i . In contrast, predictive R2 results show that
the pure temporal variation in characteristics (ci,t − c̄i ) is the most important component
for describing risk compensation. Overall, Appendix C.1 indicate that the data significantly
prefer a dynamic factor model over a static one, and the variation in characteristics across
assets and over time contribute differently (and both significantly) to the specification of
betas.

45

In our main analysis, we use rank-transformed characteristics to limit the undue impact of
outliers on our estimation. In Appendix C.2, we demonstrate the robustness of our findings
to alternative characteristic transformations. The first normalizes each characteristic by its
cross-sectional standard deviation period-by-period. This removes fluctuations in the scale
of characteristics over time, while preserving differences in their relative magnitudes across
stocks, and is thus a less invasive transformation than ranking. We also report results using
raw characteristics with no functional transformation or outlier mitigation. The resulting
fits in terms of total R2 are nearly identical to our main analysis, while the predictive R2 is
slightly higher than in our main analysis.
As a third standardization approach, we cross-sectionally orthonormalize characteristics each
period, so that Zt0 Zt = IL for all t. This standardization has a special property that the
IPCA model becomes directly calculable via singular value decomposition with no need for
numerical optimization, just like PCA. Appendix C.2 derives this property and shows that,
with orthonormal characteristics, model fits are qualitatively similar but slightly weaker than
our main IPCA results.
In Appendix C.3, we investigate the similarity between the IPCA factors and other commonly
studied factors in the literature, including the FFC6 factors and 15 anomaly portfolios returns
studied by Novy-Marx and Velikov (2015). We report pairwise and multiple correlations
among IPCA factors and factors from prior literature. The excess market has the highest
multiple correlation (93%) with the six IPCA factors, followed by idiosyncratic volatility
factor (87%) followed by failure probability (84%). Among the FFC6 factors, the momentum
has the highest IPCA multiple correlation (78%). We also calculate multiple correlations in
the other direction, i.e. regression each IPCA factor on all 21 portfolios. The leading (highest
variance) IPCA factor has a surprisingly low multiple correlation of 68% with previously
studied factors, indicating that a substantial fraction of it’s variation (more than 50% in
terms of R2 ) is unspanned by the 21 factor portfolios that we study. The remaining IPCA
factor have multiple correlations with the 21 factors ranging from 75% to 89%.
The absence of book-to-market from the list of significant characteristics is surprising given
its prominence in the empirical asset pricing literature. A possible explanation is that our
sample includes financial stocks along with non-financials, and book-to-market ratios may
be incomparable across these two groups. Appendix C.4 assesses the robustness of our
results to excluding financial stocks (SIC codes 6000–6999). We find that financial stocks
are not responsible for our findings regarding book-to-market. Γβ estimates from the sample
of all stocks are 95% correlated with those from the non-financial stock sample. Total and
predictive R2 ’s are nearly identical when restricting our analysis to non-financials, and book46

to-market remains statistically insignificant in the non-financials sample.

5

Conclusion

Our primary conclusions are three-fold. First, by estimating latent factors as opposed to
relying on pre-specified observable factors, we find a low dimension factor model that is
successfully describes riskiness of stock returns (by explaining realized return variation) and
risk compensation (by explaining cross section differences in average returns). We show
that there are no significant anomaly intercepts associated with a large collection stock
characteristics, and instead show that the differences in average returns across stocks align
with differences in exposures to a few common factors.
Second, our factor model outperforms leading observable factor models, such as the FamaFrench five-factor model, in delivering small pricing errors. This is true in-sample and outof-sample. Our factors also achieve a higher level of out-of-sample mean-variance efficiency
than alternative models.
Third, only a small subset of the stock characteristics in our sample are responsible for
IPCA’s empirical success. 80% of the characteristics in our sample are statistically irrelevant
for describing returns. Our tests conclude that the 20% of characteristics that significantly
contribute to our model do so by better identifying dynamic latent factor loadings, and show
no statistical evidence of generating anomaly alphas.
The key to isolating a successful factor model is incorporating information from stock characteristics into the estimation of factor loadings. In our asset pricing model, risk loadings
are depend on observable asset characteristics. We propose a new method, instrumental
principal components analysis (IPCA), which treats characteristics as instrumental variables
for estimating dynamic loadings on latent factors. The estimator is as easy to work with as
standard PCA while allowing the researcher to bring information beyond just returns into
estimation of factors and betas.
We introduce a set of statistical asset pricing tests that offer a new research protocol for
evaluating hypotheses about patterns in asset returns. When researchers encounter a new
anomaly characteristic, they should evaluate its significance in a multivariate setting against
the large body of previously studied characteristics via IPCA. In doing so, the researcher
can draw inferences regarding the incremental explanatory power of the candidate characteristic after controlling for the wide gamut of previously proposed predictors. And, if the

47

characteristic does contribute significantly to the return model, a researcher can then test
whether it contributes as a risk factor loading or as an anomaly alpha. Thus, the researcher
need no longer ask the narrow question, “Is my proposed characteristic/return association
explained by a specific set of pre-specified factors,” and instead can ask “Does there exist
any set of factors that explains the observed characteristic/return pattern?”
Finally, our model has an exciting practical benefit. It allows investors and managers to
easily assess a firm’s cost of capital without relying on the obviously misspecified CAPM
beta or other factor loadings that may be infeasible to estimate with time series regression.
Instead, IPCA prescribes a simple cost of capital calculation as a function of the asset’s
observable characteristics and estimated model parameters. The essence of IPCA is to
describe the riskiness and commensurate expected return of an asset by viewing it as an
evolving collection of its defining characteristics. It estimates a set of universal parameters,
Γβ , that map characteristics into factor loadings and thus into expected returns. These
parameters do not depend on time or the asset in question, so once they are estimated from
a group of representative assets, they can be used to extrapolate conditional expected returns
for other assets whose characteristics are available even if a long history of returns is not.

48

References
Asness, C. S., A. Frazzini, and L. H. Pedersen (2014): “Quality Minus Junk,” Discussion paper, AQR.
Barra (1998): “United States Equity Version 3 (E3),” White Paper.
Carhart, M. (1997): “On Persistence in Mutual Fund Performance,” Journal of Finance,
52(1), 57–82.
Chamberlain, G., and M. Rothschild (1983): “Arbitrage, Factor Structure, and MeanVariance Analysis on Large Asset Markets,” Econometrica, 51(5), 1281–304.
Chordia, T., A. Goyal, and J. Shanken (2015): “Cross-Sectional Asset Pricing with
Individual Stocks: Betas versus Characteristics,” Working papers, Emory Goizueta and
Swiss Finance Institute.
Cochrane, J. (2005): Asset Pricing. Princeton University Press, second edn.
Connor, G., and R. A. Korajczyk (1986): “Performance measurement with the arbitrage pricing theory: A new framework for analysis,” Journal of financial economics,
15(3), 373–394.
Connor, G., and R. A. Korajczyk (1988): “Risk and return in an equilibrium APT :
Application of a new test methodology,” Journal of Financial Economics, 21(2), 255–289.
Daniel, K., and S. Titman (1997): “Evidence on the Characteristics of Cross Sectional
Variation in Stock Returns,” Journal of Finance, 52(1), 1–33.
Daniel, K., S. Titman, et al. (2012): “Testing factor-model explanations of market
anomalies,” Critical Finance Review, 1(1), 103–139.
Fama, E., and K. French (1993): “Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and
bonds,” Journal of Financial Economics, 33(1), 3–56.
Fama, E., and J. MacBeth (1973): “Risk, Return, and Equilibrium: Empirical Tests,”
Journal of Political Economy, 81(3), 607–36.
Fama, E. F., and K. R. French (2015): “A five-factor asset pricing model,” Journal of
Financial Economics, 116(1), 1–22.
Fan, J., Y. Liao, and W. Wang (2016): “Projected principal component analysis in
factor models,” Ann. Statist., 44(1), 219–254.
49

Ferson, W., and C. Harvey (1991): “The Variation of Economic Risk Premiums,”
Journal of Political Economy, 99(2), 385–415.
Freyberger, J., A. Neuhierl, and M. Weber (2017): “Dissecting Characteristics Nonparametrically,” Working papers, University of Wisconsin and Notre Dame and Chicago
Booth.
Gibbons, M. R., S. Ross, and J. Shanken (1989): “A Test of the Efficiency of a Given
Portfolio,” Econometrica, 57(5), 1121–52.
Goncalves, S., and L. Kilian (2004): “Bootstrapping autoregressions with conditional
heteroskedasticity of unknown form,” Journal of Econometrics, 123(1), 89–120.
Goyal, A. (2012): “Empirical cross-sectional asset pricing: a survey,” Financial Markets
and Portfolio Managament, 26, 3–38.
Hansen, L. P. (1982): “Large sample properties of generalized method of moments estimators,” Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, pp. 1029–1054.
Hansen, L. P., and S. F. Richard (1987): “The Role of Conditioning Information in
Deducing Testable Restrictions Implied by Dynamic Asset Pricing Models,” Econometrica,
55(3), 587–613.
Kelly, B. T., S. Pruitt, and Y. Su (2017): “Instrumented Principal Component Analysis,” Working papers, Chicago Booth and ASU WP Carey.
Kozak, S., S. Nagel, and S. Santosh (2017): “Shrinking the Cross-Section,” Discussion
paper, Michigan Ross and Chicago Booth and Maryland Smith.
(forthcoming): “Interpreting Factor Models,” Journal of Finance.
Lewellen, J. (2015): “The Cross-section of Expected Stock Returns,” Critical Finance
Review, 4, 1–44.
Lewellen, J., S. Nagel, and J. Shanken (2010): “A skeptical appraisal of asset pricing
tests,” Journal of Financial economics, 96(2), 175–194.
Light, N., D. Maslov, and O. Rytchkov (2017): “Aggregation of Information About
the Cross Section of Stock Returns: A Latent Variable Approach,” Review of Financial
Studies, 30(4), 1339–1381.
Roll, R. (1977): “A critique of the asset pricing theory’s tests Part I: On past and potential
testability of the theory,” Journal of Financial Economics, 4(2), 129–176.
50

Rosenberg, B. (1974): “Extra-Market Components of Covariance in Security Returns,”
Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 9(2), 263–274.
Ross, S. A. (1976): “The Arbitrage Theory of Capital Asset Pricing,” Journal of Economic
Theory, 13, 341–360.
Stock, J. H., and M. W. Watson (2002a): “Forecasting Using Principal Components
from a Large Number of Predictors,” Journal of the American Statistical Association,
97(460), 1167–1179.
(2002b): “Macroeconomic Forecasting Using Diffusion Indexes,” Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 20(2), 147–62.

51

Internet Appendix
A

Estimation via Alternating Least Squares

This appendix describes our ALS approach to optimizing IPCA objective function (5). To
initialize the algorithm, we choose a starting guess for Γβ as the left eigenvectors corresponding to the leading K eigenvalues of the characteristic-managed portfolio second moment
P
matrix, t xt x0t . As described in Section 2, this initial guess, which amounts to the static
loading matrix estimate from applying PCA to the xt dataset, is a close approximation to
the exact solution of (5) as long as Zt0 Zt is not too volatile. Initializing the optimization with
this guess ensures that the algorithm converges very quickly (typically within 10 iterations,
taking roughly 0.25 seconds on a standard desktop computer).
Given the initial guess for Γβ , we evaluate the least squares regression corresponding to firstorder condition (6) for all t. Then, given the resulting solutions ft ’s, we evaluate the least
squares regression corresponding to first-order condition (7). We iterate between evaluations
of (6) and (7) until convergence, defined as the point at which the maximum absolute change
in any element of Γβ or ft (for all t) is smaller than 10−6 .

B

Bootstrap Monte Carlo Analysis

This appendix investigates the finite sample behavior of our test for the null hypothesis that
Γα = 0. Our analysis focuses on assessing the size of the test (rejection rates under the null)
and power of the test (rejection rates under the alternative).
We simulate data according to the following general model:
rt = Zt−1 Γα κ + (Zt−1 Γβ + νt )Ft + ηt .
We use cross sections sizes (N ) of 500, 5000, or 25000 assets with monthly observation count
(T ) of 100 or 1000. We set number of factors (K) to 3 or 5 factors, and consider instrument
set sizes (L) of 10 or 20.
We draw factor realizations ft as a K × 1 vector of standard normals. We draw Γβ as a
random orthonormal matrix. To do this, we draw an L × K matrix of normals, M , and set
Γβ = M MC−1 for MC the Cholesky of M 0 M . We draw Zt as an N × L matrix of standard
52

Table A.1
Size and Power of Γα = 0 Test
Note. Simulated rejection probabilities of a 5%-level test. Rejection rates in the κ = 0 column describe the
size of the test. Rejection rates in the κ = κ1 , κ2 , and κ3 columns describe the power of the test.

N
500
500

T
100
100

K
3
5

L
10
20

0
3.4
5.6

Wild
κ1
κ2
5.4
32.0
6.6
30.2

5000
5000

100
100

3
5

10
20

4.6
4.2

6.2
5.2

27.6
15.8

93.4
82.4

4.0
3.2

5.8
2.8

6.6
5.8

93.4
86.8

5000
5000

1000
1000

3
5

10
20

4.2
3.4

18.0
19.8

24.8
50.6

75.0
90.4

4.6
3.4

11.2
15.0

21.0
32.6

71.8
87.8

25000
25000

100
100

3
5

10
20

2.6
3.6

7.2
7.4

16.0
15.6

44.8
98.6

2.2
2.2

5.6
6.8

14.8
14.6

38.0
44.2

25000
25000

1000
1000

3
5

10
20

4.4
5.0

66.2
77.0

78.4
93.2

95.8
99.8

3.0
4.6

54.6
76.4

80.6
95.2

99.2
100.0

4.1

21.9

38.4

83.7

3.7

18.8

29.0

76.0

Average

κ3
75.0
81.4

0
4.4
5.0

Non-wild
κ1
κ2
5.4
11.3
4.4
7.4

κ3
70.0
68.4

normals. We allow betas to possess a purely unobservable component, νt , which is an N × K
array of independent normals with the variance parameter chosen such that 50% of the
variation of βt−1 ≡ Zt−1 Γβ + νt is due to νt .
Idiosyncratic returns, ηt , are drawn as a N × 1 array of normals with time-varying volatility.
In particular, the conditional variance ηt is log-normally distributed with its own variance
chosen such that on average 15% of return variance is systematic and 85% is idiosyncratic.
By incorporating heteroskedasticity akin to that in the data, we can assess the usefulness of
the wild bootstrap in conducting inference.
Γα is a random normal vector that is orthogonal to Γβ . In particular, we draw a L × 1 vector
of normals, Y , and set Γα = (IL − Γβ (Γ0β Γβ )−1 Γ0β )Y κ, where κ controls the distance from the
null. When κ = 0 the model embodies the null hypothesis that Γα = 0. For κ > 0, data is
generated under the alternative. We consider three values of κ > 0 such that when κ = κx ,
Zt−1 Γα κx drives about x × 0.25% of the variation in returns.
In every simulated data set, we calculate the Wα statistic and perform the bootstrap procedure of Section 3.1 to arrive at a p-value. We also consider a variation on our test that uses

53

a standard rather than wild bootstrap. We conduct 1000 simulations with 500 bootstraps
for each simulation. Table A.1 reports the results.
In all cases, the test maintains appropriate size when data are generated under the null.
Rejection rates based on a 5% significance level never fall below 2.2% or rise above 5.6%.
The power of the test to reject the null when data are generated under the alternative also
behaves well. Rejection rates increase steadily with κ and with sample size. Finally, we
find that the wild bootstrap indeed improves inference, both in terms of size and power,
compared to the standard bootstrap.

C
C.1

Additional Empirical Results
Static or Dynamic Loadings?

Our definition of zi,t splits each characteristic into two instruments: its mean and its time
series deviation from the mean. We next analyze the relative contribution of these two
components to the return factor model. In addition to our main specification in which
zi,t = (c̄0i , c0i,t − c̄0i )0 , we consider three nested variations of the IPCA model. The first sets
instruments equal the total characteristic value, zi,t = ci,t . This is equivalent to imposing
that the Γβ coefficients corresponding to c̄i and ci,t − c̄i are equal, and helps answer the
question, “Do the level and variation in characteristics contribute different information to
factor loadings?” If this specification performs as well as our main specification, then level
and variation enter βi,t equally and there is no need to split them.
The second specification sets instruments equal to the mean characteristic value, zi,t = c̄i .
This is equivalent to setting Γβ coefficients on to ci,t − c̄i equal to zero. By testing this
against our main specification we address the question, “Is a static factor model sufficient
for describing returns?,” in which case the benefits of characteristics shown in our preceding
results arise from their ability to better differentiate loadings across assets rather than over
time. The third specification asks the complementary question, “Is time series variation in
characteristics the primary contributor to IPCA success?” In this case we set instruments
equal to the deviation value only, zi,t = ci,t − c̄i , and fix coefficients on c̄i to zero.
Because these comparisons can be formulated as restrictions on rows of Γβ , the model comparison test in Section 3.3 can be used to conduct formal statistical inference for whether
our main split-characteristic specification significantly improves over each of the three nested

54

Table A.2
Static Versus Dynamic Loadings
Note. Percentage R2 from IPCA specifications based on either total characteristics (“c”), average characteristic levels (“c̄”), time series deviations from average levels (“c − c̄”), or our baseline specification in which
levels and deviations are allowed to enter with difference coefficients (“c̄, c − c̄”).

K
1
2
3
4
5
6

c
14.8
16.4
17.4
18.0
18.6
18.9

Total R2
c̄
c − c̄
14.4
13.3
16.1
15.0
16.8
15.9
17.4
16.4
17.8
16.7
18.0
17.0

c̄, c − c̄
15.1
17.0
18.5
19.4
19.9
20.3

c
0.35
0.34
0.42
0.42
0.69
0.68

Predictive R2
c̄
c − c̄
0.28
0.52
0.44
1.04
0.60
1.25
0.88
1.25
0.88
1.24
0.89
1.25

c̄, c − c̄
0.44
1.64
1.70
1.83
1.82
1.82

variations.27
Table A.2 reports model fits for each specification. In terms of total R2 , the nested subspecification that is closest to our main specification for K = 4 is that using the total
characteristic, zi,t = ci,t . It produces a total R2 of 18.0%, versus 19.4% in the main model.
However, for the purposes of describing asset riskiness, even the unconditional levels of
characteristics c̄i are nearly as informative as our main specification.
In contrast, the predictive R2 results show that temporal variation around the mean is
the most important characteristic component for describing risk compensation. Conditional
expected return estimates from time series variation alone describe 1.3% of total return
variance, versus 1.8% from the main split-characteristic specification and 0.9% for the c̄i
specification. Lastly, the statistical test rejects all three nested variations in favor of the
more general split-characteristic specification with p-values below 1%.28 This is true for all
K. In summary, the data significantly prefer a dynamic factor model over a static one, and
the variation in characteristics across assets and over time contribute differently (and both
significantly) to the specification of betas.
27

Goyal (2012) notes that “In practice, one almost always employs firm characteristics that vary over
time. There are relatively few analytical results in the literature for the case dealing with time-varying
characteristics.” The tests we describe in this section provide a means of investigating the role of timevarying characteristics in a fully formulated statistical setting.
28
We omit percentage p-values from the table because as they all are zero to two decimal places.

55

Table A.3
Other Characteristic Transformations
Note. This table repeats the analysis of Panel A in Table I using characteristics that are cross-sectionally
volatility-scaled each period (Panel A), untransformed (Panel B), or cross-sectionally orthonormalized each
period (Panel C).

K
1

2

3

4

5

6

15.2
0.53

Panel A: Volatility-scaled
17.6
19.4
20.2
20.8
2.10
2.17
2.26
2.27

21.1
2.26

Total R2
Pred. R2

15.6
0.58

17.9
2.22

Panel B: Raw
19.5
20.4
2.29
2.27

21.0
2.32

21.4
2.17

Total R2
Pred. R2

14.6
0.46

16.4
0.85

Panel C: Orthonormal
17.9
18.8
1.52
1.59

19.3
1.60

19.6
1.60

2

Total R
Pred. R2

C.2

Alternative Characteristic Transformations

In our main analysis, we use rank-transformed characteristics to limit the undue impact of
outliers on our estimation. We now demonstrate the robustness of our findings to alternative
characteristic transformations. The first normalizes each characteristic by its cross-sectional
standard deviation period-by-period. This removes fluctuations in the scale of characteristics
over time, while preserving differences in their relative magnitudes across stocks, and is thus
a less invasive transformation than ranking. We also report results using raw characteristics
with no functional transformation or outlier mitigation. The IPCA fits for these approaches
are shown in Panel A and B of Table A.3, respectively. The fits in terms of total R2 are
nearly identical to our main analysis, while the predictive R2 is slightly lower with ranked
characteristics (roughly 1.9%, versus 2.1%–2.3% for volatility-scaled and raw characteristics
when K > 1).

C.2.1

Orthonormal Characteristics: An Exact Analytical Estimator

As a third standardization approach, we cross-sectionally orthonormalize characteristics each
period, so that Zt0 Zt = IL for all t. A convenient feature of this normalization is that the
IPCA estimator of Γβ becomes directly calculable via singular value decomposition with no
need for numerical optimization.
56

This result follows from the concentrated IPCA objective described in equation (8) of Section
2. When instruments are orthonormal period-by-period, (8) reduces to
max tr
Γβ

T −1
X

!
Γ0β Γβ

−1

0
Γ0β Zt0 rt+1 rt+1
Zt Γβ

.

(16)

t=1

That is, the objective function collapses to a sum of homogeneous Rayleigh quotients. As a
P
0
Zt satisfy the maximization problem and
result, the K leading eigenvectors of t Zt0 rt+1 rt+1
thus estimate Γβ , a solution well known from the PCA literature.
More specifically, we derive the algebraic solution for Γβ via the following eigenvalue decomposition:
X
0
U SU 0 =
Zt0 rt+1 rt+1
Zt ,
t

The IPCA estimator of Γβ is
Γ̂β = UK
where the columns of U are arranged in decreasing eigenvalue order and UK denotes the first
K columns of U . The factor estimates are likewise analytical, and simplify to
fˆt+1 = Γ̂0β (Zt0 rt+1 ).
Once can directly impose characteristic orthonormality in the data. In particular, given
some matrix of “raw” instruments Z̃t , we construct orthonormal instruments Zt using the
Gram-Schmidt process. This uses regression to sequentially orthogonalize instruments in the
cross section each period, then cross-sectionally volatility-standardizes the residuals. This
orthogonalization is not invariant to the ordering of characteristics. As a result, our tests of
individual characteristics can be influenced by the order of the instruments. We choose an
instrument ordering on economic grounds. In particular, characteristics are arranged within
zi,t according to the date that the proposed characteristic effect was published. Thus market
beta is ordered first, size second, and so forth.
We report IPCA fits for orthonormalized instruments in Panel C of Table A.3. Model fits are
qualitatively similar, though slightly weaker, compared to our main IPCA results, generate
total R2 ’s of nearly 20%. Predictive R2 ’s reach 1.6% and handily outperform observable
factor models in this dimension.

57

Table A.4
Correlation with Observable Factors
Note. Pairwise and multiple correlations in percent. The first six columns report pairwise correlations
between each of the six IPCA factors (listed in the corresponding column) and √
each of the previously proposed
portfolios (rows). The last column reports the absolute multiple correlation ( R2 ) from a regression of each
portfolio on the six IPCA factors. The last column reports the absolute multiple correlation of each IPCA
factor with the 21 portfolios.
√
Portolio
f1
f2
f3
f4
f5
f6
R2
Mkt-RF
24.3
−2.8
−39.0
59.4
−59.8
2.9
93.4
SMB
43.6
−47.2
−43.4
17.8
−29.2
−7.0
74.7
HML
−6.7
2.1
46.9
−13.5
−4.6
−50.9
70.9
RMW
−23.0
45.3
16.4
3.9
17.5
−21.7
56.9
CMA
−2.2
−0.4
33.7
−27.2
8.1
−37.9
58.5
MOM
2.3
34.1
−54.8
−42.2
15.2
1.9
77.8
Net Issuance
Ret. Book Equity
Failure Prob.
ValMomProf
ValMom
Idios. Volatility
Momentum
PEAD SUE
PEAD CAR
Ind. Mom.
Ind. Rel. Reversal
High Freq. Combo
Short-run Reversal
Seasonality
IRR (Low vol.)
√
R2 All Ptfs.

C.3

−19.2
−29.8
−34.9
15.4
3.8
−39.8
−3.3
−8.8
−8.9
−16.4
20.4
2.6
18.9
8.4
11.2

22.4
57.2
63.4
2.7
13.5
53.3
38.6
36.2
21.4
8.0
−24.2
−5.9
−19.6
1.5
−16.8

29.5
4.7
−7.0
−38.7
−20.0
35.3
−45.9
−30.7
−21.0
−6.2
14.9
−6.7
11.1
−4.8
0.0

−13.7
−18.7
−38.3
−25.9
−38.2
−28.6
−39.9
−26.0
−25.3
−25.7
39.9
3.4
38.0
3.4
23.1

13.6
24.9
40.3
22.6
3.6
42.1
17.8
5.2
5.4
9.7
−27.4
−14.2
−20.8
−6.1
−23.4

−25.7
−9.9
−2.5
−12.0
−24.9
−26.5
0.5
15.1
8.7
−0.4
8.6
3.2
6.1
5.4
0.3

55.1

75.4

84.4

76.5

72.2

68.9

49.6
66.3
83.8
53.8
51.6
87.0
73.4
54.5
39.2
33.5
58.0
18.3
50.8
13.5
37.1

Comparison with Factors in Prior Literature

Table A.4 reports pairwise and multiple correlations between the estimated factors in our
restricted K = 6 IPCA specification and 21 portfolios from prior literature, including the
FFC6 factors and the 15 anomaly portfolios from Novy-Marx and Velikov (2015). The first
six columns report pairwise correlations between factors listed in the corresponding column
√
and row. The last column reports the absolute multiple correlation ( R2 ) from a regression
of each portfolios on the six IPCA factors. The last column reports the absolute multiple
correlation of each IPCA factor with the 21 portfolios.

58

Figure A.1: Parameter Stability
Note. The figure plots Γβ parameter estimates element-wise from the all stock sample against those from the
sample excluding financials (SIC codes 6000–6999) in the four-factor restricted (Γα = 0) IPCA specification.

0.8
Corr. = 95%
0.6

Non-Financials

0.4
0.2
0
-0.2
-0.4
-0.6
-0.6

-0.4

-0.2

0

0.2

All Firms

C.4

0.4

0.6

0.8

beta
e2p
beme
q
mom-36-13
a2me
mom-1-0
size
cto
oa
roe
mom-12-2
lturnover
noa
rel-high
idio-vol
ato
dpi2a
investment
pm
rna
suv
roa
free-cf
ol
c
mom-12-7
spread-mean
at
lev
prof
s2p
sga2m
d2a
fc2y
pcm
45

o

Exclusion of Financial Stocks

This appendix assesses the robustness of our results to excluding financial stocks, defined
as those having SIC codes 6000–6999. Figure A.1 compares Γβ estimates from the sample
including all stocks (financial and non-financials) to the sample excluding financials.
Given the insignificance of book-to-market ratios in our main analysis, and given the stark
differences in book-to-market for financial and non-financial firms, we are particularly interested in how the role of book-to-market ratios for IPCA factor loadings in the non-financial
sample might differ from that for the financial sample. When we conduct significance tests
in the non-financials sample, book-to-market remains statistically insignificant. In the fourfactor restricted (Γα = 0) IPCA specification, the non-financial total and predictive R2 ’s are
19.6% and 1.8%, essentially unchanged from the R2 ’s in our baseline sample that includes
financials.

59

