                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        DEBT OVERHANG, ROLLOVER RISK, AND CORPORATE INVESTMENT:
                   EVIDENCE FROM THE EUROPEAN CRISIS

                                     Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan
                                          Luc Laeven
                                         David Moreno

                                      Working Paper 24555
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24555


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2018




We are grateful for useful comments from Olivier Blanchard, Laura Blattner, Stijn Claessens,
Gita Gopinath, Alberto Martin, Giuseppe Nicoletti, Steven Ongena, Marco Pagano, Thomas
Philippon, Alex Popov, Moritz Schularick, and David Thesmar, and from seminar presentations
at the 2019 American Economic Association Annual Meeting, University of Bonn, London
Business School, Oxford University, University of Maryland, University of Zurich, Bank of
Canada, European Central Bank, International Monetary Fund, OECD, World Bank, and 21st
Dubrovnik Economic Conference. We also thank Di Wang and Jun Hee Kwak for their excellent
research assistance. The views expressed are our own and should not be interpreted to reflect
those of the European Central Bank, the Banco Central de Chile, or the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2018 by Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, Luc Laeven, and David Moreno. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Debt Overhang, Rollover Risk, and Corporate Investment: Evidence from the European Crisis
Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, Luc Laeven, and David Moreno
NBER Working Paper No. 24555
April 2018, Revised August 2020
JEL No. E22,E32,E44,F34,F36,G32

                                         ABSTRACT

We quantify the role of financial leverage behind the sluggish post-crisis investment performance
of European firms. We use a cross-country firm-bank matched database to identify separate roles
for firm leverage, bank balance sheet weaknesses arising from sovereign risk, and aggregate
demand conditions. We find that firms with higher debt levels reduce their investment more after
the crisis. This negative effect is stronger for firms holding short-term debt in countries with
sovereign stress, consistent with rollover risk being an important channel influencing investment.
The negative effect of firm leverage on investment is persistent for several years after the shock
in the countries with sovereign stress. The corporate leverage channel can explain 40 percent of
the cumulative decline in aggregate investment over four years after the crisis.


Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan                            David Moreno
Department of Economics                         Banco Central de Chile
University of Maryland                          Morandé 115 floor 5
Tydings Hall 4118D                              Santiago, RM
College Park, MD 20742-7211                     Chile
and CEPR                                        dmoreno@bcentral.cl
and also NBER
kalemli@econ.umd.edu

Luc Laeven
European Central Bank
Research Department
Sonnemannstrasse 20
Frankfurt am Main
GERMANY
and CEPR
Luc.Laeven@ecb.europa.eu
1    Introduction

Investment expenditure in Europe experienced a dramatic collapse in the aftermath of the

2008 global financial crisis. Net corporate investment as a share of GDP in the euro area more

than halved from its peak in 2008, with even sharper declines in the most affected periphery

countries, and by the end of 2016 had still not recovered to pre-crisis levels (Figure 1, panel

A). By contrast, the   US   recovered much faster over the same period, reaching its 2008 peak

by 2014. This collapse in corporate investment in Europe followed a boom period during

which the corporate sector borrowed heavily (Figure 1, panel B). Indebtedness of euro area

non-financial corporations, measured as debt liabilities to GDP, increased 30 percentage points

since 1999 on average, and 90 percentage points for the countries in the periphery.

    Thus far both the theoretical and the empirical literatures have primarily focused on two

channels to explain the depth of the crisis in Europe: a collapse in aggregate demand, partly

induced by excessive household borrowing (e.g., Martin and Philippon, 2017) and weak bank-

sovereign linkages, with bank balance sheets being weakened on account of large exposures

to risky sovereign debt (e.g., Gennaioli et al., 2014; Acharya et al., 2014; Popov and Van Horen,

2015). We are the first to consider the role of firm leverage in explaining the decline in firm-

level and aggregate corporate investment during the European crisis. We do so while simulta-

neously controlling for the aggregate demand and bank-sovereign channels. Specifically, we

investigate whether corporate debt accumulated during the boom years holds back invest-

ment in the aftermath of the crisis. We refer to a situation where debt holds back investment

as “debt overhang”. Our debt overhang channel is distinct from the aggregate demand and

bank-sovereign channels previously identified in the literature. Myers (1977) shows that debt

overhang leads to under-investment by firms, as new capital cannot be raised when profits



                                                 2
 1.5                                                                      2.1


                                                                                                              Periphery
 1.0                                     Euro area                        1.8

                                                      United States


 0.5                                                                      1.5

                                                                                                                Euro area
                                                          Periphery

 0.0                                                                      1.2
                                                                                                              United States




-0.5                                                                      0.9
       99   01      03   05    07   09         11    13      15                 99   01   03   05   07   09   11       13     15

                 Figure 1: Evolution of Net Corporate Investment and Corporate Leverage
                 Notes: Net fixed capital formation of non-financial corporations, scaled by total
                 economy GDP (left-hand side panel A) and credit to nonfinancial corporations
                 granted by banks and non-banks, scaled by total economy GDP (right-hand side
                 panel B). Quarterly data for the period 1999 to 2016. Values are indexed at 1 for
                 1999Q1. Periphery group of economies comprises Greece, Ireland, Italy, Portugal,
                 and Spain.

                 Sources: Eurostat, BEA, and BIS.


primarily benefit existing debt holders, instead of the new investors. More generally, debt

overhang can crowd out private investment in general equilibrium via higher borrowing costs

(e.g. Krugman, 1988). Either way, the result will be a firm de-leveraging process during which

firms cut down investment.

       The ongoing COVID crisis highlights the dangers of firm debt overhang. What started as

a liquidity shock to firms induced by a combination of demand and supply shocks due to

the virus combined with lockdowns is quickly turning into solvency problems, especially for

highly indebted firms (e.g., Gourinchas et al. (2020), Ding et al., 2020). Our results on the

potentially strong persistent effects of firm debt overhang on firm investment, while based


                                                                      3
on a different type of crisis, can therefore be seen as informative for the evolution of firm

investment going forward.

    We show that the effect of firm leverage on investment is persistent and can explain the

sluggish investment in Europe over 4 years, till the end of our sample, after the crisis. We

run local projections a la Jordà (2005) using our firm panel dataset and obtain firm-level im-

pulse response functions. Firms with high leverage in the periphery reduce investment rate by

about 10 percentage points immediately after the shock, 8 percentage points after 1 year, and 4

percentage points after 4 years.1 The differential responses of highly levered firms and lowly

levered firms in the periphery is substantial: 5 percentage points on impact and 3 percentage

points after 1 year and so on. These findings suggest that the debt overhang channel explains

40 percent of the aggregate decline.2

    We use a firm-bank matched dataset since the deteriorations in firm and bank balance

sheets have to be measured simultaneously to separate shifts in bank weakness and firm weak-

ness. Our data is detailed in terms of financial position of firms including on the total amount

of debt outstanding and on the maturity of this debt to capture the effects of debt overhang

and rollover risk. A big advantage of our data set is its representative coverage of SMEs. SMEs

tend to be informationally opaque and dependent on banks for their external financing, and

therefore more likely to be affected by debt overhang (e.g. Kashyap et al., 1993, 1994a,b) and

they make up more than 70 percent of the aggregate economic activity in Europe.

    We use the Orbis-Bureau Van Dijk/Moody’s database, also known as the AMADEUS database.

The database has detailed firm-level balance sheet information on investment, indebtedness,

debt service, and debt maturity across a large number of European countries. The database
   1 To the best of our knowledge, the only other papers using local projections in firm panels are Drechsel (2019),
Cloyne et al. (2018), and Ottonello and Winberry (2018).
   2 We used the fact that cumulative decline in aggregate corporate sector investment as a ratio to aggregate

capital stock is 20 percentage points over 4 years for this back-of-the-envelope calculation.


                                                         4
also incorporates information on each firm’s main relationship bank(s), including the names

and address of the bank, which we use to match firms and banks. For each bank, we ob-

tain bank balance sheet information, including data on total sovereign bond holdings, from

BANKSCOPE .     In order to distinguish between banks’ exposure to their own sovereign as op-

posed to other sovereigns, we use confidential ECB data which has nationality information on

the sovereign exposure. A similar exercise would not be possible for the US where data on

bank-firm relationships is generally not available, especially for privately held firms.3

    We measure weakness in bank balance sheets during the crisis using the bank’s holdings

of risky sovereign bonds. In Europe, where banks hold sovereign bonds and firms depend on

banks for their lending, sovereign risk can affect firm investment through bank-sovereign link-

ages. Following an increase in sovereign risk, banks with large exposures to risky sovereigns

will experience a deterioration in their balance sheets, reducing the supply of loans to firms via

a traditional bank lending channel. This will lead to an increase in debt overhang and rollover

risk, especially for firms that financed themselves primarily with short-term debt during the

boom years. It is also possible that weak banks continue to lend to risky borrowers in an effort

to preserve relationships, consistent with loan evergreening/zombie lending.

    We use a difference-in-difference approach to identify the effect of corporate debt overhang

and rollover risk on investment, assessing the differential (relative) impact on investment of

different levels of (short and long-term) leverage and between the pre-crisis and post-crisis

periods. Consistent with the literature, we consider the year 2008 as the start of the financial

crisis. We limit the analysis to firms in the euro area. The advantage of this setup is that
   3 Inthe US, even though private firms account for 74 percent of aggregate employment and 56 percent of
aggregate gross output, they are not required to publicly disclose their financial data. In Europe, private firms
also account for over 70 percent of aggregate employment and over 50 percent of aggregate output on average
and in most European countries these (small) private firms are required to file their financial data with public
registers. See Kalemli-Özcan et al. (2019) for data coverage in Europe and Dinlersoz et al. (2018) for the US.




                                                       5
we limit the analysis to firms that were subject to the same monetary policy but experienced

diverging sovereign risk and banking conditions during the crisis. We measure leverage as

the ratio of debt to total assets and distinguish between short-term and long-term debt. The

analysis controls for the usual determinants of investment such as firm size and profitability

and also for debt service to account for differences in payment terms on the debt.

   To control for aggregate demand shocks we use four-digit industry×country×year fixed

effects. These effects will absorb the impact of changes in credit demand for the four-digit

sector that our firms operate in as well as any changes in country-level demand conditions,

including those arising from changes in sovereign risk and general uncertainty conditions.

We also control for bank fixed effects to capture the role of pre-existing bank relationships.

We assume that most of the fluctuations in aggregate demand derive from the country and

narrowly defined industry-specific factors, not idiosyncratic firm-specific factors. We control

firm fixed effects to absorb permanent productivity differences across firms.

   We run various panel regressions of corporate investment over the period 2000 to 2012,

where we distinguish between the crisis period (2008-2012) and the pre-crisis period (2000-

2007). Specifically, we run a panel regression of triple interactions, where we interact a crisis

dummy that takes the value of one starting in 2008, with the interaction of a periphery dummy

for firms in the periphery and a high-leverage indicator indicating whether firm leverage prior

to the crisis was above the sample median. To mitigate concerns about reverse causality, we

measure leverage and bank-firm relationships prior to the crisis. Because some firms delever-

aged during and in the aftermath of the crisis, our conservative approach, if anything, under-

estimates the effect of high leverage on investment.

   Our findings are as follows. First, high ex ante debt levels depress investment during crisis

times, consistent with debt overhang. Second, the negative relationship between leverage and


                                               6
investment during the crisis is more pronounced for firms with high short-term leverage in the

periphery, consistent with theories of shorter-term debt implying greater rollover risk. Third,

the debt overhang effect remains when controlling for aggregate demand effects and the influ-

ence of sovereign-bank linkages, suggesting that debt overhang channel we focus on operates

independently from aggregate demand and bank-sovereign channels. These results are eco-

nomically significant. One standard deviation increase in firm leverage reduces investment by

20 percent and going from minimum to maximum level of leverage in our firm sample reduces

investment by 57 percent. And last but not least, our effects are very persistent, explaining 40

percent of the decline in aggregate investment over a 4 year period.

   We make three contributions to the literature. First, we identify the role of financial lever-

age in explaining the collapse in corporate investment during the European crisis. We show

that this is an economically important channel over and above the aggregate demand and

bank-sovereign channels previously identified in the literature, which are also very impor-

tant channels. Second, our analysis shows that short-term debt exacerbates the debt overhang

problem, as argued by Diamond and He (2014). And last but not least, we provide an ex-

planation for the persistently low investment in the periphery of Europe, as shown by our

dynamic response of firm-level investment to leverage after 4 years of the shock. These con-

tributions are made possible by the uniqueness of our firm-bank-sovereign matched dataset,

which features extensive coverage of small firms.4

   We proceed as follows. Section 2 reviews related literature on corporate debt and firm in-

vestment. Section 3 presents the data used in the paper and reports descriptive statistics. Sec-

tion 4 introduces the empirical framework and identification methodology. Section 5 presents
   4 Usinga similar firm-level dataset encompassing small firms but without matching it to firms’ banks’ balance
sheets, Gopinath et al. (2017) show the importance of firm leverage on misallocation and aggregate productivity
dynamics during the boom period, whereas our focus is on investment dynamics during the bust period.



                                                       7
our empirical results. Section 6 concludes.




2     Literature

There is a large theoretical literature on debt overhang5 and how financially distressed firms,

when protected by limited liability, have an incentive to gamble by investing in risky projects

(e.g., Jensen and Meckling, 1976; Admati et al., 2018). The empirical literature does not find

strong results in either direction (under- or over-investment)6 . Moreover, recent theoretical

work by Aragón (2019) argues for mitigating factors arising from the firm losing access to

credit when a creditor becomes insolvent. In his model, the bank can either liquidate the firm

or continue lending. Funding new investment has the disadvantage that it will incentivize the

firm to take more risk, decreasing the overall value for the bank. Hence, zombie-lending and

under-investment can co-exist.7

    Our paper also relates to an extensive empirical literature on corporate debt and firm in-

vestment. For instance, Whited (1992) shows that adding debt capacity variables to a standard

investment model improves the model fit. Similarly, Bond and Meghir (1994) find an empirical

role for debt in standard investment models. This literature generally finds a negative relation-

ship between firm leverage and investment. For instance, for listed firms in the US, Lang et

al. (1996) document a negative relationship between debt and investment for firms without

valuable growth opportunities. More recently, Giroud and Mueller (2017) analyze the impact

of firm leverage on employment using US establishment-level data. They find that firms that
   5 Hennessy (2004), Titman and Tsyplakov (2007), Moyen (2007), Diamond and Rajan (2011), and Occhino and

Pescatori (2015).
   6 See De Jong and Van Dijk (2007), Eisdorfer (2008), and Gilje (2016).
   7 See Hoshi et al. (1990), Almeida et al. (2011) and Barnea et al. (1980) for theoretical models of zombie lending.

The empirical literature on the significance of zombie lending in Europe during the recent crisis finds mixed
results (e.g., Andrews and Petroulakis, 2019 and Schivardi et al., 2017). The literature that focuses on Japan finds
strong results as in Peek and Rosengren (2000, 2005) and Caballero et al. (2008).


                                                          8
increased leverage experienced a larger decline in employment during the global financial cri-

sis. Their work differs from us in at least two dimensions. First, they do not consider the role

of maturity. Second, they focus on the US, not Europe, and therefore do not consider the role

of bank-sovereign linkages and also do not have a firm-bank matched dataset.

    Our work also relates to the theoretical literature on the maturity structure of debt. In the

benchmark model of Myers (1977), short-term debt reduces the debt overhang problem, while

in recent work by Diamond and He (2014), short-term debt can increase debt overhang. Darst

and Refayet (2017) develops a model where a combination of short-term and long-term debt

emerges as the optimal contract to deal with agency problems and bankruptcy costs. In their

model, long-term debt insulates the firm from changes in credit spreads while short-term debt

exposes the firm to credit spread fluctuations. However, short-term debt comes at the ad-

vantage of risk-free financing. Firms optimally choose the maturity structure of debt to inter-

temporally manage how much risky debt to issue. The sovereign debt literature has developed

models of debt contracts with bankruptcy costs and agency costs for debtholders, where short-

term debt will generally be preferred because it is cheaper, except when self-fulfilling rollover

crises are probable (Chaterjee and Eyigungor, 2012). As debt accumulated during the boom

period is mostly short-term, rollover risk will increase because lenders are reluctant to renew

expiring credit lines during a crisis when collateral values drop (e.g. Diamond, 1991; Acharya

et al., 2011).8

    In related work on the implications of debt overhang, Lamont (1995) shows that the effect

of debt overhang varies with economic conditions. Debt overhang binds when the economy
   8 Debt maturity may also affect the debt overhang by altering incentives to invest. According to Myers (1977),
short-term debt reduces the debt overhang problem because the value of shorter debt is less sensitive to the
value of the firm and thus receives a much smaller benefit from new investment. However, Diamond and He
(2014) show that reducing maturity can increase debt overhang. For firms with future investment opportunities,
shorter-term debt may impose stronger debt overhang in bad times since less risk is shared by shorter-term debt.




                                                       9
is in a downturn since investment returns are low. As a result, high levels of debt can create

multiple equilibria in which the profitability of investment varies with economic conditions.

Hennessy (2004) shows that debt overhang distorts the level and composition of investment,

with a severe problem of underinvestment for long-lived assets. A significant debt overhang

effect is found, regardless of firms’ ability to issue additional secured debt. Hennessy et al.

(2007) corroborate large debt overhang effects of long-term debt on investment, especially for

firms with high default risk.




3     Data

In this section, we describe the data and variables used in the paper, before turning to the

empirical framework and identification of the effects we are interested in.



3.1   Firm-Level Data

We use the Orbis global database, from Bureau van Dijk (BvD)—a Moody’s Analytics com-

pany. Orbis is the largest cross-country firm-level database, covering over 200 countries and

200 million firms that can be used for research focusing on linking firms’ financial accounts,

ownership structure and production decisions. The database includes all industries and both

private and public firms. BvD collects data from various sources, in particular, publicly avail-

able national company registries, and harmonizes the data into an internationally comparable

format.

    The coverage of firms varies both by country, industry, over time and across variables.

The reason for variation in firm coverage by country is that different countries have different




                                              10
laws in terms of which firms are required to file their financial accounts.9 For countries where

the law requires every firm to file with the national company registry, the data obtained via

Orbis will be identical to that contained in the country’s financial accounts prepared by official

statistical offices.10

    The coverage of firms in Orbis database can vary by time and industry and this may be

a source of discrepancy between various studies. The cause of this problem is the common

practice in the literature of using a single vintage of Orbis database (or a single download

from Wharton Research Data Services (WRDS)). As explained in detail in Kalemli-Özcan et al.

(2019), the only way to get around this problem and have consistent coverage of firms over

time and by industry is to use the historical vintages and match the firm data over time using

unique firm identifiers. If a single vintage is used, firms will be missing since Orbis drops

firms over a certain period of time from the database and also some variables, such as value-

added and intermediate inputs, will be missing since every vintage does not cover all the

variables. The industry classification will also be misleading since these classifications change

over time due to firms’ expanding their operations and/or firm and industry ID changes made

by the national statistical offices. Due to such missing information, Orbis single vintage data

will generally over-represent larger firms and under-represent smaller firms, requiring impu-

tations and re-weighing of the data to ensure an adequate representation of small firms. As
   9 There is a common misconception that data from countries’ national statistical offices always have better
coverage than Orbis. If the country regulation is such that all firms have to file with the business registry then
the coverage obtained from Orbis will be representative. For the other countries where the regulation is such
that firms over a certain size threshold file their financial accounts, then the national statistical offices might have
administrative surveys that can cover some of the differences in coverage of firms’ financial accounts. A case
in point is the United States, where private firms are not required to file financial accounts but there are select
surveys covering certain set of firms in certain years such as the Federal Reserve Board of Governors’ survey on
“small business finance,” which is a repeated cross-section that comes in four waves and covers only 3000-5000
firms and is not nationally representative.
   10 Country censuses are administrative datasets and will cover the universe of firms in a country; however, cen-

sus datasets typically do not provide information on individual firms’ financial accounts as company registries
do.




                                                          11
shown in Kalemli-Özcan et al. (2019), there is no need to re-weigh and impute the data if the

historical vintages are used, as this produces the nationally representative data mimicking the

firm size distributions of the official statistics of each country.

   We follow Kalemli-Özcan et al. (2019) to construct and clean our firm-level data. The main

financial variables used in the analysis are total assets, sales, operating revenue (gross output),

tangible fixed assets, intangible fixed assets, liabilities, and cash flow. We distinguish between

short-term and long-term liabilities, with short-term liabilities being defined as debt liabilities

with a remaining maturity of up to 1 year. A large fraction of short-term liabilities constitute

trade credits that originate outside the financial system, we also construct a measure of short-

term liabilities that excluded trade credits. We transform nominal financial variables into real

variables using country-specific consumer price indices with 2005 base and converting to                  US


dollars using the end-of-year 2005 US dollar/national currency exchange rate. In other words,

the value of variables is expressed in constant prices at constant exchange rates. We drop

financial firms and government-owned firms, and keep all the other sectors. As shown in

Kalemli-Özcan et al. (2019), the coverage of our sample when compared to official statistics is

extensive, ranging from roughly 70 to over 90 percent depending on the country.



3.2    Matching Firm- and Bank-Level Data

We create a novel data set of bank-firm relationships in Europe by matching our firm-level

data to their banks. For each firm, there is a variable called         BANK   in our firm-level database

showing the name(s) of the firm’s main bank(s), which, following the literature on firm-bank

lending relationships, we assume to be the main bank(s) that the firm borrows from. We obtain

this information through our firm-level database but the original source is             KOMPASS .11    This
  11 KOMPASS  provides the bank-firm connections in 70 countries including firm address, executive names, in-
dustry, turnover, date of incorporation and, most importantly the firms’ primary bank relationships. KOMPASS

                                                     12
data has been used before by Giannetti and Ongena (2012), among others, to study bank-

firm relationships. We use the 2013 data entries by firms of their main banks, including both

the primary and secondary bank-firm relationships. We checked the stability of bank-firm

relationships with the 2015 data entries and confirmed that bank-firm relationships are sticky

and do not significantly change over short periods of time.12

    For each main bank, we obtain bank balance sheet data from                     BANKSCOPE .       This data set

is also from Bureau Van Dijk, containing balance sheet information about more than 30,000

banks spanning most countries and data up to 16 years. Linking the main bank name to its

equivalent in    BANKSCOPE       is a significant hurdle since there is no standardized procedure to

match KOMPASS and BANKSCOPE bank names. We make use of the programs OpenRefine and

OpenReconcile that offer several approximate-matching algorithms. We use these programs

to match the     BANK    variable to the bank names in          BANKSCOPE .      Our match rate is very high:

87.6% of all bank name observations. Most of the unmatched observations correspond to small

cooperative banks for which financial data is anyway not available in BANKSCOPE.



3.3    Matching Bank-Level Data to Sovereigns

Banks in the     BANKSCOPE       database are all recorded as domestic legal entities, including the

subsidiaries of foreign parent companies. To determine the country of origin of each bank

in our sample, we need to trace its ownership information to the ultimate owner. We set the

country of origin of each bank equal to the country of origin of the ultimate owner of the

bank, even if this entity is incorporated in a foreign country, under the assumption that it is
collects data using the information provided by chambers of commerce and firm registries, but also conducts
phone interviews with firm representatives. Firms are also able to voluntarily register with the KOMPASS direc-
tory, which is mostly sold to companies searching for customers and suppliers.
  12 Giannetti and Ongena (2012) use both the 2005 and 2010 vintages and also find that bank-firm relationships

are sticky. Other research has shown that these relationships are sticky also in the United States (see, for instance,
Chodorow-Reich, 2014).


                                                         13
the strength of the parent bank that determines the strength of each subsidiary. We trace this

information using the Global Ultimate Owner (GUO) variable. Then, we use its consolidated

balance sheet reported directly in BANKSCOPE.

   Whenever the    GUO   information is missing, a couple of criteria are used. First, some of

the banks listed are actually branches of foreign banks. These are matched by hand to their

GUO   abroad. Second, some banks are reported to be independent or "single location” (i.e.,

they have only one branch). For these banks, the     GUO   is the bank itself. And finally, using

the independence indicator provided by Bureau Van Dijk, for banks with a high degree of

independence (i.e., values B-, B or B+), the GUO will be also the bank itself, as in the previous

case. The sovereign of each bank is defined as the sovereign country of the entity that is the

ultimate owner of the bank.

   Data on total sovereign bond holdings come from         BANKSCOPE .   The limitation of these

data is that they do not indicate the nationality of the sovereign. We therefore complement

this data with data on own sovereign’s holdings of the bank from the European Central Bank

(ECB)’s proprietary database of Individual Balance-Sheet Items (IBSI). The difference between

the two datasets is that the BANKSCOPE data captures all sovereign bonds while the IBSI data

captures domestic bonds only. In practice, the difference between the two data series should be

small since most of a bank’s total sovereign bond holdings consist of domestic bonds. Indeed,

according to the IBSI data for our sample of banks, around 70% of euro area banks’ sovereign

bond holdings are domestic, with an even higher percentage in the periphery.



3.4   Descriptive Statistics

Investment in real capital expenditures can be measured on a gross or net basis (i.e., with or

without depreciation). If investment expenditures just match the depreciation of capital equip-

                                               14
ment, then gross investment is positive, but net investment remains unchanged. Therefore, net

investment matters most for future productivity. Consequently, we use net investment rate in

our empirical work, computed as the annual change in fixed tangible assets.13

    We capture firm leverage using the ratio of total liabilities to total assets. Total liabilities

are measured as the sum of long-term debt, loans, trade credit, and other current liabilities.

To capture the drag on finances stemming from debt payments, we include the debt service

ratio calculated as total interest paid by the firm over its earnings before taxes, depreciation

and amortization of capital (EBITDA).

    We distinguish between long-term and short-term liabilities. Long-term liabilities comprise

all loans and bonds with residual maturities above one year. Short-term liabilities comprise all

current liabilities, i.e., loans, trade credits and other current liabilities, with residual maturities

up to 1 year. We also construct alternative measures of liabilities that exclude trade credits

since these originate outside the financial system. When excluding trade credits, we lose about

one-tenth of observations due to missing data on trade credits.

    Previous literature has found that firm size is an important determinant of firm leverage.

We thus use log of total assets as a control for firm size, labeled as “size.”

    Figure 2 shows the importance of including small and medium-sized firms (SMEs) in the

sample when analyzing the maturity structure of debt. On average, SMEs have a short-term

leverage ratio of 38.5 percent and a long-term leverage ratio of 30.5 percent, which adds up to

a total leverage ratio of 68.5 percent. SMEs are also considerably more leveraged than large

firms, both in terms of short-term and long-term debt, indicating the significance of including

SMEs into the analysis.
  13 Using  net investment is common in the literature; see, for example, Lang et al. (1996). We measure net
investment rate as the ratio between net fixed capital stock increase and the initial net fixed capital stock, i.e.,
∆Kt /Kt−1 . Fixed capital is measured as the firm’s gross capital stock minus depreciation.



                                                        15
                        40                                     38.5




                                                                              30.5
                             29.6
                        30
                                            25.1
           percentage




                        20




                        10




                         0
                                    Large                             Small

                                            Short Term            Long Term



                             Figure 2: Firm Leverage by Size Class
         Notes: This figure shows averages of the leverage (measured as a ratio of either
         short-term debt to assets or long-term debt to assets) of each firm for large firms
         and SMEs. Small and medium-sized firms (SMEs) are firms with fewer than 250
         employees and/or firms with total assets lower than 43 million euros at 2005
         prices.




   We control for growth opportunities using net sales growth. We cannot use Tobin’s Q or

other market-based proxies for growth opportunities because market values are only available

for listed firms which are less than 1% of our sample. We also control for cash flow as is

standard in these regressions.

   We measure bank weakness of the firm’s main bank,         WEAK BANK ,      using the share of total

sovereign holdings of the bank over total assets of the bank. We use both BANKSCOPE and IBSI

data on sovereign bond holdings to construct the variable       WEAK BANK       since   IBSI   data starts

only in the fourth quarter of 2007 and covers fewer banks. In an extension, we only consider

own sovereign exposure for banks in the periphery because exposure to own sovereigns in


                                                   16
center (i.e., non-periphery) countries need not indicate weakness. While this is our preferred

specification, it is also the most limited in terms of data coverage.

   We also explored alternative measures of bank weakness based on bank leverage and total

capital ratio. However given that most bank assets and liabilities are not marked to market,

these balance sheet variables are very stable and do not register large enough movements over

time to qualify as reliable measures of bank weakness. Moreover, sovereign bond holdings are

a more direct measure of exposure to sovereign risk of each bank, and therefore more directly

captures bank-sovereign linkages, which previous literature has shown to be an important

channel through which bank weaknesses surfaced during the European financial crisis.

   All firm-level variables are winsorized such that their kurtosis falls below a threshold of 10.

This implies that net investment to lagged capital, (short-term/long-term) liabilities to assets

ratio, interest paid to   EBITDA ,   cash flow to assets, sales growth and log of capital stock are

winsorized at the 5%, 3%, 3%, 2%, 2%, and 1% level respectively.

                                 Table 1: Firm-Bank Relationships
                               (percentage of the total number of firms)


                          Country         With more than         Without any
                                             one bank1           foreign bank2
                                             (percent)             (percent)
                          Austria               20.4                  99.5
                          France                 0.0                 100.0
                          Germany               32.2                  99.8
                          Greece                50.4                  99.9
                          Ireland               25.5                 100.0
                          Netherlands            0.4                 100.0
                          Portugal              37.9                  97.9
                          Spain                 40.3                  99.0
                     1 Share of firms in matched sample reporting more than one
                     bank they have relationship with.
                     2 Share of firms that report having relationships only with do-

                     mestic banks.


   Table 1 presents how many of the firm-bank relationships in the sample are multiple re-

                                                   17
lationships (i.e., with more than one bank) and cross-border (i.e., with banks whose parent

company is foreign). It is quite common for European firms to have multiple bank relation-

ships although the data shows quite some variation across countries, with the fraction of firms

having relationships with more than one bank ranging from a low of none in France to 50.4

percent Greece. Having a foreign bank is very rare in this sample. The one exception in our

sample is Portugal but even there only 2.1 percent of firms have relationships with any foreign

bank. In the case where multiple bank relationships are reported, the first listed bank is con-

sidered the main bank. For Italy, no firm reports its bank relationships so this country will be

excluded from the analysis.

                                   Table 2: Summary Statistics


    Variables                            Obs.          Mean     St. Dev.   Min.     Median   Max.
    Net investment/Capital1           7,962,577         0.104    0.621     -0.539   -0.060    2.383
    Liabilities/Assets                9,389,076         0.749    0.414      0.091    0.723    2.311
    Fin.Expenses/EBITDA2              4,763,675         0.152    0.387     -1.188    0.083    1.566
    Cash Flow/Assets                  5,337,854         0.075    0.124     -0.600    0.065    0.534
    Sales growth3                     5,536,637         0.013    0.324     -1.410   -0.003    1.595
    Size4                             9,389,078        13.547    1.713      0.104   13.459   26.245
    Banks’ sovereign bonds/Assets     5,624,503         0.043    0.041        0      0.032    0.382
    Periphery (banker)5               9,389,082         0.288    0.453        0        0        1
    Periphery (firm)5                 9,389,082         0.304    0.460        0        0        1
 Notes: Based on unbalanced sample of matched firms (to their primary banks).
1 Increase in real capital stock over lagged real capital stock.
2 Interest paid scaled by EBITDA.
3 Logarithmic change of real sales.
4 Logarithm of total real assets.
5 Binary variable equal to 1 if the firm (parent banker) comes from a peripheral economy.




     Table 2 shows descriptive statistics for the main regression variables. Investment rates

average about 10.4 percentage points during the sample period but declined by about 8.4 per-

centage points during the crisis period relative to the pre-crisis period. On average, debt lia-

bilities account for about 75 percent of assets, and about 60 percent of total liabilities are short


                                                  18
term (i.e., with a remaining maturity up to 1 year). Only a small fraction of short-term liabil-

ities is made up of trade credits (about 14 percent). Financial expenses account for about 15

percent of   EBITDA   on average, with much variation across firms and over time. Exposures to

sovereign bond holdings are modest on average, at about 4 percent of total assets, but there

is much variation with some banks holding more than one-third of their assets in sovereign

bonds. Firms in countries in the periphery comprise about 30 percent of the sample.




4    Empirical Framework and Identification

In this section we explain the framework and identification strategy we use to investigate the

role of financial leverage in affecting corporate investment in Europe.

    Our baseline model of corporate investment builds on a standard investment model with

financial factors, similar to those used in Whited (1992), Bond and Meghir (1994), Lang et al.

(1996), and Giroud and Mueller (2017). In these models, debt enters on account of bankruptcy

and agency costs. Let the standard model for firm i be:


                                                                   
                            Investment                       Debt
                                                 =   β                        + Xi 0 γ + α + ε i
                              Capital        i               Assets       i



where Investment/Capital is the net investment ratio, Debt/Assets is the ratio of total debt

to total assets, capturing the financial leverage of the firm, and α is a constant. The vector Xi

contains control variables, such as sales growth, cash flow ratio, and the debt service ratio. The

model includes the usual determinants of investment as well as the debt service ratio since the

debt to assets ratio may not fully capture the effects of lingering debt overhang when debt is

measured at book value.

    Our baseline model of corporate investment extends this standard model in several ways.

                                                         19
First, we estimate the above model using panel data, with all control variables lagged one

period to mitigate reverse causality concerns. Second, we distinguish between post-crisis and

pre-crisis periods by including interaction terms on the financial leverage variable using a

post-crisis dummy variable. Third, we allow the effect of financial leverage to vary between

peripheral countries and center countries. Fourth, we use a predetermined variable of financial

leverage, constructed over the pre-crisis variable, to explain the evolution of investment in the

post-crisis period to mitigate endogeneity concerns of the relationship between leverage and

investment. Fifth, we include a host of fixed effects, including firm fixed effects, country-

sector-year fixed effects, and main bank fixed effects.

    Our baseline model of corporate investment is as follows:


                              
                  Investment
                                             = β 1 POSTt × Peripheryc × High Leveragei,s,c +                  (1)
                    Capital        i,s,c,t

                                                β 2 POSTt × High Leveragei,s,c +

                                                Xi,s,c,t−1 0 γ + αi + αs,c,t + αb + ε i,s,c,t



Our main variable of interest is High Leveragei which is a dummy variable that is equal to one

if the firm’s average liabilities to assets ratio is greater than its sample median during the pre-

crisis period 2000 to 2007. The reason why we use a dummy in this specification as opposed to

a continuous variable is because we want to identify the effect of leverage from changes over

time induced by the crisis shock. Hence we do not let firm leverage change with the shock but

rather see how investment responds to the shock differentially for firms with high and low

leverage ex-ante. This is a cleaner difference-in-difference exercise as it does not confound the

effects of leverage with that of deleveraging.14
  14 We can also provide results upon request where we use the actual leverage ratio which will also capture
de-leveraging of the firms after the crisis. These results are larger in magnitudes as they combine the effects of


                                                            20
    Our main coefficients of interest are formed by the vector β. We expect β 1 and β 2 to be neg-

ative on account of debt overhang effects, that are more pronounced during the crisis period

and for peripheral countries. Xit−1 is the vector of control variables including sales growth,

firm size, cash flow ratio, and debt coverage ratio. αi are firm-specific fixed effects, and αs,c,t

are four-digit sector×country×year fixed effects. This specification allows to test for differen-

tial effects of financial leverage during the crisis, and the direct effect of leverage is absorbed

by firm fixed effects as we define this variable as a time-invariant dummy at the firm-level.

The direct effect of the crisis (POST) and the differential effect of crisis for periphery coun-

tries (POST × PERIPHERY) will be absorbed by the time and time-country fixed effects, but

we also show specifications without these fixed effects to establish the direct negative effects

of crisis on firm investment. The baseline model boils down to a difference-in-difference ap-

proach to identify the effect of high leverage on investment by assessing the differential impact

on investment of different levels of leverage between the pre- and post-crisis periods, where

we define the pre-crisis period as 2000–2007 and the post-crisis period as 2008–2012. We also

control for bank fixed effects to capture the role of pre-existing bank relationships.

    Our identification approach is valid as long as any remaining variation in ex post firm-

specific demand conditions does not vary systematically with the ex ante level of the firm’s

indebtedness. We think this is a reasonable assumption. After all, it is more likely that firms

operating in the same four-digit sector tend to be hit by similar demand shocks over time.

In addition, we limit the analysis to firms in the euro area. These firms were subject to the

same monetary policy when they experienced diverging conditions in terms of banking and

sovereign risk during the crisis.

    As a robustness check, we incorporate the lagged investment rate as an explanatory vari-
pre-crisis leverage and de-leveraging during the crisis.



                                                           21
able and estimate using the Arellano and Bond (1991) two-step GMM procedure to account

for Nickell (1981) bias. and transform the variables using forward deviations as in Arellano

and Bover (1995) to reduce the amount of observations dropped from our sample.

   In the first extension of the baseline model, we consider the role of weak banks where the

“weakness” is time-varying and hence cannot be captured by the bank fixed effects. We do

this by including the variable Weak Banki,t−1 in the set of control variables Xi,t−1 , where Weak

Bank is the firm i’s main bank’s ratio of sovereign bond holdings to total assets, lagged one

period. The Weak Bank variable captures the role of bank-sovereign linkages. These can affect

firm investment via a bank lending channel when increases in sovereign risk weaken bank

balance sheets, reducing the supply of loans to firms and increasing rollover risk.

   In a second extension of the baseline model, we consider whether the effects are different

for long-term liabilities as opposed to short-term liabilities. The benchmark model of Myers

(1977) predicts that debt overhang effects are more pronounced for long-term debt, on ac-

count of higher agency costs. However, Diamond and He (2014) develop a model where debt

overhang can increase with shorter term debt. Moreover, short-term debt could negatively

affect investment on account of rollover risk, which manifests itself during bust periods.15 In

practice, there may be a possible tradeoff in the use of short-term debt, being cheaper than

long-term debt during boom periods but turning costly during busts. The impact of debt ma-

turity on investment during crises is therefore ultimately an empirical question. We define

long-term liabilities as all bank loans and debt with a remaining maturity over 1 year and

short-term liabilities as all loans, trade credits and other current liabilities with a remaining

maturity of up to 1 year.
 15 See   Chaterjee and Eyigungor (2012) for a model of self-fulfilling rollover crises.




                                                          22
5     Empirical Results

This section presents the results for the estimations outlined in the previous section. We will

begin with the baseline dynamic investment model using annual data to explore how the crisis

affects the relationship between investment and leverage. Then we will account for the role

of weak bank balance sheets and consider the differential effects on short–term and long-term

liabilities.



5.1    Debt Overhang and Rollover Risk

Table 3 shows our benchmark results with firm leverage. All regressions include firm fixed

effects.

    The results in Column 1 of Table 3 indicate that high leverage is a substantial drag on

investment during the post-crisis period. Highly levered firms, defined as those with liabilities

to assets above the sample average in the pre-crisis period, have a 3.3 percentage point lower

investment rate during the crisis period compared to firms that are not highly levered. This is a

large effect compared to the average investment rate of 10.4 percent. This result remains when

accounting for aggregate demand effects and the average impact of weak banks through the

inclusion of country-sector-year and bank fixed effects, as seen in Column 2. The coefficient

estimate is slightly lower but still statistically significant. These results point to significant debt

overhang during the crisis.

    All control variables enter with the expected sign. We find that sales growth enters posi-

tively, as expected, signifying the positive effect of growth opportunities on firm investment.

Firm size enters negatively, as expected, capturing the presence of decreasing returns to scale

in investment, and the interest coverage ratio enters negatively indicating that firms with



                                                  23
                  Table 3: Benchmark Results with Total Firm Leverage
 Dependent variable: (Net investment/Capital)i,s,c,t

                                                     (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)
 Postt × Peripheryc × High Leveragei,s,c                                      -0.029***    -0.022***
                                                                              (0.003)      (0.003)
 Postt × Peripheryc                                                           -0.037***
                                                                              (0.002)
 Postt × High Leveragei,s,c                       -0.033***     -0.028***     -0.017***    -0.017***
                                                  (0.001)       (0.002)       (0.002)      (0.002)
 Postt                                            -0.020***                   -0.002
                                                  (0.001)                     (0.001)
 Fin. Expensesi,s,c,t−1                           -0.016***     -0.015***     -0.015***    -0.015***
                                                  (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.001)      (0.001)
 Cash Flowi,s,c,t−1                                0.280***      0.259***      0.277***     0.259***
                                                  (0.006)       (0.006)       (0.006)      (0.006)
 Salesi,s,c,t−1                                    0.067***      0.058***      0.064***     0.058***
                                                  (0.001)       (0.002)       (0.001)      (0.002)
 Sizei,s,c,t−1                                    -0.235***     -0.243***     -0.234***    -0.242***
                                                  (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.002)      (0.002)
 Total effect: Postt                              -0.053***     -0.028***     -0.085***    -0.039***
                                                  (0.001)       (0.002)       (0.001)      (0.002)
 Total effect: Peripheryc                                                     -0.066***    -0.022***
                                                                              (0.002)      (0.003)
 Total effect: High Leveragei,s,c                 -0.033***     -0.028***     -0.046***    -0.039***
                                                  (0.001)       (0.002)       (0.002)      (0.002)
 Firm FE                                            Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
 Country-sector-year FE                             No            Yes           No            Yes
 Bank FE                                            No            Yes           No            Yes
 Obs.                                            2,431,265     2,426,548     2,431,265    2,426,548
 R2                                                 0.17          0.18          0.17         0.18
 Within-R2                                          0.03          0.02          0.03         0.02
 Adjusted-R2                                        0.03          0.03          0.03         0.03
 Within-adjusted-R2                                 0.03          0.02          0.03         0.02

 Notes: Standard errors clustered at the firm level are in parentheses. Post is a dummy variable equal
to 1 starting in 2008. Periphery is a binary variable equal to 1 if the firm comes from a peripheral
economy, and 0 otherwise. High leverage is equal to 1 if the firm average of liabilities to assets is
greater than the median of the sample until 2007. Financial expenses are equal to the ratio of interest
paid to EBITDA. Sales are the change in the logarithm of sales. Size is measured by the logarithm of
total assets. Cash flow is scaled by total assets.
 ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.




                                                  24
higher financial expenses invest less.

   Next, we consider whether firms in peripheral countries are differentially affected by in-

cluding interaction terms with a Periphery dummy variable. The results are presented in

Columns 3 and 4, with the difference being that in Column 4 we also include fixed effects at

the country-sector-year and bank levels. We find that the debt overhang effect is more pro-

nounced for firms in peripheral countries. This is not surprising given that sovereign stress

was concentrated in these countries. The investment rate of highly levered firms during the

crisis is 2.2 percentage points lower for firms in peripheral countries as compared to firms in

the center, and the total effect of high leverage for firms in peripheral countries during the

crisis is 3.9 percentage points. However, the effect of high leverage during the crisis remains

negative also for firms in center countries, being 1.7 percentage points lower than during pre-

crisis times. These results indicate that there was significant debt overhang during the crisis

in both peripheral and center countries but that the effects of debt overhang were more pro-

nounced (i.e., at least two times larger) in peripheral countries.



5.2   Lagged Investment Rate

Table 4 shows results using the lagged investment rate as a dependent variable. The autocor-

relation of the investment rate is relatively low across all specifications, in line with evidence

from the literature on investment at the firm level. The significance of the rest coefficients in

benchmark results is unchanged with respect to Table 3, and their magnitudes slightly revised

upwards for the case of binary variables. In other words, when accounting for the low persis-

tence of investment leads to a small upward revision of estimates of the negative effects from

debt overhang problems, both for centre and periphery economies in the euro area.




                                                25
                               Table 4: Lagged Investment Rate
 Dependent variable: (Net investment/Capital)i,s,c,t

                                                        (1)         (2)           (3)           (4)
 Postt × Peripheryc × High Leveragei,s,c                                       -0.031***     -0.032***
                                                                               (0.003)       (0.003)
 Postt × Peripheryc                                                            -0.024***     -0.023***
                                                                               (0.002)       (0.002)
 Postt × High Leveragei,s,c                        -0.048***     -0.047***     -0.019***     -0.018***
                                                   (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.002)       (0.002)
 Postt                                             -0.010***                   -0.002
                                                   (0.001)                     (0.001)
 (Net Investment/Capital)i,c,s,t−1                  0.030***      0.030***      0.030***      0.029***
                                                   (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.001)
 Fin. Expensesi,c,s,t−1                            -0.016***     -0.015***     -0.015***     -0.015***
                                                   (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.001)
 Cash Flowi,c,s,t−1                                 0.287***      0.283***      0.283***      0.278***
                                                   (0.006)       (0.006)       (0.006)       (0.006)
 Salesi,c,s,t−1                                     0.061***      0.060***      0.059***      0.059***
                                                   (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.002)
 Sizei,c,s,t−1                                     -0.241***     -0.245***     -0.240***     -0.243***
                                                   (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.002)
 Total effect: Postt                               -0.058***     -0.047***     -0.076***     -0.073***
                                                   (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.002)
 Total effect: Peripheryi                                                      -0.055***     -0.055***
                                                                               (0.002)       (0.002)
 Total effect: High Leveragei,c,s                  -0.048***     -0.047***     -0.050***     -0.050***
                                                   (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.002)       (0.002)
 Firm FE                                             Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
 Year FE                                             No            Yes           No             Yes
 Obs.                                            2,066,491      2,066,491     2,066,491     2,066,491
 AR(1) test statistic                            -261.49∗∗∗     -261.78∗∗∗    -261.45∗∗∗    -261.74***
 AR(2) test statistic                               -1.60         -1.90∗        -1.70∗        -2.03∗∗
 Wald χ2 statistic                               35,218∗∗∗      36,262∗∗∗     36,429∗∗∗     37,507∗∗∗
 Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. Estimation performed à la Arellano and Bond (1991), using
two-step robust errors and a collapsed matrix of instruments, with forward-demeaned variables as
in Arellano and Bover (1995). Post is a dummy variable equal 1 starting 2008. Periphery is a binary
variable equal to 1 if the firm comes from a Periphery economy, and 0 from a Centre economy. High
leverage is equal 1 if the firm average of liabilities to assets is greater than the median of the sample
until 2007. Fin. Expenses is equal to the ratio of interest paid to EBITDA, and corresponds to the
coverage ratio. Sales is the change in logarithm of sales. Size is measured by the logarithm of total
assets. Cash flow is scaled by total assets.
 ∗ p < 0.10,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01




                                                   26
                                  Table 5: Role of Weak Banks
 Dependent variable: (Net investment/Capital)i,s,c,t

                                                     (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)
 Postt × Peripheryc × High Leveragei,s,c                                      -0.034***    -0.026***
                                                                              (0.005)      (0.006)
 Postt × Peripheryc                                                           -0.041***
                                                                              (0.004)
 Postt × High Leveragei,s,c                       -0.032***     -0.027***     -0.008*      -0.010**
                                                  (0.003)       (0.003)       (0.004)      (0.005)
 Postt                                            -0.035***                   -0.009***
                                                  (0.002)                     (0.003)
 Fin. Expensesi,s,c,t−1                           -0.012***     -0.011***     -0.011***    -0.011***
                                                  (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.001)      (0.001)
 Cash Flowi,s,c,t−1                                0.298***      0.261***      0.293***     0.261***
                                                  (0.009)       (0.009)       (0.009)      (0.009)
 Salesi,s,c,t−1                                    0.063***      0.052***      0.061***     0.052***
                                                  (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.002)      (0.002)
 Sizei,s,c,t−1                                    -0.312***     -0.319***     -0.311***    -0.319***
                                                  (0.003)       (0.003)       (0.003)      (0.003)
 Weak banki,t−1                                   -0.212***      0.037        -0.241***     0.038
                                                  (0.022)       (0.030)       (0.022)      (0.030)
 Total effect: Postt                              -0.067***     -0.027***     -0.091***    -0.036***
                                                  (0.002)       (0.003)       (0.002)      (0.003)
 Total effect: Peripheryc                                                     -0.074***    -0.026***
                                                                              (0.004)      (0.006)
 Total effect: High Leveragei,s,c                 -0.032***     -0.027***     -0.042***    -0.036***
                                                  (0.003)       (0.003)       (0.003)      (0.003)
 Firm FE                                            Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
 Country-sector-year FE                             No            Yes           No            Yes
 Bank FE                                            No            Yes           No            Yes
 Obs.                                            1,052,146     1,048,091     1,052,146    1,048,091
 R2                                                 0.26          0.28          0.26         0.28
 Within-R2                                          0.03          0.03          0.03         0.03
 Adjusted-R2                                        0.05          0.05          0.05         0.05
 Within-adjusted-R2                                 0.03          0.03          0.03         0.03

 Notes: Standard errors clustered at the firm level are in parentheses. Post is a dummy variable equal
to 1 starting in 2008. Periphery is a binary variable equal to 1 if the firm comes from a peripheral
economy, and 0 otherwise. High leverage is equal to 1 if the firm average of liabilities to assets is
greater than the median of the sample until 2007. Financial expenses are equal to the ratio of interest
paid to EBITDA. Sales are the change in the logarithm of sales. Size is measured by the logarithm
of total assets. Cash flow is scaled by total assets. Weak bank corresponds to the banker’s average
sovereign bondholdings scaled by total assets.
 ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.




                                                  27
5.3   The Role of Weak Banks

Table 5 accounts for the role of weak banks by including the Weak bank variable, which is

time variant. The results in Column 1 of Table 5 show that investment is lower when the

main banking relationship of the firm is with a weak bank (i.e., a bank with large exposure

to sovereign bonds). This finding is consistent with the role of weak sovereign-bank linkages

identified previously in the literature. Importantly, however, our main result on high leverage

is robust to the inclusion of the Weak bank variable. We continue to find that highly levered

firms have lower investment rates during the crisis. Results on our main variable of interest are

unaltered when including country-sector-year and bank fixed effects in Column 2. However,

the coefficient on the Weak bank variable turns insignificant upon the inclusion of bank fixed

effects because there is not much variation over time in bank relationships. Our results on the

more pronounced effects in peripheral countries also remain when controlling for the Weak

bank variable, as seen in Columns 3 and 4, even though the size of the effect is somewhat

reduced.

   In Table 6, we consider whether the impact of weak banks differentially affects the invest-

ment of firms during the crisis and in peripheral countries through the inclusion of interaction

terms of the Weak bank variable and the Post and Periphery dummy variables. Our main

results on High leverage are robust to including these additional interaction terms. And the

coefficients on these additional interaction terms do not enter with significant signs. Taken to-

gether, the results in Tables 5 and 6 show that the financial leverage effect we identify is robust

to accounting for the weak bank channel identified in the literature.




                                                28
             Table 6: Additional Role of Weak Banks in Periphery Countries
 Dependent variable: (Net investment/Capital)i,s,c,t

                                                     (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)
 Postt × Peripheryc × High Leveragei,s,c                                      -0.034***    -0.027***
                                                                              (0.004)      (0.004)
 Postt × High Leveragei,s,c                       -0.034***     -0.029***     -0.011***    -0.011***
                                                  (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.003)      (0.003)
 Postt × Peripheryc                                                           -0.036***
                                                                              (0.003)
 Postt                                            -0.025***                   -0.002
                                                  (0.001)                     (0.002)
 Postt × Peripheryc × Weak banki                                              -0.003        0.002
                                                                              (0.004)      (0.004)
 Postt × Weak banki                               -0.001        -0.002        -0.002       -0.003
                                                  (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.003)      (0.003)
 Fin. Expensesi,s,c,t−1                           -0.014***     -0.013***     -0.013***    -0.013***
                                                  (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.001)      (0.001)
 Cash Flowi,s,c,t−1                                0.251***      0.223***      0.246***     0.224***
                                                  (0.007)       (0.007)       (0.007)      (0.007)
 Salesi,s,c,t−1                                    0.066***      0.056***      0.064***     0.056***
                                                  (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.002)      (0.002)
 Sizei,s,c,t−1                                    -0.231***     -0.239***     -0.230***    -0.239***
                                                  (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.002)      (0.002)
 Total effect: Postt                              -0.060***     -0.031***     -0.089***    -0.040***
                                                  (0.002)       (0.003)       (0.002)      (0.003)
 Total effect: Peripheryc                                                     -0.074***    -0.025***
                                                                              (0.004)      (0.006)
 Total effect: High Leveragei,s,c                 -0.034***     -0.029***     -0.045***    -0.039***
                                                  (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.002)      (0.002)
 Total effect: Weak banki                         -0.001        -0.002        -0.005**     -0.001
                                                  (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.002)      (0.002)
 Firm FE                                            Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
 Country-sector-year FE                             No            Yes           No            Yes
 Bank FE                                            No            Yes           No            Yes
 Obs.                                            1,582,082     1,577,267     1,582,082    1,577,267
 R2                                                 0.18          0.20          0.18         0.20
 Within-R2                                          0.03          0.02          0.03         0.02
 Adjusted-R2                                        0.04          0.04          0.04         0.04
 Within-adjusted-R2                                 0.03          0.02          0.03         0.02

 Notes: Standard errors clustered at the firm level are in parentheses. Post is a dummy variable equal
to 1 starting in 2008. Periphery is a binary variable equal to 1 if the firm comes from a peripheral
economy, and 0 otherwise. High leverage is equal to 1 if the firm average of liabilities to assets is
greater than the median of the sample until 2007. Financial expenses are equal to the ratio of interest
paid to EBITDA. Sales are the change in the logarithm of sales. Size is measured by the logarithm of
total assets. Cash flow is scaled by total assets. Weak bank is equal to 1 if the firm’s main banker’s
average sovereign bondholdings before 2008 is greater than its country-specific median until 2007.
 ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.




                                                  29
5.4   The Role of Debt Maturity

In Tables 7 and 8, we contrast the effects of short-term and long-term leverage. The regres-

sions in Table 7, mirror those in Table 3 with the exception that we replace the High leverage

variable based on total financial leverage with a High leverage variable based on short-term

leverage. Similarly, in Table 8 we include a High leverage variable based on long-term lever-

age. In constructing the short-term leverage variable we abstract from trade credit. We find

that the main result on the more negative effect of high leverage for peripheral countries dur-

ing the crisis is mainly due to the presence of short-term debt, as seen when contrasting the

results in Columns 3 and 4 of Tables 7 and 8. The difference is materially substantial. In the

richest model specification presented in Column 4 where we include country-sector-year and

bank fixed effects, the differential effect of high short-term leverage in peripheral versus cen-

ter countries is -1.9 percentage points while it is not significant for long-term leverage. Firms

with high short-term leverage in peripheral countries reduced investment more than those in

center countries during the crisis. This is consistent with an increase in rollover risk during

the bust period of peripheral countries and with theories in which short-term debt increases

debt overhang problems during bust periods (such as Diamond and He, 2014). At the same

time, the total effect of shocks in bust periods for the average country is more negative for

long-term leverage (about -6.3 percentage points), compared to that of short-term leverage (-

1.0 percentage points), within the group of highly leveraged firms in peripheral countries. To

sum up, long-term debt has a bigger quantitative role in explaining overall debt overhang ef-

fects, whereas short-term debt accounts for differential effects between center and peripheral

countries due to rollover risk.




                                               30
         Table 7: Benchmark Results with Firm’s Short-Term Financial Leverage
 Dependent variable: (Net investment/Capital)i,s,c,t

                                                    (1)           (2)           (3)          (4)
 Postt × Peripheryc × High Leveragei,s,c                                     -0.034***     -0.019***
                                                                             (0.003)       (0.003)
 Postt × Peripheryc                                                          -0.033***
                                                                             (0.002)
 Postt × High Leveragei,s,c                       -0.021***    -0.000         0.008***      0.010***
                                                  (0.001)      (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.002)
 Postt                                            -0.026***                  -0.013***
                                                  (0.001)                    (0.001)
 Fin. Expensesi,s,c,t−1                           -0.016***    -0.015***     -0.015***     -0.015***
                                                  (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.001)
 Cash Flowi,s,c,t−1                                0.275***     0.253***      0.271***      0.253***
                                                  (0.006)      (0.006)       (0.006)       (0.006)
 Salesi,s,c,t−1                                    0.067***     0.059***      0.065***      0.059***
                                                  (0.001)      (0.002)       (0.001)       (0.002)
 Sizei,s,c,t−1                                    -0.236***    -0.243***     -0.234***     -0.243***
                                                  (0.002)      (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.002)
 Total effect: Postt                              -0.047***    -0.000        -0.072***     -0.010***
                                                  (0.001)      (0.002)       (0.001)       (0.002)
 Total effect: Peripheryc                                                    -0.067***     -0.019***
                                                                             (0.002)       (0.003)
 Total effect: High Leveragei,s,c                 -0.021***    -0.000        -0.026***     -0.010***
                                                  (0.001)      (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.002)
 Firm FE                                            Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes
 Country-sector-year FE                             No           Yes           No            Yes
 Bank FE                                            No           Yes           No            Yes
 Obs.                                            2,420,571    2,415,809     2,420,571     2,415,809
 R2                                                 0.17         0.18          0.17          0.18
 Within-R2                                          0.03         0.02          0.03          0.02
 Adjusted-R2                                        0.03         0.03          0.03          0.03
 Within-adjusted-R2                                 0.03         0.02          0.03          0.02

 Notes: Standard errors clustered at the firm level are in parentheses. Post is a dummy variable equal
to 1 starting in 2008. Periphery is a binary variable equal to 1 if the firm comes from a peripheral
economy, and 0 otherwise. High leverage is equal to 1 if the firm average of short-term liabilities
to assets (excluding trade credit) is greater than the median of the sample until 2007. Financial
expenses are equal to the ratio of interest paid to EBITDA. Sales are the change in the logarithm of
sales. Size is measured by the logarithm of total assets. Cash flow is scaled by total assets.
 ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.




                                                 31
                 Table 8: Benchmark Results with Firm’s Long-Term Leverage
 Dependent variable: (Net investment/Capital)i,s,c,t

                                                    (1)           (2)           (3)          (4)
 Postt × Peripheryc × High Leveragei,s,c                                     -0.011***      0.001
                                                                             (0.003)       (0.003)
 Postt × Peripheryc                                                          -0.037***
                                                                             (0.002)
 Postt × High Leveragei,s,c                       -0.063***    -0.064***     -0.049***     -0.065***
                                                  (0.001)      (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.002)
 Postt                                            -0.005***                   0.010***
                                                  (0.001)                    (0.001)
 Fin. Expensesi,s,c,t−1                           -0.016***    -0.015***     -0.015***     -0.015***
                                                  (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.001)
 Cash Flowi,s,c,t−1                                0.277***     0.258***      0.274***      0.258***
                                                  (0.006)      (0.006)       (0.006)       (0.006)
 Salesi,s,c,t−1                                    0.067***     0.058***      0.065***      0.058***
                                                  (0.001)      (0.002)       (0.001)       (0.002)
 Sizei,s,c,t−1                                    -0.235***    -0.242***     -0.234***     -0.242***
                                                  (0.002)      (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.002)
 Total effect: Postt                              -0.068***    -0.064***     -0.087***     -0.063***
                                                  (0.001)      (0.002)       (0.001)       (0.002)
 Total effect: Peripheryc                                                    -0.048***      0.001
                                                                             (0.002)       (0.003)
 Total effect: High Leveragei,s,c                 -0.063***    -0.064***     -0.060***     -0.063***
                                                  (0.001)      (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.002)
 Firm FE                                            Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes
 Country-sector-year FE                             No           Yes           No            Yes
 Bank FE                                            No           Yes           No            Yes
 Obs.                                            2,430,249    2,425,533     2,430,249     2,425,533
 R2                                                 0.17         0.19          0.17          0.19
 Within-R2                                          0.03         0.02          0.03          0.02
 Adjusted-R2                                        0.03         0.03          0.03          0.03
 Within-adjusted-R2                                 0.03         0.02          0.03          0.02

 Notes: Standard errors clustered at the firm level are in parentheses. Post is a dummy variable equal
to 1 starting in 2008. Periphery is a binary variable equal to 1 if the firm comes from a peripheral
economy, and 0 otherwise. High leverage is equal to 1 if the firm average of long-term liabilities to
assets is greater than the median of the sample until 2007. Financial expenses are equal to the ratio
of interest paid to EBITDA. Sales are the change in the logarithm of sales. Size is measured by the
logarithm of total assets. Cash flow is scaled by total assets.
 ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.




                                                 32
5.5   Threats to Identification

An important assumption underlying the use of the difference-in-difference methodology is

that there is a parallel trend in the dependent variable for different cross sections of the data

over which the difference in explanatory variables is taken, and that this difference diverges

after the shock (in our case, after the crisis starting in 2008). Figure 3 shows the behavior of

the average net investment rate for firms with high and low leverage over time, before and

after the crisis shock. A firm is considered to have high leverage if its leverage before the

shock in 2008 is above the median of the sample. It is clear that the investment behavior of

these different sets of firms was similar before the crisis (until the last observation in 2007) but

diverged after the crisis (starting with the first observation in 2008) in favor of our results such

that high leverage firms reduced investment more. This provides evidence in support of the

parallel trend assumption and the empirical approach we take.



5.6   Sluggish Investment: Dynamic Persistent Effects

To investigate the dynamic responses in the baseline model, we run the following regressions

by local projections (Jordà, 2005):


                               
                   Investment
                                           = β 1h POSTt +
                     Capital        it+h

                                             β 2h POSTt × Peripheryi +

                                             β 3h POSTt × High Leveragei +

                                             β 4h POSTt × Peripheryi × High Leveragei +

                                            Xit−1 0 β h + αi + αc,s + αb + eit                   (2)




                                                       33
              0.25



              0.20



              0.15



              0.10



              0.05



              0.00
                 2000        2002        2004        2006        2008        2010        2012

                                                 High             Low



                Figure 3: Evolution of Average Net Investment Rate by Leverage
          Note: A firm is considered to have high leverage if its ratio of total debt to total
          assets before 2008 is above the median.




where horizons are given by h = 0, 1, 2, 3, 4; αi and αb are firm and bank fixed effects, respec-

tively; and αc,s are country×industry fixed effects. Xit−1 includes a lagged investment rate

( Investment
    Capital )it−1 and other controls (sales growth, firm size, cash flow ratio, and debt coverage

ratio). We do not include year fixed effects since we are interested in how the crisis affects firm

investment differentially, depending on the level of firm leverage and country status. The High

Leverage and Periphery dummies are absorbed by firm fixed effects. We use two-way clus-

tered standard errors by firm and year. The estimated impulse coefficient β̂ 1h + β̂ 2h + β̂ 3h + β̂ 4h

is a response of investment to the crisis for highly leveraged firms in the periphery. Similarly,

we estimate impulse coefficients β̂ 1h + β̂ 2h for lowly leveraged firms in the periphery, β̂ 1h + β̂ 3h

for highly leveraged firms in the center, and β̂ 1h for lowly leveraged firms in the center.



                                                  34
   Figure 4 plots estimated impulse coefficients of each group for each horizon h. We find that

firms with high leverage in the periphery reduce investment more for up to 4 years after the

crisis than firms with low leverage in the center. Panel (a) shows that firms with high leverage

in the periphery reduce their investment rate by about 10 percentage points on impact, 8 per-

centage points after 1 year, and 4 percentage points after 4 years. Magnitudes of the impulse

coefficients are smaller in firms with high leverage in the center (panel (b)), low leverage in the

periphery (panel (c)), and low leverage in the center (panel (d)) compared to those reported

in panel (a). The estimated cumulative impact on investment of high leverage in the periph-

ery over the first 5 years since the crisis (including the crisis year) is very large: a decline of

about 32 percentage points. In order to quantify the corporate leverage channel, we use this

differential responses of highly levered firms and lowly levered firms in the periphery. As

the cumulative decline in aggregate corporate sector investment as a ratio to aggregate capital

stock is 20 percentage points over 4 years, the corporate leverage channel explains 40 percent

of the aggregate decline.




                                                35
                                                     Response of Net Investment/Capital                                                                      Response of Net Investment/Capital
                                             Shock from a Post Dummy with High Leverage in the Periphery                                               Shock from a Post Dummy with High Leverage in the Center
                    .02




                                                                                                                               .02
      Change in Net Investment/Capital




                                                                                                                Change in Net Investment/Capital
                                   0




                                                                                                                                            0
    -.1 -.08 -.06 -.04 -.02




                                                                                                                -.08  -.06    -.04
                                                                                                                               -.1   -.02
                                         0                1              2               3                 4                                       0              1              2                3               4
                                                                        Year                                                                                                    Year


                                                  (a) High Leverage, Periphery                                                                               (b) High Leverage, Center

                                                     Response of Net Investment/Capital                                                                      Response of Net Investment/Capital
                                             Shock from a Post Dummy with Low Leverage in the Periphery                                                Shock from a Post Dummy with Low Leverage in the Center
                    .02




                                                                                                                               .02
    Change in Net Investment/Capital




                                                                                                                Change in Net Investment/Capital
                                0




                                                                                                                                            0
                         -.02




                                                                                                                                     -.02
                  -.04




                                                                                                                              -.04
          -.06




                                                                                                                      -.06
    -.08




                                                                                                                -.08
                    -.1




                                                                                                                               -.1




                                         0                1              2               3                 4                                       0              1              2                3               4
                                                                        Year                                                                                                    Year


                                                   (c) Low Leverage, Periphery                                                                                (d) Low Leverage, Center

                                                                            Figure 4: Impulse Responses of Investment

Notes: We apply the local projections method by Jordà (2005) to run the following regressions: ( Investment   Capital )it+h =
β 1h POSTt + β 2h POSTt × Peripheryi + β 3h POSTt × High Leveragei + β 4h POSTt × Peripheryi × High Leveragei +
Xit−1 0 β h + αi + αc,s + αb + eit , where horizons are given by h = 0, 1, 2, 3, 4; αi and αb are firm and bank fixed effects,
respectively; and αc,s are country×industry fixed effects. Xit−1 includes a lagged investment ( Investment  Capital )it−1 and
other controls (sales growth, firm size, cash flow ratio, and debt coverage ratio). For each horizon h, this figure
plots estimated impulse coefficients β̂ 1h + β̂ 2h + β̂ 3h + β̂ 4h for highly leveraged firms in the periphery, β̂ 1h +
β̂ 2h for lowly leveraged firms in the periphery, β̂ 1h + β̂ 3h for highly leveraged firms in the center, and β̂ 1h for
lowly leveraged firms in the center. We plot 95 percent confidence interval (calculated using two-way clustered
standard errors by firm and year) as a shaded area.




6                                        Conclusions

We quantify the role of financial factors that have contributed to sluggish investment in Eu-

rope in the aftermath of the 2008–2009 crisis. We use a very large pan-European firm-bank-


                                                                                                               36
time level dataset, in which we match the firms to their banks based on banking relationships

in 8 countries over time. Our identification relies on a difference-in-difference estimation ap-

proach, where we compare the investment of high debt firms with low debt firms between

crisis and normal times, while absorbing demand shocks through country-four-digit industry-

year fixed effects. Furthermore, we distinguish between short-term and long-term debt to ac-

count for the effect of debt maturity on debt overhang and rollover risk, and use confidential

ECB data on the exposures of banks to (own) sovereign debt together with information on the

main bank relationship of each firm to identify the role of sovereign-bank linkages in driv-

ing the effect of debt overhang and rollover risk. Regressions also include bank fixed effects

alongside firm fixed effects to abstract from any unobserved bank and firm characteristics.

   Our results highlight the important role of firm leverage and debt maturity in determining

firm investment following a crisis. Firms with higher leverage reduce investment more and

this effect is stronger for firms in peripheral countries. Firms from peripheral countries that

borrowed more short-term suffer from rollover risk and decrease investment relatively more.

However, this effect is dominated for the average firm by the negative effect of long-term

debt. These results are robust to accounting for weak bank and aggregate demand effects. The

negative effect of firms leverage on investment is persistent for up to four years after the crisis

in countries with sovereign stress, resulting in a cumulative decline in investment for these

firms of about 32 percentage points. A simple back of the envelope calculation based on our

firm-level estimates suggests that the debt overhang channel explains about 40 percent of the

actual decline in aggregate corporate investment during the crisis.

   Our results are complementary to the existing explanations in the literature that have fo-

cused on aggregate demand, banking health, and sovereign-bank linkages to explain the sever-

ity of the crisis. Our results also point to the dangers of the rise in corporate financial distress


                                                37
during the ongoing COVID crisis. While governments have provided ample liquidity to cash-

strapped firms during the lockdown periods, it can be expected that these liquidity problems

will turn into solvency problems for many firms, especially highly indebted firms. Our find-

ings imply that an increase in firm debt overhang can have strong persistent negative effects

on firm investment going forward. Our findings suggest that growth-enhancing policies that

more directly target and improve the financial conditions of firms may be needed to reduce

the debt overhang and stimulate the real economy. The results also point to the dangers of an

overreliance on short-term debt to finance investment during good times, especially in coun-

tries that are prone to sovereign risk.




                                             38
References
Acharya, Viral, Douglas Gale, and Tanju Yorulmazer, “Rollover Risk and Market Freezes,”
 Journal of Finance, 2011, 66 (4), 1177–1209.

  , Itamar Drechsler, and Philipp Schnabl, “A Pyrrhic Victory? Bank Bailouts and Sovereign
  Credit Risk,” Journal of Finance, 2014, 69 (6), 2689–2739.

Admati, Anat R., Peter M. Demarzo, Martin F. Hellwig, and Paul Pfleiderer, “The Leverage
 Ratchet Effect,” The Journal of Finance, 2018, 73 (1), 145–198.

Almeida, Heitor, Murillo Campello, and Michael S. Weisbach, “Corporate Financial and
  Investment Policies when Future Financing is not Frictionless,” Journal of Corporate Finance,
  2011, 17 (3), 675–693.

Andrews, Dan and Filippos Petroulakis, “Breaking the Shackles: Zombie Firms, Weak Banks
 and Depressed Restructuring in Europe,” ECB Working Paper No. 2240 2019.

Aragón, Nicolás, “Banks vs Zombies,” Universidad Carlos III de Madrid 2019.

Arellano, Manuel and Olympia Bover, “Another look at the instrumental variable estimation
  of error-components models,” Journal of Econometrics, 1995, 68 (1), 29–51.

   and Stephen Bond, “Some tests of specification for panel data: Monte Carlo evidence and
  an application to employment equations,” The Review of Economic Studies, 1991, 58 (2), 277–
  297.

Barnea, Amir, Robert A. Haugen, and Lemma W. Senbet, “A Rationale for Debt Maturity
  Structure and Call Provisions in the Agency Theoretic Framework,” Journal of Finance, 1980,
  35 (5), 1223–1234.

Bond, Stephen and Costas Meghir, “Dynamic Investment Models and the Firm’s Financial
  Policy,” Review of Economic Studies, 1994, 61 (2), 197–222.

Caballero, Ricardo J., Takeo Hoshi, and Anil K. Kashyap, “Zombie Lending and Depressed
  Restructuring in Japan,” American Economic Review, 2008, 98 (5), 1943–1977.

Chaterjee, Stayajit and Burcu Eyigungor, “Maturity, Indebtedness, and Default risk,” Ameri-
 can Economic Review, 2012, 102 (6), 2674–2699.

Chodorow-Reich, Gabriel, “The Employment Effects of Credit Market Disruptions: Firm-
 level Evidence from the 2008–9 Financial Crisis,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2014,
 129 (1), 1–59.

Cloyne, James, Clodomiro Ferreira, Maren Froemel, and Paolo Surico, “Monetary Policy,
  Corporate Finance and Investment,” NBER Working Paper No. 25366 2018.

Darst, R. Matthew and Ehraz Refayet, “A Collateral Theory of Endogenous Debt Maturity,”
 Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017-057, Board of Governors of the Federal Re-
 serve System 2017.



                                              39
De Jong, Abe and Ronald Van Dijk, “Determinants of Leverage and Agency Problems: A
 Regression Approach with Survey Data,” The European Journal of Finance, 2007, 13 (6), 565–
 593.

Diamond, Douglas W., “Debt Maturity Structure and Liquidity Risk,” The Quarterly Journal of
 Economics, 1991, pp. 709–737.

  and Raghuram G. Rajan, “Fear of Fire Sales, Illiquidity Seeking, and Credit Freezes,” The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2011, 126 (2), 557–591.

   and Zhiguo He, “A Theory of Debt Maturity: The Long and Short of Debt Overhang,”
  Journal of Finance, 2014, 69 (2), 719–762.

Ding, Wenzhi, Ross Levine, Chen Lin, and Wensi Xie, “Corporate Immunity to the COVID-
 19 Pandemic,” Working Paper 27055, National Bureau of Economic Research April 2020.

Dinlersoz, Emin, S.ebnem Kalemli-Özcan, Henry Hyatt, and Veronika Penciakova, “Lever-
 age over the Life Cycle and Implications for Firm Growth and Shock Responsiveness,”
 NBER Working Paper No. 25226 2018.

Drechsel, Thomas, “Earnings-Based Borrowing Constraints and Macroeconomic Fluctua-
 tions,” Technical Report, University of Maryland 2019.

Eisdorfer, Assaf, “Empirical Evidence of Risk Shifting in Financially Distressed Firms,” Journal
  of Finance, 2008, 63 (2), 609–637.

Gennaioli, Nicola, Alberto Martin, and Stefano Rossi, “Sovereign Default, Domestic Banks,
 and Financial Institutions,” Journal of Finance, 2014, 69 (2), 819–866.

Giannetti, Mariassunta and Steven Ongena, ““Lending by Example”: Direct and Indirect
 Effects of Foreign Banks in Emerging Markets,” Journal of International Economics, 2012, 86
 (1), 167–180.

Gilje, Erik P., “Do Firms Engage in Risk-Shifting? Empirical Evidence,” Review of Financial
 Studies, 2016, 29 (11), 2925–2954.

Giroud, Xavier and Holger M. Mueller, “Firm Leverage, Consumer Demand, and Employ-
 ment Losses during the Great Recession,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2017, pp. 271–
 316.

Gopinath, Gita, Şebnem Kalemli-Özcan, Loukas Karabarbounis, and Carolina Villegas-
 Sánchez, “Capital Allocation and Productivity in Southern Europe,” The Quarterly Journal of
 Economics, 2017, 132 (4), 1915–1967.

Hennessy, Christopher A., “Tobin’s Q, Debt Overhang, and Investment,” Journal of Finance,
 2004, 59 (4), 1717–1742.

  , Amnon Levy, and Toni M. Whited, “Testing ‘Q’ Theory With Financing Frictions,” Journal
  of Financial Economics, 2007, 83 (3), 691–717.

Hoshi, Takeo, Anil Kashyap, and David Scharfstein, “The Role of Banks in Reducing the
 Costs of Financial Distress in Japan,” Journal of Financial Economics, 1990, 27 (1), 67–88.

                                              40
Jensen, Michael C. and William H. Meckling, “Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behavior,
  Agency Costs and Ownership Structure,” Journal of Financial Economics, 1976, 3 (4), 305–360.

Kalemli-Özcan, S.ebnem, Bent E. Sørensen, Carolina Villegas-Sánchez, Vadym Volosovych,
 and Sevcan Yesiltas, “How to Construct Nationally Representative Firm Level Data from
 the Orbis Global Database: New Facts and Aggregate Implications,” NBER Working Paper
 21558 2019.

Kashyap, Anil K., Jeremy C. Stein, and David W. Wilcox, “Monetary Policy and Credit Con-
 ditions: Evidence from the Composition of External Finance,” American Economic Review,
 1993, 83 (1), 79–98.

  , Owen A. Lamont, and Jeremy C. Stein, “Credit Conditions and the Cyclical Behavior of
  Inventories,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1994, 109 (3), 565–92.

Kashyap, Anil K, Owen Lamont, and Jeremy C. Stein, “Monetary Policy and Bank Lending,”
 in Gregory Mankiw, ed., Monetary Policy, Vol. 29 of Studies in Business Cycles, The University
 of Chicago Press, 1994, chapter 7, pp. 221–261.

Krugman, Paul, “Financing vs. Forgiving a Debt Overhang,” Journal of Development Economics,
  1988, 29 (3), 253–268.

Lamont, Owen, “Corporate-Debt Overhang and Macroeconomic Expectations,” American Eco-
  nomic Review, 1995, 85 (5), 1106–17.

Lang, Larry, Eli Ofek, and René M. Stulz, “Leverage, Investment, and Firm Growth,” Journal
  of Financial Economics, 1996, 40 (1), 3–29.

Martin, Philippe and Thomas Philippon, “Inspecting the Mechanism: Leverage and the
 Great Recession in the Eurozone,” American Economic Review, 2017, 107 (7), 1904–1937.

Moyen, Nathalie, “How Big is the Debt Overhang Problem?,” Journal of Economic Dynamics
 and Control, 2007, 31 (2), 433–472.

Myers, Stewart C., “Determinants of Corporate Borrowing,” Journal of Financial Economics,
 1977, 5 (2), 147–175.

Nickell, Stephen, “Biases in dynamic models with fixed effects,” Econometrica, 1981, pp. 1417–
 1426.

Occhino, Filippo and Andrea Pescatori, “Debt Overhang in a Business Cycle Model,” Euro-
 pean Economic Review, 2015, 73, 58–84.

Óscar Jordà, “Estimation and Inference of Impulse Responses by Local Projections,” American
 Economic Review, 2005, 95 (1), 161–182.

Ottonello, Pablo and Thomas Winberry, “Financial Heterogeneity and the Investment Chan-
 nel of Monetary Policy,” NBER Working Paper No. 24221 2018.

Peek, Joe and Eric S. Rosengren, “Collateral Damage: Effects of the Japanese Bank Crisis on
  Real Activity in the United States,” American Economic Review, 2000, pp. 30–45.


                                              41
  and , “Unnatural Selection: Perverse Incentives and the Misallocation of Credit in Japan,”
  American Economic Review, 2005, 95 (4), 1144–1166.

Popov, Alexander and Neeltje Van Horen, “Exporting Sovereign Stress: Evidence From Syn-
  dicated Bank Lending during the Euro Area Sovereign Debt Crisis,” Review of Finance, 2015,
  19 (5), 1825–1866.

Schivardi, Fabiano, Enrico Sette, and Guido Tabellini, “Credit Misallocation during the Eu-
  ropean Financial Crisis,” BIS Working Papers No.1139 2017.

Titman, Sheridan and Sergey Tsyplakov, “A Dynamic Model of Optimal Capital Structure,”
  Review of Finance, 2007, 11 (3), 401–451.

Whited, Toni M., “Debt, Liquidity Constraints, and Corporate Investment: Evidence From
 Panel Data,” Journal of Finance, 1992, 47 (4), 1425–1460.




                                            42
