NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SHOCK VALUE: BILL SMOOTHING AND ENERGY PRICE PASS-THROUGH
Catherine Hausman
Working Paper 24558
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24558

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2018

I thank Stephen Holland, Severin Borenstein, Lucas Davis, Joe Shapiro, and workshop and seminar
participants at Arizona State University, Colorado School of Mines, the University of Calgary, the
University of California Energy Institute, the University of Chicago (EPIC), the University of Michigan,
Yale University, and the MSU/UM/WMU EEE Workshop for useful comments. Thanks to Benjamin
Rego for assistance collecting pricing data. All errors are my own.. The views expressed herein are
those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2018 by Catherine Hausman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Shock Value: Bill Smoothing and Energy Price Pass-Through
Catherine Hausman
NBER Working Paper No. 24558
April 2018, Revised August 2019
JEL No. L11,L95,Q41
ABSTRACT
Energy prices are volatile, affect every consumer and industry in the economy, and are impacted by
regulations including gas taxes and carbon pricing. Like the pass-through literature in general, the
growing energy pass-through literature focuses on marginal prices. However, multi-part pricing is
common in energy retail pricing. I examine the retail natural gas market, showing that while marginal
prices exhibit full or nearly full pass-through, fixed fees exhibit negative pass-through. This is consistent
with the stated desire by utilities and regulators to prevent "bill shock." I discuss implications for pass-through
estimation and for proposed alternative pricing structures for regulated utilities.

Catherine Hausman
Gerald R. Ford School of Public Policy
University of Michigan
735 South State Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER
chausman@umich.edu

Energy price pass-through has received much recent attention (Marion and Muehlegger, 2011; Borenstein and Kellogg, 2014; Fabra and Reguant, 2014; Ganapati, Shapiro and
Walker, 2016; Stolper, 2016; Knittel, Meiselman and Stock, 2017; Lade and Bushnell, 2017;
Muehlegger and Sweeney, 2017; Chu, Holladay and LaRiviere, Forthcoming). Energy prices
can be extremely volatile, they impact every consumer and every industry in the economy,
and they are frequently impacted by regulations including gasoline taxes and carbon pricing.
In this paper, I examine pass-through in the natural gas market. In the last two decades,
natural gas prices have seen tremendous variation arising from both supply-side shocks such
as the fracking revolution and demand-side shocks such as polar vortex winters. The average year-on-year real upstream change (in absolute value) over 2002-2015 was 20 percent,
and more than 10 percent of months saw a year-on-year price change of at least 40 percent.
Because gas input costs are observable, the natural gas distribution utility sector provides
an ideal setting for understanding firm behavior.
Natural gas distribution firms—which provide the delivery of gas via pipelines through
cities to homes and businesses—face high fixed costs and relatively low marginal cost. The
distribution sector is thus a natural monopoly, and it is typically regulated by quasi-judicial
public utility commissions. Retail prices are determined so that firms can recover costs plus
a return for their investors. The textbook model of efficient utility pricing is thus a two-part
tariff: a volumetric fee set to recover marginal costs, and a lump-sum customer charge (on,
e.g., a monthly basis) set to recover fixed costs (Viscusi, Vernon and Harrington, 2005). As
such, multi-part tariffs are common in retail natural gas pricing, as well as in other utility
settings such as electricity and water distribution. The energy price pass-through literature,
like the pass-through literature in general, typically examines the impact of marginal cost
shocks on marginal prices. In this paper, I examine pass-through to both marginal prices
and fixed fees, finding that while marginal prices exhibit full or nearly full pass-through,
fixed fees exhibit negative pass-through.
These results are consistent with stated objectives of utilities and their price regulators.
Regulators are typically charged not only with setting prices that are cost-based, but that also
promote other goals, such as being easily interpretable and not unduly discriminatory. Most
importantly for this paper, one of the other objectives frequently stated is something along
the lines of avoiding “unnecessary rate shock.”1 A version of this objective comes from a
text used by many price regulators, Principles of Public Utility Rates (1988), by Bonbright,
Danielsen and Kamerschen, which includes as a “desirable attribute” the “[s]tability and
predictability of the rates themselves, with a minimum of unexpected changes seriously
adverse to rate-payers and with a sense of historical continuity” (p. 383).
1

Retail prices are usually called “rates” or “tariffs.”

1

I first provide background on retail price structures and on the regulatory process by
which prices are set. I next model the regulator’s problem when setting retail prices. In a
simple two-period framework, I show how fixed fees might be used to smooth bill volatility
induced by changes in input prices.
Next, I use survey data on utility fixed fees to show that they are negatively impacted by
gas input costs. Then, using a comprehensive dataset on utility input costs, revenues, and
volumes transacted, I recover the typical price structure of natural gas distributors in the US.
In particular, I estimate the response of both volumetric charges and fixed fees to changes
in input costs. Consistent with anecdotal and survey evidence regarding frequent updating
of gas commodity charges,2 I show essentially full pass-through to volumetric prices. I show
that every $1/mcf (dollar per thousand cubic feet) shock to citygate prices3 leads to a $1/mcf
change in the volumetric component of retail prices, although around half of the pass-through
comes with a lag of at least one month. In addition, I again show that high input prices
lead to reduced fixed fees, such that the bill total is smoothed. A positive shock of $1/mcf
at the citygate level leads to a decrease in the fixed fee of $0.4 per residential customer per
month. At the average quantity purchased, this would imply that 6 percent of a price shock
is smoothed away, i.e. does not appear in the change to the bill total. That is, bill totals
are less volatile than would be expected from input cost volatility. These results are robust
to an array of alternative specifications, under which I estimate that 3 to 18 percent of the
price shock is smoothed away. Overall, these results are consistent with both the model of
the regulator’s objective and with the stated objective of lessening “bill shock.”
Moreover, I provide evidence that utility expenditures are impacted. Using detailed panel
data on the expenditures of over 200 large investor-owned utilities, I show that capital expenditures fall when gas input prices are high. This matches anecdotal evidence from the
electricity and natural gas industries that the low gas prices induced by fracking have allowed
utilities to engage in more capital investment than they otherwise would have. Recent discussions around aging utility infrastructure have emphasized questions about how to finance
infrastructure upgrades (Hausman and Muehlenbachs, 2016), and these results suggest that
utilities have looked to raise the necessary funds in ways that protect consumers from bill
shock.
The paper contributes to a better understanding of both firm and regulator behavior in
natural monopoly settings, an area of interest to the energy economics literature. The most
directly related previous work has examined other aspects of retail pricing decisions in the
2

Gas “commodity charges” are automatically-updated charges designed to reflect gas input costs.
Citygate prices refer to the cost of natural gas at the point at which a utility purchases it. Throughout
the paper, I use the terms “citygate price” and “input cost” interchangeably.
3

2

natural gas market, particularly the presence of outsized volumetric mark-ups (Davis and
Muehlegger, 2010; Borenstein and Davis, 2012). For a discussion of pricing decisions and
risk-shifting between utilities and consumers, see Beecher and Kihm (2016). The results
are also closely related to work on political pressure on utility regulators (Joskow, 1974;
Joskow, Rose and Wolfram, 1996; McRae and Meeks, 2016). For instance, Joskow (1974)
writes that the “primary concern of regulatory commissions has been to keep nominal prices
from increasing... Consumer groups and their representatives (including politicians) tend
to be content if the nominal prices they are charged for services are constant or falling”
(pp 298–299). Other work on retail pricing decisions for utilities includes Knittel (2003),
which examines cross-subsidization consistent with interest group pressure, and Levinson
and Silva (2018), which examines how price structures might respond to concerns about income inequality. More generally, a long literature has examined utility and regulator behavior
(Abito, 2016; Lim and Yurukoglu, 2016; Borenstein, Busse and Kellogg, 2012; Guthrie, 2006;
Leaver, 2009; Joskow, Rose and Wolfram, 1996). Non-academic papers providing recommendations for utilities and commissions for dealing with rate shock include Graves, Hanser and
Basheda (2007); Kolbe, Hanswer and Zhou (2013). This paper’s contribution is to examine
how multi-part pricing responds to the potential for political pressure.
Also closely related is the large literature on pass-through in energy markets from wholesale to retail prices. A large strand of this literature aims to understand asymmetric passthrough, in which prices rise more rapidly than they fall (Borenstein, Cameron and Gilbert,
1997; Davis and Hamilton, 2004; Johnson, 2002; Lewis, 2011; Tappata, 2009). Other strands
of the literature have instead focused on how taxes and other marginal costs are passed
through in, for instance, electricity and fuel markets (Marion and Muehlegger, 2011; Borenstein and Kellogg, 2014; Fabra and Reguant, 2014; Stolper, 2016; Knittel, Meiselman and
Stock, 2017). Because energy markets are impacted by taxes and other regulatory costs
(such as cap and trade markets), understanding pass-through to retail prices is important.
The results on the importance of bill volatility to regulators is currently of additional policy relevance, as it has surfaced in discussions around real-time pricing in electricity (Borenstein, 2005, 2013; Beecher and Kihm, 2016) and around retail choice (Hortacsu, Madanizadeh
and Puller, 2017). Policy changes such as real-time pricing could increase bill volatility, and
these results suggest that this could be a real concern for price regulators and/or consumers.
At the same time, the rise of renewables implies that the welfare gains to real-time pricing
are growing (Imelda, Fripp and Roberts, 2018).
The results on pass-through and price setting are also related to the large industrial
organization literature on mark-ups. Of most direct relevance is work on bill shock in cellular telephone service (Grubb, 2012, 2015; Grubb and Osborne, 2015). That set of papers
3

examines the welfare implications of cellular pricing plans in which overage charges can substantially increase a customer’s bill. A key difference with the natural gas sector that I
investigate is that bill shock for cellular service arises not because of exogenous shocks to
input costs, but rather because firms use non-linear pricing in which quantity shocks push
customers onto a much higher marginal price. In contrast, I investigate a setting in which
firms adjust their prices to smooth exogenous cost shocks. More generally, though, two-part
tariffs are found in many settings beyond the natural gas industry that I study. Multi-part
payment schemes are used in credit card networks, in clubs with membership dues and usage
fees, in the royalty and bonus system in mineral extraction, etc. My results suggest that in
settings with non-linear prices, pass-through should be evaluated for all price components.
Finally, the results on the stickiness of bill totals relate to the macroeconomic literature
on nominal rigidities (Bils and Klenow, 2004; Boivin, Giannoni and Mihov, 2009; Gorodnichenko and Weber, 2016; Kehoe and Midrigan, 2015; Nakamura and Steinsson, 2008),
offering support for one of the explanations for sticky prices in that literature. While some
models of sticky prices rely on menu costs, another set of models considers the role of consumer antagonism. These papers hypothesize that customers respond negatively to price
changes, leading to loss of brand loyalty, search for an alternative product or supplier, boycotts, or other forms of demand decreases (Anderson and Simester, 2010; Rotemberg, 2005,
2011; Sibly, 2002). Similarly, some of the pass-through literature in energy markets has
focused on models in which rising prices induce customers to search more or otherwise transfer loyalty (Davis and Hamilton, 2004; Lewis, 2011). The setting I explore is more closely
related to these consumer antagonism models than to, e.g. the menu cost models; it is not
that menu costs are high for some technological reason (gas input costs are automatically
incorporated in bill totals) but rather that firms or price regulators deliberately smooth cost
shocks to avoid outcry.
In the consumer antagonism literature, firms are attempting to avoid the switching by
consumers of products or suppliers. That is one potential explanation for the behavior I
observe, since fuel switching away from natural gas is possible, and also since some states
have retail choice programs. However, these options are limited (for instance, in most states
retail choice programs are non-existent or have very limited participation), so for many
consumers, no alternative is available. In that case, demand is not directly impacted by bill
shock. Rather, the setting is consistent with the firm or the commission seeking to avoid
negative press, customer complaints to call centers, or some other form of political pressure.
It is thus consistent with the idea of perceived “fairness” in utility pricing, akin to what is
described by Zajac (1985). The consumer antagonism channel is of interest in many settings
beyond utility pricing. While menu costs may decrease with technological change, such as
4

the rise of online retailers, the potential for consumer antagonism as a source of sticky prices
is likely to continue to be important.
This paper proceeds as follows. Section 1 provides background on utility pricing. Section
2 provides a model of retail pricing with and without the desire to avoid bill shock. Section
3 shows empirical results for the price structure as well as capital expenditures. Section 4
concludes with thoughts on welfare and policy implications.

1

Background

1.1

Natural Gas Utilities

Natural gas providers in the US primarily face two forms of regulation. The majority of
customers are served by investor-owned utilities, companies that face price regulations at the
state level and that generally serve a large number of customers. Approximately 300 such
companies currently serve US customers. Other customers are served instead by municipal
providers. Approximately 900 such municipal providers currently exist, although their service
territories are much smaller than those of the investor-owned utilities—overall, investorowned utilities sell 90 percent of all volume distributed.
Investor-owned utilities are not free to set retail prices nor to determine capital expenditures; instead prices and expenditures are regulated by state-level public utility commissions.
Commissions are tasked with ensuring that prices are “just and reasonable.” The typical
investor-owned utility uses a price structure composed of three parts. The first part is the
gas cost recovery charge;4 this is a volumetric price set equal to the utility’s purchasing
cost. This price is typically updated frequently (e.g., monthly) via automatic adjustment
clauses.5 In addition, the utility typically charges both a volumetric mark-up, known as
a distribution charge,6 and a fixed charge.7 These two components of the retail price are
not updated automatically; instead the utility must go before regulators and justify any
change to these components of the retail prices. A lengthy quasi-judicial regulatory process
follows, in which the firm provides evidence relating to its costs, which the utility commission then weighs against evidence provided by interest groups such as rate-payer advocates.
Volumetric mark-ups and fixed fees accordingly tend to change only every couple of years.8
4

The name varies across utilities; it might be called a gas cost recovery charge, the gas cost factor, the
cost of gas, or a procurement charge.
5
In my data, the median frequency of changes to the observed gas cost recovery charges is one month.
6
Also sometimes called a delivery charge, transportation charge, or transmission charge.
7
Also called a customer charge, basic charge, or service charge. Sometimes related to a minimum charge.
8
In my data, the typical (both mean and median) utility changes its volumetric mark-ups every two
years. For fixed fees, the median frequency of changes is every three years and the mean is every four years.

5

Figure 1: Bill Components for Two Example Utilities

Note: Each panel shows the nominal prices for three bill components: the monthly fixed charge ($ per customer per month),
the commodity charge ($/mcf), and the volumetric mark-up ($/mcf). In addition, state-level average citygate prices from EIA
are shown; the commodity charges track these closely. The two panels show two different utilities, both large investor-owned
utilities.

Time series of these bill components are presented in Figure 1, for two large investorowned utilities. The monthly fixed charge (thick black line), around 8 to 14 dollars in nominal
terms, changes several times for the left-hand utility and just once for the right-hand utility.
For these two utilities, fixed fees are rising in nominal terms over this time period. According
to a nation-wide survey by the American Gas Association, fixed fees have generally been
rising in nominal terms. Historically, this approximately kept pace with inflation. Increases
in fixed charges in real terms have only come since around 2010 (American Gas Association,
2015).
The volumetric mark-up in Figure 1 (dashed grey) changes at the same time as the fixed
fee. In contrast, the gas cost recovery charge changes approximately monthly and closely
matches the state-wide citygate price.
The specifics of how these three price components are implemented vary across utilities,
across time, and across customer types (“classes”) within a utility. For instance, some
utilities use flat volumetric fees while others use increasing (or decreasing) block prices.
Economic theory provides some guidance on these components—namely that marginal price
should be set equal to marginal cost—but other aspects are necessarily guided more by
distributional and political considerations. For instance, an efficient two-part tariff might
use a flat volumetric charge equal to the gas input cost, with a fixed charge set to recover
all remaining fixed costs. A remaining distributional question, then, is how to allocate fixed
charges across customer types (e.g. residential versus industrial users; or low-income versus
high-income groups). Unless elasticities along the extensive margin are large (i.e. customers
respond to fixed charges by disconnecting from the service), the latter question has little
6

importance in terms of economic efficiency but can be of great importance politically.

1.2

Stability as a Price-Setting Goal

Both utilities and commissions refer in their documents to a guiding set of principles for
price-setting for gas and electric service provision. The principles (Bonbright, Danielsen and
Kamerschen, 1988) relate to economic efficiency, but also to equity, revenue adequacy and
stability, bill stability, and customer satisfaction. Of particular interest for this paper is
Bonbright’s third principle, quoted above, regarding rate stability and predictability. This
is sometimes summarized as avoiding “rate shock” or “bill shock” and sometimes as the
principle of “gradualism” in implementing price changes.
For instance, testimony in a Maryland rate case stated that a “critical ratemaking goal
is continuity with past rates and avoiding rate and bill shocks. This goal is often recognized
in Commission decisions that move classes toward more equality in rate of return without
imposing very large increases.”9 Similar reasoning appears in rate cases in numerous states.
For instance, a New York politician submitted comments to the Public Service Commission
to oppose gas and electric price hikes in the wake of energy price hikes caused by hurricanes
Katrina and Rita, saying “the ‘rate shock’ coupled with already skyrocketing energy costs
could threaten the health and safety of many families.”10 In addition to opposition to any
price increase at all, some documents advocate for under-collection of a utility’s cost in the
wake of high input prices,11 or phasing in price increases.12 While residential users, particularly low-income users, are frequently mentioned, business users are as well,13 and prior
work has suggested that large industrial customers are able to exert pressure (Joskow, Rose
and Wolfram, 1996). Sometimes rate shock is mentioned in the context of simply providing
additional information to prepare customers, but frequently the timing and magnitude of
9

Maryland
Public
Service
Commission.
Case
No
8959.
Direct
Testimony
of
William
B.
Marcus.
June
20
2003.
Accessed
from
http://webapp.psc.state.md.us/Intranet/casenum/CaseAction new.cfm?CaseNumber=8959.
10
Cahill, Kevin. Re: CASE 05-E-0934 - Proceeding on Motion of the Commission as to the Rates,
Charges, Rules and Regulations of Central Hudson Gas & Electric Corporation for Electric Service
and CASE 05-G-0935 - Proceeding on Motion of the Commission as to the Rates, Charges, Rules
and Regulations of Central Hudson Gas & Electric Corporation for Gas Service. May 24, 2006.
Accessed from http://documents.dps.ny.gov/public/Common/ViewDoc.aspx?DocRefId={645401D8-F5614146-8EFA-1FBB61E9DBAA}.
11
State of New Hampshire Public Utilities Commission. DG 13-251. Order No 25,633. February 28, 2014.
Accessed from http://www.puc.state.nh.us/%5C/Regulatory/Orders/2014orders/25633g.pdf.
12
Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission. Opinion and Order: Pennsylvania PUC v. Herman Oil &
Gas Company, Inc. June 11, 2015. Accessed from http://www.puc.state.pa.us/pcdocs/1365540.docx.
13
Michigan
Energy
Forum
Comment.
“Joint
response
from
Consumers
Energy,
DTE
Energy,
and
MEGA.”
2013.
Accessed
from
http://www.michigan.gov/documents/energy/Additional Question 8 response from DTE Consumers and
MEGA 419053 7.pdf

7

price changes also adjusts to incorporate concerns about bill stability (Graves, Hanser and
Basheda, 2007; Edison Electric Institute, 2016).
Anecdotal evidence from several sources suggests that rate shock avoidance impacts not
only retail prices, but also companies’ capital expenditures. One trade magazine described an
industry analyst’s 2012 comments by writing “low-cost natural gas has provided ‘headroom’
in electricity prices, which has helped utilities pursue ‘significant capital spending’ plans
with little risk of rate shock.”14 While that quote focuses on electric utilities, a press release
from the American Gas Association in 2012 stated that “[a]dvances in American technology
for natural gas production have unlocked an abundance of this domestic clean energy source
which has contributed to huge savings for residential and commercial customers. America’s
natural gas utilities are using this opportunity to continue to improve our nation’s natural
gas infrastructure, and they are working with local regulators to develop innovative models
for making these capital investments possible.”15 Similarly, slides shown to investors by a
major natural gas company, CenterPoint Energy, stated that the “[l]ow natural gas price
environment in the U.S. reduces the potential that increased capital investment will cause
customer rate shock.”16
Overall, the exact way a utility or commission might incorporate rate shock avoidance
in its price setting is likely to vary. The goal of this paper is not to provide a comprehensive catalogue or break-down, but rather to investigate how typical retail prices respond to
cost changes in ways that are consistent with rate shock avoidance. As such, I leave aside
strategies that focus on informational campaigns rather than adjustments to retail prices
themselves, although future research on information provision would be of value.17 I also
leave aside the strategic interactions between utilities and commissions related to price setting. That is, I do not take a stand on the extent to which utilities versus commissions
drive bill-smoothing behavior. Future work could explicitly model the strategic interactions
of these two players, perhaps incorporating the behavior of rate-payer advocates as well, in
the spirit of Abito (2016) or Leaver (2009).18
14

Makansi, Jason. July 1 2012. “Innovation Required as Gas Displaces Coal.” Power Magazine.
American Gas Association. June 28 2012 News Release: “Natural Gas Utilities: Building and Enhancing
an Advanced Energy Delivery System.” Accessed from https://www.aga.org/news/news-releases/naturalgas-utilities-building-and-enhancing-advanced-energy-delivery-system.
16
CenterPoint Energy,
Inc.
Form 8-K. March 26,
2015.
Accessed from
http://investors.centerpointenergy.com/secfiling.cfm?filingid=1193125-15-106014&cik=1130310.
17
A related phenomenon is the use of “budget billing,” in which a customer’s monthly payments are
roughly equalized over the year, smoothing shocks associated with cold weather in winter. This price
structure frequently targets low-income users. Sexton (2015) empirically investigates this price structure for
a utility in South Carolina, finding that customers on budget billing increase their consumption, which the
author attributes to a decrease in price salience. Other related work includes Beard, Gropper and Raymond
(1998); Borenstein (2013).
18
A related older literature looked empirically at how commission characteristics impacts regulations
15

8

1.3

Other Strategies for Reducing Price Volatility

Another strategy for mitigating retail price volatility is hedging to smooth input cost volatility.19 Utilities use several forms of hedging: physical storage of gas, long-term contracts, and
financial instruments. Because of the automatic pass-through clauses in many jurisdictions,
utilities may have limited financial incentive to hedge. Instead, hedging is frequently justified
by the desire to provide stability for retail prices (Graves and Levine, 2010; Costello, 2016).
However, analysts have noted that regulatory risk limits the amount of hedging actually
done by utilities: utilities may be punished by regulators for hedging that ex-post was not in
the utility’s favor (Borenstein, Busse and Kellogg, 2012; Graves and Levine, 2010; Costello,
2016). The extent of hedging has varied over time, but recent reports indicate that the use of
storage is nearly universal (perhaps accounting for a quarter or a third of winter volume) and
the use of financial instruments is also widespread (typically at a term of around a year) (Energy Information Administration, 2007; Graves and Levine, 2010; American Gas Association,
2016; Costello, 2016). While long-term contracts are also used, they are frequently written
with first-of-month pricing rather than fixed pricing (Graves and Levine, 2010; American
Gas Association, 2016). Below, I consider how hedging would enter my model as well as how
it could impact my empirical results.

2

Model

I begin with a simple model of the regulator’s behavior, in which the regulator observes all
costs faced by the utility, knows the consumer’s utility function, and sets prices to maximize
social welfare. Suppose there are two periods, in each of which the firm faces input costs,
composed of variable costs c and fixed costs G. The regulator sets retail prices in order to
maximize social welfare, accounting for the utility that consumers derive from consuming
quantity q of gas, and subject to a budget neutrality constraint (over the two periods; i.e.
banking and borrowing are assumed to be permitted). The regulator is able to use both
variable prices p and fixed fees F . The regulator’s problem is then:
max

p1 ,p2 ,F1 ,F2

s.t.

U (q1 ) + U (q2 ) − c1 q1 − c2 q2

p1 q1 + F1 + p2 q2 + F2 = c1 q1 + c2 q2 + G1 + G2

(Besley and Coate, 2003; Hagerman and Ratchford, 1978; Primeaux Jr. and Mann, 1986).
19
Regressions in the Appendix are suggestive of delayed and incomplete pass-through from the upstream
(Henry Hub) price to the reported citygate purchase price, consistent with hedging.

9

At the optimum, the regulator simply sets marginal price equal to marginal cost: p1 = c1
and p2 = c2 . The regulator can select, at the optimum, any F1 and F2 such that F1 + F2 =
G1 + G2 . This is the standard two-part tariff typically seen in utility pricing, in which
marginal price is set equal to marginal cost and fixed fees are used to cover all remaining
fixed costs.
Now suppose that the regulator faces an additional penalty for volatility in the bill total.
To motivate this penalty, suppose that consumers put political pressure on regulators when
bills change, as in Joskow, Rose and Wolfram (1996).20 This could be because consumers
face credit constraints, or it could result from consumers judging utility pricing “fairness”
by what is most easily observable to them—their bill total; this is related to the models
described by Kahneman, Knetsch and Thaler (1986) and Zajac (1985).21 The regulator’s
problem then becomes:
max

p1 ,p2 ,F1 ,F2

U (q1 ) + U (q2 ) − c1 q1 − c2 q2 − f (p1 q1 + F1 − p2 q2 − F2 )

s.t.

p1 q1 + F1 + p2 q2 + F2 = c1 q1 + c2 q2 + G1 + G2

Consider a quadratic penalty function: f = α (p1 q1 + F1 − p2 q2 − F2 )2 . Here α is a
constant denoting how large a penalty the regulator faces; i.e. how much consumer utility
is affected by bill volatility. At the optimum, marginal prices are unaffected; p1 = c1 and
p2 = c2 . However, fixed fees are now set at the optimum such that bill totals are equalized:
F1 = G −

1
(c1 q1 − c2 q2 )
2

F2 = G +

1
(c1 q1 − c2 q2 )
2

where G = 21 (G1 + G2 ). Thus the fixed fee will be set lower in the period with higher
variable cost.
Several aspects of this model are worth noting. First, the smoothing of the fixed fee when
the regulator faces a penalty for bill volatility does not depend on the magnitude of that
penalty, for this quadratic function. The α parameter drops out and does not impact the
fixed fees F . As such, the regulator will engage in this bill smoothing no matter how small
the penalty is. Even if only some portion of consumers exert pressure on the regulator,22 or
20

For extreme examples of political pressure, outside the US context, see McRae and Meeks (2016).
While the paper has focused conceptually on investor-owned utilities that are regulated by utility
commissions, note that similar political pressure from consumers might be expected for municipal utilities.
22
Note, however, that the simplified model abstracts from heterogeneity across customers. In reality,
21

10

even if all consumers care only a small amount about volatility, bill smoothing will occur.
Second, in theory it is possible at the optimum that the fixed fee would be need to be
negative in one of the two periods. This would occur if the volatility in variable cost is
sufficiently large relative to the magnitude of fixed costs G. In practice, this is unlikely
to be the case for the natural gas sector analyzed empirically in this paper. The typical
quantity sold to a residential household in the US is under 7 mcf per month (shown below,
in Table 2). Since the standard deviation of the citygate price is around $2.5/mcf, a one
standard deviation change in the citygate price would lead to a $17 change in the bill total.
The typical utility collects $35 per month per residential household in fees beyond what is
needed to cover gas costs (i.e., to cover fixed costs), indicating that fixed costs are large
relative to volatility in variable costs, so negative fees would be unlikely to be needed.
Third, this presentation uses a symmetric (quadratic) penalty function. One could imagine an asymmetric penalty function, in which there was no welfare loss for falling bill totals,
but a quadratic penalty for rising bill totals. In that case, if cost falls from period 1 to
period 2, any combination of fixed fees satisfying F1 + F2 = G1 + G2 can be used, as above,
provided that the bill total does not rise.23 If cost rises from period 1 to period 2, then
the combination of fixed fees such that bill totals are equalized (or weakly falling) is used.
For this simplified model, straightforward asymmetric behavior of fixed fees might not necessarily appear empirically, since the regulator can choose from a large menu of fixed fee
combinations without incurring penalty.
It is worth thinking about two alternative versions of the model that could also lead
to observed smoothing. First, consider the extensive margin, i.e. the consumer’s decision
to enter or exit the gas market, thus incurring or avoiding the fixed customer charge.24
The above model assumes there is no extensive margin. In a setting where the firm has
no discretion over the level of fixed costs, only over the timing of their recovery, and where
consumers are forward-looking, the extensive margin is unlikely to be central for the analysis.
Total fixed fees across the two periods are at the same level with and without smoothing,
and an informed customer will take into account the vector of fixed charges across time.
smoothing via the fixed fee would not protect all customers from bill shock if customers are heterogeneous
and there is a single pricing structure.
23
I.e., fixed fees could fall, stay flat, or rise, provided the rise in fixed fees did not outweight the fall in
the portion of bill total from the volumetric price.
24
For the natural gas market, exit from the market is possible for two reasons. The consumer may decide
to switch fuels (for instance, by using electricity for cooking and space heating), or in some states, the
consumer could decide to switch retailers. Fuel switching towards natural gas is expensive but has occurred
in some parts of the country in recent years (Myers, 2018). Retail choice is available in many states, but
in practice participation is very limited in all but a few states (Energy Information Administration, 2011,
2017). For analysis of retail choice in electricity markets, including a description of the consumer inertia
that limits participation, see Hortacsu, Madanizadeh and Puller (2017) and Puller and West (2013).

11

Thus the smoothing may impact when a customer enters the market, but is unlikely to
affect whether the customer enters the market. However, if the firm were able to adjust
the total amount of fixed cost recovery, or if the consumer were myopic, then it would be
possible to imagine a setting where bill smoothing is used to prevent consumers from exiting
the market. Specifically, as the marginal price rises, the consumer surplus triangle (gross
of fixed fees) falls. If it falls enough, then consumer surplus net of the fixed fee becomes
negative, and the consumer chooses to exit the market.25 Note this intuition is in line with
the consumer antagonism literature cited above. The empirical analysis that follows explores
the possibility of heterogeneity across states along this dimension.
Another extension of the model would lead to a slightly different explanation for observed
bill smoothing. Suppose the utility hedges a portion of its volume – using storage, a longterm contract, or a financial instrument. Then if the marginal cost of gas rises, this change
affects only a portion of volume purchased and sold. In this case, even though the utility
would adjust its marginal price upward, the fixed fee could be adjusted downward with the
firm still meeting its revenue constraint. To the extent that hedging was motivated by a
desire to keep bill totals stable (as described in Section 1.3), this would simply imply a
different mechanism by which fixed fees are used to smooth bill shock. Below, I discuss the
role of hedging in my empirical analysis.
Overall, this two-period model shows a context where the desire to avoid bill shock leads
to bill smoothing. Under the assumptions made here (no uncertainty, homogenous customers,
etc.), marginal prices are not distorted, and fixed fees are used to fully smooth all variable
cost shocks. As a result, one would empirically observe negative pass-through to fixed fees.
It is possible that in a more complicated model, partial but not full smoothing would
not occur. For instance, if there is uncertainty, the form smoothing would take and the
magnitude of the smoothing could depend on the regulator’s expectation over the path of
future cost shocks. Note also that in this simplified model there is no volumetric mark-up
at the optimum, although in practice such mark-ups exist (Davis and Muehlegger, 2010).
The presence of a mark-up could impact whether and how fixed fee smoothing is used by a
regulator, and smoothing could be used for the mark-up as well as the fixed fee. To examine
whether bill smoothing occurs in practice, and if so, how large it is and what form it takes,
I next turn to empirical pass-through analysis.
25

The extensive margin could also matter in a setting with positive volumetric mark-ups, as detailed in
Borenstein and Davis (2012).

12

3

Empirical Analysis

3.1

Data on Fixed Fees and Input Costs

The typical utility offers multiple pricing plans, some components of which change frequently,
and unfortunately there exists no dataset that aggregates this information across the over
1,300 utility providers in the US.26 However, I begin by leveraging three limited datasets: a
survey by the American Gas Association, a survey by Memphis Light, Gas, and Water (a
municipal utility), and my own retail pricing search.
The American Gas Association has periodically conducted an unbalanced survey of fixed
fees at around 150 to 200 utilities.27 Survey data are provided in AGA reports at the utility
level for the years 2010 and 2015, and averaged to the Census division level (e.g., New
England, Middle Atlantic, East North Central, etc.) for the years 2006, 2010, and 2015. The
average residential fee reported across the three years is $11 per customer per month.
Second, the municipal utility of Memphis Light, Gas and Water (MLGW) conducts an
annual survey of retail pricing at several dozen utilities, including natural gas (as well as
electricity and water).28 Their annual publication does not report fixed fees per se, but it
does report residential bill totals at different quantity levels, such as 1 mcf, 5 mcf, etc. I use
the bill totals for the two smallest quantities (1 mcf and 5 mcf) to back out the fixed fee;
I also verify that using other quantity points gives similar fixed fee estimates.29 The mean
fixed fee in these data is $13 per customer per month.
Finally, I collect residential tariff data for the 40 largest utilities in the US, using a
combination of searches of utility and commission websites, contacting utilities directly, and
the Internet Archive (archive.org). The resulting dataset is a monthly panel of these utilities;
the panel is unbalanced because of differential data availability across utilities. Details on
data collection are provided in the Appendix.30 Roughly matching the AGA survey data, the
26

A typical utility offers a low-income-specific rate, might have differential prices across regions within its
service territory, etc. Examples are provided in the Appendix and in Auffhammer and Rubin (2018).
27
The two most recent surveys are summarized in: American Gas Association, 2010, “Natural Gas
Utility Rate Structure: The Customer Charge Component – 2010 Update,” accessed December 2016
from https://www.aga.org/sites/default/files/ea 2010-04 customercharge2010.pdf; and American Gas Association, 2015, “Natural Gas Utility Rate Structure: The Customer Charge Component – 2015 Update,”
accessed December 2016 from https://www.aga.org/sites/default/files/ea 2015-03 customercharge2015.pdf.
28
The MLGW survey is not a random sample of utilities, nor is it even a balanced panel. Their 2016
publication reports that they “survey over 50 cities, including many that are geographically close to Memphis,
as well as utilities that are similar in size” (Memphis Light, Gas and Water, 2016). It is, of course, possible,
that cities are selected specifically based on how their prices compare with MLGW prices.
29
That is, I calculate the fixed fee as: the bill total at 1 mcf minus one quarter the difference between the
5 and 1 mcf bill totals.
30
There are a few limitations to this dataset, applying to both the fixed fees and the volumetric prices.
First, the dataset contains information on some, but not all, “riders” – temporary surcharges (or occasionally

13

mean fixed fee in these data is $12 per customer per month. The mean volumetric mark-up
is $4/mcf, and the mean gas commodity charge is $6/mcf.
Reassuringly, the mean fixed fee is roughly comparable across the three datasets. Additionally, while each dataset has limitations, they are likely to be different across the sources,
so no systematic error across the datasets is expected in my analysis. While the AGA data
are geographically quite aggregated, they at least represent a large sample of utilities. The
MLGW survey is not a random sample, but it provides greater disaggregation (both crosssectionally and temporally) than the AGA data. And while my own data collection does
not yield a balanced panel nor a random sample, it does provide information at the monthly
level for the largest utilities. It also allows for examination of volumetric prices (including
a breakdown into gas costs and mark-ups), which are not in either the AGA or the MLGW
data.
I also collect data on gas input costs to utilities. Specifically, I observe citygate prices
in dollars per thousand cubic feet ($/mcf). The data are at the monthly state level, covering 1989 to 2015, and are from the Energy Information Administration (EIA) at the US
Department of Energy. Recall that this citygate price is the price paid by a utility at the
point that natural gas enters the distribution system. The price reported by the EIA is the
quantity-weighted average across all utilities in a state. Prices vary because of demand-side
shocks like cold winters and supply-side shocks like the fracking boom, with cross-sectional
variation arising from pipeline congestion (see, e.g., Marmer, Shapiro and MacAvoy, 2007).
I normalize all price variables to 2015 dollars, using the CPI-All Urban Less Energy. Note
that since this citygate price variable is the average purchase price paid by the utility, it is
inclusive of the hedging described in Section 1.3.31 That is, any smoothing observed below
is in addition to smoothing that occurs via hedging.
For each of the three datasets, I regress the monthly fixed fee on the citygate price,
including fixed effects and a linear trend.32 The level at which the fixed fee is applied varies
across columns, since the cross-sectional unit varies. For Column 1, fixed fees are applied to
Census divisions (n = 9). For Column 2, a utility in a city is the cross-sectional unit. For
Column 3, the cross-sectional unit is a pricing plan at a utility. Most utilities are represented
in the dataset by a single pricing plan, but a few have, for instance, both a “heating” and
a “non-heating” rate. In that case, each has its own fixed effect. Similarly, the frequency
credits) that do not require a full rate case. Second, the dataset does not contain information on rates for
anything other than the standard or default residential rate. For instance, low-income pricing is not in the
data. Similarly, some utilities have different pricing plans across multiple service territories; in most cases,
the dataset has only captured the plan for one service area per state.
31
Further analysis of this is discussed in the Appendix.
32
For the AGA data, I use the citygate price for the year prior to the survey year, since the surveys were
conducted in February.

14

varies across datasets, based on data availability. For Column 1, the data are at the annual
level, albeit with 4 to 5 year gaps. For Column 2, the data are annual, and for Column 3
they are monthly.
The idea is to leverage citygate price shocks, which are generally thought to come from
upstream wholesale price shocks, to estimate pass-through to retail fixed fees. One identifying assumption is that fixed fees do not in turn impact citygate prices. Below, I consider
instrumental variables specifications to rule out this sort of endogeneity.
Results are presented in Table 1. Column 1 shows a coefficient on citygate price of -0.47,
statistically significant at the five percent level. This implies that for every $1/mcf rise in the
citygate price, the monthly fixed fee per customer falls by $0.47. Recall that in this dataset,
the median utility reports a fixed fee of around $11 per month per customer. For this utility,
a $1/mcf rise in the citygate price (roughly 20 percent of 2015 levels) would translate to a 4
percent fall in the fixed fee. As another way of understanding the magnitude, consider that
the average quantity consumed in a month is around 6.6 mcf per residential customer; this
would imply that a $1/mcf rise in the citygate price would, absent smoothing, translate to
an increase of $6.6 in the bill total. However, with smoothing, $0.47 (or 7 percent) of this
increase is muted by the change to the fixed fee. Given the infrequency with which fixed fees
adjust (because they require rate case proceedings), it is not surprising that the smoothing
is only partial.
Column 2 shows that the magnitude using the MLGW data is -0.31, albeit with noise.
Note that this column uses standard errors that are two-way clustered by state and year.
Column 3, using the prices I collect at the 40 largest utilities, shows a point estimate of 0.11, also statistically significant at the five percent level (standard errors are again two-way
clustered). Instrumental variable specifications, in the Appendix, also show that citygate
prices have a negative impact on fixed fees.
Finally, Columns 4 and 5 examine pass-through to volumetric prices, using the unbalanced panel from the 40 largest utilities. Given that these estimates cannot be compared
across multiple datasets, in contrast to the results for fixed fees, they should be taken as
suggestive. Column 4 examines pass-through to the volumetric mark-up, finding negative
pass-through, i.e. smoothing. In contrast, gas cost recovery charges, which are separately delineated on the typical bill, exhibit full pass-through – a coefficient of one cannot be rejected
at the five percent level (Column 5). These results are intuitive: automatic pass-through
clauses yield full pass-through, but smoothing may occur in volumetric mark-ups as well as
in fixed charges. Because these results are limited to a non-random subset of utilities, I next
turn to an empirical strategy that leverages a nationwide dataset.

15

Table 1: Residential Bill Smoothing

Citygate price, $/mcf

Fixed effects
Time trend

Dataset
Cross-sectional unit
Frequency

Observations
Within R2

(1)
Fixed Fee

(2)
Fixed Fee

(3)
Fixed Fee

(4)
Volumetric mark-up

(5)
Volumetric gas cost

-0.47**
(0.21)

-0.31
(0.22)

-0.11**
(0.05)

-0.10**
(0.04)

0.96***
(0.04)

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

AGA
Census division
Annual, with gaps

MLGW
Utility
Annual

Top 40
Utility by rate
Monthly

Top 40
Utility by rate
Monthly

Top 40
Utility by rate
Monthly

27
0.63

337
0.08

5,410
0.17

4,549
0.04

3,219
0.75

Notes: Column 1 uses observations at the level of a Census division (n=9), covering the years 2006, 2010, and 2015; the data
source is AGA surveys. Column 2 uses an unbalanced panel of utility-level observations for 48 cities in the US for the years
2007 and 2009-2016; the data source is a survey conducted annually by Memphis Light Gas and Water. Columns 3, 4, and 5
use an unbalanced panel of utility-level monthly observations for the approximately 40 largest utilities in the US for the years
1994 to 2017; the data source is tariff sheets collected by the author. Most utilities are represented by just one rate; a few have,
for instance, both a “heating” and a “non-heating” rate. Standard errors are two-way clustered by state and year in Columns 2
through 5. All prices are in 2015 dollars. *** Statistically significant at the 1% level; ** 5% level; * 10% level.

3.2

Estimating Price Structures

The previous section demonstrated that across multiple sources of information on utility
retail pricing, there is negative pass-through of citygate prices to fixed fees. Two limitations
of those results are (1) the data are not a census of utilities; and (2) only fixed fees are
observed, rather than the entire price structure, for two of the datasets. As such, I next
leverage comprehensive information on prices and quantities from the EIA. For 1989-2015,
I observe monthly state-level data on retail revenue, quantity sold, and customer counts33
for four categories of end-users: residential, commercial, industrial, and electric power. The
average retail price in these data is not the marginal price; it is calculated simply as total
revenue divided by total quantity. In particular, it includes revenue from fixed fees charged
to each customer irrespective of their volume purchased.
Industrial and electric power data are observed only for a subset of years (beginning
in 2001 for industrial, 2002 for electric power). Moreover, the EIA reports that data used
to calculate the state-level average price represents a majority of volume delivered for the
residential and commercial sectors (97 percent for residential, 75 percent for commercial)
whereas only 20 percent of industrial volumes delivered are represented in the reported
33

Customer count data are annual.

16

Table 2: Summary Statistics, State by Month Panel

Citygate price
Retail price
Residential
Commercial
Industrial
Revenue
Residential
Commercial
Industrial
Quantity
Residential
Commercial
Industrial
Customers
Residential
Commercial
Industrial

Mean

Std. Dev.

N

6.48

2.57

15,547

13.35
10.05
8.85

4.56
3.01
3.14

15,543
15,532
8,640

76.68
477.62
55,084.89

56.69
319.08
81,094.80

15,543
15,532
8,640

6.61
48.48
6,960.17

5.24
29.18
11,162.80

15,547
15,532
8,640

1,243,371.36
103,205.52
4,336.08

1,610,016.30
96,291.30
7,113.38

15,552
15,552
15,552

Notes: A unit of observation is a state in a month. The sample covers 1989 through
2015. Pricing data are available for industrial users only since 2001. Prices are in $
per thousand cubic feet (mcf). Revenue is in $ per customer per month. Quantity
is in mcf per customer per month. Prices and revenue are listed in 2015 dollars.

industrial price.34 Throughout my analysis, I focus on the residential and commercial sectors,
for which data are more complete.35
Table 2 provides summary statistics for these price, revenue, quantity, and customer
count variables.
Leveraging these data is not as straightforward as regressing the retail price on the
citygate price, since the retail price averages across fixed fees and volumetric prices. As
such, I next use an econometric strategy to back out the typical price structure, leveraging
insights from Davis and Muehlegger (2010), hereafter DM. DM note that components of the
price structure can be empirically estimated from quantity and revenue data. Their paper
is motivated by a desire to understand how large volumetric mark-ups are in the natural
gas sector. They begin by defining net revenue as revenues collected per customer, net of
gas input costs. As described in Section 1, a utility’s revenues must cover two sets of costs:
gas costs, which are determined by citygate prices and by quantities purchased, and costs
for the physical infrastructure. They note that under a volumetric mark-up, net revenues
are correlated with quantities sold. As a result, changes in net revenues and quantity sold
(both observable for all utilities), can be used to empirically estimate the average volumetric
34

These data do not appear to be available for delivery to the electric power sector.
I use data on the 48 contiguous states. A handful (approximately 0.1 percent) of values are missing;
these do not appear to be systematic.
35

17

mark-up. They implement this insight by regressing net revenues on quantity sold:
N Rit = α + βQit + εit ,

(1)

where net revenue N R is in dollars per month per customer and quantity Q is in mcf per
month per customer. Because β gives the amount by which net revenue per customer rises
when quantity per customer rises, it provides an estimate of the average volumetric mark-up
on natural gas purchases. I expand on their equation to estimate additional components of
the price structure.
Re-writing Equation 1 using the N R variable’s definition:
(Pit − M C it ) · Qit = α + βQit + εit

(2)

where P is the average retail price and M C is the citygate price, both in dollars per mcf.
Re-arranging:
Pit Qit = α + βQit + γM C it Qit + εit .
(3)
That is, one can estimate the same equation as DM in a slightly more flexible form, to
be able to directly estimate the pass-through of the input cost to volumetric prices; this
pass-through is implicitly assumed to be equal to 1 in the DM specification. In addition
to providing a formal test of the pass-through, this allows for the inclusion of, for instance,
lagged input prices. Adding in these lagged prices, and noting that the left-hand side Pit Qit
is simply total revenue, yields:
T Rit = α + βQit +

12
X

γl M C i,t−l Qit + εit .

(4)

l=0

Moreover, by writing out the components of the retail prices, one obtains a formulation
that allows for estimating the magnitude of the monthly fixed fee per customer as well as
how it varies. Prices are typically set with a volumetric component as well as a fixed fee, such
that the total revenue per customer can be written as a combination of volumetric prices and
fixed fees: T R = P volumetric Q + P f ixedf ee . Thus the right-hand side of Equation 4 can be conP
ceptually separated into components related to volumetric prices (βQit + 12
l=0 γl M C i,t−l Qit )
and components related to the fixed fee (α). In particular, the intercept in the DM estimating equation serves as an estimate of the monthly fixed charge per customer, since it is the
portion of revenue that does not vary with quantity.
I can additionally include the citygate price as an explanatory variable, to understand

18

how fixed fees vary in response to changes in citygate prices:
T Rit = α + ψM C it + βQit +

12
X

γl M C i,t−l Qit + εit

(5)

l=0

Thus ψ gives an estimate of how the fixed fee changes with the level of citygate prices, since
it is the component of the right-hand side that does not vary with quantity—ψ is capturing
just the impact of citygate prices on the fixed fee or non-volumetric component of the bill.36
That is, ψ can be used to examine whether a desire to avoid “bill shock” leads to smoothing
of the bill total, via adjustment of the fixed fee.
Note that one might also be interested in whether the volumetric component of the bill
responds to citygate prices. This answer is simply given by the estimated volumetric passthrough, γ. Unfortunately, while in practice the volumetric component of a typical bill is
composed of gas cost recovery charges and volumetric mark-ups, γ combines the behavior
of these two components. That is, smoothing via volumetric mark-ups is not separately
identified in this specification from incomplete pass-through of gas cost charges. If one is
willing to assume one-to-one pass-through of gas cost charges (because of the automatic
pass-through clauses described above), then the coefficient γ can be tested against one, as a
test of smoothing.
To summarize, the final specification is as follows:
T Rit = α + ψM C it + βQit +
| {z }
|{z}
Bill
smoothing:
adj. of
fixed fee

Volumetric
mark-up

12
X

γl M C i,t−l Qit +Xit Γ + εit

(6)

l=0

|

{z

Instantaneous
and lagged
pass-through

}

Total revenue T R is in dollars per month per customer. The citygate price M C is in dollars
per mcf, and quantity Q is in mcf per month per customer. Bill smoothing via adjustment
of the fixed fee would show up as a negative estimate of ψ. The average volumetric mark-up
is estimated by β, as in DM. Pass-through to the volumetric price is estimated in the γ
coefficients.
I include controls Xit : state-level fixed effects, a time trend, and state by calendar month
effects. Because natural gas demand is highly seasonal, with differing seasonal effects across
regions based on climate, the related empirical literature has generally found state-specific
month effects to be useful for both precision and identification. Below, I show that the
results are robust to alternative controls. Standard errors are two-way clustered by state
36
Note that, because quantity sold has been included as an explanatory variable, the estimate of ψ is net
of any quantity impact of citygate prices via demand response.

19

and by year.
The identifying assumption for Equation 6 is that any unobservables (i.e., components
of εit ) are uncorrelated with M Cit and Qit . If utility pricing were always determined strictly
by two-part pricing with a fixed fee and a volumetric fee, and if there were no heterogeneity
across time or across states, this would be very straightforward: unlike in many regression
contexts, we would know the exact components of the left-hand side variable and would
simply be decomposing the variable into its distinct parts.
The potential concerns for bias, then, would arise if Equation 6 failed to capture features
of utility pricing. For instance, in the case of increasing block or decreasing block pricing,
it is possible that the error term could be correlated with Qit . In the survey data for the 40
largest utilities, the majority of the utilities have flat volumetric fees, although increasing and
decreasing block prices are both observed.37 I address this concern below, by incorporating
higher order terms of the quantity variable. Below I also examine explore the assumption of
heterogeneity across states and across times.
It has also been assumed for this equation that there are no unobservables correlated
with M Cit . This would be violated if, for instance, the price of labor or other firm inputs
were correlated with citgyate prices. To alleviate this concern, I have made the standard
assumption that time series controls are adequate for absorbing such variation.
Finally, a remaining identifying assumption for this equation is that there is no reverse
causality from Pit (part of total revenue, the dependent variable) to M Cit . That is, retail
prices do not impact citygate prices. In the related literature, citygate prices are generally
thought to be determined by upstream factors. The primary mechanism by which one
might worry that retail prices would impact citygate prices would be via demand response.
However, note that quantity demanded has been controlled for in this equation. Below, I
consider alternative specifications to rule out concerns about endogeneity of the citygate
price.
The results for Equation 6, separated by end-user type, are given in Table 3. Passthrough to the volumetric price (i.e., the coefficient on cost) is nearly complete, albeit with
lags. The instantaneous pass-through rate is 42 to 45 percent, with additional pass-through
(of 46 percent for residential, 43 percent for commercial) coming with one to four months
lag. The sum of the coefficients on the instantaneous and lagged pass-through is 1.0 for
both sectors; for neither sector is it statistically different from 1. This is consistent with
the frequent changes to the gas cost recovery charge seen for the largest utilities with retail
37

Of the 40 large utilities, 24 have a constant volumetric price, 4 have a non-constant price but with a
cutoff well above the mean quantity consumed, 7 have increasing block pricing (almost all in New York), 3
have decreasing block pricing (all in California), 1 has a non-standard rate structure, and 1 could not be
located.

20

Table 3: Estimating Rate Structures, by Sector

(1)
Residential

(2)
Commercial

0.42***
(0.03)
0.24***
(0.02)
0.11***
(0.02)
0.07***
(0.02)
0.04***
(0.01)
0.00
(0.01)
0.01**
(0.01)
0.01
(0.01)
0.02
(0.01)
0.02*
(0.01)
0.03*
(0.01)
0.02
(0.02)
0.03
(0.02)

0.45***
(0.03)
0.22***
(0.02)
0.11***
(0.02)
0.06***
(0.02)
0.05***
(0.02)
-0.01
(0.01)
0.01
(0.01)
0.03*
(0.01)
0.03*
(0.01)
0.01
(0.01)
0.03**
(0.01)
0.01
(0.02)
0.02
(0.02)

3.03***
(0.26)

2.71***
(0.37)

State by month effects
Linear trend

-0.38**
(0.16)
Yes
Yes

-1.91
(1.30)
Yes
Yes

Observations
Within R2

14,942
0.85

14,931
0.83

Pass-through:
Cost, M Cit Qit , in $
M Ci,t−1 Qit
M Ci,t−2 Qit
M Ci,t−3 Qit
M Ci,t−4 Qit
M Ci,t−5 Qit
M Ci,t−6 Qit
M Ci,t−7 Qit
M Ci,t−8 Qit
M Ci,t−9 Qit
M Ci,t−10 Qit
M Ci,t−11 Qit
M Ci,t−12 Qit
Volumetric mark-up:
Quantity, Qit , in mcf
Smoothing:
Citygate price, M Cit , in $/mcf

Notes: A unit of observation is a state in a month. The data cover 1989-2015. The
dependent variable is revenue, calculated as the revenue (in $) per customer per
month. Prices are in $ per mcf. Quantity is in mcf per customer per month. “Cost
per customer” is the commodity cost (in $) per customer per month, calculated as
citygate price multipled by quantity per customer. Prices and revenue are in 2015
dollars. Standard errors are two-way clustered by state and by year. *** Statistically significant at the 1% level; ** 5% level; * 10% level.

pricing data available (see Appendix).38
38

Note the estimated volumetric pass-through of one contrasts with the survey results in Table 1, which
found smoothing of the volumetric mark-up. This may be because the Table 1 results are for a non-random
subset of utilities. For instance, in practice the survey data over-sample New York (25 percent of the survey
observations, versus 8 percent of residential sales according to the EIA data). When dropping New York,
the coefficient from Column 4, Table 1 is estimated to be only -0.04, and zero volumetric smoothing cannot

21

I estimate a positive volumetric mark-up (the coefficient on quantity). This is similar for
residential customers ($3.03/mcf) and commercial customers ($2.71/mcf). This essentially
matches DM, who estimate a volumetric mark-up of $3 to $4 for the two sectors (when
re-normalizing their 2007 values to 2015 dollars).
The novel result is that I estimate a bill smoothing effect, via the negative coefficient on
citygate price. The coefficient on citygate price in the residential equation is -0.38 and is
significant at the one percent level. This implies that for every $1/mcf rise in the citygate
price, the monthly fixed fee per customer falls by $0.38. Recalling that the average quantity
consumed in a month is around 6.6 mcf per residential customer, this would imply that a
$1/mcf rise in the citygate price would, absent smoothing, translate to an increase of $6.6 in
the bill total—however with smoothing, $0.38 (or 6 percent) of this increase is muted by the
change to the fixed fee. The portion of a shock that is smoothed for the commercial sector
is 4 percent, although it is not statistically significant.
The magnitude of this smoothing effect is consistent with the survey evidence presented
in Section 3.1, suggesting that empirically estimating the price structure is an appropriate
strategy where pricing data are limited. Recall that the survey data used in Table 1 are
not comprehensive, but they can be used with very few identifying assumptions. In contrast, the EIA datast used in Table 3 encompass a balanced panel of all utilities across all
service territories and including all tariff components. However, the EIA data require more
identifying assumptions since tariffs are estimated rather than observed. The section that
follows explores the robustness of the Table 3 results in greater detail. In the meantime, it
is reassuring that Tables 1 and 3 yield similar estimates for the bill smoothing coefficient.39
It is worth briefly noting the distributional implications of this smoothing. Suppose
citygate prices were to rise $1/mcf, and suppose demand were perfectly inelastic. Then all
customers on the standard residential pricing plan would see the volumetric component of
their bill total increase, by $1 times their monthly usage in mcf. Acting against this effect
would be a $0.38 decrease in their fixed fee. As such, there is no distributional impact in
terms of the level of the smoothing. However, in proportional terms, the smoothing would be
larger for low-usage customers – and larger for the typical low-income consumer, as usage and
income are (weakly) correlated (Borenstein and Davis, 2012). Using the mean usage across
income quintiles reported in Borenstein and Davis (2012), I calculate that the coefficient of
be rejected.
39
The robustness of the results to using either the survey data or the empirically estimated pricing structures is also reassuring regarding the timing of the identifying variation. One might worry that identification
in this section’s regressions is very short-run, since it is driven by monthly deviations from trend, whereas
some of the intuition provided earlier was regarding, for instance, fracking’s permanent shift to the supply
curve. The survey results are reassuring for this concern, since they use identification driven by longer-run
price changes (annual in the case of the MLGW data; multi-year in the case of the AGA data).

22

Table 4: Residential Bill Smoothing, Alternative Specifications

Citygate price

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

-0.37**
(0.16)

-0.62***
(0.18)

-0.38**
(0.16)

-0.33**
(0.16)

-0.47*
(0.24)

-0.38**
(0.16)

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No

Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
No
No
No

Yes
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
Yes

-0.33**
(0.16)
-0.63*
(0.32)
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No

14,942
0.85

14,942
0.85

14,942
0.85

8,411
0.84

6,531
0.86

14,942
0.85

14,942
0.85

Rising citygate indicator
State by month effects
Linear trend
Quadratic trend
Cubic trend
Weather controls
Sub-sample: <50% heating
Sub-sample: >50% heating
Cubic quantity control

Observations
Within R2

Notes: The regressions for this table are identical to those in Table 3, but this table displays, for space
purposes, only the coefficient on citygate price. Full results are in the Appendix. The primary specification from Table 3 has been modified as follows: Column 1 uses a quadratic trend. Column 2 uses a
cubic trend. Column 3 controls for cooling degree days and heating degree days. Column 4 restricts the
sample to states with less than 50 percent of homes using natural gas for heating. Column 5 restricts to
states with more than 50 percent of homes using natural gas for heating. Column 6 controls for thirdorder polynomials for the quantity variables. Column 7 adds an asymmetric citygate effect (see text for
details). *** Statistically significant at the 1% level; ** 5% level; * 10% level.

$0.38 would translate into a 7.5 percent smoothing effect for the lowest income quintile, a 6.9
percent effect for the middle income quintile, and 5.7 percent effect for the highest income
quintile.

3.3

Robustness of Smoothing Results

In this section, I discuss and test for various potential issues with the empirical specification
for the main results. If one were able to directly observe retail price structures for a comprehensive panel, there would be less concern about specification error leading to bias. Because
the previous results relied on inferring the price structure from revenue and quantity data,
here I evaluate (and rule out) various possibilities that the effects are the mechanical result
of the estimation procedure. The estimated smoothing coefficient (on citygate price) is displayed in Table 4, which focuses on the residential sector. Full estimation results, along with
commercial sector results and additional robustness checks, are given in Tables A3 through
A8 in the Appendix.
First I estimate the specification using alternative controls: including a quadratic time
trend, a cubic time trend, or weather controls (Columns 1 through 3). Specifications in

23

the Appendix drop time-series controls; drop seasonal controls; include year effects; include
state-specific linear trends; or control for GDP growth and for safety regulations taking effect
in 2010 that may have impacted utility expenditures (Hausman and Muehlenbachs, 2016).
The negative impact of the citygate price is robust to these alternative specifications, and
the magnitude is occasionally larger than in the main specification.
I next separate the sample according to the portion of homes in the state that use natural
gas for their home heating.40 If the elasticity along the extensive margin (i.e., whether or
not to have a natural gas hook-up) mattered, one would expect to see differential smoothing
across states with low versus high levels of natural gas for home heating usage, since the
extensive elasticity is likely to be driven by whether or not homes already have fuel-specific
heating capital installed. However, the smoothing effect is comparable across the two types
of states (Columns 4 and 5). An additional specification in the Appendix drops the three
states with active and well-subscribed retail choice programs; results without these states
are similar to the main results.
I next verify that the results are not driven by various mechanical features of the main
specification. First I verify that results are not driven by the linearity imposed on the quantity variable. Since some utilities use either increasing or decreasing block prices, imposing
linearity on this mark-up coefficient could introduce mis-specification. I include third-order
polynomials for the quantity variables in Column 6; results for the smoothing coefficient remain similar. In the Appendix, I also include two lags of the citygate price. The coefficients
on lagged citygate are not statistically significant, and the contemporaneous smoothing effect remains. Thus the results do not appear to be driven by misspecification arising from
omitted lags in the main specification.
I next allow for an asymmetric smoothing effect by including a dummy for whether
citygate prices have risen year-on-year. The estimated coefficient is negative, consistent with
utilities, regulators, or customers being more concerned with rising bill totals than with
falling bill totals. However, the confidence interval is large, so this result should be taken
only as suggestive. Note the negative and statistically significant coefficient on citygate price
remains, indicating that the bill smoothing effect is not solely present when citygate prices
are rising (Column 7).
Additional robustness checks in the Appendix are as follows. I weight by either customer
counts or volume sold (time-invariant). I also separate the sample into early (1989-2004) and
late (2005-2015) periods. I next allow for heterogeneity in the pass-through and mark-up
coefficients to vary by state and by five-year blocks. Finally, I estimate the specification in
40

These data come from the 2000 Census, which tabulates whether an occupied housing unit uses utility
gas, bottled gas, electricity, no heating fuel, etc.

24

first differences rather than levels. I estimate a negative smoothing effect for all of these
alternative specifications.
In the Appendix, I also use the survey data to rule out the possibility of price endogeneity.
In the main regression, finding an instrument for the price variable is complicated by the fact
that the cost variable, and its twelve lags, would also require an instrument. However, in the
more straightforward regressions using surveys of fixed fees, I can easily instrument for the
citygate price variable. In particular, I use the average citygate price in the Census region
(West, Midwest, Northeast, and South). Table A2 presents IV results, which are essentially
unchanged from the OLS results shown in Table 1.
Overall, while I have considered a very wide range of potential empirical issues, I consistently find a negative impact of the citygate price on the component of revenue that is not
correlated with quantity, i.e. on the fixed fee. The magnitude of the effect varies somewhat
across these alternative specifications, with the lowest point estimate -0.23 and the highest
-1.18 (see Appendix). These estimates imply that 3 to 18 percent of the impact of a cost
shock on a customer’s bill total would be smoothed away. For the commercial sector, the
coefficient on the citygate price ranges in the alternative specifications from -0.75 to -8.88,
implying smoothing of 1 to 17 percent at the typical quantity purchased. These negative
point estimates are consistent with bill smoothing, matching the theoretical model as well
as the anecdotal evidence from the utility industry.

3.4

Frequency of Fixed Fee Changes

As described in the background section, volumetric gas cost recovery charges tend to update
every month, whereas volumetric mark-ups and fixed charges are changed only every couple
of years. This may explain, at least in part, why the previous sections found only partial
smoothing of cost shocks via the fixed fee. In some months, zero smoothing can occur because
utilities are not able to adjust mark-ups and fixed fees. At other times, such as during a
rate case, fees may be able to freely change. There may also be intermediate cases: times
when a temporary rider can be added, removed, or adjusted – but where the magnitude of
the change is smaller than what is allowed during a full rate case.
To understand the impact of this, I estimate the heterogeneity of the smoothing effect across three groups of utilities, sorting utilities by how frequently they experience rate
changes. Specifically, for each sample month for which I observe fee data for the 40 large
utilities described in Section 3.1, I generate an indicator variable equal to one if the fixed fee
changed in nominal terms from the previous month. I then calculate the mean of this variable
for each utility/rate combination. The mean is only 0.05 and the median 0.02: as described

25

above, in a typical utility, fixed fees only change every two to four years. I group the utility/rate units into three groups: those with a low frequency of rate changes (fewer than one
percent of sample months); medium frequency (one to two percent of sample months); and
greatest frequency (at least two percent of sample months). Note that a comparable analysis
cannot be conducted using the EIA data from Section 3.2, since revenue data (as opposed
to rate data themselves) do not allow me to observe how frequently fixed fees change.
Results are shown in Table 5. Recall that the coefficient when all utility/rate combinations are pooled is -0.11 (Column 3 of Table 1). The coefficient for the “medium frequency”
group is similar: -0.14, statistically significant at the five percent level (Column 2 of Table
5). In contrast, there is essentially no smoothing observed for the utility/rate units with
nearly flat fixed fees, as expected (Column 1). And for the grouping of states with the most
frequent changes (Column 3), the coefficient is more than twice as large (-0.24) as the pooled
coefficient.
Two things are worth noting. First, it is essentially a mechanical result that the coefficient
in Column 1 is nearly zero – for the utilities in that sample, fixed fees are not observed to
change, so by definition smoothing is not observed. Along the same lines, it makes sense
that the coefficient in Column 3 is larger – since fixed fees are observed to change more often,
more smoothing is expected. At the same time, there may be other unobserved differences
between the utilities across the three sub-groups.
Overall, these results point towards an explanation for the partial smoothing observed
in all the previous results: the main results pool across rate case periods when fixed fees are
adjustable, and across periods when fixed fees are frozen.

3.5

Modeling Expectations over the Future Citygate Price

One potential concern with the previous specifications is that the current citygate price may
not accurately reflect the expecations of the regulator over the future citygate price. In a
world where fixed fees are freely adjustable in all periods, this might not matter; the regulator
could simply continue updating as new information about costs is revealed. However if the
regulator is committing to a fixed fee that will hold even as new cost shocks occur, then
using the current price could introduce measurement error. To examine this issue, I next
model the regulator’s expectations over the future path of the citygate price.
Unfortunately, an appropriate futures contract is not vailable. Futures contracts for
natural gas tend to be both upstream of the price paid by utilities, and to be fairly shortterm relative to the horizon over which fixed fees are frozen. For instance, the natural gas
futures prices reported by the EIA are for Henry Hub prices, up to four months out. In

26

Table 5: Heterogeneity by Rate Change Frequency

(1)
Least frequent

(2)
Medium frequency

(3)
Most frequent

0.05
(0.04)

-0.14**
(0.05)

-0.24**
(0.08)

Fixed effects
Linear trend

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Observations
Within R2

2,089
0.03

1,227
0.06

2,094
0.59

Citygate price, $/mcf

Notes: This table uses specifications identical to Column 3 of Table 1, but with heterogeneity by how often a utility’s fixed fee is observed to change (in nominal terms) from one
month to the next. The sample is divided into three groups. For the “least frequent” subsample of utilities in Column 1 (13 units in ten states), fixed fees change in fewer than one
percent of the months. For the Column 2 sub-sample (eight units in eight states), fixed fees
change in one to two percent of the months. For the Column 3 “most frequent” sub-sample
(24 units in 11 states), fixed fees change in at least two percent of the months. Standard
errors are two-way clustered by state and by year. *** Statistically significant at the 1%
level; ** 5% level; * 10% level.

contrast, I would ideally observe a futures contract at each state-level citygate, for a horizon
of at least a year.
As such, I construct an expected future citygate price using forecasting regressions. Conceptually, this procedure takes two steps: the first constructs a rolling average citygate price,
rather than a one-month spot price – since the fixed fee may be frozen for a certain period,
the regulator will care more about the average future price over that period than about the
price in just one month. Second, a forecast for that rolling average citygate price is generated
using lagged citygate price – in particular, just the lagged prices available to the regulator
at the time that the forecast is being created.
Specifically, in the first step I construct the rolling average citygate price over the previous
twelve months. So for January 1995, for instance, I average citygate prices from February
1994 through January 1995:
11
X
M C it =
ωi,t−j M C i,t−j .
j=0

Here ωi,t−j are state-specific calendar month quantity weights (e.g., the average quantity sold
in Michigan in July).
I then regress the rolling average citygate price on the information available from the

27

previous year:
M C it = η +

23
X

λj M C i,t−j + εit

(7)

j=12

So for January 1995, I regress the rolling average on prices from February 1993 through
January 1994. Results from this regression are given in the Appendix.
Finally, I forecast the following year’s rolling average price using the coefficients from
equation 7 and the most recent year’s prices:
d
M
C i,t+12 =

11
X

bj+12 M C i,t−j
λ

j=0

I.e., in January 1995, I use the vector of twelve λ coefficients and the February 1994 to
January 1995 price path, to get a forecast of the average rolling price for January 1995
through December 1995.
This forecasted future average price can then be used in the smoothing regressions to
estimate the magnitude of fixed fee smoothing, in lieu of the current observed price. I run
the same regressions using survey data as in Table 1 and using EIA data as in Table 3. For
space considerations, I show only the coefficient on the citygate price. Results are given in
Table 6.
If the spot price is not an accurate measure of the regulator’s belief about the future
price, then using it introduces measurement error, potentially attenuating estimates. That
is, we would expect to see larger coefficients on the forecasted price. Four of the five columns
show a coefficient that is larger than the coefficient on the spot price from the previous
specifications. Column 2, for instance, shows a (noisy) coefficient of -0.50, compared to -0.31
in Column 2 of Table 1. Similarly, Column 3 shows a coefficient of -0.20, compared to -0.11
in Column 3 of Table 1. Column 4 also shows a larger coefficient: -0.47, compared to a
coefficient on the citygate price of -0.38 in Column 1 of Table 3. At the typical quantity
consumed, this corresponds to smoothing 7 percent of a cost shock. However for Column 1,
the coefficient is somewhat lower than the comparable estimate from Table 1, and for Column
5 the coefficient is essentially identical to the comparable estimate from Table 3. None of
the coefficients are statistically different from their current-price counterparts. Overall, it
appears that a somewhat larger estimates of the smoothing effect is obtained in regressions
that allow the regulator to have more sophisticated beliefs about the future citygate price
than a simple random walk. However, the difference in the coefficients is not economically
significant.

28

Table 6: Using Forecasted Price

(1)
AGA

(2)
MLGW

(3)
Top 40

(4)
EIA, Resid.

(5)
EIA, Comm.

-0.28
(0.20)

-0.50
(0.38)

-0.20**
(0.08)

-0.47**
(0.21)

-1.92
(1.69)

Fixed effects
State by month effects
Linear trend

Yes
No
Yes

Yes
No
Yes

Yes
No
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Observations
Within R2

27
0.57

293
0.08

4,985
0.19

14,942
0.85

14,931
0.83

Forecasted citygate price, $/mcf

Notes: This Table uses specifications identical to those in Tables 1 and 3, but the following year’s average citygate
price has been forecasted using the last twelve lags of the monthly citygate price. Columns 1 through 3 match Table
1, and use AGA survey data, MLGW survey data, and tariff data for 40 large utilities, respectively. Columns 4 and 5
match Table 3, and use EIA revenue, quantity, and cost data for the residential and commercial natural gas sectors.
See text for details. *** Statistically significant at the 1% level; ** 5% level; * 10% level.

3.6

Expenditures and Citygate Prices

In addition to the possibility of welfare loss on the consumer side, it is possible that the
price structures estimated in this paper have implications for utility operations. One of the
biggest expense categories for the typical utility is capital expenditures to either upgrade or
expand infrastructure. Other expenditures include administrative expenses, meter reading,
advertising, etc.
The previous sections showed that fixed fees, and therefore net revenues, respond in
unexpected ways to input costs. In this section, I examine whether expenditures similarly
respond to unrelated input costs. In particular, I estimate the impact of citygate prices
on capital expenditures. There is no economic reason to a priori expect citygate prices to
affect these expenditures—gas purchasing costs are a separate line-item, and gas is not an
input into infrastructure-related activities. As such, evidence of an impact of citygate prices
on these expenditures would be more consistent with bill smoothing impacting the utilities’
ability to engage in pipeline network replacement and expansion activities. Several of the
anecdotes in Section 1 suggest that this might be the case in the wake of price decreases
from the fracking revolution.
To answer this question, I use an annual utility-level dataset on expenditures for large
investor-owned utilities. For this subset (n = 207) of investor-owned utilities, I observe data
on capital expenditures41 at an annual level for 1998-2013 in addition to quantity sold and
41

Additional categories of expenditures, such as administrative examples, are explored in the Appendix.

29

average price by sector.42 While only available for some utilities, these tend to be the largest
firms; as such, this panel accounts for around 80 percent of the residential and commercial
volume distributed in the US over this time frame. These data are reported to state-level
public utility commissions, and they have been assembled across state-level records by SNL,
a provider of industry data. Summary statistics are provided in the Appendix. I winsorize
the right tail (the upper one percent) because the raw data show extreme outliers.
With these data, I regress capital expenditures on the citygate price, including as controls
utility effects and a linear trend. I additionally control for the quantity sold across various
sectors to control for territory expansions. I control for heating degree days (HDDs),43
because cold weather is likely to impact both citygate prices and the need for repairs. In
particular, a severe cold snap increases demand for natural gas, which combined with supply
constraints can lead to spikes in prices. At the same time, cold snaps can contribute to
corrosion of pipelines as well as inhibit pipeline repair.
Table 7 provides results. Expenditures are per customer and per month, so the coefficient
on citygate price can be interpreted in the same way as the citygate coefficient in Table 3.
Recall that for every $1/mcf increase in the citygate price, fixed fees fall by $0.38 for residential customers and by $1.91 for commercial customers. According to the results in Table
7, capital spending falls by $0.13 per customer (statistically significant at the five percent
level). The magnitude is smaller than the smoothing of fixed fees; this is not surprising if
utilities are able to save or borrow funds. It appears that utility capital expenditures are
indeed lower when natural gas input prices are high, consistent with the anecdotes given in
Section 1. The fracking supply boom lowered natural gas prices by $3.45/mcf from 2007 to
2013 (Hausman and Kellogg, 2015); the coefficient in Table 7 implies that utilities in this
sample increased capital expenditures by five percent as a result. Robustness checks are
shown in the Appendix; the result is somewhat sensitive to the time series controls used.

4

Conclusion

The standard theoretical utility pricing structure involves a two-part tariff, in which volumetric prices are set equal to marginal cost and fixed fees are used to cover fixed costs. In
this paper, I show that fixed fees are actually tied in part to marginal cost: they fall when
marginal cost is high, consistent with utilities’ and price regulators’ stated objective of preventing customers from experiencing bill shock. While fixed fees are not directly observable
42

In principle, one could use this utility-by-year panel to estimate price structures at the utility, rather
than state, level. In practice, having only annual data makes identification of the separate price components
(pass-through, volumetric mark-up, and fixed fee smoothing) very difficult.
43
Defined as the sum over a year of daily degree days, defined as min(0, 65 − T ).

30

Table 7: The Impact of Gas Input Prices on Capital Expenditures

Capital

Citygate

-0.13**
(0.06)

Utility effects
Linear trend

Yes
Yes

Observations
Within R2

2,434
0.04

Notes: Expenditures are in $ per customer per
month, and citygate prices are in $ per mcf. All
variables are normalized to 2015 dollars. Controls
include quantity per customer, by end-user type,
and heating degree days. Coefficients on controls
are displayed in the Appendix. Standard errors are
clustered by state. *** Statistically significant at
the 1% level; ** 5% level; * 10% level.

for the entirety of natural gas firms, I use revenue and quantity data to back out the average
impact of natural gas wholesale prices on residential and commercial fixed fees. I estimate
that, at the average quantity consumed, 6 percent of a cost shock is smoothed away, i.e. not
reflected in bill totals.
In a model where price regulators face a penalty for volatility of bill totals, smoothing cost
shocks by varying fixed fees is welfare improving. Since marginal prices are not impacted,
quantity consumed remains at the socially optimal level. Note that in contrast, hedging as a
strategy to reduce bill volatility impacts marginal prices—potentially impacting consumption
decisions and thus welfare.
In the simple model presented in this paper, fixed fees would be used to smooth 100
percent of input cost shocks. That only a portion of cost shocks are smoothed could reflect
adjustment costs on the part of firms. For instance, firms typically enter rate cases only
every several years; in the intervening periods, prices are not fully adjustable.
Although not modeled here, it is possible that welfare could decrease with fixed fee
smoothing. If consumers respond to average, rather than marginal, prices (as in Ito, 2014),
smoothing of fixed fees distorts consumption decisions. However, in a setting where consumers respond to average prices, all two-part tariffs lead to distorted consumption decisions,
since average price is always greater than marginal cost.
It is also possible that fixed fee smoothing could decrease welfare if capital expenditures
are distorted away from the socially-optimal investment decision. Anecdotes suggest that

31

utilities do indeed adjust capital expenditures in response to wholesale gas prices, and I
estimate a small but statistically significant relationship. Thus it appears that the timing
of capital expenditures are distorted; whether the overall level of expenditures is distorted
remains an open question.44
Future research could examine the political and strategic processes by which rates are
set, with a focus on this smoothing behavior. Future work could also relate this smoothing
behavior to distributional questions in rate-setting. For instance, it would be interesting to
examine how the process plays out in Democratic versus Republican states, in states with
high portions of households below the poverty line, or in states with high portions of elderly
households.45
Several implications emerge from the results on fixed fees. First, these results suggest
that in settings with multi-part pricing, pass-through analysis should take into account the
entire price structure, not just the marginal price. The incidence of a tax, for instance,
will depend on not just on how volumetric prices change, but also on whether fixed fees
adjust. Second, the natural gas industry shows evidence of a form of price stickiness (in
average prices rather than marginal prices) that is consistent with the previous literature
on consumer antagonism. Finally, the results suggest that price regulators, consumers, or
firms value predictability of bill totals, consistent with anecdotal evidence. Proposals to
reform utility pricing by, for instance, tying marginal prices more tightly to marginal cost
(as in real-time pricing proposals for the electricity sector) are likely to face resistance if
bill volatility will increase. On the other hand, proposals to reduce or eliminate volumetric
mark-ups (and increase fixed fees accordingly) could take into account the benefit brought
about by reduced volatility (from quantity shocks) that this would imply for bill totals.

44

If the overall level of expenditures is distorted, welfare implications could also arise because of demand
elasticity along the extensive margin, as in Borenstein and Davis (2012).
45
Related questions are investigated in the context of electric utilities in Levinson and Silva (2018).

32

References
Abito, Jose Miguel. 2016. “Agency Costs in Environmental Regulation: Evidence from
Regulated Electric Utilities.” Working paper.
American Gas Association. 2015. “Natural Gas Utility Rate Structure: The Customer
Charge Component – 2015 Update.” https://www.aga.org/sites/default/files/ea 201503 customercharge2015.pdf.
American
Gas
Association.
2016.
“LDC
Supply
Portfolio
Management
During
the
2014-15
Winter
Heating
Season.”
https://www.aga.org/sites/default/files/sites/default/files/media/ea 2016-03 201415 winter heating season ea.pdf.
Anderson, Eric T., and Duncan I. Simester. 2010. “Price Stickiness and Customer
Antagonism.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 729–765.
Auffhammer, Maximilian, and Edward Rubin. 2018. “Natural Gas Price Elasticities
and Optimal Cost Recovery Under Consumer Heterogeneity: Evidence from 300 Million
Natural Gas Bills.” NBER Working Paper 24295.
Beard, T. Randolph, Daniel M. Gropper, and Jennie E. Raymond. 1998. “Bill Averaging Programs and Consumer Behavior: Theory and Evidence.” Journal of Regulatory
Economics, 13: 19–35.
Beecher, Janice A., and Steven G. Kihm. 2016. Risk Principles for Public Utility
Regulators. Michigan State University Press.
Besley, Timothy, and Stephen Coate. 2003. “Elected Versus Appointed Regulators:
Theory and Evidence.” Journal of the European Economic Association, 1(5): 1176–1206.
Bils, Mark, and Peter J. Klenow. 2004. “Some Evidence on the Importance of Sticky
Prices.” Journal of Political Economy, 112(5): 947–985.
Boivin, Jean, Mark P. Giannoni, and Ilian Mihov. 2009. “Sticky Prices and Monetary
Policy: Evidence from Disaggregated US Data.” American Economic Review, 99(1): 350–
384.
Bonbright, James C., Albert L. Danielsen, and David R. Kamerschen. 1988. Principles of Public Utility Rates. . 2 ed., Public Utilities Reports, Inc.
Borenstein, Severin. 2005. “The Long-Run Efficiency of Real-Time Electricity Pricing.”
The Energy Journal, 26(3): 1–24.
Borenstein, Severin. 2013. “Effective and Equitable Adoption of Opt-In Residential Dynamic Electricity Pricing.” Review of Industrial Organization, 42: 127–160.
Borenstein, Severin, A. Colin Cameron, and Richard Gilbert. 1997. “Do Gasoline Prices Respond Asymmetrically to Crude Oil Price Changes?” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, February: 305–339.
33

Borenstein, Severin, and Lucas W. Davis. 2012. “The Equity and Efficiency of TwoPart Tariffs in U.S. Natural Gas Markets.” Journal of Law and Economics, 5(1): 75–128.
Borenstein, Severin, and Ryan Kellogg. 2014. “The Incidence of an Oil Glut: Who
Benefits from Cheap Crude Oil in the Midwest?” The Energy Journal, 35(1): 15–33.
Borenstein, Severin, Meghan R. Busse, and Ryan Kellogg. 2012. “Career Concerns,
Inaction and Market Inefficiency: Evidence from Utility Regulation.” Journal of Industrial
Economics, 40(2): 220–248.
Chu, Yin, Scott Holladay, and Jacob LaRiviere. Forthcoming. “Opportunity Cost
Pass-through from Fossil Fuel Market Prices to Procurement Costs of the U.S. Power
Producers.” Journal of Industrial Economics.
Costello, Ken. 2016. “Vertical Arrangements for Natural Gas Procurement by Utilities:
Rationales and Regulatory Considerations.” National Regulatory Research Institute Report No. 16-04.
Davis, Lucas W., and Erich Muehlegger. 2010. “Do Americans Consume Too Little
Natural Gas? An Empirical Test of Marginal Cost Pricing.” RAND Journal of Economics,
791–810.
Davis, Michael C., and James D. Hamilton. 2004. “Why Are Prices Sticky? The Dynamics of Wholesale Gasoline Prices.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 36(1): 17–
37.
Edison Electric Institute. 2016. “Memo: Primer on Rate Design for Residential Distributed Generation.” http://www.puc.state.pa.us/pcdocs/1423623.pdf, Memo to NARUC
President.
Energy Information Administration. 2007. “Impact of Higher Natural
Gas Prices on Local Distribution Companies and Residential Customers.”
https://www.eia.gov/pub/oil gas/natural gas/feature articles/2007/ngpristudy/ngpristudy.pdf.
Energy
Information
Administration.
2011.
“Natural
https://www.eia.gov/naturalgas/annual/archive/2011/pdf/nga11.pdf.

Gas

Annual.”

Energy
Information
Administration.
2017.
https://www.eia.gov/naturalgas/annual/pdf/nga17.pdf.

Gas

Annual.”

“Natural

Fabra, Natalia, and Mar Reguant. 2014. “Pass-Through of Emissions Costs in Electricity
Markets.” American Economic Review, 104(9): 2872–2899.
Ganapati, Sharat, Joseph S. Shapiro, and Reed Walker. 2016. “The Incidence of
Carbon Taxes in U.S. Manufacturing: Lessons from Energy Cost Pass-Through.” NBER
Working Paper 22281.
Gorodnichenko, Yuriy, and Michael Weber. 2016. “Are Sticky Prices Costly? Evidence
from the Stock Market.” American Economic Review, 106(1): 165–199.
34

Graves, Frank C., and Steven H. Levine. 2010. “Managing Natural Gas Price
Volatility: Principles and Practices Across the Industry.” https://bipartisanpolicy.org/wpcontent/uploads/sites/default/files/Managing%20Natural%20Gas%20Price%20Volatility.pdf,
The Brattle Group, prepared for American Clean Skies Foundation.
Graves, Frank, Philip Q. Hanser, and Greg Basheda. 2007. “Rate Shock Mitigation.”
http://www.eei.org/issuesandpolicy/stateregulation/Documents/rate shock mitigation.pdf,
The Brattle Group, prepared for Edison Electric Institute.
Grubb, Michael D. 2012. “Dynamic Nonlinear Pricing: Biased Expectations, Inattention,
and Bill Shock.” International Journal of Industrial Organization, 30: 287–290.
Grubb, Michael D. 2015. “Consumer Inattention and Bill-Shock Regulation.” Review of
Economic Studies, 82(1): 219–257.
Grubb, Michael D., and Matthew Osborne. 2015. “Cellular Service Demand: Biased
Beliefs, Learning, and Bill Shock.” American Economic Review, 105(1): 234271.
Guthrie, Graeme. 2006. “Regulating Infrastructure: The Impact on Risk and Investment.”
Journal of Economic Literature, 44: 925–972.
Hagerman, Robert L., and Brian T. Ratchford. 1978. “Some Determinants of Allowed
Rates of Return on Equity to Electric Utilities.” The Bell Journal of Economics, 9(1): 46–
55.
Hausman, Catherine, and Lucija Muehlenbachs. 2016. “Price Regulation and Environmental Externalities: Evidence from Methane Leaks.” NBER Working Paper No.
22261.
Hausman, Catherine, and Ryan Kellogg. 2015. “Welfare and Distributional Implications of Shale Gas.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring: 71–125.
Hortacsu, Ali, Seyed Ali Madanizadeh, and Steven L. Puller. 2017. “Power to
Choose? An Analysis of Consumer Inertia in the Residential Electricity Market.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 9: 192–226.
Imelda, Matthias Fripp, and Michael J. Roberts. 2018. “Variable Pricing and the
Social Cost of Renewable Energy.” Manuscript.
Ito, Koichiro. 2014. “Do Consumers Respond to Marginal or Average Price? Evidence
from Nonlinear Electricity Pricing.” American Economic Review, 104: 537–563.
Johnson, Ronald N. 2002. “Search Costs, Lags and Prices at the Pump.” Review of
Industrial Organization, 20: 33–50.
Joskow, Paul L. 1974. “Inflation and Environmental Concern: Structural Change in the
Process of Public Utility Price Regulation.” Journal of Law and Economics, 17: 291.

35

Joskow, Paul L., Nancy L. Rose, and Catherine D. Wolfram. 1996. “Political Constraints on Executive Compensation: Evidence from the Electric Utility Industry.” The
RAND Journal of Economics, 27(1): 165–182.
Kahneman, Daniel, Jack L. Knetsch, and Richard Thaler. 1986. “Fairness as a
Constraint on Profit Seeking: Entitlements in the Market.” American Economic Review,
76(4): 728–741.
Kehoe, Patrick, and Virgiliu Midrigan. 2015. “Prices are Sticky after All.” Journal of
Monetary Economics, 75: 35–53.
Knittel, Christopher R. 2003. “Market Structure and the Pricing of Electricity and Natural Gas.” Journal of Industrial Economics, 51(2): 167–191.
Knittel, Christopher R., Ben S. Meiselman, and James H. Stock. 2017. “The PassThrough of RIN Prices to Wholesale and Retail Fuels under the Renewable Fuel Standard.”
Journal of the Association of Environmental and Resource Economists, 4(4): 1081–1119.
Kolbe, A. Lawrence, Philip Q. Hanswer, and Bin Zhou. 2013. “Reducing Rate
Shocks.” http://www.brattle.com/system/publications/pdfs/000/003/978/original/Reducing
Rate Shocks Kolbe Hanser Zhou PUF June 2013.pdf, Public Utilities Fortnightly.
Lade, Gabriel E., and James B. Bushnell. 2017. “Fuel Subsidy Pass-Through and
Market Structure: Evidence from the Renewable Fuel Standard.” EEP Working Paper
014.
Leaver, Clare. 2009. “Bureaucratic Minimal Squawk Behavior: Theory and Evidence from
Regulatory Agencies.” American Economic Review, 99(3): 572–607.
Levinson, Arik, and Emilson Silva. 2018. “The Electric Gini: Income Redistribution
through Energy Prices.” Mimeo.
Lewis, Matthew S. 2011. “Asymmetric Price Adjustment and Consumer Search: An Examination of the Retail Gasoline Market.” Journal of Economics & Management Strategy,
20(2): 409–449.
Lim, Clare S. H., and Ali Yurukoglu. 2016. “Dynamic Natural Monopoly Regulation:
Time Inconsistency, Moral Hazard, and Political Environments.” Working paper.
Marion, Justin, and Erich Muehlegger. 2011. “Fuel Tax Incidence and Supply Conditions.” Journal of Public Economics, 95: 1202–1212.
Marmer, Vadim, Dmitry Shapiro, and Paul MacAvoy. 2007. “Bottlenecks in Regional
Markets for Natural Gas Transmission Services.” Energy Economics, 29: 37–45.
McRae, Shaun, and Robyn Meeks. 2016. “Price Perception and Electricity Demand
with Nonlinear Tariffs.” Manuscript.
Memphis Light, Gas and Water. 2016. “2016 Utility Bill Comparisons for Selected U.S.
Cities.” http://www.mlgw.com/images/content/files/pdf/2016RatesSurvey2016.pdf.
36

Muehlegger, Erich, and Richard L. Sweeney. 2017. “Pass-Through of Input Cost
Shocks Under Imperfect Competition: Evidence from the U.S. Fracking Boom.” NBER
Working Paper 24025.
Myers, Erica. 2018. “Asymmetric Information in Residential Rental Markets: Implications
for the Energy Efficiency Gap.” E2e Working Paper 021.
Nakamura, Emi, and Jon Steinsson. 2008. “Five Facts about Prices: A Reevaluation of
Menu Cost Models.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(4): 1415–1464.
Primeaux Jr., Walter J., and Patrick C. Mann. 1986. “Regulator Selection Methods
and Electricity Prices.” Land Economics, 62(1): 1–13.
Puller, Steven L., and Jeremy West. 2013. “Efficient Retail Pricing in Electricity and
Natural Gas Markets.” American Economic Review, 103(3): 350–355.
Rotemberg, Julio J. 2005. “Customer Anger at Price Increases, Changes in the Frequency
of Price Adjustment and Monetary Policy.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 52: 829–852.
Rotemberg, Julio J. 2011. “Fair Pricing.” Journal of the European Economic Association,
9(5): 952981.
Sexton, Steven. 2015. “Automatic Bill Payment and Salience Effects: Evidence from Electricity Consumption.” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 97(2): 229–241.
Sibly, Hugh. 2002. “Loss Averse Customers and Price Inflexibility.” Journal of Economic
Psychology, 23: 521–538.
Stolper, Samuel. 2016. “Who Bears the Burden of Energy Taxes? The Role of Local
Pass-Through.” Harvard Environmental Economics Program Discussion Paper 16-70.
Tappata, Mariano. 2009. “Rockets and Feathers: Understanding asymmetric pricing.”
RAND Journal of Economics, 40(4): 673–687.
Viscusi, W. Kip, John M. Vernon, and Joseph E. Harrington. 2005. Economics of
Regulation and Antitrust. . 4 ed., The MIT Press.
Zajac, Edward E. 1985. “Perceived Economic Justice: The Example of Public Utility
Regulation.” In Cost Allocation: Methods, Principles, Applications. , ed. H. Peyton Young.
North-Holland.

37

Online Appendix
This appendix provides additional tables and figures.

Pass-Through from Henry Hub to Citygate
Another form of price smoothing is via hedging, including physical storage of gas, signing
long-term contracts, or the use of financial instruments. To get a sense of how this impacts the purchasing price that utilities report, I regress purchasing cost on the Henry Hub
price. Across various specifications (Table A1), pass-through is estimated to be at most 0.9,
suggestive of some form of hedging. Column 1 shows the immediate pass-through (0.76).
Column 2 shows that much of this comes with one-month lag. Column 3 shows that the
pass-through after one year is 0.87; Column 4 includes additional time-series controls and
shows a one-year pass-through of 0.79. Column 5 shows that, with an AR(1) process, the
long-run pass-through is estimated to be 0.91 (calculated as 0.26 / (1-0.72)). Column 6
shows that instrumenting for the Henry Hub price does not change the results; the instrument, in the spirit of Hausman and Kellogg (2015), is the national average heating degree
days over twelve months. Across these six specifications, the largest estimated long-run passthrough is 0.91 (Column 5). All specifications except the long-run pass-through in Column
5 are statistically different from one. This delayed (and possibly incomplete) pass-through
is consistent with some hedging on the part of utilities.

Allowing for Price Endogeneity
Table A2 presents IV results for the residential fixed fee smoothing using the survey data on
fixed fees. All three columns instrument for the citygate price with the average price at the
Census region level. Results are essentially unchanged from the OLS results shown in Table
1.

Price Data Collection
While no comprehensive dataset on utility retail prices exists, some price documentation
is publicly available online or by request from utilities and commissions. I searched for a
time-series of rate documents for the largest utilities in the US.46 Information was collected
via a combination of web searches for utility and commission websites, contacting utilities
directly, and the Internet Archive (archive.org). I searched for data on fixed charges for
46

Largest according to the number of residential customers in 2013, the last year for which I have SNL
data.

A-1

the 40 largest utilities, finding both current and historical information for 30, and current
or spotty information only for an additional 9. I additionally searched for data on variable
mark-ups and on gas cost recovery charges. I found historical mark-up data for 28 utilities
and current or spotty data for an additional 7; and historical gas cost recovery data for 20
utilities and current or spotty data for an additional 4.
The typical utility or commission provides two types of documentation: a table of changes
in gas commodity charges over time, and a “tariff book” in pdf form detailing the other
components of the prices, which tend to change less often. For instance, Con Edison (New
York) provides the information for March 2017 displayed in Figure A1. The left image
shows the “gas cost factors,” or volumetric commodity charge, for Con Edison, which change
monthly. The right image shows the “minimum charge (per month)” (in practice, akin to
a fixed charge) and “base rate... per therm” (volumetric mark-up), which tend to change
every 1-3 years. Other utilities tend to show comparable documentation.
The Con Edison documentation also shows some of the complications that arise when
collecting price data. The right panel of Figure A1 shows the pricing for “Service Classification No. 3: Residential and Religious - Heating Firm Sales Service.” Numerous other
price plans are available, including “general firm sales service,” “residential and religious
firm sales service,” “seasonal off-peak firm sales service,” “interruptible” rates, etc. Moreover, a comprehensive dataset would also need to account for additional fees and charges
(frequently called “riders”), including the “merchant function charge,” “revenue decoupling
mechanism,” “system benefits charge,” and “temporary state assessment surcharge,” each
of which carries its own time series of changes. These additional charges are widespread
across utilities, and they can appear as either volumetric or fixed charges. Finally, for the
case of Con Edison (and some other utilities), what is loosely described here as a two-part
tariff with a fixed and a volumetric charge is actually a minimum charge with an increasing
block pricing structure: that is, there is a fixed charge, then zero mark-up (but a commodity
charge) for the first three units sold, and a volumetric charge (both commodity cost and a
mark-up) for additional units rising with usage. In practice, the typical customer is likely to
use between 3 and 87 units, so I have elided the non-linear aspect of the volumetric fee.
Additional complications that arise include multiple service territories (in general, I collected pricing data for the largest service territory) and additional service classifications (e.g.
low-income pricing).
A comprehensive dataset would require tracking, for all utilities, changes in (1) fixed
charges, (2) volumetric mark-ups, (3) commodity costs, (4) additional temporary fixed and
volumetric surcharges, (5) non-linear volumetric prices—these would need to be tracked
for each service classification and each service territory, and one would need data on the
A-2

number of customers subject to each service classification. Each of these components could
be structured and reported differently across utilities, and across time within a utility.
In general, I have collected data on the standard or default residential plan; low-income
or other residential pricing plans are not included in the data. In some cases, I have collected
both a “heating” rate and a “non-heating rate.” Where it was clear what the main service
territory was, I have collected data only for that geographic region. If it was unclear, I have
included both regions as two separate cross-sectional units. Where possible, I have included
riders, but for several utilities these were not clearly available.

Estimating Price Structures
Table A3 provides full results for the tests of potential threats to identification, using residential sector data (matching the condensed results presented in Table 4). Tables A4 and A5
provide additional robustness checks. Tables A6 through A8 provide comparable estimates
for the commercial sector. Descriptions are given in the main text.

Expenditures
Table A10 provides summary statistics for the firm-level panel used in the capital expenditures regression. While the data are annual, quantity and expenditure variables have been
divided by 12, to be comparable with the monthly summary statistics in Table 2.47 Summary
statistics are displayed for the 229 companies in the raw data; the regressions results in the
main text use fewer companies because of missing data.
Tables A11 shows the robustness of the expenditures and input cost results to alternative
specifications: alternative controls (Columns 1-3), using the region-level price as an instrument (Column 4), and weighting (Column 5). The results are sensitive to the time series
controls (Columns 2 and 3); the coefficient is approximately zero if a quadratic trend is
used, but the coefficient is larger in absolute value when year effects are used. Results are
qualitatively similar when instrumenting for the citygate price (Column 4), but statistical
significance is lost.
Table A12 shows the same specification as in Table 7, but with alternative expenditures
categories. The expenditures data are broken out into multiple categories: distribution operations and maintenance (O&M); customer accounts, sales, and information; administrative
expenses; and capital. Distribution O&M includes, for instance, repairs at citygate stations,
47

The only variable not directly comparable with Table 2 is the customer count variable; in the stateby-month panel, this is a count of customers per state, whereas in the utility-by-year panel, it is a count of
customers per utility.

A-3

repairs to customer meters, etc. Customer accounts, sales, and information includes such
spending as meter reading, customer accounts maintenance, uncollectible expenses, lowincome assistance, etc. I subtract uncollectible accounts from this category, since its value is
mechanically linked to the citygate price. As a result, this category has missing values—data
on uncollectible accounts contain missing values. Administrative expenses include salaries,
office supplies, etc. While negative impacts are estimated for capital, impacts for distribution
expenditures; customer accounts, information, and sales; and administrative expenditures
are small and not statistically different from zero.
Note that control coefficients (not displayed in the main text’s Table 7) are also displayed
in this table, in Column 2. The positive coefficients on quantity consumed, although not
statistically significant, are consistent with two possibilities: (1) service territory expansions
increase the number of customers and require capital expenditures; (2) a positive mark-up
means that additional sales will lead to additional revenue, which can then be used for capital expenditures. The negative coefficient on heating degree days is also consistent with
two possibilities: (1) cold weather might inhibit pipeline repair; (2) “weather normalization”
clauses in some jurisdictions are designed to undo the quantity/revenue tie previously mentioned. In these jurisdictions, additional HDDs would lead to additional consumption and
therefore additional revenue, but some of this additional revenue would be removed via the
normalization clause. To the extent these revenue changes impact capital expenditures, it
would imply a positive coefficient on quantity but a negative coefficient on HDDs.

A-4

Figure A1: Sample Price Documentation, Con Edison (NY)

Note: The left image shows the “gas cost factors,” or volumetric commodity charge, for Con Edison, which change monthly.
The right image shows the “minimum charge (per month)” (in practice, akin to a fixed charge) and “base rate... per therm”
(volumetric mark-up), which tend to change every 1-3 years.

A-5

Table A1: Pass-Through of Henry Hub to Citygate

Henry Hub price

(1)
0.76***
(0.03)

Henry Hub, lag 1
Henry Hub, lag 2

(2)
0.26***
(0.05)
0.48***
(0.07)
0.06
(0.04)

Henry Hub, lag 3
Henry Hub, lag 4
Henry Hub, lag 5
Henry Hub, lag 6
Henry Hub, lag 7
Henry Hub, lag 8
Henry Hub, lag 9
Henry Hub, lag 10
Henry Hub, lag 11
Henry Hub, lag 12

(3)
0.25***
(0.04)
0.48***
(0.05)
-0.05
(0.05)
0.01
(0.04)
0.02
(0.03)
-0.02
(0.02)
0.06**
(0.02)
0.02
(0.03)
0.04
(0.03)
-0.03
(0.03)
-0.02
(0.04)
0.07
(0.04)
0.03
(0.03)

(4)
0.24***
(0.03)
0.48***
(0.05)
-0.05*
(0.03)
-0.00
(0.03)
0.04
(0.03)
-0.03*
(0.02)
0.05**
(0.02)
-0.01
(0.02)
0.04*
(0.02)
-0.04
(0.03)
0.00
(0.04)
0.07
(0.04)
0.01
(0.03)

Citygate price, lag 1
Linear trend
Quadratic trend
State by month effects
Observations
R2
F-stat

Yes
No
No
10,943
0.59

Yes
No
No
10,847
0.63

Yes
No
No
10,367
0.64

Yes
Yes
Yes
10,367
0.80

(5)
0.26***
(0.02)

0.72***
(0.02)
Yes
No
No
10,942
0.84

(6)
0.71***
(0.15)

Yes
No
No
10,943
0.59
6.29

Notes: This table regresses citygate purchasing costs reported by utilities on the Henry Hub
price. The Henry Hub price, originally reported in dollars per mmBtu, has been rescaled
to dollars per mcf using a conversion factor of 1.037. Column 6 instruments for the Henry
Hub price using the national average heating degree days over 12 months. Standard errors
are clustered by sample month. *** Statistically significant at the 1% level; ** 5% level; *
10% level.

A-6

Table A2: Residential Bill Smoothing, IV Specifications

Citygate price, $/mcf
Fixed effects
Time trend
Observations
Within R2
F-stat

(1)
Fixed Fee
-0.43*
(0.22)
Yes
Yes
27
0.63
245.90

(2)
Fixed Fee
-0.41
(0.27)
Yes
Yes
337
0.08
221.17

(3)
Fixed Fee
-0.17**
(0.07)
Yes
Yes
5,410
0.16
1580.36

(4)
Volumetric mark-up
-0.10*
(0.05)
Yes
Yes
4,549
0.04
1630.69

(5)
Volumetric gas cost
1.04***
(0.05)
Yes
Yes
3,219
0.75
1434.11

Notes: Column 1 uses observations at the level of a Census division (n=9), covering the years 2006, 2010, and
2015; the data source is AGA surveys. Column 2 uses an unbalanced panel of utility-level observations for 48
cities in the US for the years 2007 and 2009-2016; the data source is a survey conducted annually by Memphis
Light Gas and Water. Columns 3, 4, and 5 use an unbalanced panel of utility-level monthly observations for
the approximately 40 largest utilities in the US for the years 1994 to 2017; the data source is tariff sheets collected by the author. Most utilities are represented by just one rate; a few have, for instance, both a “heating”
and a “non-heating” rate. Standard errors are two-way clustered by state and year in Columns 2 through 5.
The citygate price is instrumented with the Census region level (West, Midwest, Northeast, and South) average price. All prices are in 2015 dollars. *** Statistically significant at the 1% level; ** 5% level; * 10% level.

Table A3: Estimating Residential Rate Structures, Alternative Specifications

Cost, M Cit Qit , in $
M Ci,t−1 Qit
M Ci,t−2 Qit
M Ci,t−3 Qit
Quantity
Citygate price

(1)
0.42***
(0.03)
0.24***
(0.02)
0.12***
(0.02)
0.07***
(0.02)
3.03***
(0.26)
-0.37**
(0.16)

(2)
0.44***
(0.03)
0.24***
(0.02)
0.12***
(0.02)
0.07***
(0.02)
3.14***
(0.26)
-0.62***
(0.18)

CDD
HDD

(3)
0.42***
(0.03)
0.24***
(0.02)
0.11***
(0.02)
0.07***
(0.02)
2.98***
(0.29)
-0.38**
(0.16)
-0.04
(0.05)
0.04
(0.10)

(4)
0.38***
(0.03)
0.23***
(0.03)
0.11***
(0.03)
0.10***
(0.03)
3.59***
(0.37)
-0.33**
(0.16)

(5)
0.47***
(0.04)
0.24***
(0.03)
0.12***
(0.02)
0.03
(0.02)
2.35***
(0.26)
-0.47*
(0.24)

Quantity, quadratic

(6)
0.42***
(0.03)
0.24***
(0.02)
0.12***
(0.02)
0.07***
(0.02)
3.10***
(0.74)
-0.38**
(0.16)

(7)
0.43***
(0.03)
0.24***
(0.02)
0.12***
(0.02)
0.07***
(0.02)
3.06***
(0.26)
-0.33**
(0.16)

-0.00
(0.06)
0.00
(0.00)

Quantity, cubic
Rising citygate indicator

-0.63*
(0.32)

Citygate, lag 1
Citygate, lag 2
Observations
Within R2

14,942
0.85

14,942
0.85

14,942
0.85

8,411
0.84

6,531
0.86

14,942
0.85

14,942
0.85

Notes: This table is identical to Table 3 in the main text, with the following exceptions. Additional lags
(4-12) on cost are included as controls, as in Table 3, but are not shown here for space. All columns use
fixed effects and a linear trend with the following exceptions. Column 1 uses a quadratic trend. Column
2 uses a cubic trend. Column 3 controls for cooling degree days and heating degree days. Column 4 restricts the sample to states with less than 50 percent of homes using natural gas for heating. Column 5
restricts to states with more than 50 percent of homes using natural gas for heating. Column 6 controls
for third-order polynomials for the quantity variables. Column 7 adds an asymmetric citygate effect (see
text for details). *** Statistically significant at the 1% level; ** 5% level; * 10% level.

A-7

Table A4: Estimating Residential Rate Structures, Alternative Specifications

Cost, M Cit Qit , in $
M Ci,t−1 Qit
M Ci,t−2 Qit
M Ci,t−3 Qit
Quantity
Citygate price

(8)
0.46***
(0.03)
0.23***
(0.02)
0.10***
(0.01)
0.08***
(0.02)
2.44***
(0.24)
-0.89***
(0.29)

(9)
0.47***
(0.03)
0.23***
(0.02)
0.10***
(0.01)
0.08***
(0.02)
2.62***
(0.23)
-1.05***
(0.28)

(10)
0.47***
(0.03)
0.23***
(0.02)
0.11***
(0.02)
0.06**
(0.02)
3.21***
(0.30)
-1.18***
(0.24)

(11)
0.42***
(0.03)
0.24***
(0.02)
0.11***
(0.02)
0.07***
(0.02)
3.13***
(0.26)
-0.33**
(0.15)

(12)
0.43***
(0.03)
0.24***
(0.02)
0.12***
(0.02)
0.07***
(0.02)
3.08***
(0.26)
-0.51***
(0.16)

(13)
0.42***
(0.03)
0.27***
(0.04)
0.13***
(0.02)
0.05**
(0.02)
2.85***
(0.33)
-0.37*
(0.21)

(14)
0.43***
(0.03)
0.26***
(0.04)
0.13***
(0.02)
0.06**
(0.02)
2.94***
(0.30)
-0.23
(0.18)

14,942
0.96

14,942
0.96

14,942
0.80

14,942
0.87

14,942
0.85

14,942
0.85

14,942
0.86

CDD
HDD
Quantity, quadratic
Quantity, cubic
Rising citygate indicator
Citygate, lag 1
Citygate, lag 2
Observations
Within R2

Notes: This table is identical to Table 3 in the main text, with the following exceptions. Additional lags
(4-12) on cost are included as controls, as in Table 3, but are not shown here for space. All columns use
fixed effects and a linear trend with the following exceptions. Column 8 has only state fixed effects as
controls. Column 9 has no seasonal controls. Column 10 uses year effects. Column 11 uses state-specific
linear trends. Column 12 controls for GDP growth and for PHMSA safety regulations. Column 13 weights
by customer count (time-invariant). Column 14 weights by volume sold (time-invariant). *** Statistically
significant at the 1% level; ** 5% level; * 10% level.

A-8

Table A5: Estimating Residential Rate Structures, Alternative Specifications

Cost, M Cit Qit , in $
M Ci,t−1 Qit
M Ci,t−2 Qit
M Ci,t−3 Qit
Quantity
Citygate price

(15)
0.43***
(0.03)
0.23***
(0.02)
0.12***
(0.02)
0.06**
(0.02)
3.02***
(0.26)
-0.32**
(0.14)

(16)
0.45***
(0.04)
0.22***
(0.02)
0.10***
(0.02)
0.07**
(0.03)
3.11***
(0.41)
-0.86***
(0.18)

(17)
0.45***
(0.04)
0.26***
(0.03)
0.11***
(0.02)
0.05*
(0.03)
3.31***
(0.44)
-0.60**
(0.26)

(18)
0.42***
(0.03)
0.25***
(0.03)
0.10***
(0.03)
0.07***
(0.02)
3.04***
(0.26)
-0.37*
(0.18)

(19)

(20)

-0.33**
(0.13)

-0.64***
(0.20)

6,336
0.91

-0.13
(0.23)
0.13
(0.16)
14,942
0.85

14,942
0.87

14,891
0.82

CDD
HDD
Quantity, quadratic
Quantity, cubic
Rising citygate indicator
Citygate, lag 1
Citygate, lag 2
Observations
Within R2

14,011
0.86

8,606
0.80

Notes: This table is identical to Table 3 in the main text, with the following exceptions. Additional lags (4-12) on cost are included as controls, as in Table 3, but are not shown here for
space. All columns use fixed effects and a linear trend with the following exceptions. Column
15 drops the three states with active and well-subscribed retail choice programs: Georgia, New
York, and Ohio. Column 16 is restricted to 1990 through 2004. Column 17 is restricted to 2005
through 2015. Column 18 uses additional lags on the citygate variable. Column 19 allows the
markup and pass-through coefficients to vary by state and by five-year periods. Column 20
uses first-differences of all variables. *** Statistically significant at the 1% level; ** 5% level;
* 10% level.

A-9

Table A6: Estimating Commercial Rate Structures, Alternative Specifications

Cost, M Cit Qit , in $
M Ci,t−1 Qit
M Ci,t−2 Qit
M Ci,t−3 Qit
Quantity
Citygate price

(1)
0.45***
(0.03)
0.22***
(0.02)
0.11***
(0.02)
0.06***
(0.02)
2.73***
(0.38)
-2.14
(1.40)

(2)
0.46***
(0.03)
0.22***
(0.02)
0.11***
(0.02)
0.05***
(0.02)
2.90***
(0.40)
-3.96**
(1.57)

CDD
HDD

(3)
0.45***
(0.03)
0.22***
(0.02)
0.11***
(0.02)
0.06***
(0.02)
2.63***
(0.44)
-1.90
(1.31)
-0.15
(0.66)
0.68
(0.96)

(4)
0.40***
(0.04)
0.22***
(0.02)
0.10***
(0.03)
0.06**
(0.02)
3.11***
(0.49)
-1.95
(1.76)

(5)
0.50***
(0.05)
0.21***
(0.03)
0.13***
(0.03)
0.05**
(0.02)
1.99***
(0.27)
-1.53
(1.73)

Quantity, quadratic

(6)
0.45***
(0.03)
0.22***
(0.02)
0.11***
(0.02)
0.06***
(0.02)
0.63
(1.29)
-2.31*
(1.19)

(7)
0.45***
(0.03)
0.22***
(0.02)
0.11***
(0.02)
0.06***
(0.02)
2.74***
(0.36)
-1.59
(1.38)

0.02
(0.02)
-0.00
(0.00)

Quantity, cubic
Rising citygate indicator

-4.20*
(2.18)

Citygate, lag 1
Citygate, lag 2
Observations
Within R2

14,931
0.83

14,931
0.83

14,931
0.83

8,411
0.84

6,520
0.83

14,931
0.83

14,931
0.83

Notes: This table is identical to Table 3 in the main text, with the following exceptions. Additional lags
(4-12) on cost are included as controls, as in Table 3, but are not shown here for space. All columns use
fixed effects and a linear trend with the following exceptions. Column 1 uses a quadratic trend. Column 2 uses a cubic trend. Column 3 controls for cooling degree days and heating degree days. Column
4 restricts the sample to states with less than 50 percent of homes using natural gas for heating. Column 5 restricts to states with more than 50 percent of homes using natural gas for heating. Column 6
controls for third-order polynomials for the quantity variables. Column 7 adds an asymmetric citygate
effect (see text for details). *** Statistically significant at the 1% level; ** 5% level; * 10% level.

A-10

Table A7: Estimating Commercial Rate Structures, Alternative Specifications

Cost, M Cit Qit , in $
M Ci,t−1 Qit
M Ci,t−2 Qit
M Ci,t−3 Qit
Quantity
Citygate price

(8)
0.48***
(0.03)
0.21***
(0.02)
0.10***
(0.02)
0.06***
(0.02)
2.32***
(0.28)
-5.12**
(2.07)

(9)
0.50***
(0.03)
0.21***
(0.02)
0.10***
(0.02)
0.06***
(0.02)
2.44***
(0.28)
-6.05***
(1.98)

(10)
0.51***
(0.03)
0.20***
(0.02)
0.10***
(0.02)
0.04**
(0.02)
3.13***
(0.43)
-8.88***
(2.02)

(11)
0.45***
(0.03)
0.22***
(0.02)
0.11***
(0.02)
0.05***
(0.02)
2.48***
(0.32)
-1.97
(1.38)

(12)
0.46***
(0.03)
0.21***
(0.02)
0.11***
(0.02)
0.06***
(0.02)
2.83***
(0.38)
-3.48**
(1.42)

(13)
0.46***
(0.04)
0.24***
(0.03)
0.14***
(0.02)
0.06***
(0.01)
2.70***
(0.36)
-1.01
(1.66)

(14)
0.46***
(0.03)
0.24***
(0.03)
0.14***
(0.02)
0.06***
(0.01)
2.80***
(0.38)
-0.75
(1.51)

14,931
0.94

14,931
0.94

14,931
0.77

14,931
0.85

14,931
0.83

14,931
0.82

14,931
0.83

CDD
HDD
Quantity, quadratic
Quantity, cubic
Rising citygate indicator
Citygate, lag 1
Citygate, lag 2
Observations
Within R2

Notes: This table is identical to Table 3 in the main text, with the following exceptions. Additional lags
(4-12) on cost are included as controls, as in Table 3, but are not shown here for space. All columns
use fixed effects and a linear trend with the following exceptions. Column 8 has only state fixed effects
as controls. Column 9 has no seasonal controls. Column 10 uses year effects. Column 11 uses statespecific linear trends. Column 12 controls for GDP growth and for PHMSA safety regulations. Column
13 weights by customer count (time-invariant). Column 14 weights by volume sold (time-invariant). ***
Statistically significant at the 1% level; ** 5% level; * 10% level.

A-11

Table A8: Estimating Commercial Rate Structures, Alternative Specifications

Cost, M Cit Qit , in $
M Ci,t−1 Qit
M Ci,t−2 Qit
M Ci,t−3 Qit
Quantity
Citygate price

(15)
0.45***
(0.03)
0.22***
(0.02)
0.09***
(0.02)
0.06***
(0.02)
2.74***
(0.39)
-1.96
(1.27)

(16)
0.46***
(0.05)
0.19***
(0.03)
0.10***
(0.02)
0.05**
(0.02)
2.21***
(0.40)
-4.75***
(1.57)

(17)
0.51***
(0.04)
0.23***
(0.03)
0.10***
(0.02)
0.05
(0.03)
2.78***
(0.61)
-5.81*
(2.78)

(18)
0.46***
(0.04)
0.22***
(0.04)
0.08*
(0.05)
0.06***
(0.02)
2.74***
(0.38)
-2.84
(1.92)

(19)

(20)

-1.86*
(1.02)

-3.52***
(0.95)

6,336
0.87

-0.43
(1.33)
1.62
(1.81)
14,931
0.83

14,931
0.85

14,879
0.74

CDD
HDD
Quantity, quadratic
Quantity, cubic
Rising citygate indicator
Citygate, lag 1
Citygate, lag 2
Observations
Within R2

14,007
0.83

8,595
0.76

Notes: This table is identical to Table 3 in the main text, with the following exceptions. Additional lags (4-12) on cost are included as controls, as in Table 3, but are not shown here for
space. All columns use fixed effects and a linear trend with the following exceptions. Column
15 drops the three states with active and well-subscribed retail choice programs: Georgia,
New York, and Ohio. Column 16 is restricted to 1990 through 2004. Column 17 is restricted
to 2005 through 2015. Column 18 uses additional lags on the citygate variable. Column 19
allows the markup and pass-through coefficients to vary by state and by five-year periods.
Column 20 uses first-differences of all variables. *** Statistically significant at the 1% level;
** 5% level; * 10% level.

A-12

Table A9: Forecasting the Future Rolling Average Citygate Price

L12.Citygate price
L13.Citygate price
L14.Citygate price
L15.Citygate price
L16.Citygate price
L17.Citygate price
L18.Citygate price
L19.Citygate price
L20.Citygate price
L21.Citygate price
L22.Citygate price
L23.Citygate price
State by month effects
Observations
Within R2

Rolling (Lags 11 to 0) Average Citygate Price
0.44***
(0.01)
0.07***
(0.01)
0.04***
(0.01)
0.00
(0.01)
0.02*
(0.01)
0.04***
(0.01)
0.03*
(0.01)
0.02*
(0.01)
0.04***
(0.01)
0.04***
(0.01)
0.01
(0.01)
0.04***
(0.01)
Yes
14,397
0.66

Notes: This table displays the coefficients on lagged citygate prices used for
forecasting. Specifically, a rolling-average citygate price (using up to 11 lags)
was generated, using seasonal quantity weights. This was then regressed on
the previous year’s 12 months of prices. These coefficients are then used to
predict the following year’s rolling average price. See text for details. ***
Statistically significant at the 1% level; ** 5% level; * 10% level.

A-13

Table A10: Summary Statistics, Utility by Year Panel

Citygate price
Retail price
Residential
Commercial
Industrial
Quantity
Residential
Commercial
Industrial
Power Plant
Customers
Residential
Commercial
Industrial
Power Plant
Expenditures
Distribution O&M
Customer accounts, info, and sales
Administrative
Capital

Mean
7.58

Std. Dev.
2.38

N
2,666

13.30
11.40
9.76

3.79
3.11
3.54

2,629
2,625
2,371

6.49
47.58
5,778.13
111,957.71

1.84
26.35
11,683.51
320,432.13

2,666
2,666
2,666
2,666

308,180.56
24,624.75
988.86
8.14

583,831.14
34,062.64
2,897.76
53.79

2,666
2,666
2,666
2,666

6.90
4.22
10.50
10.30

3.21
2.24
7.26
10.44

2,578
1,898
2,577
2,440

Notes: A unit of observation is a utility in a year. For comparison with Table
2, the quantity and expenditure variables have been divided by 12 and thus
are monthly amounts per customer. The sample covers 1998 through 2013.
The subset of firms included is 229 large investor-owned utilities; see text for
details. Prices are in $ per thousand cubic feet (mcf). Revenue is in $ per customer per month. Quantity is in mcf per customer per month. Expenditures
are in $ per customer per month. Prices and revenue are listed in 2015 dollars.

Table A11: The Impact of Gas Input Prices on Capital Expenditures, Alternative Specifications

Citygate price

(1)
-0.19***
(0.06)

(2)
0.01
(0.10)

(3)
-0.41*
(0.22)

(4)
-0.12
(0.08)

(5)
-0.14*
(0.07)

-0.26
(0.17)
Yes
Yes
No
2,434
0.02

1.08*
(0.60)
0.04
(0.02)
0.00
(0.00)
0.00
(0.00)
-0.70**
(0.33)
Yes
Yes
No
2,434
0.04

1.01
(0.65)
0.04
(0.03)
0.00
(0.00)
0.00
(0.00)
-0.78**
(0.33)
Yes
No
Yes
2,434
0.02

1.12*
(0.60)
0.04
(0.03)
0.00
(0.00)
0.00
(0.00)
-0.77**
(0.33)
Yes
Yes
No
2,434
0.04

0.40
(0.62)
0.01
(0.01)
0.00*
(0.00)
-0.00
(0.00)
-0.34
(0.29)
Yes
Yes
No
2,434
0.06

Quantity
Residential
Commercial
Industrial
Power Plant
Heating degree days
Utility effects
Time trend
Year effects
Observations
Within R2

Notes: Expenditures are per-customer and in 2015 dollars. Observations are weighted
by the number of customers. Standard errors are clustered by state. Table is identical
to Table 7 in the main text, with the following exceptions. Column 1 uses no controls other than utility effects and a linear trend. Column 2 uses a quadratic trend.
Column 3 uses year effects. Column 4 uses the region-level average price as an instrument for the state-level price. Column 5 weights by customer count. *** Statistically
significant at the 1% level; ** 5% level; * 10% level.

A-14

Table A12: The Impact of Gas Input Prices on Various Categories of Expenditures

Citygate price
Quantity
Residential
Commercial
Industrial
Power Plant
Heating degree days
Utility effects
Linear trend
Observations
Within R2

(1)

(2)
Capital
-0.13**
(0.06)

(3)
Customer Accounts,
Info, and Sales
-0.00
(0.02)

(4)
Administrative
0.02
(0.03)

Distribution
-0.04
(0.03)
0.24
(0.27)
0.01*
(0.00)
-0.00
(0.00)
-0.00
(0.00)
-0.15
(0.13)
Yes
Yes
2,574
0.03

1.11*
(0.59)
0.04
(0.03)
0.00
(0.00)
0.00
(0.00)
-0.76**
(0.32)
Yes
Yes
2,434
0.04

0.19*
(0.10)
0.01***
(0.00)
-0.00
(0.00)
0.00
(0.00)
-0.11*
(0.06)
Yes
Yes
1,891
0.04

-0.30
(0.21)
0.02***
(0.00)
-0.00
(0.00)
0.00
(0.00)
0.11
(0.11)
Yes
Yes
2,573
0.02

Notes: Expenditures are per-customer and in 2015 dollars. Upper one percent expenditure outliers have been winsorized. Standard errors are clustered by state. *** Statistically significant
at the 1% level; ** 5% level; * 10% level.

A-15

