                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    ON THE RISE OF FINTECHS – CREDIT SCORING USING DIGITAL FOOTPRINTS

                                          Tobias Berg
                                         Valentin Burg
                                         Ana Gombovi
                                          Manju Puri

                                      Working Paper 24551
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24551


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                             April 2018, Revised July 2018




We wish to thank Frank Ecker, Falko Fecht, Christine Laudenbach, Laurence van Lent, Kelly
Shue (discussant), Sascha Steffen, as well as participants of the 2018 RFS FinTech Conference,
the 2018 Swiss Winter Conference on Financial Intermediation, and research seminars at Duke
University, FDIC, and Frankfurt School of Finance & Management for valuable comments and
suggestions. This work was supported by a grant from FIRM (Frankfurt Institute for Risk
Management and Regulation). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Tobias Berg, Valentin Burg, Ana Gombovi , and Manju Puri. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
On the Rise of FinTechs – Credit Scoring using Digital Footprints
Tobias Berg, Valentin Burg, Ana Gombovi , and Manju Puri
NBER Working Paper No. 24551
April 2018, Revised July 2018
JEL No. D12,G20,O33

                                         ABSTRACT

We analyze the information content of the digital footprint – information that people leave online
simply by accessing or registering on a website – for predicting consumer default. Using more
than 250,000 observations, we show that even simple, easily accessible variables from the digital
footprint equal or exceed the information content of credit bureau scores. Furthermore, the
discriminatory power for unscorable customers is very similar to that of scorable customers. Our
results have potentially wide implications for financial intermediaries’ business models, for
access to credit for the unbanked, and for the behavior of consumers, firms, and regulators in the
digital sphere.

Tobias Berg                                         Ana Gombovi
Frankfurt School of Finance & Management            Frankfurt School of Finance & Management,
t.berg@fs.de                                        a.gombovic@fs.de

Valentin Burg                                       Manju Puri
Humboldt University Berlin                          Fuqua School of Business
valentin.burg@gmail.com                             Duke University
                                                    100 Fuqua Drive
                                                    Durham, NC 27708-0120
                                                    and FDIC
                                                    and also NBER
                                                    mpuri@duke.edu
1. Introduction
         The growth of the internet leaves a trace of simple, easily accessible information about almost

every individual worldwide – a trace that we label “digital footprint”. Even without writing text about

oneself, uploading financial information, or providing friendship or social network data, the simple act of

accessing or registering on a webpage leaves valuable information. As a simple example, every website can

effortlessly track whether a customer is using an iOS or an Android device; or track whether a customer

comes to the website via a search engine or a click on a paid ad. In this project, we seek to understand

whether the digital footprint helps augment information traditionally considered to be important for default

prediction and whether it can be used for the prediction of consumer payment behavior and defaults.

         Understanding the importance of digital footprints for consumer lending is of significant

importance. A key reason for the existence of financial intermediaries is their superior ability to access and

process information relevant for screening and monitoring of borrowers.1 If digital footprints yield

significant information on predicting defaults then FinTechs – with their superior ability to access and

process digital footprints – can threaten the information advantage of financial intermediaries and thereby

challenge financial intermediaries’ business models.2

         In this paper, we analyze the importance of simple, easily accessible digital footprint variables for

default prediction using a comprehensive and unique data set covering approximately 250,000 observations

from an E-Commerce company located in Germany. Judging the creditworthiness of its customers is

important because goods are shipped first and paid later. The use of digital footprints in similar settings is

growing around the world.3 Our data set contains a set of ten digital footprint variables: the device type (for


1
  See in particular Diamond (1984), Boot (1999), and Boot and Thakor (2000) for an overview of the role of banks in
overcoming information asymmetries and Berger, Miller, Petersen, Rajan, and Stein (2005) for empirical evidence.
2
  The digital footprint can also be used by financial intermediaries themselves, but to the extent that it proxies for
current relationship-specific information it reduces the gap between traditional banks and those firms more prone to
technology innovation.
3
  In China, Alibaba’s Sesame Credit uses social credit scores from AntFinancial and goods are also shipped first and
paid later (see https://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21710292-chinas-consumer-credit-rating-
culture-evolving-fastand-unconventionally-just). Other FinTechs that have publicly announced using digital
footprints for lending decisions include ZestFinance and Earnest in the U.S., Kreditech in various emerging markets,
and Rapid Finance, CreditEase, and Yongqianbao in China (see https://www.nytimes.com/2015/01/19/technology/
banking-start-ups-adopt-new-tools-for-lending.html         and       https://www.forbes.com/sites/rebeccafeng/2017/
07/25/chinese-fintechs-use-big-data-to-give-credit-scores-to-the-unscorable/#45b0e6ed410a).
                                                                                                                     2
example, tablet or mobile), the operating system (for example, iOS or Android), the channel through which

a customer comes to the website (for example, search engine or price comparison site), a do not track

dummy equal to one if a customer uses settings that do not allow tracking device, operating system and

channel information, the time of day of the purchase (for example, morning, afternoon, evening, or night),

the email service provider (for example, gmail or yahoo), two pieces of information about the email address

chosen by the user (includes first and/or last name and includes a number), a lower case dummy if a user

consistently uses lower case when writing, and a dummy for a typing error when entering the email

address. In addition to these digital footprint variables, our data set also contains a credit score from a

private credit bureau. We are therefore able to assess the discriminatory ability of the digital footprint

variables both separately, vis-à-vis the credit bureau score, and jointly with the credit bureau score.

           Our results suggest that even the simple, easily accessible variables from the digital footprint proxy

for income, character and reputation and are highly valuable for default prediction. For example, the

difference in default rates between customers using iOS (Apple) and Android (for example, Samsung) is

equivalent to the difference in default rates between a median credit score and the 80th percentile of the

credit score. Bertrand and Kamenica (2017) document that owning an iOS device is one of the best

predictors for being in the top quartile of the income distribution. Our results are therefore consistent with

the device type being an easily accessible proxy for otherwise hard to collect income data.

           Variables that proxy for character and reputation are also significantly related to future payment

behavior. For example, customers coming from a price comparison website are almost half as likely to

default as customers being directed to the website by search engine ads, consistent with marketing research

documenting the importance of personality traits for impulse shopping.4 Belenzon, Chatterji, and Daley

(2017) and Guzman and Stern (2016) have documented an eponymous-entrepreneurs-effect, implying that

whether a firm is named after their founders matters for subsequent performance. Consistent with their

results, customers having their names in the email address are 30% less likely to default.




4
    See for example Rook (1987), Wells, Parboteeah, and Valacich (2011), and Turkyilmaz, Erdem, and Uslu (2015).
                                                                                                                   3
        We provide a more formal analysis of the discriminatory power of digital footprint variables by

constructing receiver operating characteristics and determining the area under the curve (AUC). The AUC

is a simple and widely used metric for judging the discriminatory power of credit scores (see for example

Stein, 2007; Altman, Sabato, and Wilson, 2010; Iyer, Khwaja, Luttmer, and Shue, 2016; Vallee and Zeng,

2018). The AUC ranges from 50% (purely random prediction) to 100% (perfect prediction) and is closely

related to the Gini coefficient (Gini= 2*AUC–1). The AUC corresponds to the probability of correctly

identifying the good case if faced with one random good and one random bad case (Hanley and McNeil,

1982). Following Iyer, Khwaja, Luttmer, and Shue (2016), an AUC of 60% is generally considered

desirable in information-scarce environments, while AUCs of 70% or greater are the goal in information-

rich environments.

        The AUC using the credit bureau score alone is 68.3% in our data set, comparable to the 66.6%

AUC using the credit bureau score alone documented in a consumer loan sample of a large German bank

(Berg, Puri, and Rocholl, 2017), as well as the 66.5% AUC using the credit bureau score alone in a loan

sample of 296 German savings banks (Puri, Rocholl, and Steffen, 2017). As a comparison, Iyer, Khwaja,

Luttmer, and Shue (2016) report an AUC of 62.5% in a U.S. peer-to-peer lending data set using a credit

bureau score only. Similarly, in an own analysis we find an AUC of 59.8% using U.S. credit scores from

Lending Club. This suggests that the score provided to us by a German credit bureau clearly possesses

discriminatory power and we use the credit bureau score related AUC of 68.3% as a benchmark for the

digital footprint variables in our analysis.5

        Interestingly, a model that uses only the digital footprint variables equals or exceeds the

information content of the credit bureau score: the AUC of the model using digital footprint variables is

69.6%, higher than the AUC of the model using only the credit bureau score (68.3%). This is remarkable

because our data set only contains digital footprint variables that are easily accessible for any firm

conducting business in the digital sphere. Our results are also robust to a large set of robustness tests. In

particular, we show that digital footprint variables are not simply proxies for time or region fixed effects

5
 Note that the German credit bureau may use some information which U.S. bureaus are legally prohibited to use
under the Equal Credit Opportunity Act. Examples include gender, age, current and previous addresses.
                                                                                                            4
and results are robust to various default definitions and sample splits. We also provide out-of-sample tests

for all of our results which yield very similar magnitudes. Furthermore, we show that digital footprints

today can forecast future changes in the credit score. This provides indirect evidence that the predictive

power of digital footprints is not limited to short-term loans originated online, but that digital footprints

matter for predicting creditworthiness for more traditional loan products as well.

        In the next step, we analyze whether the digital footprint complements or substitutes for

information from the credit bureau. We find that the digital footprint complements rather than substitutes

for credit bureau information. The correlation between a score based on the digital footprint variables and

the credit bureau score is only approximately 10%. As a consequence, the discriminatory power of a model

using both the credit bureau score and the digital footprint variables significantly exceeds the

discriminatory power of models that only use the credit bureau score or only use the digital footprint

variables. This suggests that a lender that uses information from both sources (credit bureau score + digital

footprint) can make superior lending decisions. The AUC of the combined model (credit bureau score +

digital footprint) is 73.6% and therefore 5.3 percentage points higher than that of a model using only the

credit bureau score. This improvement is very similar to the 5.7 percentage points AUC improvement

reported in Iyer, Khwaja, Luttmer, and Shue (2016) who compare the AUC using the Experian credit score

to the AUC in a setting where, in addition to the credit score, lenders have access to a large set of borrower

financial information as well as access to non-standard information (characteristics of the listing text, group

and friend endorsements as well as borrower choice variables such as listing duration and listing category).

It is also sizeable relative to the improvement in the AUC by +8.8 percentage points in a consumer loan

sample of a large German bank (Berg, Puri, and Rocholl, 2017) and the improvement in the AUC by +11.9

percentage points in a loan sample of 296 German savings banks (Puri, Rocholl, and Steffen, 2017), where

the AUC using the credit bureau score is compared to the AUC using the entire bank-internal information

set, including account data, credit history, as well as socio-demographic data and income information.

Taken together, this evidence suggests that a few variables from the digital footprint can (partially)

substitute for variables that are otherwise more expensive to collect, otherwise take significantly more

                                                                                                            5
effort to provide and process, or might only be available to a few lenders with specific access to particular

types of information.

        Furthermore, digital footprints can facilitate access to credit when credit bureau scores do not exist,

thereby fostering financial inclusion and lowering inequality (Japelli and Pagano, 1993; Djankov, McLiesh,

and Shleifer, 2007; Beck, Demirguc-Kunt, and Honohan, 2009; and Brown, Jappelli and Pagano, 2009).

We therefore analyze customers for whom no credit bureau score is available, i.e., customers whose credit

history is insufficient to calculate a credit bureau score, which we label “unscorable customers”. We find

that the discriminatory power of the digital footprint for unscorable customers matches the discriminatory

power for scorable customers (72.2% versus 69.6% in-sample, 68.8% versus 68.3% out-of-sample). These

results suggest that digital footprints have the potential to boost financial inclusion to parts of the currently

two billion working-age adults worldwide that lack access to services in the formal financial sector.

        In the last section, we discuss implications of our findings for the behavior of consumers, firms and

regulators. Consumers might plausibly change their behavior if digital footprints are widely used for

lending decisions (Lucas (1976)). Some of the digital footprint variables are clearly costly to manipulate

(such as buying the newest smart device or signing up for a paid email account) while others require a

customer to change her intrinsic habits (such as impulse shopping or making typing mistakes). However,

more importantly, such a change in behavior can lead to a situation where consumers fear to express their

individual personality online. A wider implication of our findings is therefore that the use of digital

footprints has a considerable impact on everyday life, with consumers constantly considering their digital

footprints which are so far usually left without any further thought. Firms and regulators are equally likely

to react to an increased use of digital footprints. As an example, firms associated with low creditworthiness

products may object to the use of digital footprints and may conceal the digital footprint of their products.

Regulators are likely to watch closely whether digital footprints proxy for variables that are legally

prohibited to be used for credit scoring.

          Our paper relates to the literature on the role of financial intermediaries in mitigating information

asymmetries (Diamond, 1984; Petersen and Rajan, 1994, Boot, 1999; Boot and Thakor, 2000; Berger,

                                                                                                              6
Miller, Petersen, Rajan, and Stein, 2005). The prior literature has established the importance of credit

history and account data to assess borrower risk (Mester, Nakamura, and Renault, 2007; Norden and

Weber, 2010; Puri, Rocholl, and Steffen, 2017), thereby giving rise to an informational advantage for those

financial intermediaries with access to borrowers’ credit history and account data. More recently, the

literature has explored the usefulness of data beyond the credit bureau score and bank-internal relationship-

specific data for default prediction. These data sources include soft information in peer-to-peer lending

(Iyer, Khwaja, Luttmer, and Shue, 2016), friendships and social networks (Hildebrandt, Rocholl, and Puri,

2017; Lin, Prabhala, and Viswanathan, 2013), text-based analysis of applicants listings (Gao, Lin, and Sias,

2017; Dorfleitner et al., 2016), and signaling and screening via contract terms (reserve interest rates in

Kawai, Onishi, and Uetake 2016; maturity choice in Hertzberg, Liberman, and Paravisini, 2017).

        Our paper differs from these papers, in that the information we are looking at is provided simply by

accessing or registering on the website, not by furnishing any information – hard or soft – about the

applicant. We show that even simple, easily accessible variables from the digital footprint provide valuable

information for default prediction that helps to significantly improve traditional credit scores. Our variables

stand out in terms of their ease of collection: almost every firm operating in the digital sphere can

effortlessly track the digital footprint we use. Unlike the papers cited above, the processing and

interpretation of these variables does not require human ingenuity, nor does it require effort on the side of

the applicant (such as uploading financial information or inputting a text description about oneself), nor

does it require the availability of friendship or social network data. Simply accessing or registering on the

website is adequate. Our results imply that barriers to entry in financial intermediation might be lower in a

digital world, and easily accessible digital footprints can (partially) substitute for variables that need to be

collected with considerable effort in a non-digital world. As a consequence, the digital footprint can also

be used to process applications faster than traditional lenders (see Fuster et al. (2018) for an analysis of

process time of FinTech lenders versus traditional lenders). A credit score based on the digital footprint

should therefore serve as a benchmark for other models that use more elaborate sources of information that

might either be more costly to collect or only accessible to a selected group of intermediaries.

                                                                                                             7
         The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 provides an overview about the institutional

setup and data. Section 3 provides empirical results. Section 4 discusses further implications of our

findings. Section 5 concludes.



2. Institutional setup, descriptive statistics, and the digital footprint


2.1 Institutional setup

         We access data about 270,399 purchases from an E-commerce company selling furniture in

Germany (similar to “Wayfair” in the U.S.) between October 2015 and December 2016. Before purchasing

an item, a customer needs to register using his or her name, address and email. Judging the creditworthiness

of its customers is important because goods are shipped first and paid later.6 The claims in our data set are

therefore akin to a short-term consumer loan.

         The company uses information from two private credit bureaus to decide whether customers have a

sufficient creditworthiness. The first credit bureau provides basic information such as whether the customer

exists and whether the customer is currently or has been recently in bankruptcy. This score is used to

screen out customers with fraudulent data as well as customers with clearly negative information.7 The

second credit bureau score draws upon credit history data from various banks (credit card debt and loans

outstanding, past payment behavior, number of bank accounts and credit cards), sociodemographic data, as

well as payment behavior data sourced from retail sales firms, telecommunication companies, and utilities.

This credit bureau score is requested for purchases exceeding € 100 and we consequently restrict our data

set to purchases for which the company requested a credit bureau score.8 We label those customers for

whom a credit bureau exists “scorable customers”.




6
  Customers can choose to pay upfront instead of paying after shipment of the products. Customers paying upfront
are not included in our data set. Paying after shipment, so called “deferred payment”, is by far the dominant payment
type: more than 80% of customers choose to pay after shipment if this method is offered to a customer.
7
  The firm switched the credit bureau that provides this basic information in July 2016. Results are very similar pre-
July-2016 and post-July-2016.
8
  The company requests the credit bureau score if the customer’s shopping cart amount exceeds € 100, even when the
customer ultimately purchases a smaller amount.
                                                                                                                     8
        The E-commerce company uses the credit bureau score together with the digital footprint

(discussed further below) to screen out borrowers with a predicted default rate exceeding 10 percent.

Restricting our data set to orders exceeding € 100 and excluding customers with a very low

creditworthiness has the benefit of making our data set more comparable to a typical credit card, bank loan

or peer-to-peer lending data set.

        After the purchase, the items are sent to the customer together with an invoice. The customer has

14 days to pay the invoice. If the customer does not pay on time, three reminders (one per email, two per

email and letter) are sent out. A customer who does not pay after three reminders is in default and the claim

is transferred to a debt collection agency, on average 3.5 months from the order date.



2.2 Descriptive statistics

        Our data set comprises 270,399 purchases between October 2015 and December 2016. The credit

bureau score is available for 254,808 observations (94% of the sample) and unavailable for 15,591

observations (6% of the sample). Non-existence is due to customers being unscorable, i.e., not having a

sufficient credit history that would allow the credit bureau to calculate a credit score. In the following and

throughout the entire paper, we distinguish between scorable and unscorable borrowers, i.e. those with and

without a credit bureau score. As shown in Figure 1a, the purchases are distributed roughly even over time

with slight increases in orders during October and November, as typical for the dark season. Table 2

provides descriptive statistics for both subsamples, variable descriptions are in Table 1.


                             [Table 1 and Table 2, Figure 1a, Figure 1b, Figure 2]


        In the sample with credit bureau scores, the average purchase volume is EUR 318 (approximately

USD 350) and the mean customer age is 45.06 years. On average, 0.9% of customers default on their

payment. Our default definition comprises claims that have been transferred to a debt collection agency. 9

The credit bureau score ranges from 0 (worst) to 100 (best). It is highly skewed with 99% of the

9
 The average time between the order date and the date a claim is transferred to the debt collection agency is 103
days in our sample, i.e., approximately 3.5 months.
                                                                                                                9
observations ranging between 90 and 100. The average credit bureau score is 98.11, the median is 98.86.

Figure 2 provides the distribution of credit bureau scores together with (smoothed) default rates. The

average credit bureau score of 98.11 corresponds to a default rate of approximately 1% and default rates

grow exponentially when credit bureau scores decrease, with a credit bureau of 95 corresponding to a 2%

default rate and a credit bureau of 90 corresponding to a 5% default rate. Note that default rates are not

annualized but constitute default rates over a shorter window of approximately 3.5 months.

        Descriptive statistics for the sample without credit bureau score are similar with respect to order

amount and gender, with age being somewhat lower (consistent with the idea that it takes time to build up a

credit history) and default rates being significantly higher (2.5%).



2.3 Representativeness of data set

        Our data set is largely representative of the geographic distribution of the German population

overall. As can be seen from Figure 1b, the share of observations in our sample closely follows the

population share for all the 16 German states. Furthermore, the mean customer age is 45.06 years,

comparable both to the mean age of 43.77 in the German population as well as to the mean age of 45.24

reported by Berg, Puri, and Rocholl (2017) in a sample of more than 200,000 consumer loans at a large

German private bank. Our sample is restricted to customers of legal age (18 years and older) and less than

5% of the customers are older than 70. The age distribution in our sample therefore resembles the age

distribution of the German population aged 18-70: the interquartile range of the German population aged

18-70 ranges from 31-56, compared to an interquartile range of 34-54 in our sample.

        The average default rate in our sample is 1.0% (0.9% for scorable customers, 2.5% for unscorable

customers). As discussed above, these default rates constitute default rates over a window of approximately

4 months, implying a scaled-up annualized default rate of 3.0%. We compare our default rate to other

studies in Appendix Table A.1. Berg, Puri, and Rocholl (2017) report an average default rate of 2.5% in a

sample of more than 200,000 consumer loans at a large German private bank; the major German credit

bureau reports an average default rate of 2.4% (2015) and 2.2% (2016) in a sample of more than 17 million

                                                                                                       10
consumer loans, and the two largest German banks report probability of default estimates of 1.5%

(Deutsche Bank) and 2.0% (Commerzbank) across their entire retail lending portfolio. Default rates

reported by Puri, Rocholl, and Steffen (2017) in a sample of German savings banks are somehow lower.

Taken together, this evidence suggests that default rates in our sample are largely representative of a typical

consumer loan sample in Germany. Charge-off rates on consumer loans in the U.S. across all commercial

banks as reported by the Federal Reserve were approximately 2% in 2015/2016, implying a comparable

default rate to our sample. Default rates reported in some U.S. peer-to-peer lending studies are higher (up to

10% per annum). However, the studies with the highest default rates were conducted using loans originated

in 2007/2008 at the height of the financial crisis. More recent studies report default rates that are

comparable to our default rates on an annualized basis (for example, Hertzberg, Liberman, and Paravisini,

(2016) report a 4.2% annualized default rate in a sample of Lending Club loans originated in 2012/2013).



2.4 Digital footprint

        In addition to the credit bureau score described above, the company collects a “digital footprint”

for each customer. All digital footprint variables are simple, easily accessible variables that every firm

operating in the digital sphere can collect at almost no cost. The list of all digital footprint variables is

reported in Table 1.

        The digital footprint comprises easily accessible pieces of information known to be a proxy for the

economic status of a person, for instance the device type (desktop, tablet, mobile) and operating system (for

example, Windows, iOS, Android). As documented by Bertrand and Kamenica (2017), owning an iOS

device is one of the best predictors for being in the top quartile of the income distribution. Furthermore, the

distinct features of most commonly used email providers in Germany (for example Gmx, Web, T-Online,

Gmail, Yahoo, or Hotmail) also allow us to infer information about the customer’s economic status. Gmx,

Web, and T-online are common email hosts in Germany which are partly or fully paid. In particular, T-

online is a large internet service provider and is known to serve a more affluent clientele, given that it

offers internet, telephone, and television plans and in-person customer support. A customer obtains a T-

                                                                                                           11
online email address only if she purchased a T-online package. Yahoo and Hotmail, in contrast, are fully

free and mostly outdated services. Thus, based on these simple variables, the digital footprint provides

easily accessible proxies of a person’s economic status absent of private information and hard-to-collect

income data.

        Second, the digital footprint provides simple variables known to proxy for character, such as the

channel through which the customer has visited the homepage of the firm. Examples for the channel

include paid clicks (mainly through paid ads on google or by being retargeted by ads on other websites

according to preferences revealed by prior searches), direct (a customer directly entering the URL of the E-

commerce company in her browser), affiliate (customers coming from an affiliate site that links to the E-

commerce company’s webpage such as a price comparison site), and organic (a customer coming via the

non-paid results list of a search engine). Information about a person’s character (such as her self-control) is

also reasonably assumed to be revealed by the time of day at which the customer makes the purchase (for

instance, we find that customers purchasing between noon and 6 pm are approximately half as likely do

default as customers purchasing from midnight to 6am).

        Finally, corporate research documents that firms being named after their owners have a superior

performance. This so called eponymous effect is mainly driven via a reputation channel (Belenzon,

Chatterji, and Daley, 2017). We find it reasonable to extend this finding to the choice of email addresses. A

testable prediction from this prior literature is that eponymous customers – those who include their first

and/or last names in their email address – are less likely to default. In contrast to eponymous customers,

those arguably less concerned with including their name but instead include numbers or type errors in their

email address default more frequently.10 The digital footprint provides this type of simple information that

can serve as a proxy for reputation in the form of four dummies, as to whether the last and/or first name is

part of the email address, whether the email address contains a number, whether the email contains an



10
   Approximately 10-15% of defaults are identified as fraud cases. Compared to non-fraud defaults, fraud cases have
a higher incidence of numbers in their email address. This is consistent with anecdotal evidence suggesting that
fraudsters create a large number of email addresses and do so in a way that uses a string combined with consecutive
numbers.
                                                                                                                 12
error, as well as whether the customer types either the name or shipping address using lower case on the

homepage.11

         Note that some of the variables discussed above are likely to proxy for several characteristics. For

example, iOS devices are a predictor of economic status (Bertrand and Kamenica, 2017), but might also

proxy for character (for example, status-seeking users might be more likely to buy an iOS device). It is not

our target to point to exactly one single channel that can explain why digital footprints variables can predict

default. Rather we want to highlight existing research that provides guidance as to why we can expect these

variables to matter for default prediction.




3. Empirical results


3.1 Univariate results

We provide univariate results for the sample of customers with a credit bureau score in Table 3.


                                                      [Table 3]


         As expected, the credit bureau score clearly exhibits discriminatory ability: the default rate in the

lowest credit score quintile is 2.12%, more than twice the average default rate of 0.94% and five times the

default rate in the highest credit score quintile (0.39%).12

         Interestingly, the univariate results indicate discriminatory ability for the digital footprint variables

as well. The footprint variables that proxy for income and wealth reveal significant differences in payment

behavior. For example, orders from mobile phones (default rate 2.14%) are three times as likely to default

as orders from desktops (default rate 0.74%) and two-and-a-half times as likely to default as orders from

11
   Kreditech is an example of a German company already using simple typography variables, such as the lack of
capital letters, to evaluate credit risk but also detect possible fraud and online impersonations (see BBVA (2017):
The digital footprint: a tool to increase and improve lending, accessed via https://www.bbva.com/en/digital-footprint-
tool-increase-improve-lending/).
12
   Using credit bureau scores for Lending Club loans over the same period we find that the default rate increases only
by a factor of 2.5 from the highest to the lowest credit bureau score quintile, suggesting our credit bureau score has
more discriminatory power in our data set than the credit bureau score in the Lending Club data set, which we will
confirm later using AUCs.
                                                                                                                    13
tablets (default rate 0.91%). Orders from the Android operating systems (default rate 1.79%) are almost

twice as likely to default as orders from iOS systems (1.07%) – consistent with the idea that consumers

purchasing an iPhone are usually more affluent than consumers purchasing other smartphones. As

expected, customers from a premium internet service (T-online, a service that mainly sells to affluent

customers at higher prices but with better service) are significantly less likely to default (0.51% versus the

unconditional average of 0.94%). Customers from shrinking platforms like Hotmail (an old Microsoft

service) and Yahoo exhibit default rates of 1.45% and 1.96%, almost twice the unconditional average.

        Information on character is also significantly related to default rates. Customers arriving on the

homepage through paid ads (either clicking on paid google ads or being retargeted after prior google

searches) exhibit the largest default rate (1.11%). One possible interpretation is that ads, in particular ads

that are shown multiple times on various websites to a customer, seduce customers to buy products they

potentially cannot afford. Customers being targeted via affiliate links, e.g. price comparison sites, and

customers directly entering the URL of the E-commerce company in their browser exhibit lower-than-

average default rates (0.64% and 0.84%). Finally, customers ordering during the night have a default rate of

1.97%, approximately two times the unconditional average.

        There are only few customers who make typing mistakes while inputting their email addresses

(roughly 1% of all orders), but these customers are much more likely to default (5.09% versus the

unconditional mean of 0.94%). Customers with numbers in their email-addresses default more frequently,

which is plausible given that fraud cases also have a higher incidence of numbers in their email address.13

Customers who use only lower case when typing their name and shipping address are more than twice as

likely to default as those writing names and addresses with first capital letters. Interestingly, we find that

eponymous customers who use their first and/or last name in their email address are less likely to default.

Thus information on reputation also shows significant power for predicting default rates. These findings are



13
   Approximately 10-15% of defaults are identified as fraud cases. Compared to non-fraud defaults, fraud cases have
a higher incidence of numbers in their email address. This is consistent with anecdotal evidence suggesting that
fraudsters create a large number of email addresses and do so in a way that uses a string combined with consecutive
numbers.
                                                                                                                 14
consistent with recent findings by Belenzon, Chatterji, and Daley (2017) who show that eponymous firms

perform better, supporting the reputational explanation of their findings.



3.2 Measures of association between variables, Combination of digital footprint variables


In the next step, we report measures of association between the credit bureau score and the digital footprint

variables in order to assess whether the digital footprint variables are correlated with the credit bureau score

and among each other, or whether they provide independent information. As most of the digital footprint

variables are categorical variables, standard measures for ordinal variables (for example, Pearson’s

correlation or Spearman rank correlation) are not feasible. We therefore report Cramér’s V, which provides

a measure of association between categorical variables that is bounded in the interval [0,1], with 0 denoting

no association and 1 denoting perfect association. To allow calculation of Cramér’s V, we transform the

continuous variables (credit bureau score and Check-Out Time) into categories by forming quintiles by

credit bureau score and categorizing the check-out time into morning, afternoon, evening, and night. Table

4 reports the results.


                                                   [Table 4]


        Interestingly, the Cramér’s V between the credit bureau score and the digital footprint variables is

economically small, with values ranging between 0.01 and 0.07. This suggests that digital footprint

variables act as complements rather than substitutes for credit bureau scores – a claim we will analyze more

formally below in a multivariate regression setup.

        The association between the variables Device Type and Operating System is high. This is not

surprising, for example most desktop computers run on Windows and most tablets on iOS or Android. To

avoid multicollinearity, we therefore simply use the most frequent combinations from these two categories

in our multivariate regressions below.14 The check-out time has some association with device


14
  The most frequent combinations are Windows and Macintosh for desktop computers, Android and iOS for tablets,
and Android and iOS for mobile phones. See Table A.3 in the Appendix for descriptive statistics.
                                                                                                           15
type/operating system. Mobile phones are used relatively more frequently than desktops and tablets for late

night shopping, and desktops are used relatively more in the afternoon. All other combinations of digital

footprint variables have a Cramér’s V of less than 0.25.

          The fact that many of the digital footprint variables provide mutually independent information

suggests that a combination of digital footprint variables is significantly more powerful in predicting

default than single variables. We illustrate this idea in Figure 3. Figure 3 depicts default rates using the

variables “Operating system” and “Email host” separately as well as in combination. The sample is

restricted to customers with a credit bureau score.


                                                          [Figure 3]


         Among the categories from these two variables, T-online users have the lowest default rate

(0.51%), while Yahoo users have the highest default rate (1.96%). As a reference point, we list deciles by

credit bureau score at the bottom of Figure 3. The default rate of T-online users of 0.51% is approximately

equal to the default rate in the 7th decile of credit bureau scores, while the default rate of Yahoo users

(1.96%) is between the 1st and 2nd decile of credit bureau scores. When combining information from both

variables (“Operating system” and “Email host”), default rates are even more dispersed.15 We observe the

lowest default rate for Mac-users with a T-online email address. The default rate for this combination is

0.36%, which is lower than the average default rate in the 1st decile of credit bureau scores. On the other

extreme, Android users with a Yahoo email address have an average default rate of 4.30%, significantly

higher than the 2.69% default rate in the highest decile of credit bureau scores. These results suggest that

even two simple variables from the digital footprint allow categorizing customers into default bins that

match or exceed the variation in default rates from credit bureau score deciles.



3.3 Multivariate results: Digital footprint and default



15
   The following results are not driven by small sample sizes, i.e., all categories reported in Figure 3 have at least
1,000 observations.
                                                                                                                   16
        Table 5 provides multivariate regression results of a default dummy on the credit bureau score and

digital footprint variables. We use a logistic regression and report the Area-Under-Curve (AUC) for every

specification. The AUC is a simple and widely used metric for judging the discriminatory power of credit

scores (see for example Stein, 2007; Altman, Sabato, and Wilson, 2010; Iyer, Khwaja, Luttmer, and Shue,

2016). The AUC ranges from 50% (purely random prediction) to 100% (perfect prediction). Following

Iyer, Khwaja, Luttmer, and Shue (2016), an AUC of 60% is generally considered desirable in information-

scarce environments, while AUCs of 70% or greater are the goal in information-rich environments. We

also plot the Receiver Operating Characteristic that is used to calculate the AUC in Figure 4.


                                                [Table 5 and Figure 4]


        Column (1) of Table 5 reports results using the (continuous) credit bureau score as an independent

variable. As expected and consistent with Figure 2, the credit bureau score is a highly significant predictor

of default, with higher credit bureau scores being associated with lower default rates. The AUC using only

the credit bureau score is 68.3% and is significantly different from chance (AUC of 50%). This result is

comparable to the 66.6% AUC using the credit bureau score alone documented in a consumer loan sample

of a large German bank (Berg, Puri, and Rocholl, 2017) and the 66.5% AUC using the credit bureau score

alone in a loan sample of 296 German savings banks (Puri, Rocholl, and Steffen, 2017). This result is

higher than the AUC of 62.5% reported by Iyer, Khwaja, Luttmer, and Shue (2016) in a U.S. peer-to-peer

lending data set using the Experian credit score only and the AUC of 59.8% we compute for comparison

using credit bureau scores for Lending Club loans. This suggests that the credit score provided to us by a

German credit bureau clearly possesses discriminatory power and we use the AUC of 68.3% as a

benchmark for the digital footprint variables in the following.

        Column (2) reports results for the digital footprint, column (3) uses both the credit bureau score

and the digital footprint variables, and column (4) adds age and month and region fixed effects. For

categorical variables, all coefficients need to be interpreted relative to the baseline level. We always choose

the most popular category in a variable as the baseline level. We report AUCs in the bottom rows of Table

                                                                                                           17
5 and also test for differences in AUCs using the methodology by DeLong, DeLong, and Clarke-Pearson

(1988).

          Interestingly, digital footprint variables have an AUC of 69.6% – which is higher than the AUC of

the credit bureau score.16 These results suggest that even simple, easily accessible variables from the digital

footprint are as useful in predicting defaults as the credit bureau score. We focus on the economic and

statistical significance of the variables in column (2) in the following discussion.

          The variables “Email error”, “Mobile/Android”, and the “Night” dummy have the highest

economic significance. The variable “Email error” is a simple dummy variable that is equal to one in only a

few cases, and thus allows categorizing a small portion of customers as being high risk. Customers with an

Email Error have an odds ratio of defaulting which is exp(1.66)=5.25 times higher than customers without

an Email Error. Given that default rates are rather small, default probabilities p and odds ratios (p/(1-p)) are

very similar, implying that customers with an Email Error default approximately 5.25 times more frequent

than customers without Email Error.

          Android users default more frequently than the baseline category, consistent with the univariate

results and consistent with the fact that consumer purchasing an iPhones are usually more affluent than

consumers purchasing other smartphones. Customers purchasing at night (midnight-6am) also default more

frequently than customers purchasing at other times of the day, suggesting that purchases made during a

time when many people might be asleep are fundamentally different from daytime purchases.

          In column (3) of Table 5, we complement the digital footprint variables with the credit bureau

score. Both the coefficient on the credit bureau score as well as the coefficients on the digital footprint

variables barely change compared to columns (1) and (2). This suggests that the digital footprint variables

complement rather than substitute for the information content of the credit bureau score. As a consequence,

the AUC of the combined model using both the digital footprint variables and the credit bureau score



16
  Note that in Table 5 we report only the 6 largest categories for email providers even though we use the largest 18
categories in the regression (all email providers with at least 1000 observations). In a regression using only the 6
reported email hosts, the AUC of the digital footprint decreases by 0.9PP, still being higher than the AUC using
credit bureau score alone.
                                                                                                                  18
(73.6%) is significantly higher than the AUC of each of the stand-alone models (68.3% for the credit

bureau score and 69.6% for the digital footprint variables).17

        In column (4) of Table 5, we add time and region fixed effects and control for age. Results remain

almost unchanged, suggesting that neither the credit bureau score nor the digital footprint act as simple

proxies for different regions, different sub-periods, or different age. While older people are expectedly less

likely to default, consistent with the idea that it takes time to build up a credit history, coefficients for the

credit bureau score and the digital footprint remain very similar.18 Only the coefficient for users of the

premium service T-online, which is known to serve more affluent and older customers, decreases slightly

in economic significance (from -0.35 in column (3) to -0.27 in column (4)).

        Figure 5 provides a more detailed look at the correlation between the credit bureau score and the

digital footprint. Using the results from column (2) of Table 5, we construct a default prediction using only

the digital footprint variables for each observation in our sample. For each observation, Figure 5 then

depicts the percentile using the credit bureau score as well as the percentile using the digital footprint score.

As an example, if a customer has a very good credit bureau score (=low default probability) and a very low

default probability by the digital footprint as well, then it would end up in the upper right-hand corner of

Figure 5. A customer with a low credit bureau score (=high default probability) and a very high default

probability by the digital footprint as well would end up in the lower left-hand corner. Observations where

credit bureau score and digital footprint have opposing predictions end up in the upper left-hand corner or

the lower right-hand corner. Figure 4 clearly shows that the correlation between credit bureau score and

digital footprint is very low (R2 of 1.0%, implying a correlation of approximately 10%). These results

confirm our prior observation that the digital footprint acts as a complement, rather than a substitute, of the

credit bureau score.


                                                         [Figure 5]


17
   Please note that AUCs generated by two independent variables cannot be simply summed up because the AUC of
an uninformative variable is already 50%.
18
   The coefficient on log(age) in Column (4) of Table (5) is -0.33 (significant at the 1% level), suggesting that a
doubling in age reduces defaults by approximately one third.
                                                                                                                19
3.4 Unscorable customers and access to finance

        The lack of access to financial services affects around two billion working-age adults worldwide

and is seen as one of the main drivers of inequality.19 Particularly in developing countries, the inability of

the unbanked population to participate in financial services is often caused by a lack of information

infrastructure, such as credit bureau scores. Many countries have therefore already started leveraging

digital technologies to promote financial inclusion.20 As digital footprint variables are available also for

customers without a credit score, analyzing borrowers’ digital behavior may present an opportunity to

boost financial inclusion – particularly in developing economies, where a large share of the population does

not have access to banking services and therefore to traditional credit sources.21

        We test whether the digital footprint can present an opportunity to facilitate access to finance for

customers who do not have a credit bureau score, which we label unscorable customers in our analysis. The

average default rate of unscorable customers in our sample is 2.49% (see Table 6), thereby clearly

exceeding the default rate for scorable customers of 0.94% (see Table 2). This is not surprising, given that

unscorable customers are customers without credit record where uncertainty about repayment is likely to be

higher. Interestingly, the discriminatory power of the digital footprint – as measured by the AUC – is

broadly similar for unscorable customers than for scorable customers (72.2% versus 69.6%), see Table 7

and Figure 6. Adding time and region fixed effects also does not affect our results (Column (3) of Table 7).


                                             [Table 6, Table 7 and Figure 6]


        These results suggest that digital footprints may help to overcome information asymmetries

between lenders and borrowers when standard credit bureau information is not available. We clearly have

19
   The World Bank Group identifies financial inclusion as a key enabler of reducing poverty and boosting prosperity
and promotes new use of data and digital technology as an opportunity for expanding access to financial services.
See     e.g.    http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/video/2016/03/10/2-billion-number-of-adults-worldwide-without-
access-to-formal-financial-services, http://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/financialinclusion
20
    Initiatives include the G20 High-Level Principles for Digital Financial Inclusion available via
https://www.gpfi.org/sites/default/files/G20%20High%20Level%20Principles%20for%20Digital%20Financial%20I
nclusion.pdf
21
   See BBVA (2017), suggesting analyzing borrowers’ online behavior can help financial inclusion particularly in
emerging economies, available via https://www.bbva.com/en/digital-footprint-tool-increase-improve-lending/
                                                                                                                20
to be cautious in interpolating these results from a developed country to unscorable customers in emerging

markets. Still, recent activity in the FinTech industry suggests this is an avenue that FinTechs aim to take.

Motivated by a dramatic increase in the availability of digital footprints in developing economies, new

FinTech players have emerged that use digital footprints to challenge traditional banking options and

develop innovative financing solutions.22 These FinTechs have the vision to give billions of unbanked

people access to credit when credit bureaus scores do not exist, thereby fostering financial inclusion and

lowering inequality (see Japelli and Pagano, 1993; Djankov, McLiesh, and Shleifer, 2007; Beck,

Demirguc-Kunt, and Honohan, 2009; and Brown, Jappelli and Pagano, 2009 for the link between

availability of credit scores, access to credit and inequality).



3.5 Out-of-sample tests

           Table 5 (scorable customers) and Table 6 (unscorable customers) were estimated in-sample which

may overstate discriminatory power due to overfitting. We therefore provide out-of-sample tests using

Nx2-fold cross validation in Table 8. Nx2-fold cross validation is a common method to evaluate out-of-

sample performance of an estimator (see for example Dietterich, 1998 for a general discussion of cross-

validation techniques). We thereby randomly divide the full sample into half samples A and B, estimate a

predictive logistic regression using sample A, and use the coefficients to create predicted values for the

observations in sample B. We then estimate a predictive regression using sample B and use the coefficients

to create predicted values for observations in sample A. Finally, we determine the AUC for the full sample

of observations, using all predicted values estimated out-of-sample. We repeat this procedure N=100 times

and report the mean out-of-sample AUCs in column (2) of Table 8.

           Panel 1 of Table 8 reports out-of-sample results for scorable customers. The out-of-sample AUC is

less than 1 PP lower than the in-sample AUC for all specifications apart from the fixed effects regression.

In the fixed effects specification, where we insert granular month and region fixed effects, out-of-sample

AUCs are 2.8 PP lower than in-sample AUCs. This is not surprising given that overfitting is in particular an


22
     See e.g. https://hbr.org/2017/01/fintech-companies-could-give-billions-of-people-more-banking-options
                                                                                                             21
issue when many explanatory variables are used. AUCs for the fixed effects regressions are of little

relevance for our paper as the fixed effects regressions serve the sole purpose of showing that neither the

credit bureau score nor the digital footprint variables are simple proxies for month or region fixed effects.

        Panel 2 of Table 8 reports out-of-sample results for unscorable customers. The out-of-sample AUC

using Nx2-fold cross validation decreases by 3.9 PP for unscorable customers compared to the in-sample

estimate. The sample size for unscorable customers is significantly smaller than for scorable customers so

that a larger gap between out-of-sample and in-sample AUCs is expected. The out-of-sample AUC of the

digital footprint for unscorable customers (68.3%) is, however, still similar to the out-of-sample AUC of

68.8% for scorable customers. Overall, our main conclusion – digital footprints provide a similar predictive

power for unscorable customers than for scorable customers – is clearly confirmed in out-of-sample tests as

well.

                                                        [Table 8]




3.6 Alternative default definitions and sample splits

        Table 9 provides various robustness tests. Panel A uses alternative default definitions and Panel B

provides results for various sample splits. In all Panels, we report the area under curve (AUC) for the credit

bureau score, for the digital footprint, and for both together.

        Panel A uses an alternative default definition, namely default after efforts by the collection agency,

in column (2). The collection agency is able to fully recover approximately 40% of the claims, resulting in

a reduced default rate after the collection agency process. The relative importance of credit bureau score

versus digital footprint is almost unaffected and the AUC increases slightly. This seems intuitive, given that

it is harder to predict customers who don’t pay in the first months, but pay at a later point in time than to

simply predict customers that won’t be able to pay at all. Column (3) of Panel A reports results using the

loss given default as the dependent variable. Compared to the credit bureau score, the digital footprint is

both economically and statistically a better predictor of loss given default. The digital footprint therefore

does not only help to predict default, but also helps to predict recovery rates for defaulted exposures. Panel
                                                                                                            22
B reports various sub-sample splits. Results are very similar for small and large orders (split at the median)

as well as for female and male customers.

          Overall, the robustness tests suggest that our key results from Table 5 – digital footprints predict

default as well or even better than the credit bureau score, and digital footprint and credit bureau score

being complements rather than substitutes, is robust for different default definitions and various sample

splits. This suggests even simple, easily accessible variables from the digital footprint are important for

default prediction over and above the information content of credit bureau scores.

                                                         [Table 9]


3.7 External validity

          The evidence presented so far provides evidence of the predictive power of the digital footprint for

short term loans for products purchased online. In Section 2.3 (and Appendix Table A.2) we have shown

that our data set is largely representative to a typical German consumer loan sample in terms of age

distribution, geographic distribution, as well as default rates. Appendix Table A.2 – also discussed in

Section 2.3 – further shows that the credit bureau score has a very similar predictive power in our sample

compared to consumer loan samples both at German savings banks as well as at German private banks.

          In this section, we provide further evidence for the external validity of our setting. In particular, we

test whether digital footprints today can forecast future changes in the credit bureau score. If a good digital

footprint today predicts an increase in the credit bureau score in the future, then this is evidence that digital

footprints matter for other loan products as well. We therefore run regressions of the form:



                   ∆                   ,                 =    +      ∆    ,                 +    +            (1)

where ∆                      ,                 is the change in credit bureau score between t+1 and t,

∆     ,                  is the difference between predicted default rates using the digital footprint variables

(i.e., predicted values from column (2) of Table 5) and predicted default rates using the credit bureau score

(i.e., predicted values from column (1) of Table 5), and X is a set of control variables. We winsorize both

the dependent and the independent variable in equation (1) at the 1/99 percent level. A limitation of our
                                                                                                              23
dataset is that the left-hand side variable is available only for customers that are part of our original dataset

and have returned to the E-Commerce company at least once up to March 2018.23 For each observation in

our original data set from Table 5 we check whether the customer returned to the platform and report the

latest available credit bureau score for each customer. For returning customers, the E-Commerce company

only requests a new credit bureau score if the existing credit bureau score is older than six months,

implying that the difference between t and t+1 in equation (1) is at least 181 days. The average (median)

time between t and t+1 in equation (1) is 450 days (431 days), i.e. a little over one year.24

       Figure 7 provides descriptive evidence of the predictive power of the digital footprint for the

subsequent development of credit bureau scores. We split our sample into 10 deciles by credit bureau score

and further split each of the 10 decile into observations where the digital footprint predicts a lower

probability of default than the credit bureau score (grey line in Figure 7) and observations where the digital

footprint predicts a higher probability of default than the credit bureau score (black line in Figure 7). We

then plot the average of the subsequent credit bureau score on the vertical axis for each of these 20 bins (10

deciles x digital footprint better/worse than credit bureau score). Figure 7 shows that the grey line is

consistently above the black line, suggesting that customers with better digital footprints also see a better

development of their credit bureau score in the future.



                                                    [Figure 7 and Table 10]


         Table 10 provides formal regression results. Column (1) provides results without control variables.

The coefficient on ∆           ,                   is economically and statistically highly significant. The

23
   The data set in Table 5 is limited to the period from October 2015 to December 2016 to allow for a subsequent
observation of default rates and loss given defaults. For changes in credit bureau scores we expand the data set until
March 2018. Please note that while the sample from Table 5 is limited to customers that pass the minimum-
creditworthiness condition (see Section 2.1), the subsequent credit bureau score is also available for returning
customers that were denied buying via invoice upon returning due to a very low credit bureau score.
24
   It is plausible that changes in credit bureau scores affect customers’ decision to return to the E-Commerce
company, but such a selection does not necessarily invalidate our regression design. For the estimate of β1 in
equation (1) we rely on the assumption that the decision to return to the E-Commerce platform is not related to both
the difference ∆(DFt,CreditScoret) and the subsequent change in credit bureau scores. If, for example, customers
whose creditworthiness using the digital footprint is better than their creditworthiness using the credit bureau score
return only if their credit bureau score has increased, then the coefficient β1 would be downward biased (and vice
versa).
                                                                                                                    24
coefficient of -74.56 suggests that if the digital footprint default prediction is 1PP higher than the credit

bureau default prediction (for example, the digital footprint predicts a 2% default probability while the

credit bureau score predicts a 1% default probability), then the credit bureau score decreases by 0.75 points

in the future. Given that German credit bureau scores represent 1-year survival probabilities, this suggests

that the credit bureau score adjusts 75% on its way towards the digital footprint. Figure 7 shows some

mean reversion in credit bureau scores, with low credit bureau scores getting better on average and high

credit bureau scores getting worse. To ensure that our results are not purely driven by mean-reversion, we

control for CreditScoret in column (2). As expected, the coefficient decreases but remains both

economically and statistically highly significant at -28.14. Controlling for month and region fixed effects

barely changes the coefficient (column (3) of Table 10). The effect is rather monotone across quintiles by

∆     ,                 , suggesting that effects are not driven only by particularly negative or particularly

positive digital footprints. Consistent with Figure 7, there is some evidence that the effects are somehow

larger for lower credit bureau scores (see column (5) and (6) of Table 10), but the digital footprint clearly

possesses predictive power for future changes in the credit score for higher credit scores as well.

          Taken together, the evidence suggests that digital footprints today forecast subsequent changes in

credit bureau scores. This result provides a window into the traditional banking world. As credit bureau

scores are known to predict default rates for traditional loan products, our results point to the usefulness of

digital footprints for traditional loan products as well.




4. Implications for the behavior of consumers, firms, and regulators



Implications for the behavior of consumers

          Our prior results are subject to the Lucas (1976) critique, with customers potentially changing their

online behavior if digital footprints are widely used in lending decisions. Some of the digital footprint

variables are clearly costly to manipulate (such as buying the newest smart device or signing up for a paid

                                                                                                           25
email account) while others require a customer to change her intrinsic habits (such as impulse shopping or

making typing mistakes). In the following we lay out two major implications of the Lucas critique: one that

directly affects the use of digital footprints in lending decisions, and another implication that affects the

right to free development and expression of one's personality more generally.

        First, in the long-run, the discriminatory power of the digital footprint depends on how easily bad

types can mimic good types. If mimicking good types is costless, an uninformative pooling equilibrium

evolves. A sufficiently high cost for mimicking good types results in a separating equilibrium, possibly

making the digital footprint even more informative than is currently the case (Spence (1973)). Clearly,

other digital footprint variables may evolve in the future that are costly to manipulate or proxy for a

person’s innate character. A particular vibrant example is Pentaquark’s scoring model that rejects loans

from applicants who write a lot about their souls on Facebook, as these people are usually too concerned

about what will happen in thirty years, but not the fine print of today’s life.25

        Second, and even more importantly, the repercussions of our findings seem even stronger when

consumers adapt their behavior in a conformable way. A world of conformity, where consumers fear to

express their individual personality and act with a permanent desire to portray a positive image to others is

not the role model of a society that most people think of. This argument becomes even more relevant if

lenders expand the scope of digital footprint variables they use, the more of our devices are connected to

the internet, and the more of our personal communication can be traced online. A wider implication of our

findings is therefore that the use of digital footprints has a considerable impact on everyday life, with

consumers constantly considering their digital footprints which are so far usually left without any further

thought.



Implications for the behavior of firms and regulators

        The Lucas critique applies not only to consumer behavior, but firms and regulators are equally

likely to react to an increased use of digital footprints. Firms associated with low creditworthiness products

25
    See BBVA (2017): The digital footprint: a tool to increase and improve lending, accessed via
https://www.bbva.com/en/digital-footprint-tool-increase-improve-lending/
                                                                                             26
may object to the use of digital footprints and may conceal the digital footprint of their products.

Commercial services that offer to manage individual’s digital footprints may develop. On the other hand,

firms whose products are pooled with low-quality products (for example high-cost Android phones) may

want to ensure that their digital footprint clearly distinguishes them from lower-reputation products in the

same category. Overall, similar to our discussion on consumer behavior, the reaction by firms can either

increase or decrease the predictive power of the digital footprint.

        Regulators are likely to watch the use of digital footprints closely. Regulators worldwide have long

recognized the key role of credit scores for consumers’ access to key financial products. As a consequence,

lending acts worldwide – such as the Equal Credit Opportunities Act in the U.S. – legally prohibit the use

of variables that can lead to an unfair discrimination for specific borrower groups. Prohibited variables

usually include variables such as race, color, gender, national origin, and religion. Lenders using digital

footprints are likely to face scrutiny whether the digital footprint proxies for such information and therefore

violate fair lending acts (see Fuster et al. (2017) on this issue). It is also conceivable that incumbent

financial institutions, threatened by competitors using digital footprints, use their well-established access to

politicians and regulators to lobby for a restriction of the use of digital footprints on these grounds.



5. Conclusion


        In this paper, we have analyzed the information content of the digital footprint – a trail of

information that people leave online simply by accessing or registering on a website – for predicting

consumer default. Using more than 250,000 observations, we show that even simple, easily accessible

variables from the digital footprint match or exceed the information content of credit bureau scores.

        The correlation between the score based on the digital footprint variables and the credit bureau

score is approximately 10%. As a consequence, the discriminatory power of a model using both the credit

bureau score and the digital footprint variables significantly exceeds models that only use the credit bureau

score or only use the digital footprint variables. This suggests that the digital footprint complements rather

than substitutes for credit bureau information and a lender that uses information from both sources (credit
                                                                                                            27
bureau score + digital footprint) can make superior lending decisions compared to lenders that only access

one of the two sources of information.

         We also show that the discriminatory power for unscorable customers matches the discriminatory

power for scorable customers. These results suggest that digital footprints can indeed help to overcome

information asymmetries between lenders and borrowers when standard credit bureau information is not

available. Digital footprints thus have the potential to boost access to credit to parts of the currently two

billion working-age adults worldwide that lack access to services in the formal financial sector, thereby

fostering financial inclusion and lowering inequality.

        Finally, while consumers might plausibly change their online behavior if digital footprints are

widely used for lending decisions, we show that some of the digital footprint variables are clearly costly to

manipulate, but, more importantly, such a change in behavior can lead to a situation where the use of

digital footprints has a considerable impact on everyday life, with consumers constantly considering their

digital footprints which are so far usually left without any further thought. Firms and regulators are

equally likely to react, with firms managing the digital footprint of their products and regulators

scrutinizing compliance with fair lending acts worldwide.

        Overall, our results have potentially wide implications for financial intermediaries’ business

models going forward, for access to credit for the unbanked, and for the behavior of consumers, firms, and

regulators in the digital sphere.




                                                                                                          28
Literature
Beck, Demirguc-Kunt, and Honohan (2009): Access to Financial Services: Measurement, Impact, and Policies, The
World Bank Research Observer 24(1), 119-145.

Belenzon, S., A. K. Chatterji, and B. Daley (2017): Eponymous Entrepreneurs, American Economic Review 107(6),
1638-1655.

Berg, T., M. Puri, and J. Rocholl (2017): Loan Officer Incentives, Internal Rating Models and Default rates, Working
Paper.

Berger, A., N. Miller, M. Petersen, R. Rajan, and J. Stein (2005): Does Function Follow Organizational Form?
Evidence from the Lending Practices of Large and Small Banks, Journal of Financial Economics 76(2), 237-269.

Bertrand, M. and E. Kamenica (2017): Coming apart? Lives of the rich and poor over time in the United States,
Working Paper.

Boot, A.W. (1999): Relationship Banking: What Do We Know?, Journal of Financial Intermediation 9, 7-25.

Boot, A.W. and A.V. Thakor (2000): Can Relationship Banking Survive Competition?, Journal of Finance 55(2),
679-713.

Brown, M., T. Jappelli, and M. Pagano (2009): Information Sharing and Credit: Firm-level Evidence from Transition
Countries, Journal of Financial Intermediation 18(2), 151-172.

DeLong, E., D. DeLong, and L. Clarke-Pearson (1988): Comparing the Areas under Two or More Correlated Receiver
Operating Characteristic Curves: A Nonparametric Approach, Biometrics 44(3), 837-845.

Diamond, D.W. (1984): Financial Intermediation and Delegated Monitoring, The Review of Economic Studies 51 (3),
393–414.

Dietterich, T.G. (1998) : Approximate Statistical Tests for Comparing Supervised Classification Learning
Algorithms, Neural Computation 10(7), 1895-1923.

Djankov, S., C. McLiesh, and A. Shleifer (2007): Private credit in 129 countries, Journal of Financial Economics
84(2), 299-329.

Dorfleitner, G, C. Priberny, S. Schuster, J. Stoiber , M. Weber, I. de Castro , and J. Kammler (2016): Description-
text related soft information in peer-to-peer lending – Evidence from two leading European platforms. Journal of
Banking & Finance 64:169-187.

Fuster, A., P. Goldsmith-Pinkham, T. Ramadorai, and A. Walther (2017): Predictably Unequal? The Effects of
Machine Learning on Credit Markets, Working Paper.

Fuster, A., M. Plosser, P. Schnabl, and J. Vickery (2018): The Role of Technology in Mortgage Lending, Working
Paper.

Gao, Q., M. Lin, and R. Sias (2017): Word Matters: The Role of Texts in Online Credit Markets, Working Paper.

Guzman, J., and S. Stern (2016): The State of American Entrepreneurship: New Estimates of the Quantity and Quality
of Entrepreneurship for 15 US States, 1988-2014. Working Paper.



                                                                                                                29
Hanley, J. and B. McNeil (1982): The meaning and use of the area under a receiver operating characteristic (ROC)
curve, Radiology 143(1), 29-36.

Hertzberg, A., A. Liberman, and D. Paravisini (2016): Adverse Selection on Maturity: Evidence from On-Line
Consumer Credit, Working Paper.

Hildebrandt, T., M. Puri, and J. Rocholl (2017): Adverse Incentives in Crowdfunding. Management Science 63(3),
587-608.

Iyer, R., A. Khwaja, E. Luttmer, and K. Shue (2016): Screening Peers Softly: Inferring the Quality of Small
Borrowers, Management Science 62(6), 1554-1577.

Japelli, T. and M. Pagano (1993): Information Sharing in Credit Markets, Journal of Finance 48(5), 1693-1718.

Kawai, K., K. Onishi, and K. Uetake (2016): Signaling in Online Credit Markets, Working Paper, Yale University.

Lin, M., N. Prabhala, and S. Viswanathan (2013): Judging Borrowers by the Company They Keep: Friendship
Networks and Information Asymmetry in Online Peer-to-Peer Lending, Management Science 59(1), 17-35.

Lucas, R. (1976): Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique, Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy
1, 19-46.

Mester, L., L. Nakamura, and M. Renault (2007): Transaction accounts and loan monitoring. Review of Financial
Studies 20, 529-556.

Norden, L. and M. Weber (2010): Credit Line Usage, Checking Account Activity, and Default Risk of Bank
Borrowers. Review of Financial Studies 23, 3665-3699

Petersen, M., and R. Rajan (1994): The Benefits of Lending Relationships: Evidence from Small Business Data,
Journal of Finance 49(1), 3-37.

Petersen, M.A and R. Rajan (2002): Does Distance still Matter? The Information Revolution in Small Business
Lending, Journal of Finance 57(6), 2533-2570.

Puri, M., J. Rocholl, and S. Steffen (2017): What do a million observations have to say about loan defaults? Opening
the black box of relationships, Journal of Financial Intermediation 31, 1-15.

Rook, D. (1987): The Buying Impulse. Journal of Consumer Research 14(2), 189-199.

Spence, M (1973): Job Market Signaling, Quarterly Journal of Economics 87(3), 355-374.

Stein, R. (2007): Benchmarking default prediction models: pitfalls and remedies in model validation, Journal of Risk
Model Validation 1(1), 77-113.

Turkyilmaz, C., E. Erdem, and A. Uslu (2015): The Effects of Personality Traits and Website Quality on Online
Impulse Buying, Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences 175, 98-105.

Vallee, B. and Yao Zeng (2018): Marketplace Lending: A New Banking Paradigm? Working Paper.

Wells, J., V. Parboteeah, and J. Valacich, (2011) : Online Impulse Buying: Understanding The Interplay Between
Consumer Impulsiveness and Website Quality. Journal of The Association for Information Systems, 12(1), 32-56.




                                                                                                                  30
                                                       Figure 1a: Number of observations per month

This figure shows the monthly number of observations for scorable customers, for unscorable customers, as well as
for the total sample. The sample period is from October 19, 2015 to December 2016. The number of observations for
October 2015 is scaled up by a factor of 31/13 to make it comparable to a monthly figure. For variable definitions see
Table 1.
                  5000 10000 15000 20000 25000 30000
                    No. of monthly observations
                                   0




                                01oct2015                01jan2016     01apr2016     01jul2016    01oct2016      01jan2017
                                                                                Date

                                                         With credit bureau score          Without credit bureau score
                                                         Total




Figure 1b: Geographic distribution of customers in our sample compared to the German population

This figure illustrates the share of customers by state in our sample compared to the German population by state.




                                                                                                                             31
                        Figure 2: Credit bureau score distribution and default rates

This figure shows the distribution of the credit bureau score and the raw and smoothed default rates as a function of
the credit bureau score. (Default(0/1)) is equal to one if the claim has been transferred to a debt collection agency. The
smoothed default rates have been determined using a logistic regression and a second-order polynomial of the credit
bureau score. The sample period is from October 19, 2015 to December 2016. For variable definitions see Table 1.




                                                                                                                      32
                   Figure 3: Default rates by combinations of digital footprint variables

This figure shows default rates for combinations of the variables “Operating System” and “Email Host”. The x-axis
shows default rates, the y-axis illustrates whether the respective dot comes from a single digital footprint variable (for
example, “Android users”) or whether it comes from a combination of digital footprint variables (for example,
“Android + Hotmail”). Default rates for credit bureau score deciles are provided as reference points in the row at the
very bottom. The sample only includes customers with credit bureau scores. The sample period is from October 19,
2015 to December 2016. For variable definitions see Table 1.




                                                                                                                      33
Figure 4: AUC (Area Under Curve) for scorable customers for various model specifications

This figure illustrates the discriminatory power of three different model specifications by providing the receiver
operating characteristics curve (ROC-curve) and the area under curve (AUC). The ROC-curves are estimated using a
logit regression of the default dummy on the credit bureau score (light gray), the digital footprint (gray), both credit
bureau score and digital footprint (dark gray). The sample only includes customers with credit bureau scores. The
sample period is from October 19, 2015 to December 2016. For variable definitions see Table 1.




                                      Credit bureau
                                      score + Digital
                                      Footprint
                                      73.6% (+5.3 PP)



                          Digital
                          Footprint
                          69.6%




                                        Credit
                                        bureau
                                        score
                                        68.3%




                                           45 degree
                                           line




                                                                                                                    34
   Figure 5: Correlation between Digital Footprint and Credit Bureau Score (scorable customers)
This figure illustrates the correlation between the credit bureau score and the digital footprint. The x-axis shows
percentiles by credit bureau score. The y-axis shows percentiles by the digital footprint. The digital footprint is
estimated using the results from column (2) of Table 5 and multiplied by minus 1 to ensure the same ordering as the
credit bureau score (high value = low default probability). The sample only includes customers with credit bureau
score and is based on a 1% random sample in order to be able to visualize the results. The sample period is from
October 19, 2015 to December 2016. For variable definitions see Table 1.


                                                                                                                 2
                                                PctByDigitalFootprint = 46.23 + 0.10 PctByCreditScore           R = 1.0%
                             100
            Percentiles by digital footprint
            20       40      060         80




                                               0               20             40              60           80         100
                                                                      Percentiles by credit bureau score
                                               n = 2488   RMSE = 28.8525




                                                                                                                            35
                           Figure 6: AUC for scorable vs. unscorable customers

This figure illustrates the discriminatory power for different samples by providing the receiver operating
characteristics curve (ROC-curve) and the area under curve (AUC) for scorable customers (light gray) and unscorable
customers (dark gray). The ROC-curves are estimated using a logistic regression of the default dummy on the digital
footprint. The sample period is from October 19, 2015 to December 2016. For variable definitions see Table 1.




                        Unscorable
                        customers
                        AUC 72.2%



                                         Scorable
                                         customers
                                         AUC 69.6%




                                     45 degree
                                     line




                                                                                                               36
                                                     Figure 7: Digital footprint and subsequent changes in the credit bureau score
This figure illustrates the predictive power of the digital footprint for subsequent changes in the credit bureau score.
The grey line depicts subsequent credit bureau scores when the creditworthiness using the digital footprint is better
than the creditworthiness using the credit bureau score. The black line depicts subsequent credit bureau scores when
the creditworthiness using the digital footprint is worse than the creditworthiness using the credit bureau score. Values
are shown by decile of credit bureau score.
       92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 100
       Subsequent credit score (0=worst, 100=best)




                                                     92        93        94         95       96       97       98          99         100
                                                                              Credit score (0=worst, 100=best)

                                                                  Creditworthiness using digital footprint worse than credit score
                                                                  Creditworthiness using digital footprint better than credit score




                                                                                                                                            37
                                         Table 1: Description of variables


              Variable                                     Description                                         Unit
Order, customer, credit bureau score, and payment behavior
Order amount                   Purchase amount in EUR                                              Numerical variable
Gender                         Gender of customer (female or male)                                 Dummy variable
Age                            Age of customer in years. Information about age is obtained Numerical variable
                               from the credit bureau. Missing information on age indicate that
                               the credit bureau does not have information about a customer’s
                               age.
Credit bureau score            Credit bureau score. The score is based on credit history data   Numerical variable,
                               from various banks, sociodemographic data, as well as payment 0=worst, 100=best
                               behavior data sourced from retail sales firms, telecommunication
                               companies, and utilities.
Default                        Dummy variable equal to one if the claim is transferred to a debt Dummy variable
                               collection agency (i.e., the customer did not pay the invoice after
                               the third reminder of the firm).
Digital footprint variables
Device Type                    Device type. Main examples: Desktop, Tablet, Mobile.                Categorical variable
Operating System               Operating system. Main examples: Windows, iOS, Android,             Categorical variable
                               Macintosh.
Email Host                     Email host. Main examples: Gmx, Web, T-Online, Gmail,               Categorical variable
                               Yahoo, Hotmail.
Channel                        Channel through which customer comes to website. Main               Categorical variable
                               examples: Paid (including paid and retargeted clicks), Direct,
                               Affiliate, Organic.
Check-Out Time                 Time of day of purchase.                                            Numerical variable (0-24hrs)
Do not track setting           Dummy equal to one if customer does not allow tracking of           Dummy variable
                               device and operating system information, and channel.
Name in Email                  Dummy equal to one if first or last name of customer is part of     Dummy variable
                               email address.
Number in Email                Dummy equal to one if a number is part of email address.            Dummy variable
Is Lower Case                  Dummy equal to one if first name, last name, street, or city are    Dummy variable
                               written in lower case.
Email Error                    Dummy equal to one if email address contains an error in the        Dummy variable
                               first trial (Note: Clients can only order if they register with a
                               correct email address).




                                                                                                                           38
                                                                      Table 2: Descriptive statistics

This table presents summary statistics for the whole sample. The sample period is from October 19, 2015 to December 2016. Panel A provides descriptive statistics for
customers with credit bureau score. Panel B provides descriptive statistics for customers without credit bureau score. For variable definitions see Table 1.


         Panel A: Customers with credit bureau score
         Variable                                            Unit                          N           Mean           Std.           P25         Median             P75

         Order and customer
         Order amount                        Euro                                         254,808      317.75        317.10        119.99         218.92          399.98
         Gender                              Dummy (0=male, 1=female)                     254,808       0.66          0.47           0               1              1
         Age#                                Number                                       254,604       45.06        13.31           34             45              54
         Credit bureau score                 Number (0=worst, 100=best)                   254,808       98.11         2.05         97.58           98.86          99.41

         Payment behavior
         Default                             Dummy (0/1)                                  254,808      0.009          0.096            0             0               0


         Panel B: Customers without credit bureau score
         Variable                                            Unit                          N           Mean           Std.           P25         Median             P75

         Order and customer
         Order amount                        Euro                                          15,591      324.58        319.26        119.99         220.99          399.99
         Gender                              Dummy (0=male, 1=female)                      15,591       0.70          0.46           0               1              1
         Age#                                Number                                           555       38.20        10.46           30             35              46
         Credit bureau score                 Number (0=worst, 100=best)                    15,591        n.a.         n.a.          n.a.           n.a.            n.a.

         Payment behavior
         Default                             Dummy (0/1)                                   15,591      0.025          0.156            0             0               0

     #
      Based on information from the credit bureau. Missing information on age indicate that the credit bureau does not have information about a customer’s age. Observations with
     non-missing age in Panel B are cases where the credit bureau has information about the age of the customer, but not enough information to provide a credit score.




                                                                                                                                                                                    39
      Table 3: Credit Bureau score, digital footprint variables, and default rates (scorable customers)

This table provides default rates by credit bureau score quintile as well as default rates by category of each of the digital
footprint variables. The sample is based on scorable customers, i.e. the set of customers for which a credit bureau score is
available. The sample period is from October 19, 2015 to December 2016. For variable definitions see Table 1.
                                                                                                          T-test against
    Variable                          Value                  Observations   Proportion   Default rate
                                                                                                          Baseline
    Credit Bureau Score                        All           254,808        100%         0.94%
    (by quintile)                             Q1 - lowest    50,966         20%          2.12%            Baseline
                                                       Q2    50,964         20%          1.01% ***        (14.19)
                                                       Q3    50,956         20%          0.68% ***        (19.51)
                                                       Q4    50,983         20%          0.47% ***        (23.33)
                                              Q5 - highest   50,939         20%          0.39% ***        (24.93)

    Device                                    All            254,808        100%         0.94%
                                                Desktop      145,871        57%          0.74%            Baseline
                                                  Tablet     45,575         18%          0.91% ***        (-3.62)
                                                  Mobile     26,808         11%          2.14% ***        (-21.84)
                                     Do not track setting    36,554         14%          0.88% ***        (-2.90)

    Operating System                          All            254,808        100%         0.94%
                                               Windows       124,598        49%          0.74%            Baseline
                                                     iOS     41,478         16%          1.07% ***        (-6.35)
                                                Android      29,089         11%          1.79% ***        (-16.64)
                                              Macintosh      21,162         8%           0.69%            (0.79)
                                                   Other     1,927          1%           0.11% *          (1.74)
                                     Do not track setting    36,554         14%          0.88% ***        (-2.66)

    Email Host                                All            254,808        100%         0.94%
                                      Gmx (partly paid)      58,609         23%          0.82%            Baseline
                                       Web (partly paid)     54,864         22%          0.86%            (-0.70)
                           T-Online (affluent customers)     30,277         12%          0.51% ***        (5.32)
                                            Gmail (free)     27,842         11%          1.25% ***        (-6.02)
                             Yahoo (free, older service)     11,922         5%           1.96% ***        (-11.33)
                            Hotmail (free, older service)    10,241         4%           1.45% ***        (-6.11)
                                                   Other     61,053         24%          0.90%            (-1.38)

    Channel                                    All           254,808        100%         0.94%
                                                    Paid     111,398        44%          1.11%            Baseline
                                                  Direct     45,178         18%          0.84% ***        (4.77)
                                                Affiliate    24,769         10%          0.64% ***        (6.68)
                                                Organic      18,295         7%           0.86% ***        (3.00)
                                                   Other     18,614         7%           0.69% ***        (5.24)
                                     Do not track setting    36,554         14%          0.88% ***        (3.68)

    Check-Out Time                          All              254,808        100%         0.94%
                                Evening (6pm-midnight)       108,543        43%          0.85%            Baseline
                                  Night (midnight-6am)       6,913          3%           1.97% ***        (-9.49)
                                   Morning (6am-noon)        46,600         18%          1.09% ***        (-4.55)
                                 Afternoon (noon-6pm)        92,752         36%          0.89%            (-0.91)

    Do not track setting                       All           254,808        100%         0.94%
                                                      No     218,254        86%          0.94%            Baseline
                                                      Yes    36,554         14%          0.88%            (1.12)

    Name in Email                          All               254,808        100%         0.94%
                                                      No     71,016         28%          1.24%            Baseline
                                                      Yes    183,792        72%          0.82% ***        (9.99)

    Number in Email                        All               254,808        100%         0.94%
                                                      No     213,640        84%          0.84%            Baseline
                                                      Yes    41,168         16%          1.41% ***        (-10.95)

    Is Lower Case                          All               254,808        100%         0.94%
                                                      No     235,560        92%          0.84%            Baseline
                                                      Yes    19,248         8%           2.14% ***        (-18.07)

    Email Error                            All               254,808        100%         0.94%
                                                      No     251,308        99%          0.88%            Baseline
                                                      Yes    3,500          1%           5.09% ***        (-25.71)
                                                                                                                           40
              Table 4: Correlation/Association between credit bureau score and digital footprint variables (scorable customers)

This table provides a measure of association, Cramér’s V, between credit bureau score quintiles and the digital footprint variables. Cramér’s V measures the
association between two categorical variables and is bounded between [0,1], with 0 denoting no association and 1 denoting perfect association. To allow
calculation of Cramér’s V, the credit bureau score has been transformed into categories by forming quintiles of the credit bureau score. Please note that most
digital footprint variables are nominal categorical variables so that Pearson’s correlation coefficient or Spearman’s rank correlation cannot be determined. The
sample is based on scorable customers, i.e. the set of customers for which a credit bureau score is available. The sample period is from October19, 2015 to
December 2016. For variable definitions see Table 1.

                                                   Credit
                                                                              Operatin                                Check-
                                                   bureau       Device                     Email                                    Name in      Number        Is Lower   Email
                                                                              g                          Channel      Out
                                                   score        Type                       Host                                     Email        in Email      Case       Error
                                                                              System                                  Time1
                                                   quintile1
                Credit bureau score quintile1      1.00***      0.07***       0.05***      0.07***       0.03***      0.03***       0.01***      0.07***       0.02***    0.01
                                                                                       2                          2
                                 Device Type                    1.00***       0.71***      0.07***       0.06***      0.04***       0.05***      0.06***       0.07***    0.01***
                           Operating System                                   1.00***      0.08***       0.06***2     0.04***       0.06***      0.08***       0.06***    0.01***
                                   Email Host                                              1.00***       0.03***      0.03***       0.08***      0.18***       0.04***    0.06***
                                      Channel                                                            1.00***      0.02***       0.01***      0.02***       0.04***    0.02***
                           Check-Out Time     1                                                                       1.00***       0.01***      0.01***       0.01***    0.01*
                              Name in Email                                                                                         1.00***      0.22***       0.01***    0.02***
                            Number in Email                                                                                                      1.00***       0.02***    0.00**
                               Is Lower Case                                                                                                                   1.00***    0.03***
                                  Email Error                                                                                                                             1.00***
                 1. Transformed into quintiles.
                 2. We exclude customers with a do not track setting, as the setting simultaneously applies to device, operating system, and channel information.




                                                                                                                                                                                    41
                                          Table 5: Default regressions (scorable customers)

We estimate default rate regressions where the dependent variable (Default(0/1)) is equal to one if the claim has been transferred to
a debt collection agency. Column (1) provides results using the credit bureau score as the independent variable, column (2) provides
results using the digital footprint variables as independent variables, column (3) uses both the credit bureau score and the digital
footprint variables as independent variables, and column (4) adds age and month and region fixed effects. All models are estimated
using a logistic regression model. The sample is based on scorable customers, i.e. the set of customers for which a credit bureau
score is available. The sample period is from October 19, 2015 to December 2016. For variable definitions see Table 1.
                                                            (1)                    (2)                     (3)                    (4)
                                                                                                                       Credit bureau score &
                                                                                                Credit bureau score    Digital footprint, fixed
                                                 Credit bureau score      Digital footprint     & digital footprint             effects
           VARIABLES                             Coef.        z-stat    Coef.        z-stat     Coef.        z-stat    Coef.            z-stat
              Credit bureau score                -0.17***     (-7.89)                           -0.15***     (-6.67)   -0.14***         (-5.83)
              Computer & Operating system
                 Desktop/Windows                                        Baseline                Baseline               Baseline
                 Desktop/Macintosh                                      -0.07        (-0.53)    -0.13        (-1.03)   -0.17            (-1.35)
                 Tablet/Android                                         0.29***      (3.19)     0.29***      (3.06)    0.30***          (3.25)
                 Tablet/iOS                                             0.08         (1.05)     0.08         (0.97)    0.06             (0.81)
                 Mobile/Android                                         1.05***      (17.26)    0.95***      (15.34)   0.97***          (15.53)
                 Mobile/iOS                                             0.72***      (9.07)     0.57***      (6.73)    0.56***          (6.65)
              Email Host 26
                Gmx (partly paid)                                       Baseline                Baseline               Baseline
                Web (partly paid)                                       -0.00        (-0.01)    -0.02        (-0.22)   -0.01            (-0.07)
                 T-Online (affluent customers)                          -0.40***     (-3.89)    -0.35***     (-3.34)   -0.27**          (-2.53)
                 Gmail (free)                                           0.34***      (3.79)     0.28***      (3.08)    0.28***          (2.98)
                 Yahoo (free, older service)                            0.75***      (9.19)     0.72***      (8.98)    0.72***          (8.71)
                 Hotmail (free, older service)                          0.35***      (3.70)     0.28***      (2.73)    0.25**           (2.37)
              Channel
                Paid                                                    Baseline                Baseline               Baseline
                 Affiliate                                              -0.49***     (-5.33)    -0.54***     (-5.56)   -0.56***         (-5.67)
                 Direct                                                 -0.27***     (-4.24)    -0.28***     (-4.43)   -0.19***         (-3.10)
                 Organic                                                -0.15*       (-1.79)    -0.15*       (-1.73)   -0.13            (-1.52)
              Check-Out Time
                Evening (6pm-midnight)                                  Baseline                Baseline               Baseline
                 Morning (6am-noon)                                     0.28***      (4.52)     0.28***      (4.62)    0.29***          (4.77)
                 Afternoon (noon-6pm)                                   0.08         (1.42)     0.08         (1.47)    0.09*            (1.77)
                 Night (midnight-6am)                                   0.80***      (7.74)     0.75***      (7.11)    0.73***          (6.86)
              Do not track setting                                      -0.02        (-0.25)    -0.07        (-0.90)   -0.05            (-0.63)
              Name In Email                                             -0.28***     (-5.67)    -0.29***     (-5.69)   -0.29***         (-5.81)
              Number In Email                                           0.26***      (4.50)     0.23***      (3.92)    0.22***          (3.82)
              Is Lower Case                                             0.76***      (13.04)    0.74***      (13.16)   0.74***          (13.25)
             Email Error                                                1.66***      (20.01)    1.67***      (20.37)   1.70***          (20.56)
           Constant                              12.43*** (5.77)        -4.92***     (-62.84)   9.97***      (4.49)    10.46***         (4.76)
           Control for age                               No                        No                      No                     Yes
           Month & region fixed effects                    No                     No                      No                      Yes
           Observations                                  254,808                254,808                 254,808                 254,604
           Pseudo R2                                      0.0244                 0.0525                  0.0718                  0.0808
           AUC                                             0.683                  0.696                   0.736                   0.749
           (SE)                                           (0.006)                (0.006)                 (0.005)                 (0.005)
           Difference to AUC=50%                         0.183***               0.196***                0.236***                0.249***
           Difference AUC to (1)                                                 0.013*                 0.053***                0.067***


26
  We only report coefficients for the 6 largest email providers even though we use the largest 18 categories in the regression (all
email providers with at least 1000 observations). Using only the 6 reported email hosts does not affect our results.
                                                                                                                                42
                 Table 6: Digital footprint variables and default rates (unscorable customers)

This table provides default rates by category of each of the digital footprint variables. The sample is based on
unscorable customers, i.e. the set of customers for which a credit bureau score is not available. The sample period is
from October 19, 2015 to December 2016. For variable definitions see Table 1.

                                                                                                             T-test against
 Variable                      Value                              Observations   Proportion   Default rate   baseline
 Device                                      All                  15,591         100%         2.49%
                                                      Desktop     9,191          59%          2.15%          Baseline
                                                        Tablet    2,618          17%          1.64%          (1.63)
                                                       Mobile     1,546          10%          6.21% ***      (-9.07)
                                           Do not track setting   2,236          14%          2.28%          (-0.37)

 Operating System                            All                  15,591         100%         2.49%
                                                     Windows      7,770          50%          2.19%          Baseline
                                                           iOS    2,424          16%          2.35%          (-0.48)
                                                      Android     1,646          11%          4.80% ***      (-6.01)
                                                    Macintosh     1,421          9%           1.69%          (1.20)
                                                         Other    94             1%           7.44% ***      (-3.42)
                                           Do not track setting   2,236          14%          2.28%          (-0.26)

 Email Host                                 All                   15,591         100%         2.49%
                                           Gmx (partly paid)      3,681          24%          2.42%          Baseline
                                            Web (partly paid)     3,352          21%          2.63%          (-0.55)
                                T-Online (affluent customers)     1,711          11%          1.52% **       (2.13)
                                                 Gmail (free)     1,694          11%          3.60% **       (-2.44)
                                  Yahoo (free, older service)     732            5%           3.14%          (-1.14)
                                 Hotmail (free, older service)    546            4%           2.75%          (-0.46)
                                                        Other     3,875          25%          2.22%          (0.57)

 Channel                                     All                  15,591         100%         2.49%
                                                          Paid    6,447          41%          2.89%          Baseline
                                                        Direct    3,262          21%          1.87% ***      (3.00)
                                                      Affiliate   1,395          9%           2.65%          (0.47)
                                                      Organic     1,178          8%           2.55%          (0.64)
                                                         Other    1,073          7%           2.14%          (1.36)
                                           Do not track setting   2,236          14%          2.28% ***      (1.51)

 Check-Out Time                              All                  15,591         100%         2.49%
                                       Evening (6pm-midnight)     6,349          41%          2.05%          Baseline
                                         Night (midnight-6am)     369            2%           3.52% **       (-1.91)
                                          Morning (6am-noon)      2,960          19%          2.74% **       (-2.08)
                                        Afternoon (noon-6pm)      5,913          38%          2.77% ***      (-2.63)

 Do not track setting                        All                  15,591         100%         2.49%
                                                           No     13,355         86%          2.52%          Baseline
                                                           Yes    2,236          14%          2.28%          (0.68)

 Name in Email                               All                  15,591         100%         2.49%
                                                           No     4,433          28%          3.93%          Baseline
                                                           Yes    11,158         72%          1.92% ***      (7.27)

 Number in Email                             All                  15,591         100%         2.49%
                                                           No     12,967         83%          1.99%          Baseline
                                                           Yes    2,624          17%          4.95% ***      (-8.91)

 Is Lower Case                               All                  15,591         100%         2.49%
                                                           No     14,566         93%          2.21%          Baseline
                                                           Yes    1,025          7%           6.44% ***      (-8.42)

 Email Error                                 All                  15,591         100%         2.49%
                                                           No     15,305         98%          2.31%          Baseline
                                                           Yes    286            2%           12.24% ***     (-10.72)




                                                                                                                         43
                                    Table 7: Default regressions (unscorable customers)

This table provides regression results for the same model specifications as in Table 5 using the sample of unscorable
customers. Since this sample only includes customers for whom credit bureau scores are unavailable, the first column from
the initial specification is omitted. We estimate default rate regressions where the dependent variable (Default(0/1)) is equal
to one if the claim has been transferred to a debt collection agency. Column (1) provides results using the digital footprint
variables as independent variables. Column (2) provides a comparison to the results for the sample of scorable customers.
Column (3) adds month and region fixed effects. All models are estimated using a logistic regression model. The sample is
based on unscorable customers, i.e. the set of customers for which a credit bureau score is not available. The sample period is
from October 19, 2015 to December 2016. For variable definitions see Table 1.
                                                               (1)                     (2)                     (3)
                                                                             For comparison: Digital   Digital footprint for
                                                    Digital footprint for    footprint for scorable    unscorable
                                                    unscorable customers     customers (column (2)     customers, fixed
                                                                             of Table 5)               effects
                VARIABLES                           Coef.         z-stat     Coef.        z-stat     Coef.         z-stat
                  Computer & Operating system
                    Desktop/Windows                 Baseline                 Baseline                Baseline
                     Desktop/Macintosh              -0.26         (-1.10)    -0.07        (-0.53)    -0.22         (-0.93)
                     Tablet/Android                 -0.22         (-0.85)    0.29***      (3.19)     -0.18         (-0.72)
                     Tablet/iOS                     -0.45*        (-1.71)    0.08         (1.05)     -0.47*        (-1.76)
                    Mobile/Android                  1.07***       (5.98)     1.05***      (17.26)    1.05***       (5.56)
                    Mobile/iOS                      0.63***       (2.69)     0.72***      (9.07)     0.60**        (2.42)
                  Email Host 27
                      Gmx                           Baseline                 Baseline                Baseline
                      Web                           0.02          (0.11)     -0.00        (-0.01)    0.02          (0.13)
                      T-Online                      -0.39         (-1.14)    -0.40***     (-3.89)    -0.44         (-1.29)
                      Gmail                         0.32          (1.36)     0.34***      (3.79)     0.32          (1.35)
                      Yahoo                         0.17          (0.61)     0.75***      (9.19)     0.14          (0.45)
                      Hotmail                       -0.02         (-0.06)    0.35***      (3.70)     -0.09         (-0.31)
                  Channel
                    Paid                            Baseline                 Baseline                Baseline
                    Affiliate                       -0.08         (-0.39)    -0.49***     (-5.33)    -0.02         (-0.11)
                    Direct                          -0.42**       (-2.35)    -0.27***     (-4.24)    -0.39**       (-2.08)
                    Organic                         -0.05         (-0.24)    -0.15*       (-1.79)    0.03          (0.12)
                  Check-Out Time
                     Evening (6pm-midnight)         Baseline                 Baseline                Baseline
                     Morning (6am-noon)             0.30*         (1.81)     0.28***      (4.52)     0.29*         (1.74)
                     Afternoon (noon-6pm)           0.39***       (2.71)     0.08         (1.42)     0.38***       (2.63)
                     Night (midnight-6am)           0.45          (1.38)     0.80***      (7.74)     0.43          (1.36)
                  Do not track setting              -0.16         (-0.83)    -0.02        (-0.25)    -0.12         (-0.59)
                  Name In Email                     -0.59***      (-4.68)    -0.28***     (-5.67)    -0.55***      (-4.33)
                  Number In Email                   0.63***       (4.32)     0.26***      (4.50)     0.64***       (4.35)
                  Is Lower Case                     0.95***       (5.44)     0.76***      (13.04)    0.90***       (4.78)
                  Email Error                       1.66***       (7.82)     1.66***      (20.01)    1.67***       (7.33)
                Constant                            -3.80***      (-19.20)   -4.92***     (-62.84)   -4.11***      (-14.33)
                Month & region fixed effects                   No                      No                       Yes
                Observations                                  15,591                 254,808                   15,591
                Pseudo R2                                    0.0907                  0.0525                    0.139
                AUC                                           0.722                   0.696                    0.777
                (SE)                                         (0.014)                 (0.006)                  (0.012)
                Difference to AUC=50%                        0.222***                0.196***                 0.277***

   27
      We only report coefficients for the 6 largest email providers even though we use the largest 18 categories in the
   regression (all email providers with at least 1000 observations). Using only the 6 reported email hosts does not
   significantly affect the results.
                                                                                                                     44
                                              Table 8: Out-of-sample estimates

This table provides robustness tests out-of-sample for all main regression specifications. Panel 1 reports AUCs for scorable
customers for the model specifications from Table 5, and Panel 2 reports AUCs for unscorable customers for the model
specifications from Table 7. Column (1) reports the baseline results for scorable and unscorable customers. Column (2) reports out-
of-sample estimates of the AUC using Nx2-fold cross validation. We thereby randomly divide the full sample into half samples A
and B. We then estimate a predictive logistic regression using sample A and use the coefficients to create predicted values for
observations in sample B. We also estimate a predictive regression using sample B and use the coefficients to create predicted
values for observations in sample A. We then determine the AUC for the full sample of observations, using all predicted values
estimated out-of-sample. The AUCs reported in Column (2) are the mean AUCs from 100 iterations. The sample period is from
October 19, 2015 to December 2016.

                                                                             (1)
                                                                          Baseline                 (2)
                                                                        (In-sample)           Out-of-sample
                  Panel 1: Scorable customers
                                      AUC credit bureau score             0.683                   0.680
                                                           N             254,808                 254,808

                                          AUC Digital Footprint           0.696                   0.688
                                                             N           254,808                 254,808

                    AUC credit bureau score + Digital Footprint           0.736                   0.728
                                                             N           254,808                 254,808

                   AUC credit bureau score + Digital Footprint,
                                                  fixed effects           0.749                   0.721
                                                             N           254,604                 254,604

                  Panel 2: Unscorable customers
                                       AUC Digital Footprint              0.722                   0.683
                                                          N               15,591                  15,591

                            AUC Digital Footprint, fixed effects          0.777                   0.647
                                                              N           15,591                  15,591




                                                                                                                                45
                                        Table 9: Robustness tests (scorable customers)

This table provides robustness tests using alternative default definitions as well as various sample splits. Panel A provides results
using alternative default definitions. Column (1) reports results using the standard default definition (default = transfer to debt
collection agency), column (2) provides a stricter default definition (default = no full repayment after attempts of debt collection
agency). Column (3) uses only the sample of defaulted loans and uses the loss given default as the dependent variable. In column (3)
we report the R-squared instead of the AUC, as column (3) is estimated using a linear regression model while all other models are
estimated using a logistic regression. Panel B provides results for various sample splits. All models are estimated using a logistic
regression model; apart from column (3) in Panel A, which is estimated using a linear regression model. The sample is based on
scorable customers, i.e. the set of customers for which a credit bureau score is available. The sample period is from October 19,
2015 to December 2016. For variable definitions see Table 1.




Panel A: Default definition             (1)                       (2)                       (3)
                                     Baseline            Default = Writedown         Loss given default
                              (Default = Transfer to                                   (R2 reported)
                                collection agency)
AUC credit bureau score               0.6826                   0.6918                     0.0126
AUC Digital footprint                 0.6960                   0.7232                     0.0650
AUC credit bureau score +             0.7360                   0.7564                     0.0715
digital footprint
N                                   254,808                    254,808                     2,384

Panel B: Sample splits                (1)                        (2)                        (3)                       (4)
                                  Small orders               Large orders                 Female                      Male
                                 < EUR 218.92               ≥ EUR 218.92
AUC credit bureau score             0.6878                     0.6784                     0.6893                     0.6696
AUC Digital footprint               0.7126                     0.6910                     0.6997                     0.6999
AUC credit bureau score +           0.7497                     0.7306                     0.7448                     0.7245
digital footprint
N                                   127,404                    127,404                    168,366                    86,442




                                                                                                                                 46
                        Table 10: Predicting changes in credit bureau score with the digital footprint

 This table provides a linear regression of changes in credit bureau scores on the difference between the default probability using
 the digital footprint and the default probability using the credit bureau score. The independent variable ∆(DigitalFootprintt,
 CreditScoret) measures the difference in predicted values of column (2) of Table 5 and the predicted values of column (1) of Table
 5. The dependent variable (∆ (CreditScoret+1, CreditScoret)) measures the change in credit bureau score between i) the credit
 bureau score as of the date of purchase from Table 5 and ii) the latest available credit bureau score up to March 2018. Two credit
 bureau scores at two different dates are only available when customers return to the E-Commerce company at least once between
 October 2015 and March 2018. Column (2) adds the initial credit bureau score as a control variable, column (3) adds month and
 region fixed effects, column (4) displays results by quintile of ∆(DigitalFootprintt, CreditScoret), and columns (5) and (6) split the
 sample at the median credit bureau score. For variable definitions see Table 1.

                                       (1)                (2)                (3)                (4)                (5)                (6)
Sample                                 All                All                All                All           CreditScoret <    CreditScoret ≥
                                                                                                                 Median             Median
Dependent variable                      ∆                  ∆                  ∆                  ∆                  ∆                  ∆
                                 (CreditScoret+1,   (CreditScoret+1,   (CreditScoret+1,   (CreditScoret+1,   (CreditScoret+1,   (CreditScoret+1,
                                  CreditScoret)      CreditScoret)      CreditScoret)      CreditScoret)      CreditScoret)      CreditScoret)
∆ (DigitalFootprintt,              -74.56***          -28.14***          -29.74***                             -34.24***           -20.75**
CreditScoret)                       (-11.71)            (-4.56)            (-4.95)                               (-4.23)            (-2.48)
         Q1 (-100% to -0.49%)                                                                0.39**
                                                                                              (2.38)
         Q2 (-0.49% to -0.25%)                                                                0.15*
                                                                                              (1.74)
         Q3 (-0.25% to -0.05%)                                                               baseline

         Q4 (-0.05% to +0.35%)                                                                  0.08
                                                                                               (0.92)
         Q5 (+0.35% to +100%)                                                                -0.39***
                                                                                               (-3.05)
CreditScoret                                           -0.43***           -0.42***           -0.42***           -0.42***             -0.19
                                                        (-13.81)           (-13.66)           (-10.27)           (-8.38)            (-1.37)
Constant                            0.37***            42.31***           absorbed           absorbed           absorbed           absorbed
                                     (8.64)             (13.84)
Month & region fixed effects           No                  No               Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes
Observations                        17,645               17,645            17,645             17,645             8,853              8,792
Adj. R2                              2.74%               6.95%             7.95%              7.92%              7.13%              1.54%




                                                                                                                                              47
                                                                                Appendix

                                   Table A.1: Comparability of default rates to other retail data sets

                Study                                        Sample                             Default rate              Time horizon               Default rate
                                                                                                                                                     (annualized)
 This study
 This study                               270,399 purchases at a German E-                           1.0%                   ~4 months                     3.0%
                                          commerce company between October
                                          2015 and December 2016


 Germany
 Berg, Puri, and Rocholl                  100,000 consumer loans at a large                          2.5%                   12 months                     2.5%
 (2017)                                   German private bank, 2008-2010
 Puri, Rocholl, and Steffen               1 million consumer loans at 296                            1.1%                   12 months                     1.1%
 (2017)                                   German savings banks, 2004-2008
 Schufa (2017)1 – study by the            17.4 million consumer loans covered                        2.2%                   12 months                     2.2%
 major credit bureau in                   by the main credit bureau in
 Germany                                  Germany in 2016
 Schufa (2016)1– study by the             17.3 million consumer loans covered                        2.4%                   12 months                     2.4%
 major credit bureau in                   by the main credit bureau in
 Germany                                  Germany in 2015
 Deutsche Bank (2016)2                    All retail loans of Deutsche Bank (i.e,                  1.5%                     12 months                     1.5%
                                          the largest German bank)                              (Basel II PD
                                                                                                 estimate)
 Commerzbank (2016)3                      All retail loans of Commerzbank                          2.0%                     12 months                     2.0%
                                          (i.e., the second largest German                      (Basel II PD
                                          bank)                                                  estimate)
 United States
 Federal reserve4                         Charge-off rate on consumer loans,                        2.09%                   12 months                    2.09%
                                          Q4/2016                                                                          (annualized
                                                                                                                          quarterly data)
 Federal reserve4                         Charge-off rate on consumer loans,                        1.76%                   12 months                    1.76%
                                          Q4/2015                                                                          (annualized
                                                                                                                          quarterly data)
 Hertzberg, Liberman, and                 12,091 36-months loans from                                9.2%                   ~26 months                    4.2%
 Paravisini (2016)                        Lending Club issued between
                                          December 2012 and February 2013
 Lending Club (own analysis)              375,803 36-month loans from                               5.11%                   12 months                    5.11%
                                          Lending Club issued between
                                          October 2015 and December 2016
 Iyer, Khwaja, Luttmer, and               17,212 36-months loans from                               30.6%                   36 months                    10.2%
 Shue (2016)                              Prosper.com issued between
                                          February 2007 and October 2008
 Puri, Hildebrandt, and                   12,183 loans from Prosper.com                        10.8%-18.6%                per 1,000 days               3.9%-6.8%
 Rocholl (2017)                           between February 2007- April 2008
1. Schufa is the main credit bureau in Germany, comparable to Fair Isaac Newton in the U.S., for example, For data on 2016 default rates see Figure 2.11 on page 17 in
https://www.schufa.de/media/editorial/themenportal/kredit_kompass_2017/SCHUFA_Kredit-Kompass_2017_neu.pdf . For the data on 2016 default rates see Figure 2.11 on
page 18 in https://www.schufa.de/media/editorial/ueber_uns/bilder/studien_und_publikationen/kredit_kompass/SCHUFA_Kredit-Kompass-2016.pdf (available in German
only).
2. See Table on page 90 in Deutsche Bank’s Pillar 3 Report 2016, available via https://www.db.com/ir/en/download/Deutsche_Bank_Pillar_3_Report_2016.pdf
3. See Table 12 on page 34 in Commerzbank’s Disclosure Report 2016, available via
https://www.commerzbank.de/media/aktionaere/service/archive/konzern/2017/Disclosure_Report_2016.pdf
4. Series “CORCABAS” in FRED, see https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/CORCACBS

                                                                                                                                                                     48
                     Table A.2: Comparability of Area-Under-Curve to other retail data sets

                Study                                          Sample                            AUC using credit
                                                                                                     score
Area Under the Curve (AUC) using credit bureau scores only
This study                                 270,399 purchases at a German E-                             68.3%
                                           Commerce company in 2015/2016
Berg, Puri, and Rocholl (2017)#            100,000 consumer loans at a large                            66.6%
                                           German private bank, 2008-2010
Puri, Rocholl, and Steffen (2017)#         1 million consumer loans at 296 German                       66.5%
                                           savings banks, 2004-2008
Iyer, Khwaja, Luttmer, and Shue            17,212 36-months loans from                                  62.5%
(2016)                                     Prosper.com issued between February
                                           2007 and October 2008
Lending Club (own analysis)                375,803 36-month loans from Lending                          59.8%
                                           Club issued between October 2015 and
                                           December 20161


AUC and changes in the Area Under the Curve using other variables in addition to the credit score
                                                                                                    AUC Change                 Combined AUC
This study                                 Digital footprint versus credit bureau                      + 5.3PP                          73.6%
                                           score only
Berg, Puri, and Rocholl (2017)#            Bank internal rating (which includes                         +8.8PP                          75.4%
                                           credit bureau score) versus credit bureau
                                           score only
Puri, Rocholl, and Steffen (2017)#         Bank internal rating (which includes                        +11.9PP                          78.4%
                                           credit bureau score) versus credit bureau
                                           score only
Iyer, Khwaja, Luttmer, and Shue            Interest rates versus credit score only                      +5.7PP                          68.2%
(2016)
Iyer, Khwaja, Luttmer, and Shue            All available financial and coded                            +8.9PP                          71.4%
(2016)                                     information (including credit score)
                                           versus credit score only
Lending Club (own analysis)                Lending Club loan grade (which includes                     +11.9PP                          71.7%
                                           credit score) versus credit score only
# These results are not in the original papers but were provided to us by the authors using exactly the same data set from the paper.
1. Results are very similar for 60-month loans.




                                                                                                                                                49
Table A.3: Descriptive statistics for computer and operating system category (scorable customers)

This table provides descriptive statistics for the computer and operating system category. The sample is based on
scorable customers, i.e. the set of customers for which a credit bureau score is available. The sample period is from
October 19, 2015 to December 2016. For variable definitions see Table 1.

                                                                                                      T-test against
           Variable                     Value             Observations   Proportion   Default rate
                                                                                                      baseline
   Computer and Operating system          All             254,808        100%         0.94%
                                    Desktop/Windows       123,085        48%          0.74%           Baseline
                                   Desktop/Macintosh      21,158         8%           0.69%           (0.70)
                                        Desktop/other     1,628          1%           0.74%           (0.03)
                                       Tablet/Android     15,111         6%           1.11% ***       (-4.86)
                                            Tablet/iOS    29,940         12%          0.79%           (-0.88)
                                          Tablet/other    524            0%           1.53% **        (-2.08)
                                      Mobile/Android      13,967         5%           2.53% ***       (-20.92)
                                           Mobile/iOS     11,531         5%           1.80% ***       (-11.90)
                                         Mobile/other     1,310          1%           1.15% *         (-1.68)
                                   Do not track setting   36,554         14%          0.88% ***       (-2.70)




              Table A.4: Descriptive statistics for computer and operating system category
                                         (unscorable customers)

This table provides descriptive statistics for the computer and operating system category. The sample is based on
unscorable customers, i.e. the set of customers for which a credit bureau score is not available. The sample period is
from October 19, 2015 to December 2016. For variable definitions see Table 1.

                                                                                                      T-test against
          Variable                      Value             Observations   Proportion   Default rate    baseline
   Computer and Operating system                    All   15,591         100%         2.49%
                                    Desktop/Windows       7,688          49%          2.20%           Baseline
                                   Desktop/Macintosh      1,421          9%           1.69%           (1.22)
                                        Desktop/other     82             1%           6.10% **        (-2.37)
                                       Tablet/Android     857            5%           2.10%           (0.19)
                                            Tablet/iOS    1,737          11%          1.44% **        (2.01)
                                          Tablet/other    24             0%           0.00%           (0.73)
                                      Mobile/Android      789            5%           7.73% ***       (-9.15)
                                           Mobile/iOS     687            4%           4.66% ***       (-4.04)
                                         Mobile/other     70             0%           4.43%           (-1.18)
                                   Do not track setting   2,236          14%          2.28%           (-0.23)




                                                                                                                       50
