NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ASYMMETRIC BUSINESS-CYCLE RISK AND SOCIAL INSURANCE
Christopher Busch
David Domeij
Fatih Guvenen
Rocio Madera
Working Paper 24569
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24569

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2018

For helpful critiques and comments, we thank Nick Bloom, Alexander Ludwig, Kurt Mitman,
Luigi Pistaferri, Kjetil Storesletten, and Anthony Smith, as well as seminar and conference
participants at various institutions. Domeij acknowledges financial support from the Jan
Wallander and Tom Hedelius Foundation. Guvenen acknowledges financial support from the
National Science Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Christopher Busch, David Domeij, Fatih Guvenen, and Rocio Madera. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Asymmetric Business-Cycle Risk and Social Insurance
Christopher Busch, David Domeij, Fatih Guvenen, and Rocio Madera
NBER Working Paper No. 24569
May 2018
JEL No. D52,E32,J31
ABSTRACT
This paper studies the business-cycle variation in higher-order (labor) income risk—that is, risks
that are captured by moments higher than the variance. We examine the extent to which such
risks can be smoothed within households or with government social insurance and tax policies.
We use panel data from three countries that differ in many aspects relevant for our analysis: the
United States, Germany, and Sweden. Our analysis has three main results. First, using individual
gross income, we document that skewness is procyclical and dispersion (variance) is flat and
acyclical in Germany and Sweden, as was previously documented for the United States. The
same patterns hold true for groups defined by education, gender, public- versus private-sector
jobs, among others. Second, household-level income displays cyclical patterns that are very
similar to individual income, indicating that within-household smoothing is not very effective at
mitigating business cycle fluctuations in skewness. Third, government tax and transfer programs
blunt some of the largest declines in incomes, reducing procyclical fluctuations in skewness,
especially in Germany and Sweden. The resulting welfare gain—through the lens of a structural
model—amounts to 1.3% in consumption-equivalent terms for Sweden (for which we are able to
perform this calculation). However, the remaining risk (in household disposable income) is still
substantial: households are willing to pay 4.6% of their consumption to completely eliminate
procyclical fluctuations in skewness.
Christopher Busch
MOVE-UAB and Barcelona GSE
Campus de Bellaterra-UAB Edifici B
ES-08193 Cerdanyola del Vallès
Barcelona, Spain
chris.busch@movebarcelona.eu
David Domeij
Department of Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
Box 6501 SE-113 83 Stockholm, SWEDEN
david.domeij@hhs.se

Fatih Guvenen
Department of Economics
University of Minnesota
4-101 Hanson Hall
1925 Fourth Street South
Minneapolis, MN, 55455
and NBER
guvenen@umn.edu
Rocio Madera
Department of Economics
Southern Methodist University
3300 Dyer St.
Umphrey Lee 301
Dallas, TX 75275
romadera@smu.edu

1

Introduction

There is broad consensus among economists that idiosyncratic earnings risk rises
in recessions. So, recessions are not only times when earnings fall on average, but they
are also times when earnings uncertainty is higher. While this much is agreed upon,
there is still an active debate on two key questions. One, how much does idiosyncratic
risk rise in recessions? And two, what is the precise change in the nature of risk?1
A simple way to approach these questions is to measure risk by the variance of
income shocks and measure how much it rises in recessions.2 While this is certainly a
useful first step, it cannot be the last: in principle, income risk depends on the entire
distribution of shocks, so higher-order moments, such as skewness, kurtosis, and so on,
could matter just as much and perhaps more for income risk. As we will see later,
two distributions of income shocks with the same variance can imply very different
amounts of risk if they differ in higher-order moments. To emphasize this point, we
will refer to income risk stemming from the latter components as higher-order income
risk and study how it changes over the business cycle.
A key step in attempting to answer both questions is to account for the various
ways income fluctuations are smoothed in an economy, which prevents these fluctuations from affecting an individual’s consumption. Two prominent sources of such
smoothing are the household (where spouses can act together to mitigate fluctuations
in their individual incomes) and the government, which operates a rich tax and transfer
system, parts of which are specifically designed to insure against income losses, and
more so during recessions. Thus, one goal of this paper is to understand the extent to
which the rise in individual income risk in recessions is mitigated by households and
government policies. Our analysis will shed light on this question by studying the cyclical properties of idiosyncratic risk as we change the income definition (in several steps)
from “gross individual income” to “post-tax-transfer household income.” The change in
these cyclical properties in each step will be informative both about the effectiveness
of each source of insurance and about the remaining risk once these important sources
have been accounted for.
1

Measuring income risk faces well-understood challenges because researchers observe income fluctuations in the data, but (often) do not have access to other information the worker may have to
distinguish what is the anticipated component and what is a surprise. This is a difficult issue that
has been addressed in only a few papers in the literature (see, Pistaferri (2001); Cunha et al. (2005);
Guvenen (2007); Guvenen and Smith (2014)). In this paper, we will follow the bulk of the literature
that treats income fluctuations as unanticipated.
2
We use earnings and income interchangeably throughout the paper.

1

Turning to the second question—the change in the nature of risk—we will study
the business-cycle variation in the skewness (or asymmetry—hence the title) of the
distribution of income changes in addition to the variance. Consistent with some recent
work (reviewed below), we find that skewness fluctuations are procyclical and are a
critical component of changing idiosyncratic risk over the business cycle. We have also
examined the business-cycle variation in the fourth moment—the kurtosis—but did not
find large and robust patterns. That said, the average level of the kurtosis of income
changes is very high, meaning that the distribution has very high concentration at
the center as well as long and thick tails. These long tails interact with, and amplify,
the effects of skewness fluctuations to generate a large rise in idiosyncratic risk in
recessions.
To better understand how different channels of smoothing affect higher-order risk,
we study panel data on individuals and households from three countries—the United
States, Germany, and Sweden. These countries differ in important aspects relevant for
our analysis, such as the extent of their social safety nets, household structures, labor
market institutions and compositions (unions, employment in public sector), among
others. The data sets we use are based on social security records (SIAB for Germany),
tax register data (LINDA for Sweden), and household surveys (PSID for the United
States and SOEP for Germany), and cover more than three decades in each country.
The most closely-related previous paper is Guvenen et al. (2014), which used panel data
from the US Social Security Administration but, due to data limitations, restricted
their analysis to gross individual income of males. Here, we provide new evidence for
the United States using survey data from the Panel Study Income Dynamics (PSID),
which allows us to study household income and the role of government programs on
the cyclicality of higher-order risk.
Our analysis yields four sets of results. First, we start with gross individual income
and find that, in all three countries, the variance of income growth is relatively stable over time and does not display any significant cyclicality (i.e., acyclical), whereas
the skewness is robustly procyclical.3 This finding both confirms the empirical evidence in Guvenen et al. (2014) from the US administrative data and shows that it
holds more broadly—in two other developed economies, as well as in survey data (the
PSID and SOEP). In addition, we show that this result is robust across demographic
groups defined by gender, skill/education, occupation, and private/public sector em3

In most of our empirical analysis, we focus on a time-series regression of the moments of income
growth on an indicator of business cycles (contemporaneous GDP growth) in that country. This is a
simple but useful way to summarize the cyclicality of each moment.

2

ployment. Furthermore, the administrative data set we employ from Germany contains
information on workers’ employer and their full-time status. Using this information
we examine the extent to which the cyclicality of skewness is driven by variation in
work hours or employer changes. We find that even for full-time workers who are continuously employed at the same establishment, the variance of income growth is flat
and acyclical and the skewness is procyclical, with magnitudes that are similar for the
overall population. This indicates that the results are not primarily driven by changes
in annual hours worked.
Second, moving to gross household-level income, we find that it displays cyclical
patterns that are qualitatively very similar to those found for individual income, indicating that within-household smoothing is not very effective at mitigating business
cycle fluctuations in skewness. In one experiment designed to measure the degree of
smoothing within households, we form “synthetic” (or random) couples by randomly
matching men and women in a way that matches the overall distribution of couples
by age and education level in the economy. Because the behavior of each synthetic
“spouse” in these random couples does not respond to each others’ shocks, we should expect a higher cyclicality of higher-order risk in synthetic couples compared with actual
ones. We do not find this to be the case. Actual couples have similar or higher cyclicalities in most dimensions we measure, suggesting limited smoothing of business cycle
variation in higher-order risk.4 This result could be driven by the assortative nature
of marital matching or by shocks that are semi-aggregate (regional, or industry-level
where spouses work in similar industries, etc.).
Third, we move to disposable household income—that is, income after all government tax and transfer programs are accounted for—and find that the procyclical
fluctuations in skewness are smaller: the coefficient on GDP growth is about half what
we found for gross income for the US and Sweden, although their statistical significance
is barely affected. For Germany, the coefficient is both smaller and insignificant. A
natural interpretation of this finding is that government programs blunt the largest
declines in income and do so more strongly during recessions (through both automatic
stabilizers and an active expansion of the social safety net). While this is true for the
United States and Germany, it is not the case for Sweden. In other words, in Sweden it
is the upper half of the disposable income change distribution that fluctuates less over
the business cycle compared with gross income, whereas the bottom half fluctuates
4

Notice that there could be smoothing of the level of risk or other aspects of it. Here we focus on
the business cycle variation only.

3

similarly in gross versus disposable income. This suggests that the progressivity of
the income tax system makes disposable income growth less variable over the cycle,
rather than changes at the bottom end. In Germany and the United States, the effect
is at the bottom end, more consistent with what we expect from government insurance
policies.
Fourth, and finally, we investigate how effective government policy is in insuring
households against business-cycle fluctuations of earnings risk, and how much households value this insurance. To do that, we need a structural model where households
can self insure through borrowing and saving, wherein we can translate the statistics on
income changes into distributions of underlying income shocks. To generate non-zero
skewness, we specify the econometric model for (log) income as the sum of a persistent
process whose innovations are drawn from a mixture of normals and a purely transitory component. We estimate the parameters of this process separately for gross and
disposable household labor income by matching moments on the cyclical properties of
the higher-order income risk documented in the empirical part.
We then feed these parameters into a variant of the partial insurance model of
Heathcote et al. (2014) to quantify the welfare gains. We conduct this analysis for
Sweden only, because even this fairly rich income process does not fit all the higher
order moments we target sufficiently well for the United States and Germany, which
makes a comparison of pre- versus post-government income less reliable. For Sweden, we find that the degree of overall insurance provided by the existing tax and
transfer system amounts to a welfare gain of 1.3% in consumption equivalent terms
(CEV). However, the remaining risk (in post-government household-level income) is
still substantial: households are willing to pay 4.6% of their consumption to completely
eliminate procyclical fluctuations in skewness.
The paper is organized as follows. The next section discusses the data sources, and
Section 3 describes the empirical approach. Section 4 presents the results for gross
individual income for various groups in the population. Section 5 expands the analysis
to households and post-tax-transfer income. Section 6 uses a structural consumptionsavings model with partial insurance to quantify the welfare benefits of governments’
social insurance policies in the three countries under study. Section 7 concludes.

Related Literature
Earlier empirical work in the literature was limited by the small sample size and time
span of the available survey-based panel data sets, such as the PSID, leading researchers
4

to make parametric assumptions to obtain identification. One common assumption
is that shocks to earnings are Gaussian, which implies zero skewness. Restricting
attention to the changes in the mean and variance of income shocks, Storesletten et al.
(2004) concluded that the variance of income shocks in the US data is countercyclical.5
More recently, Guvenen et al. (2014) studied the earnings histories of a 10% representative panel of US males from SSA records. The large sample size allowed them
to relax parametric assumptions as well as to examine variations in skewness. They
found that the variance of income shocks is stable over the business cycle and is robustly
acyclical, whereas the skewness of shocks varies significantly over time in a procyclical fashion. The current paper goes substantially beyond their analysis by studying
two new countries and four data sets, using income measures that include significant
sources of smoothing, and employing a structural consumption-savings model to quantify the welfare benefits of government insurance and the cost of remaining (uninsured)
fluctuations in higher-order income risk.
Taking a different methodological approach, Busch and Ludwig (2017) adapt the
parametric approach of Storesletten et al. (2004) to allow skewness fluctuations and
analyzed the cyclicality of labor income risk in Germany and the United States. They
come to the same substantial conclusion as we do, namely, that variation of income
risk over the business cycle is asymmetric. In ongoing work, Angelopoulos et al. (2018)
follow the approach in the present paper to study the cyclicality of higher-order risk
in the United Kingdom using panel data from the British Household Panel Survey.
They confirm the same finding of strongly procyclical skewness for the UK since the
early 1990s. Finally, Hoffman and Malacrino (2016) explore the role played by hours
versus wages for the observed cyclical dynamics of earnings changes in Italy. They find
a larger role for hours changes in driving fluctuations in skewness than what we find
for Germany.
A growing number of theoretical and quantitative studies emphasizes the importance of the higher-order moments of income shocks for various economic questions. In
asset pricing, several papers have found that the procyclical skewness of consumption
(and income) growth helps explain various puzzling features of asset prices (Mankiw
(1986), Constantinides and Ghosh (2014), Schmidt (2016)). Recent research on monetary and fiscal policy also emphasizes the role of higher-order income risk in shaping
5

Using a similar approach, Bayer and Juessen (2012) studied the cyclicality of the variance in
Germany, the UK, and the US, and different patterns in Germany and the UK relative to the US and
attributed it to differences in institutions.

5

optimal policy or in modifying the standard channels through which policy works.
Examples include Kaplan et al. (2016) who examine the monetary transmission mechanism in the presence of leptokurtic shocks and Golosov et al. (2016) who find that,
in a Mirleesian setting, the optimal tax schedule is greatly affected by whether or not
one accounts for higher order moments of income shocks.

2

The Data

This section provides an overview of the data sets we use in our empirical analysis,
the sample selection criteria, as well as the variables used in the subsequent empirical
analyses. Given the diversity of our data sources, we relegate the details to Appendix
A. Briefly, we employ four longitudinal data sets corresponding to three different countries: the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) for the United States, covering
1976 to 2010;6 the Sample of Integrated Labour Market Biographies (SIAB7 ) and the
German Socio-Economic Panel (SOEP) for Germany, covering 1976 to 2010 and 1984
to 2011, respectively; and the Longitudinal Individual Data Base (LINDA) for Sweden,
covering 1979 to 2010. The PSID and the SOEP are survey-based data sets. The PSID
has a yearly sample of approximately 2,000 households in the core sample, which is
representative of the US population; the SOEP started with about 10,000 individuals (or 5,000 households) in 1984 and, after several refreshments, covers about 18,000
individuals (10,500 households) in 2011.8
The SIAB is based on administrative social security records and our initial sample
covers on average 370,000 individuals per year. It excludes civil servants, students,
and self-employed workers, which make up about 20% of the workforce. From the
perspective of our analysis, the SIAB has two caveats: (i) income is top-coded at the
limit of income subject to social security contributions, and (ii) individuals cannot be
linked to each other, which prohibits identification of households. We deal with (i) by
fitting a Pareto distribution to the upper tail of the wage distribution9 and with (ii)
6

The PSID contains information since 1967. We choose our benchmark sample to start in 1976
because of the poor coverage of income transfers before the 1977 wave. We complement our results
using a longer period whenever possible and pertinent.
7
We use the factually anonymous scientific use file SIAB-R7510, which is a 2% draw from the
Integrated Employment Biographies data of the Institute for Employment Research (IAB).
8
These numbers refer to observations after cleaning but before sample selection. Only the representative SRC sample is considered in the PSID. The immigrant sample and high-income sample of
the SOEP are not used, because they cover only subperiods.
9
The imputation is done separately for each year by subgroups defined by age and gender. For
workers with imputed wages, across years, we preserve the relative ranking within the age-specific

6

by using data from SOEP for all household-level analyses. Throughout the analysis,
we focus on West Germany, which for simplicity we refer to as Germany. LINDA is
compiled from administrative sources (the Income Register) and tracks a representative
sample with approximately 300,000 individuals per year.
For each country, we consider three samples: two at the individual level—one
for males and one for females—and one at the household level. The samples are
constructed as revolving panels: for a given statistic computed based on the time
difference between years t − s and t, the panel contains individuals who are ages 25 to
59 in periods t − s and t (s = 1 in the case of Sweden and Germany, and s = 2 in the
case of the United States) and have yearly labor earnings above a minimum threshold
in both years. This threshold is defined as the earnings level that corresponds to
520 hours of employment at half the legal minimum wage, which is about $1,885 US
dollars for the United States in 2010.10 To avoid possible outliers, we exclude the top
1% of earnings observations in the PSID and SOEP, but not in LINDA (which is from
administrative sources). For each individual, we record age, gender, education, and
gross labor earnings. By gross earnings we mean a worker’s compensation from his/her
employer before any kind of government intervention in the form of taxes or transfers.
The household sample is constructed by imposing the same criteria on the household head and adding specific requirements at the household level. More specifically, a
household is included in our sample if it has at least two adult members, one of them
being the household head,11 that satisfy the age criterion and household income that
satisfies the income criteria. At the household level, we analyze pre- and post government earnings. Pre-government earnings is defined as the sum of gross labor earnings
earned by the adults in the household. Post-government earnings is constructed by
adding taxes and transfers.

cross-sectional wage distribution. The procedure follows Daly et al. (2014); see Appendix A.3 for
details.
10
For the United States, we use the federal minimum wage. There is no official minimum wage
in Sweden or Germany during this period. For Germany, we follow Fuchs-Schündeln et al. (2010)
and take a minimum threshold of 3 euros (in year 2000 euros) for the hourly wage. For Sweden, the
effective hourly minimum wage via labor market agreements was around SEK 75 in 2004 (Skedinger,
2007). For other years, we adjust the minimum wage by calculating the mean real earnings for each
year, estimating a linear time trend for these means and removing that time trend from the SEK 75
minimum wage.
11
In PSID and SOEP, the head of a household is defined within the data set. In LINDA, the head
of a household is defined as the sampled male.

7

3

Empirical Approach

Measuring Income Volatility over the Business Cycle
For each year, we calculate robust statistics of log s-year changes in income. We
consider different choices of s in order to distinguish between earnings growth over short
and long horizons, and interpret these as corresponding to “transitory” and “persistent”
earnings shocks.
More specifically, we compute moments m [∆s yt ], where yt ≡ lnYt , ∆s yt ≡ yt − yt−s ,
and Yt denote income in period t. The moments m we consider are: the log differential
between the 90th and 10th percentiles (L9010), the Kelley measure of skewness, and
the top (L9050) and bottom (L5010) tails. For Germany and Sweden, s refers to 1year changes. Due to the biennial structure of the PSID from the 1997 wave on, our
analyses for the United States refer to 2-year changes instead.12
We do not impose any parametric assumption on the dynamics of income but
instead analyze the behavior of the tails of the distribution of earnings changes. We
think this is important since interpretations when using the variance as a summary
statistic of the distribution alone can be misleading. To see this point, consider a
widening of both the upper and lower tails of a normally distributed variable. That
is, P90 is shifted to the right and P10 is shifted to the left. This certainly implies an
increase in the variance; the opposite, however, is not necessarily true. Think of the
case in which only the lower tail shifts to the left. Then the overall dispersion of the
distribution increases, but if we were to interpret this increase in isolation, we would
wrongfully conclude that not only one tail expands, but both of them expand.
Similarly, unchanged overall dispersion does not imply an unchanged distribution,
but can be observed when both tails move together (i.e., one tail shrinks while the
other expands). Both of these last two scenarios imply a change of the relative size of
the tails–a feature summarized by the skewness of the distribution. In our empirical
analysis, these are the two scenarios we observe when considering cyclicality: either
overall dispersion does not change while skewness does, or dispersion is cyclical, caused
by one tail expanding and the other shrinking.
A Continuous Measure of Business Cycles
Some important macroeconomic variables do not perfectly synchronize with expansions and contractions, as classified by the NBER dating committee for example,
12

We calculate overlapping s-year differences up to ∆s y1996 , and non-overlapping s-year differences
from then and up to ∆s y2010 , for s = 2, 4.

8

but their fluctuations might have an impact on earnings. For example, the US stock
market experienced a significant drop in 1987, officially classified as an expansion year,
and indeed the skewness of household income growth dips in that year (Figure 2a).
Similarly, the US economy displayed an overall weakness in 1993 and 1994, which is
evident in a range of economic variables, but these years are technically classified as
expansion years. Other examples (e.g., 1996) are easy to find for Germany and Sweden.
Therefore, the main focus of our analysis will be on the comovement of higher-order
moments of earnings changes with a continuous measure of business cycles. We use the
(natural) log growth rate of GDP—that is ∆s GDPt ≡ ln(GDP t ) − ln(GDP t−s )—as
our measure of aggregate fluctuations. More specifically, we regress each moment m
of the log income change between t − s and t on a constant, a linear time trend, and
the log growth rate of GDP between year t − s and t :
m (∆s yt ) = α + γt + β m × ∆s (GDPt ) + ut .

(1)

For a quantitative interpretation of the results reported in the next sections, Figure
1 reports the short-run volatility of GDP growth for each country and displays the
cyclical component of log GDP as a reference.13

4

Empirical Results: Gross Individual Income

In this section, we address four questions concerning higher-order risk for individual earnings. First, we ask whether the countercyclical skewness and the acyclical
dispersion are US-only phenomena or robust features of business cycles that can be
observed in other countries whose labor markets differ greatly from that in the US.
For example, according to the OECD (2016), 10.7% of US workers are unionized and
11.9% are covered by trade union agreements. In Germany, the equivalent shares are
18.1% and 57.6%, respectively. In Sweden, 67.3% are unionized and the overwhelming
majority (89%) of workers is covered by trade union agreements.14
Second, we ask whether business-cycle variation in higher-order income risk differs
across observationally distinct groups, defined by gender, education, private/public
13

Throughout the paper, shaded areas indicate recessionary episodes. For the US, we
classify recession episodes based on the NBER peak and trough dates, with the exception that we
classify 1980-1983 as a single “double-dip” recession. For Germany and Sweden, we classify
recessions based on Economic Cycle Research Institute (ECRI) dates, with the exception that
we classify 2001-2003 as a recession in Sweden, since Swedish GDP fell by a similar magnitude
to that in the US and Germany during these years, as seen in Figure 1.
14

The numbers refer to 2013.

9

Figure 1: Cyclical Component of Quarterly GPD Growth: US, Germany, and Sweden

Note: The shaded areas indicate US recessions. The series for Germany corresponds to West Germany
up to and including 1990Q4, and to (Unified) Germany from 1991Q1 on. The cyclical components
are obtained by HP-filtering the series for GDP per capita from 1970Q1 to 2014Q1. The numbers in
parentheses next to each country indicate the standard deviation of the (unfiltered) short-run GDP
growth series over the period 1976-2010, where short-run is one-year difference for Germany and
Sweden, and two-year difference for the United States, to be consistent with the micro data used in
our analysis.

sector employment and occupation. Third, we ask whether the cyclicality of earnings
changes can be attributed mainly to changes in hours worked or to changes in wages,
or both. Fourth, we ask whether the countercyclicality of skewness and the acyclicality
of dispersion found in US administrative earnings data are also borne out in US survey
data (e.g., the PSID). This question is important because earlier papers that used the
PSID and adopted parametric methods found a strongly countercyclical variance of
shocks. This raises the question: is it the data set or the methodology that accounts
for these different conclusions?
Cyclicality of Dispersion
In Table I, we report the cyclicality of four key statistics computed from the distribution of earnings changes of individual workers. To provide a comparative discussion,
we report the results for all three countries in the same table. For now, we focus on the
first row of each panel, corresponding to the sample of male workers in each country.
In the United States, L9010 for males is acyclical, as seen from the statistically insignificant coefficient (–0.54 with a t-stat of –1.38). Turning to Sweden and Germany,

10

Table I: Cyclicality of Income Growth Moments: Gross Individual Income
L9010
Males

–0.54
(–1.38)
0.40
(1.39)

Females
Males

–0.11
(–1.22)
0.43**
(2.24)

Females
Males

0.15

(0.36)

Females

0.34

(0.48)

Kelley
L9050
United States
2.25*** 0.68**
(4.79)
(2.49)
1.17*** 0.86**
(3.01)
(2.57)
Sweden
3.74*** 0.91***
(4.00)
(3.80)
1.64*** 0.67***
(3.33)
(3.09)
Germany (SIAB)
5.48*** 0.95***
(5.80)
(3.14)
2.55**
0.80
(2.05)
(1.25)

L5010
–1.23***
(–4.27)
–0.47**
(–2.38)
–1.01***
(–3.74)
–0.24**
(–2.67)
–0.80***

(–4.11)

–0.46*

(–1.80)

Note: Each cell reports the coefficient on log GDP change of a regression of a moment of the
distribution of changes in an income measure on log GDP change, a constant, and a linear time trend.
Newey-West t-statistics are included in parentheses (maximum lag length considered: 3 for SIAB and
LINDA, 2 for PSID). Asterisks (∗, ∗∗, ∗ ∗ ∗) denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels.

the L9010 for male earnings is also acyclical.15
Overall, we conclude that in all three countries, the dispersion of earnings changes
does not display any robust pattern of cyclicality, judging from these regressions. In
addition to being acyclical, the dispersion of earnings changes is quite flat over time (see
the left panels of Figure 2). These figures should be compared with typical calibrations
in the literature that assume that the volatility of earnings shocks doubles or triples
during recessions. Here, the largest movements are on the order of 10% to 15%, and
they show no signs of cyclicality.
Cyclicality of Skewness
We next turn to the cyclical behavior of skewness. Column 2 in Table I reports one
measure of asymmetry, Kelley skewness, defined as follows:
Sk =

(P 90 − P 50) − (P 50 − P 10)
.
(P 90 − P 10)

15

All regression results based on SIAB data are robust to various robustness checks that address
issues of top-coding and a structural break in the wage variable. See Appendix C for details.

11

Figure 2: Standard Deviation, Skewness, and Tails of Short-Run Income Growth:
United States, Sweden, and Germany (SIAB): All Males
(a) United States, Std. Dev./Kelley skew.

(b) United States, Upper and Lower Tails

(c) Sweden, Std. Dev./Kelley skewness

(d) Sweden, Upper and Lower Tails

(e) Germany, Std. Dev./Kelley skewness

(f) Germany, Upper and Lower Tails

Note: Linear trend removed, centered at sample average. Shaded areas indicate recessionary
periods (see footnote 13).

12

This measure has several attractive features compared with the standardized third
moment. First, it is not sensitive to extreme observations, since it does not depend
on observations beyond the 90th and 10th percentiles of the distribution. It is therefore our preferred measure of skewness, especially when considering the survey data
from the US and Germany (GSOEP) where potential outliers and measurement issues
could be more important.16 Second, the particular value of Kelley skewness has a
simple interpretation, in terms of the relative lengths of the top and bottom tails. In
particular,
Sk
P 90 − P 50
= 0.5 + ,
(2)
P 90 − P 10
2
which can be used to compute the fraction of overall dispersion (P90-P10) that is
accounted for by the top tail (P90-50) and consequently by the bottom tail (P50-P10).
In all three countries, Kelley skewness is procyclical (see the left panels of Figure
2). This pattern is particularly striking in Sweden and Germany, where movements in
Kelley skewness are almost perfectly synchronized with the business cycle as defined
by ECRI. The notable exception is the fall in Kelley skewness in 1996, but note that
the cyclical component of GDP did indeed fall in 1996, as displayed in Figure 1.
Furthermore, Table I shows that the procyclicality of Kelley skewness is (statistically)
significant at the 1% level in all three countries. The coefficient is 1.67 for the US, 3.74
for Sweden, and 5.48 for Germany, showing more cyclicality when moving from the US
to Sweden and the most cyclicality for Germany.
In order to interpret these coefficients, we need to take into account the volatility
of GDP growth itself in each country, as measured by the standard deviations reported
in Figure 1. Thus, for example, if a typical recession in Sweden entails a drop in GDP
growth of two standard deviations (from +1 to −1 sigmas, for a swing of 2 × 0.0236 =
0.0472), Kelley skewness will fall by 0.0472 × 3.74 = 0.177. For the sake of discussion,
suppose Skexp. = 0 in an expansion, then Skrec. = −0.18, which in turn implies from
equation (2) that the upper tail to lower tail ratio, (P 90 − P 50)/(P 50 − P 10), goes
from 50/50 to 41/59 from an expansion to a recession. This is a large change in the
relative size of each tail, especially for a country like Sweden, which might be thought
of as displaying lower business-cycle risk (because of the high unionization rate, among
other factors).17

16
17

We have also analyzed the third standardized moment and found very similar results.
The corresponding changes in Sk for the US and Germany are 0.15 and 0.22, respectively.

13

Inspecting the Tails
At the expense of some oversimplification, it might be useful to think about a shift
toward more negative skewness as arising from either a compression of the right tail
or an expansion of the left tail or both. Thus, a follow-up question is: which one of
these changes is driving the cyclical changes in skewness for each country? Again, the
pattern is particularly striking in Sweden (see panel d of Figure 2). It shows that the
top tail is procyclical, whereas the bottom tail is countercyclical. The last two columns
of Table I show that this pattern is present and (statistically) significant in all three
countries. This means that, in a recession, the positive half of the shock distribution
compresses relative to the median, whereas the negative half expands. Thus, the shift
toward negative skewness happens through the process of both tails moving in unison
during recessions.
Furthermore, notice that for all three countries, it turns out that the magnitude of
movement of each tail is similar to each other. For example, for Sweden, the coefficient
for L9050 is 0.91 and for L5010 it is –1.01. The corresponding coefficients are 0.68
and –1.23 for the US, and 0.95 and –0.80 for Germany. Therefore, as log GDP growth
fluctuates over the business cycle, the shrinking of one tail is matched closely by the
expansion of the other tail, making total dispersion, the L9010, move very little over
the cycle. As a result, skewness becomes more negative in recessions without any
significant change in the variance.
This analysis shows that the behavior of higher-order risk is best understood by
separately studying the top and bottom tails over the cycle, which can move together
or independently. Focusing simply on a directionless moment, such as the L9010 or the
variance, can miss important asymmetries that might matter for the nature of earnings
risk. As we will see in a moment, whenever we observe cyclical dispersion, it is driven
by asymmetric movements of the tails and should not be thought of as a pure change
in L9010 or the variance (which would imply an expansion/compression of both tails).
Survey versus Administrative Data
As noted earlier, it is not possible to link individual data from the SIAB data set
to obtain household-level information. This is why we use survey data (PSID for the
US and SOEP for Germany) to answer questions regarding insurance provided within
households and by the government. These data sets, however, suffer from having fairly
few observations, which may imply that higher moments are imprecisely estimated.
Specifically, we have rerun the regression in equation (1) using moments from the
SSA data (reported in Guvenen et al. (2014)), and from SOEP data. The resulting
14

coefficients for US males using SSA data for each of the four moments are –0.07 ,
2.31*** , 1.02*** , and –1.09**, respectively. These numbers are strikingly similar to
those in the first row of the top panel in Table I. The equivalent numbers using SOEP
data are –1.33**, 1.76***, –0.21, and –1.12***. While these numbers differ somewhat
from those in the first row of the bottom panel in Table I, they tell the same story. In
particular, male earnings changes in both SOEP and SIAB are characterized by asymmetric movements of the tails rather than uniform expansions and contractions of both
tails.18 The main difference is that, in the SOEP, there is evidence of countercyclical
dispersion, which was not observed in the SIAB.
However, this is best understood by looking directly at the tails. The bottom tail
is countercyclical in both data sets, whereas the top tail is procyclical in SIAB but
acyclical in SOEP. As a result, the L9010 is acyclical in SIAB and countercyclical in
SOEP. This is yet another example in which limiting the analysis to the overall measure
of dispersion gives an incomplete picture: the L9010 is countercyclical, but due to an
expansion of the left tail in contractions while the right tail is unchanged, not to a
symmetric expansion of both tails. This evidence of asymmetric risk is reflected in
procyclical skewness.

4.1

Differences by Gender

In examining the cyclicality of higher-order risk for female workers (the second row
of each panel in Table I), we see two main patterns. First, Kelley’s measure of skewness
is always procyclical as indicated by the positive coefficient on log GDP growth, which
is highly significant for Sweden and the US (1% level), and significant for Germany
(5% level). Second, inspecting the top and bottom tails separately (last two columns),
we observe the expected pattern of cyclicality whenever the coefficient is significant.
In particular, the L9050 is procyclical and significant for the US and Sweden, whereas
the L5010 is countercyclical and significant for all three economies. Thus, just as in
the case of male workers, the behavior of the variance is driven by an asymmetric
movement of the two tails rather than a uniform expansion of both tails.
In our view, this finding reiterates our earlier point that the L9010 or the variance
are not ideal statistics to focus on when it comes to measuring higher-order earnings
risk over the business cycle. In comparing patterns in higher order risk across gender,
18

We have also run regression 1 using the standard deviation of earnings changes as our measure for
overall dispersion instead, and the coefficients are small (0.07 (SIAB), –0.12 (SOEP)) and insignificant
(t-stat of 0.42 (SIAB), –0.54 (SOEP)) in both data sets.

15

the magnitudes of the fluctuations in both Kelley skewness and the upper and lower
tails separately are somewhat attenuated for women compared with men.

4.2

Differences across Groups of Workers

To shed light on the possible sources of cyclicality of higher-order income risk, we
now examine whether it differs across observationally distinct groups. First we divide
male and female workers into groups by education (college versus non-college graduates) or by private and public employment. These are two dimensions by which the
three countries differ greatly. In Germany, 12% of men and 8% of women are college
educated. In Sweden and the US, the equivalent numbers are 16 and 25 for males
and 17 and 25 for females, respectively. Differences in the size of public sector employment are even larger. Defining public sector employment as employment in public
administration, health care, and education (sectors which in Germany and Sweden
are dominated by public sector jobs or by jobs funded by the public),19 the share of
public sector employment in Sweden is more than twice as large as in Germany or the
US.20 Moreover, public sector jobs are often thought of as less risky, offering generous
employment protection and less volatile compensation, so it is interesting to ask if this
is borne out in the data.
For each of these groups, we analyze higher-order income risk by first computing average (standardized) moments across years and countries by quartiles of (standardized)
log GDP change as shown in Figures 3 and 4. The standardization of moments and
log GDP changes is performed independently for each country before pooling across
countries, which implies that a deviation from zero indicates a standardized deviation
from the country-specific mean of the moment. For each quartile, the bars correspond
to the average moment for (ordered from the left) the full sample, college graduates,
non-college graduates, private employment, and public employment, respectively.
Figure 3 shows that the nature of income risk is qualitatively similar across all
male subgroups: overall dispersion is acyclical (panel a), Kelley skewness is procyclical
(panel b), the upper tail is procyclical (panel c), and the lower tail is countercyclical
19

Formally, we classify a worker as working in the public sector, if he/she works in these sectors in
both years t and t − s. Historically, most workers in these sectors were employed by the public; this
is less true today.
20
In Sweden, about 23% of men and 63% of women work in the public sector (these figures have
been relatively stable over the considered time period). In Germany, a stable 10% of men work in
the public sector, while the share of women steadily increased from about 23% to about 36% over
the considered time period. In the US, 13% of males and 18% of females are employed in the public
sector.

16

Figure 3: Higher-Order Moments by Quartiles of Log GDP Change: Males
(b) Kelley skewness

(a) Dispersion (L9010)

(c) Upper Tail

(d) Lower Tail

Note: For different samples, each bar shows the average moment across years and countries
by quartiles of log GDP change. Both log GDP changes and moments are standardized by
country.

(panel d). Figure 4 shows a similar picture for women and, as noted above, shows that
fluctuations in earnings risk is somewhat attenuated relative to men. For both males
and females, we see a strong asymmetric cyclical change of the distribution of earnings
changes across groups.
For each group and country, we estimated our baseline regression (equation 1). The
estimated sensitivity coefficients are displayed in Figure 5. (Further details are in in
Appendix B; see tables B.1 through B.4). Each panel in the figure shows, starting
17

Figure 4: Higher-Order Moments by Quartiles of Log GDP Change: Females
(b) Kelley skewness

(a) Dispersion (L9010)

(c) Upper Tail

(d) Lower Tail

Note: See notes to figure 3.

from the left, the regression coefficients along with 95% confidence intervals for males
(solid) in Sweden (red, triangles), Germany (green, squares), and the US (blue, bullets),
followed by the equivalent regression coefficients for females (dotted). Within each
country-gender grouping, the coefficients are (ordered from the left) those from the
full sample, college graduates, non-college graduates, private employment, and public
employment, respectively.
Figure 5 confirms the picture that emerged in Figures 3 and 4: higher-order earnings
risk is similar across groups. However, we see some noteworthy differences. The
magnitude of cyclicality is stronger for non-college graduates as compared to college
18

Figure 5: Cyclicality of Higher-Order Moments: Income vs Wages (Sweden, Germany
(SIAB), and the United States)
(a) Dispersion (L9010)

(b) Kelley skewness

(c) Upper Tail: L9050

(d) Lower Tail: L5010

Note: The samples are (1) earnings: full sample , (2) earnings: college graduates, (3) earnings: noncollege graduates, (4) earnings: private sector, (5) earnings: public sector. In each figure, the left
(right) half shows the results for males (females). For details of samples, see text. For the regressions,
see note to Table I. Each marker reports the coefficient on log GDP change.

graduates. The difference is particularly large for males in the US and Sweden, where
the regression coefficient for Kelley skewness is about two to three times larger for noncollege graduates (insignificant 0.97 vs. 2.37*** for the US and 1.80*** vs. 4.03*** for
Sweden). Moreover, the magnitude of cyclicality for public sector workers is weaker in
all countries—and insignificant in the cases of Germany and the US.
In Sweden, the procyclicality of Kelley’s measure of earnings is lower for the public
19

sector (2.10*** for males and 1.10*** for females) compared with the private sector
(3.83*** for males and 1.99*** for females). For males, this is due to differences in
the top tail; it compresses strongly for private sector employees, whereas it is acyclical
in the public sector. The L5010 gap, on the other hand, fluctuates by comparable
magnitudes for both groups. For women, the reduced cyclicality is due to both tails
fluctuating slightly less.
Overall, it is somewhat surprising that for workers in the public sector in a country
like Sweden with a reputation for high levels of public insurance, there is robust evidence of higher downside risk in recessions—compression of the top and expansion of
the bottom—even if the magnitudes are somewhat smaller than in the private sector.
This finding further strengthens the conclusion of this section that increasing downside
earnings risk appears to be a robust feature of business cycles in developed countries.
Differences across Occupations
We now turn to occupations and explore the heterogeneity of cyclical earnings
changes along this dimension. We are able to conduct this analysis for Germany; the
SIAB provides time-consistent occupational codes based on the KldB-88, the 1988 version of the classification of occupations by the German Federal Employment Agency.
We run the cyclicality regressions separately for each occupation, where a worker contributes to the earnings changes of occupation j from t − 1 to t if in year t − 1 he or
she works in that occupation.
We first consider the most broad categories in the KldB-88, which defines five
occupational areas: (1) farming, gardening, animal breeding, fishing, and similar occupations; (2) mining and mineral extraction; (3) manufacturing and fabrication; (4)
technical occupations like engineering or laboratory work; and (5) service occupations.
For each occupation, we ran the baseline regression (equation 1) of each moment on
GDP growth. Detailed results can be found in Appendix B. The results are quite similar to those for the full sample. In each occupational category, the variance of income
growth is acyclical. And for male workers in manufacturing occupations, technical occupations, and service occupations, skewness is procyclical, resulting from a procyclical
the top tail and counter-cyclical bottom tail. These same trends are present for female
works but with less statistical significance, as in the full sample. (see table B.5 in the
appendix).
We then conduct a more disaggregated analysis—at the expense of relatively small
sample sizes for some occupations—and rerun the regressions for 30 occupational segments. The same general patterns in variance, skewness, and the top and bottom tails
20

of the distribution remain, but with significant variation. For example, the coefficient
on Kelley skewness ranges from 2.36 to 17.87, which implies large differences in the
asymmetric cyclical dynamics of income risk across occupations. Tables B.6 and B.7
report summary statistics of the distribution of coefficients across the 30 occupational
segments.
Summing up, we find that broad occupational groups experience similar cyclicality,
particularly in manufacturing, technical, and service occupations. Regressions at a
finer level of disaggregation point towards heterogeneity of earnings cyclicality across
occupations.

4.3

Cyclicality: Earnings versus Wages

A natural question that is raised by these results is whether the observed cyclicality
of earnings changes can be attributed mainly to changes in wages or to increased risk
of unemployment in economic downturns. We take advantage of the rich information
on labor market attachment in the SIAB, in particular we exploit information on the
duration of each employment spell and on whether it is a part-time or full-time job.
Focusing on full-time workers, we analyze the cyclicality of the distribution of wage
changes and compare the results to the ones on earnings changes. We define a worker
as full time if his or her full-time spells add up to at least 50 weeks of employment in
a given year. (A less strict definition of full-time workers as 45 weeks of employment
does not change the results.) The wage variable is the average daily wage rate, where
the average is taken over all full-time spells. The same measure has also been used in
Dustmann et al. (2009) and Card et al. (2013).21
In Table II, rows 1 and 4 reproduce the results from Table I for completeness. The
first set of new results are in rows 2 and 5: these report the cyclicality regressions using
average daily wages instead of annual earnings. The main finding for both males and
females is that the cyclicality of wages for full-time workers is remarkably similar to the
cyclicality of earnings. Specifically, both measures of dispersion of wages are acyclical,
as was the case for earnings, and the point estimates for both skewness measures are
very close for wages and earnings.22 Naturally, the dispersion of earnings changes is
21

In Germany, a full-time worker is entitled to an annual vacation time of 4 to 6 weeks, which is
counted as part of the employment spell.
22
The sample of full-time female workers contains about 73% of women (who make up only 54%
of the observations) that contribute to the measures of earnings changes for women. The corresponding figures are 88% of individuals and 82% of observations for males. This implies that part-time
employment plays a more important role for the female sample.

21

Table II: Cyclicality of Individual Earnings vs. Wages; Germany (SIAB)
L9010
Earnings
Full-Time Wages
Full-Time Wages
(Firm Stayers)
Earnings
Full-Time Wages
Full-Time Wages
(Firm Stayers)

0.15

(0.36)

–0.09

(–0.54)

–0.12
(–0.81)
0.34
(0.48)
0.03
(0.18)
0.02
(0.13)

Kelley

L9050
Males
5.48*** 0.95***
(5.80)
(3.14)
4.73*** 0.30***
(6.31)
(3.77)
4.98*** 0.28***
(5.78)
(3.29)
Females
2.55**
0.80
(2.05)
(1.25)
2.12*** 0.17**
(5.11)
(2.61)
2.28*** 0.16***
(4.84)
(3.17)

L5010
–0.80***

(–4.11)

–0.39***

(–3.20)

–0.40***
(–3.20)
–0.46*
(–1.80)
–0.14
(–1.58)
–0.14
(–1.61)

Note: See notes for Table I.

wider than the distribution of wage changes, which is reflected by the point estimates
on the tails (last two columns), which are about half as big for wage changes.
What remains is the question of what happens to the wages of workers that stay
at the same firm. We therefore further restrict the sample to those workers that work
at least 50 weeks for the same employer in two consecutive years.23 The second set
of new results is in rows 3 and 6: the cyclicality regressions for average daily wages
for those workers who work at the same firm. The remarkable result is that even for
those, we observe the same qualitative pattern of cyclicality of wage changes. By and
large, these results strongly indicate that the cyclicality results are driven by changes
in wages, and not by hours, even for full-time workers.

5

Introducing Insurance

We now turn to various sources of insurance available and gauge the extent to which
they are able to mitigate downside risk over the business cycle.
23

The sample of full-time female workers that do not switch firms contains about 61% of women
(who make up about 40% of the observations) that contribute to the measures of earnings changes
for women. The corresponding figures are 80% of individuals and 65% of observations for males.

22

Table III: Cyclicality of Earnings Growth Moments: Actual vs. Synthetic Households
L9010
Actual households
Synthetic households:
Fully random match
Random | spouses’ ages
Random | age and educ.
Actual Households
Synthetic households:
Fully random match
Random | spouses’ ages
Random | age and educ.
Actual households
Synthetic households:
Fully random match
Random | spouses’ ages
Random | age and educ.

Kelley
L9050
United States
1.91*** 0.81***

0.04
0.09
–0.04
–0.01

L5010
–0.78***

1.33*** 0.64*** –0.55***
1.61*** 0.71*** –0.75***
1.59*** 0.72*** –0.73***
Sweden
2.24***
0.50*** –0.52*

–0.02

–0.21*** 1.72*** 0.31***
–0.20*** 1.76*** 0.32***
0.02
1.82*** 0.46***
Germany (SOEP)
–1.31*** 1.88** –0.05

–0.52***
–0.53***
–0.43***

–0.99*** 1.28***
–1.15*** 1.02**
–1.19*** 1.01**

–0.87***
–0.89***
–0.91***

–0.12
–0.25
–0.28

–1.26***

Note: See notes for Table I. The parameter for the synthetic couples is the
mean over 250 bootstrap repetitions. The regression for Sweden with education
starts in 1991.

5.1

Within-Family Insurance

In the previous section, we have shown that individual earnings risk over the business cycle is captured by higher-order moments. While it is important to understand
the underlying nature of labor income risk and the systematic differences across groups,
most of our samples are composed of individuals in cohabitation.24 Assuming pooling
of resources within the household, the relevant income measure for many economic decisions is the joint labor income in the household, not individual incomes. We therefore
shift our attention to joint labor earnings at the household level in order to shed light
on the role of informal insurance mechanisms within the household. As mentioned
earlier, it is not possible to link individuals in SIAB, so for the household-level analysis
of Germany we rely on SOEP data instead.
24

Only 12% of our benchmark individual sample in the United States lives in a single-person
household.

23

Several mechanisms that are potentially relevant for household income dynamics
are at work simultaneously. An active insurance channel against income losses of one
earner is spousal labor supply adjustments, both along the intensive and extensive
margins—sometimes referred to as “added worker effect” (e.g., Blundell et al. (2016),
or Attanasio et al. (2005)). A passive insurance channel is simply the existence of two
income streams as opposed to one as opposed to one. Male labor income on average
constitute 71%, 60%, and 62% of household earnings in the United States, Sweden, and
Germany, respectively. Thus, for example, if male income dropped while his spouse’s
income stayed constant, we would see household income react less to aggregate changes
than individual earnings. However, to the degree that spouses work in same regions,
industries, or firms, and are exposed to the same cyclical income shocks, this channel
is unlikely to provide a significant among of insurance.
In order to assess the insurance provided within households, we consider the cyclicality of income for actual households in comparison to income changes for randomly
formed couples. Any endogenous response of spousal earnings is by construction not
existent for synthetic couples. To the extent that each spouse in actual households
endogenously respond to a shock to the other spouse’s income (i.e., a strong “added
worker effect”), we would see household income fluctuate less compared with that of
synthetic households.
We consider three sets of randomly formed couples. First, we randomly pair heads
and spouses for each t − 1 to t change. To each synthetic couple we apply the same
selection criteria as for the actual households. We next control for some characteristics
of the actual household formation, as sorting along those dimensions might in part
explain the higher cyclicality of actual household incomes. Thus, we make the synthetic couples more similar to actual households. Specifically, we control for age (seven
age groups) or for both age and education. Table III shows the regression coefficients
for each country and each randomization. Overall, in all three economies, earnings
of actual households are more cyclical than earnings of randomly paired couples, suggesting that there is no clear sign of insurance against cyclicality of individual incomes
provided at the household level.

5.2

Government: Taxes and Social Insurance Policy

Focusing on the household as the relevant unit, we analyze the effectiveness of social
policy in mitigating business-cycle risk in addition to any insurance arrangements made
within households. We evaluate the total insurance effect of the tax and transfer system
24

by analyzing the cyclicality of post-government earnings as compared to household
gross earnings. In order to gain insights into the effectiveness of different policies, we
then evaluate the relative importance of several subcomponents of transfers using the
empirical tools employed in the previous analysis on artificial income measures that in
turn add certain transfers to household gross earnings.
The Overall Effect of the Tax and Transfer System
We begin with a brief discussion on the overall effect of the government, comparing
the cyclicality of pre- and post-government measures of household earnings listed in
rows 1 and 2 of Table IV. Figures 6 and 7 visualize the findings. We find that the
tax schedule and social insurance policy are important sources of insurance against
aggregate fluctuations in all three economies, with very similar overall effects.
Motivated by the considerations from the above sections, we directly consider the
reactions of the upper and lower tails of income changes. In all three economies, downside risk is mitigated successfully by the tax and transfer system. In both the United
States and Germany, the lower tail of post-government earnings changes is unresponsive
to the business cycle–while significantly countercyclical for pre-government earnings.
In Sweden, considering the point estimates, lower tail countercyclicality appears to be
dampened but is still statistically significant (from a point estimate of –0.52 to –0.38).
Considering the cyclicality of the upper tail reveals differences between the countries. In Germany, it is unresponsive to the cycle for both pre- and post-government
earnings. While both the US and Sweden display procyclicality in the L9050 of pregovernment earnings changes, the L9050 of post-government earnings changes is acyclical in Sweden, but still procyclical in the United States. The different reactions of the
tails translate into procyclical overall dispersion of post-government earnings changes
in the US (with a t-statistic of 1.57) and countercyclical dispersion in Sweden. Taken
together, the reaction of overall dispersion and tails results in procyclicality of Kelley’s
skewness measure for both countries, although the procyclicality is much smaller for
post- than for pre-government earnings.
To sum up, the analysis suggests that asymmetric risk in recessions is mitigated,
though not completely eliminated, by taxes and transfers. In all countries, the tax and
transfer system plays an important role at insuring away downside risk. In Sweden,
an additional effect is lowered upside risk in expansions.

25

Figure 6: Standard Deviation and Skewness of Short-Run Earnings Growth: United
States, Germany (SOEP), and Sweden
(a) United States, Std. Dev.

(b) United States, Kelley skewness

(c) Sweden, Std. Dev.

(d) Sweden, Kelley skewness

(e) Germany, Std. Dev.

(f) Germany, Kelley skewness

Note: See notes to Figure 2

26

Figure 7: Tails of Short-Run Earnings Growth: United States, Germany (SOEP), and
Sweden
(a) United States, Upper Tail

(b) United States, Lower Tail

(c) Sweden, Upper Tail

(d) Sweden, Lower Tail

(e) Germany, Upper Tail

(f) Germany, Lower Tail

Note: See notes to Figure 2

27

Table IV: Business Cycle Variation in Household Income Change Distribution
L9010

Pre-Gov
Post-Gov
Pre-Gov
Post-Gov
Post-Gov
Post-Gov

Kelley
L9050
United States
0.04
1.91***
0.81***
(0.15)
(6.57)
(5.93)
0.34
1.09***
0.55***
(1.57)
(3.40)
(3.20)
Sweden
–0.02
2.24***
0.50***
(–0.08)
(3.33)
(4.94)
–0.41*
0.94**
–0.03
(–2.00)
(2.38)
(–0.44)
Germany (SOEP)
–1.31*** 1.88**
–0.05
(–3.60)
(2.68)
(–0.18)
–0.18
0.66
0.07
(–1.09)
(0.85)
(0.32)

L5010
–0.78***
(–3.78)
–0.21
(–1.43)
–0.52*
(–2.00)
–0.38**
(–2.33)
–1.26***

(–4.26)

–0.25

(–1.28)

Note: See notes for Table I.

Components of Government Social Insurance
The measure of post-government earnings used so far lumps many different transfers
received and taxes paid by households. While this measure is appropriate for assessing
the overall effect of the tax and transfer system, it is not as well suited for understanding
the success of different social policies that specifically aim at mitigating downside risk
or aiding low-income families, who can be expected to be especially vulnerable in
recessionary periods. Therefore, we now consider different types of transfers separately.
We consider three main groups of transfers that are comparable across countries
and for each country are consistently measured over time. The groups are (1) labormarket-related policies, (2) aid to low-income families, and (3) pension payments.25
25

The components are measured as follows.
“Labor-market-related policies” in all three data sets are unemployment benefits; in LINDA additionally labor market programs; in PSID additionally workers’ compensation.
“Aid to low-income families”: LINDA: family support, housing support, cash transfers from the
public (no private transfers); SOEP: subsistence allowance, unemployment assistance (before 2005),
unemployment benefits II (since 2005); PSID: Supplemental Security Income; Aid to Families

with Dependent Children (AFDC); Food Stamps; Other Welfare.

28

Labor-market-related policies mainly consist of unemployment benefit payments. This
component of social insurance policy is of particular importance for the mitigation of
increased downside household earnings risk in recessions, if the nature of downside risk
is (temporary) job loss of household head or spouse.
The second component considered, aid to low-income families, consists of several
measures of social insurance policies specifically aimed at at-risk households. The relevance of this type of transfer can therefore be expected to matter most for low-income
households who have a higher likelihood of satisfying at-risk criteria in the course of
a recession. The third component, pension payments, is not directly connected to
business-cycle considerations. It can still play a relevant role for household members
near or at retirement age, who may take up pension payments instead of unemployment
payments if they decide to leave the labor market upon job loss.
The results of the cyclicality analysis are listed in Table V. As for the estimates of
total taxes and transfers, we compare the coefficients to the ones from the household
gross earnings analysis in the first row of each panel in Table IV.26 The estimates
suggest that out of the three groups of transfers, only labor-market-related transfers
(which have unemployment benefits as the main component) play a role in the reduction
of downside risk. However, the lower tail remains significantly cyclical in all three
countries, which is indicative of a major role played by the tax system (in combination
with the transfers). The other two components of transfers do not have any impact on
cyclicality as measured by our cyclicality regressions: for all three economies, the point
estimates when adding aid to low-income families or pensions are almost identical to
the ones for gross earnings.
In Germany, we additionally look at individual-level incomes in our larger sample
based on the SIAB database. Besides individual earnings, SIAB also contains information on unemployment benefits at the individual level. Table VI shows results for
individual-level regressions for male and female earnings separately, when unemployment benefits are excluded (rows 1 and 3) and included (2 and 4). These individual
level results line up well with the household level analysis conducted using SOEP data;
labor market transfers has some, but limited, effect in mitigating the cyclicality. To“pension payments: LINDA: (old-age) pensions; SOEP: combined old-age, disability, civil service,
and company pensions; PSID: combined (old-age) social security and disability (OASI).
26
Recall that in order to be in the year t base sample for the analysis, the lowest considered income
measure of a household needs to be above the income threshold for that year. This way, we ensure
that the sample is stable at the lower end of the distribution and that the results are not driven by
low-income households entering the sample for one type of transfer but not for another type.

29

Table V: Cyclicality of Household Earnings: Transfers Added Separately
L9010
+ Labor transfers
+ Aid to low-income
+ Pensions
+ Labor transfers
+ Aid to low-income
+ Pensions

0.23
(1.12)
0.04
(0.19)
0.04
(0.20)
–0.22
(–1.23)
–0.07
(–0.38)
–0.07
(–0.43)

+ Labor transfers

–1.09***
(–2.96)
+ Aid to low-income –1.32***
(–3.82)
+ Pensions
–1.21***
(–3.30)

Kelley
L9050
United States
1.56***
0.73***
(5.73)
(4.84)
1.86***
0.80***
(6.09)
(6.25)
1.69***
0.73***
(5.52)
(5.60)
Sweden
1.14***
0.13*
(4.23)
(2.04)
2.11***
0.42***
(3.72)
(4.51)
2.34***
0.48***
(3.55)
(4.50)
Germany (SOEP)
1.34**
–0.13
(2.50)
(–0.60)
1.66**
–0.11
(2.40)
(–0.47)
1.80*** –0.04
(3.10)
(–0.18)

L5010
-0.50***
(-3.33)
-0.75***
(-3.66)
-0.68***
(-3.28)
–0.35**
(–2.58)
–0.49**
(–2.47)
–0.55**
(–2.68)
–0.96***
(–3.65)
–1.21***
(–4.08)
–1.17***
(–4.58)

Note: See notes for Table I.

gether with the household-level analysis, this suggests that the German tax system
(or interaction between taxes and transfers) is a primary reason for post-government
earnings being acyclical.

6

Welfare Analysis

In this section, we quantitatively investigate how successful government policy is in
insuring households against business-cycle fluctuations of earnings risk—and how much
households value this insurance. For that purpose, we estimate income processes for
pre-government household labor income and, separately, for post-government household income. The process is specified flexibly as a mixture of normals with time-varying
moments to allow for cyclical higher-order risk.
30

Table VI: Cyclicality of Individual Earnings Including Unemployment Benefits in Germany (SIAB)
L9010
Male earnings
0.11
(0.26)
+Unempl. benefits
0.15
(0.34)
Female earnings
0.46
(0.60)
+ Unempl. benefits 0.50
(0.67)

Kelley
5.71***
(5.32)
5.12***
(5.24)
2.69*
(1.92)
2.43*
(1.82)

L9050
0.97***
(2.93)
0.84**
(2.61)
0.89
(1.26)
0.82
(1.22)

L5010
–0.86***
(–4.40)
–0.70***
(–4.01)
–0.44*
(–1.74)
–0.32
(–1.43)

Note: See notes for Table I. Differences between estimates in Table I are due
to regressions starting in 1981 instead of 1976.

Our estimation is based on earnings data, so we use a model to simulate the consumption profiles of households facing either pre- or post-government income streams.
Specifically, we use a variant of the partial insurance model by Heathcote et al. (2014)
to quantify the welfare gains. In the model, there is full insurance against transitory
shocks and partial insurance against permanent shocks to income. We assume that
there is no additional insurance against permanent shocks to post-government household income, and then calculate the corresponding degree of partial insurance against
pre-government household income shocks. We also reinterpret this measure in terms
of consumption-equivalent variation.
We pursue this analysis for Sweden only, because we need both pre- and postgovernment income to be captured well by the specific process we use in the estimation
and which we feed into the model. Although the income process we choose is quite
rich and flexible, the estimated models for Germany and Sweden fail to match some
of the higher-order moments we target. Without a very good fit, the welfare effects
we measure will be affected by the relative differences in the fit of the models to preand post-government household income moments. Of course, the same point applies
to Sweden as well, but the fit is significantly better than the other two countries giving
us some confidence that the measured welfare figures are meaningful. Before going to
the results of the model-based analysis in Section 6.2, the next subsection discusses
the estimation of the income process.

31

6.1

Estimation of Pre- and Post-Government Income

Let Yt denote household earnings in period t, and define yt ≡ log Yt . We assume yt
evolves according to the following process (for expositional reasons, we do not indicate
pre- and post-government):
yt = zt + ξt

(3)

zt = zt−1 + ζt
2
where ξt is an iid transitory shock, drawn from a mixture of two normals N (µ̄ξ , σξ,i
),

ξ
i =1,2, with probabilities pξ,i and 1−pξ,i , respectively, µ̄ξ is chosen such that E e = 1,
and ζt denotes a permanent shock with time-varying and business-cycle-dependent
distribution, modeled as in McKay (2014). This specification allows the process to
match excess kurtosis found in the data.
2
In particular, ζt follows a mixture of three normals N (µ̄ζ,t + µζ,i − φi xt , σζ,i
), with
P3
respective probability pζ,i , i = 1, 2, 3, where
i=1 pζ,i = 1, xt is standardized log
GDP growth, and µ̄ζ,t is chosen such that E(eζ ) = 1. We use GDP growth as the
empirical measure of aggregate fluctuations in order to make the quantitative results
easily interpretable in relation to the empirical estimates shown in Section 4. The
parameters φi determine how much of aggregate risk is transmitted to idiosyncratic
earnings risk and are estimated alongside the other parameters that characterize the
distributions of the shocks.

We estimate the set of parameters
χ = (σξ,1 , σξ,2 , pξ,1 , µζ,2 , µζ,3 , σζ,1 , σζ,2 , pζ,1 , pζ,2 , φ2 , φ3 )
by simulated method of moments (SMM).27 We target the time series of L9050 and
L5010 of the 1-, 3-, and 5-year earnings change distributions, the average of the CrowSiddiqui (1967) measure of kurtosis of 1-, 3-, and 5-year changes,28 as well as the age
profile of the cross-sectional variance from ages 25 to 60. Table E.1 in Appendix E
shows the parameter estimates for pre- and post-government income. Appendix E
includes the comparison between the simulated moments at these parameters and the
empirical moments as well as further details of the estimation.
27

For identification purposes, we impose µζ,2 ≥ 0, µζ,3 ≤ 0, and φ1 = 0. With this assumption,
the time-varying means of the three mixtures will control the center, right tail, and left tail of the
distribution of ζ, respectively. For practical purposes, we further assume pζ,2 = pζ,3 , σζ,2 = σζ,3 .
28
The Crow-Siddiqui measure is a robust percentile-based measure of kurtosis (see appendix E).

32

6.2

Quantitative Model

Shocks differ in their nature: some shocks are insurable, while others are not. In
order to assess the welfare implications of the existing tax and transfer system, we map
the estimated earnings process into a quantitative framework. Heathcote et al. (2014)
set up a model populated by a continuum of islands, each of which is in turn populated
by a continuum of agents. Two types of shocks exist in their economy: one common to
all members of an island and the other specific to an individual. An island refers to a
group of agents that are described by the same history of uninsurable shocks. Islands
can be thought of as a network of family members, who perfectly share the risks faced
by each individual. If, for example, all family members work in the same industry and
live in the same region, there will be shocks that hit every member equally and hence
cannot be insured within the family network.
Importantly for the quantitative analysis, there is no need to define empirical counterparts to the model islands. Given some assumptions on the market structure, outlined below, Heathcote et al. (2014) show the existence of a non-trade equilibrium in
the spirit of Constantinides and Duffie (1996). In this equilibrium, there is no asset
trade across islands, while agents within an island insure themselves perfectly against
the individual-specific shocks. This reflects insurable (within-island) and uninsurable
(island-level) shocks. A major advantage of their framework is that it allows for an
analytical solution of an incomplete markets model. Crucially for us, this result does
not depend on any distributional assumption of the shocks.
Model Structure
We employ a version of their model in which we abstract from endogenous labor
supply. We also stay agnostic about the specific functional form of the tax and transfer
system. Instead, we confront the model agents with the estimated pre-government
earnings process and derive the implied consumption profile faced by expected utility
maximizers, whose only choice (on top of engaging in asset trade) is consumption. We
then consider the alternative world in which agents face the estimated post-government
earnings process and derive their consumption profiles. Because some of the permanent
shocks are insured while others are not, we need to slightly adjust notation of the
income process.

33

Specifically, income is assumed to follow
yt = αt + εt
αt = αt−1 + ωt
εt = κt + θt
κt = κt−1 + ηt

(4)

θt ∼ Fθ,t
ηt ∼ Fη,t
ωt ∼ Fω,t
where αt is the "island-specific" component, which is common to a continuum of agents,
and εt is the "individual" component, which in turn has a permanent part κt and a
transitory part θt .
Agents live finite lives. Each period a mass (1 − δ) of newborns enters the economy
with age 0. The probability of survival from age a to age a + 1 is constant at δ. Newborn agents maximize discounted lifetime utility. For the per period utility function,
we use log utility: u (ct ) = log (ct ).
Age 0 agents entering in year τ hold zero financial wealth and are allocated to
an island of agents that then share the same sequence of uninsurable shocks {ωt }∞
t=τ .
Within islands, agents can trade a full set of state-contingent claims for individualspecific shocks. Between-island trading contracts are non-existent.
In equilibrium, log consumption and consumption change are given by29
Z
a
log ct (xt , εt ) = αt + log exp (εt ) dFε,t
,
R
R


exp (ηt ) dFη,t exp (θt ) dFθ,t
R
∆ log ct = ωt + log
.
exp (θt−1 ) dFθ,t−1

(5)
(6)

Note that the uninsurable shock ωt translates one for one to consumption. The
individual realizations of the two insurable shocks, however, do not affect consumption:
given perfect risk-sharing, all members of an island consume the mean realization of
these shocks.
29

The derivation of consumption outlined in Heathcote et al. (2014) carries over one to one to our
simplified version of their model, which abstracts from the tax function and endogenous labor supply.

34

Distribution of Shocks
In order to use the model framework for our analysis, we need to translate the estimated earnings process (3) into the process specified in (4). The transitory component
ξt in (3) directly translates into θt from (4). Permanent earnings changes, ζt , in (3) are
drawn from a mixture of three normal distributions. In specification (4), the overall
permanent earnings change is given by (ωt + ηt ) , the insurable (individual-level) and
the uninsurable (island-level) part. We assume that both types of permanent shocks
are drawn from time-varying mixture distributions. We scale the estimated parameters
of the permanent shocks such that the variance of ηt (ωt ) is equal to a fraction λ (1-λ)
2
)
of the overall variance of the permanent shock ζ. Specifically, ηt ∼ N (λ1/2 µζ,i,t , λσζ,i
1/2
2
with probability pζ,i for i =1,2,3 and ωt ∼ N ((1 − λ) µζ,i,t , (1 − λ) σζ,i
) with probability pζ,i .
This scaling implies that the first three moments of ηt and ωt are given by E [ηt ] =
λ E [ζt ], var [ηt ] = λvar [ζt ], and skew [ηt ] = skew [ζt ] (for ω replace λ with 1 − λ);
see Appendix F for further details.30 In this setup, λ is a measure of the degree of
partial insurance against permanent shocks: it measures the share of the total variance
of permanent shocks that is accounted for by the insurable component.
1/2

6.3

Quantitative Results

For a given degree of partial insurance, we simulate income and consumption profiles
for a large number of agents. Agent i’s expected discounted lifetime utility when facing
the pre- or post-government income streams is given by
Uij



cji,a

j

λ




a

=

X

(βδ)a−1 u cji,a λj



,

a

for j = pre, post, and cji,a is consumption of agent i at age a when facing income
stream j given that 
the degree of partial insurance is λj . Utilitarian welfare is given

P
by W j (λj ) = i Uij cji,a (λj ) a .
Now consider the following experiment. Agents face either the pre- or the postgovernment income process. We assume that permanent shocks to post-government
income translate one for one into consumption changes; that is there is no insurance
against permanent shocks: λpost = 0. This assumption is motivated by empirical
results in Blundell et al. (2016), who find that the degree of partial insurance on top of
30

We then adjust the cross-sectional mean, such that E [exp (η)] = E [exp (ω)] = 1.

35

government and family transfers is very close to zero. Now, we search for the degree of
partial insurance against permanent shocks to the pre-government income process such
that the agents are indifferent ex ante between the post-government income process
with λpost = 0 and the pre-government process with λpre > 0. The term λpre can thus
be interpreted as the degree of partial insurance provided by the government under
the assumption that there is no additional partial insurance. For the per-period utility
function, we choose log utility.
We focus on the case of Sweden because for both the United States and Germany,
the income process does not fit the data as well (because of more noise in the measure of
the moments, resulting from the smaller sample size), and thus welfare implications can
hardly be derived from the estimated processes. We find λpre = 0.43, which means that
the existing tax and transfer schedule in Sweden corresponds to insuring households
against 43% of permanent shocks to household labor income, as shown in Table VII.
In order to assess the magnitude of this degree of partial insurance in terms of
welfare, we use the model to calculate the consumption equivalent variation (CEV)
that makes agents in the world with the pre-government income stream and no partial
insurance indifferent to the world with the pre-government income stream and partial
insurance of the size given by λpre . The 43% partial insurance translates into a CEV of
14.3% when assuming log utility. Hence, the existing tax and transfer system provides
sizable insurance. Note that this calculation abstracts from any first-order effects: both
the level effect of the tax and transfer system on average income and the variation in
average income changes are taken out of the equation.
When interpreting these results, it is important to notice that government policy
not only reduces the cyclicality of shocks but also reduces the overall level of crosssectional dispersion. In order to filter out the effect of this change of “initial variance,”
we impose in a second run of the same experiment that the cross-sectional variance
at age 25 (when agents are born in the model) is the same as for the pre-government
process. As expected, this step takes away some of what is measured as insurance
before. After adjusting the level of income variance at age 25, we get λpre = 0.06. The
overall welfare gain of moving from the pre- to the post-government income stream
adjusted to the same initial variance is 6%, which translates into a CEV of about
1.3%.
Given this already sizable insurance, what is the scope of additional government
policy as a means of insurance against cyclical risk? In order to approach this question,
we consider the same experiment for a counterfactual income process. Assume that
36

on top of what the government already does, cyclicality is completely shut down for
the post-government income stream. For this experiment, we set φ2 = φ3 = 0, thus
imposing the distribution of idiosyncratic income changes that corresponds to periods
of average GDP growth. This implies an even stronger degree of insurance of about
64% (or 27% when adjusting for initial variance). Considering the CEV connected to
those insurance parameters, the scope of additional insurance is sizable: through the
lens of the model, when adjusting for initial variance effects, an additional welfare gain
of about 4.6% is possible, abstracting from first-order effects.
Table VII: Welfare Gains of the Tax and Transfer System
Scenario
Pre to Post
Pre to Post*

λpre CEV
43% 14.26%
64% 17.53%

λpre (adjustment)
6%
27%

CEV (adjustment)
1.27%
5.91%

Note: The term λpre denotes the degree of partial insurance against permanent shocks;
the per-period utility function is log (c). * indicates that the cyclicality of the permanent
shocks is shut down. See text for details on the scenarios. The CEV columns denote
the corresponding consumption equivalent variation associated with the change from the
world with the pre-government income stream and no partial insurance to a world with
the pre-government income stream and partial insurance of the size given by λpre .

Digging deeper into the structure of the model economy, Figure 8 shows moments
of the cross-sectional consumption distribution for the cohort that lives through the
Swedish macroeconomic history. Considering the variance that accumulates over time,
it is apparent that in the two recessions of the early 1990s and the late 2000s the
distribution becomes more dispersed. If no government insurance had been available
for Swedish households, this increase would have been very strong. During the first
three years of the 1990s, the distribution widens by more than in the whole preceding
decade. Considering the accumulated consumption variance that is realized given the
actual post-government income stream, this increase is mitigated, as can be seen even
more directly by considering the cross-sectional variance when the post-government
income stream is adjusted for the initial variance difference.
In panel b of Figure 8, we see how the asymmetric cyclical dynamics of income
changes translates into asymmetry of the cross-sectional consumption distribution. The
clear pattern is that the steep increases of dispersion do not come in a symmetric way.
Instead we see that the distribution clearly becomes more left-skewed as measured by
Kelley skewness. Zooming in on the tails, L9050 and L5010, establishes that the steep
37

Figure 8: Moments of Cross-Sectional Consumption Distribution
(a) Variance

(b) Kelley skewness

(c) Lower Tail

(d) Upper Tail

Note: Each figure shows a moment of the simulated cross-sectional consumption distribution
for a cohort that lives through the Swedish macroeconomic history and faces, (i), the estimated
pre-government income process; (ii), the estimated post-government income process; (iii), the
post-government income process adjusted for initial variance; or, (iv), the post-government
income process that eliminates all cyclicality of the distribution of shocks.

increase of dispersion comes from the lower tail widening more in the two recessionary
periods as compared to the other time periods.
When the cyclicality of the post-government income process is shut down (φ2 =
φ3 = 0), the variance increases only mildly and does not change toward a negatively
skewed distribution in recessionary periods. These elements together explain the potential welfare gain of further reducing cyclicality.

38

7

Conclusion

This paper has studied how higher-order income risk varies over the business cycle,
as well as the extent to which such risks can be smoothed within households or with
government social insurance policies. To provide a broad perspective on these questions, we studied panel data on individuals and households from the United States,
Germany, and Sweden, covering more than three decades of data for each country.
We find that the underlying variation in higher-order risk is remarkably similar across
these countries that differ in many details of their labor markets. In particular, in all
three countries, the variance of earnings shocks is almost entirely constant over the
business cycle, whereas the skewness of these shocks becomes much more negative in
recessions.
Government-provided insurance, in the form of unemployment insurance, aid to
low-income households, social security benefits, among other taxes and transfers, play
an important role in reducing the cyclicality of downside risk in all three countries.
Relative to this social insurance, additional risk-sharing within the household is a less
important source of insurance. Through the lens of a structural model with partial
insurance against permanent income shocks, the degree of overall insurance provided
by the existing tax and transfer system amounts to 14% in consumption-equivalent
terms in Sweden (for which we are able to perform this calculation). After isolating
the gains from a lower initial variance at age 25, the insurance gain amounts to about
1.3%. However, the remaining risk in post-government household-level income is still
substantial: individuals are willing to pay 4.6% of their consumption to completely
eliminate procyclical fluctuations in skewness.

39

References
Angelopoulos, K., Lazarakis, S. and Malley, J. (2018). Time variation in
labour income risk in Great Britain. Working paper, University of Glasgow.
Attanasio, O., Low, H. and Sanchez-Marcos, V. (2005). Female labor supply
as insurance against idiosyncratic risk. 3.
Bayer, C. and Juessen, F. (2012). The life-cycle and the business-cycle of wage risk
- cross-country comparisons. Economics Letters, 117 (3), 831 – 833.
Blundell, R., Pistaferri, L. and Saporta-Eksten, I. (2016). Consumption inequality and family labor supply. American Economic Review, 106 (2), 387–435.
Busch, C. and Ludwig, A. (2017). Higher-order income risk over the business cycle:
A parametric approach.
Card, D., Heining, J. and Kline, P. (2013). Workplace Heterogeneity and the Rise
of West German Wage Inequality. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128 (3),
967–1015.
Constantinides, G. M. and Duffie, D. (1996). Asset pricing with heterogeneous
consumers. The Journal of Political Economy, 104 (2), 219–240.
— and Ghosh, A. (2014). Asset Pricing with Countercyclical Household Consumption
Risk. Working paper, University of Chicago.
Crow, E. L. and Siddiqui, M. M. (1967). Robust estimation of location. Journal of
the American Statistical Association, 62 (318), 353–389.
Cunha, F., Heckman, J. and Navarro, S. (2005). Separating uncertainty from
heterogeneity in life cycle earnings. Oxford Economic Papers, 57 (2), 191–261.
Daly, M., Hryshko, D. and Manovskii, I. (2014). Reconciling estimates of earnings
processes in growth rates and levels, manuscript.
Dustmann, C., Ludsteck, J. and Schönberg, U. (2009). Revisiting the german
wage structure. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124 (2), 843–881.
Fitzenberger, B., Osikominu, A. and Völter, R. (2006). Imputation rules
to improve the education variable in the IAB employment subsample. Schmollers
Jahrbuch. Zeitschrift für Wirtschafts- und Sozialwissenschaften, Jg. 126.
40

Fuchs-Schündeln, N., Krueger, D. and Sommer, M. (2010). Inequality trends
for germany in the last two decades: A tale of two countries. Review of Economic
Dynamics, 13 (1), 103–132.
Golosov, M., Troshkin, M. and Tsyvinski, A. (2016). Redistribution and social
insurance. American Economic Review, 106 (2), 359–386.
Guvenen, F. (2007). Learning your earning: Are labor income shocks really very
persistent? American Economic Review, 97 (3), 687–712.
— (2011). Macroeconomics with heterogeneity: A practical guide. Federal Reserve
Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly, 97 (3), 255–326.
—, Ozkan, S. and Song, J. (2014). The Nature of Countercyclical Income Risk.
Journal of Political Economy, 122 (3), 621–660.
— and Smith, A. A. (2014). Inferring Labor Income Risk and Partial Insurance from
Economic Choices. Econometrica, 82 (6), 2085–2129.
Heathcote, J., Storesletten, K. and Violante, G. L. (2014). Consumption and
labor supply with partial insurance: An analytical framework. American Economic
Review.
Hoffman, E. and Malacrino, D. (2016). Employment Time and the Cyclicality of
Earnings Growth. Tech. rep., Department of Economics, Stanford University.
Kaplan, G., Moll, B. and Violante, G. L. (2016). Monetary Policy According to
HANK. Working paper, Princeton University.
Mankiw, N. G. (1986). The equity premium and the concentration of aggregate
shocks. Journal of Financial Economics, 17 (1), 211–219.
McKay, A. (2014). Time-Varying Idiosyncratic Risk and Aggregate Consumption Dynamics. Working paper, Boston University.
OECD (2016). Economic policy reforms 2016: Going for growth interim report. OECD
Publishing.
Pistaferri, L. (2001). Superior information, income shocks and the permanent income hypothesis. Review of Economics and Statistics, 83 (3), 465–476.

41

Schmidt, L. D. W. (2016). Climbing and Falling Off the Ladder: Asset Pricing
Implications of Labor Market Event Risk. Working paper, University of Chicago.
Shin, D. and Solon, G. (2011). Trends in men’s earnings volatility: What does the
panel study of income dynamics show?,. Journal of Public Economics, 95 (7-8),
973–982.
Skedinger, P. (2007). The Design and Effects of Collectively Agreed Minimum
Wages: Evidence from Sweden. Working Paper Series 700, Research Institute of
Industrial Economics.
Storesletten, K., Telmer, C. I. and Yaron, A. (2004). Cyclical dynamics in
idiosyncratic labor market risk. Journal of Political Economy, 112 (3), 695–717.
vom Berge, P., Burghardt, A. and Trenkle, S. (2013). Sample-of-IntegratedLabour-Market-Biographies Regional-File 1975-2010 (SIAB-R 7510). Tech. rep., Research Data Centre (FDZ) of the German Federal Employment Agency (BA) at the
Institute for Employment Research (IAB).

42

Appendices
A

Data Appendix

This appendix briefly describes the variables used for each of the data sets and lists
the numbers of observations after the sample selection steps.

A.1

PSID

Variables
Demographic and Socioeconomic
Head and Relationship to Head. We identify current heads and spouses as those
individuals within the family unit with Sequence Number equal to 1 and 2, respectively. In the PSID, the man is labelled as the household head and the woman as his
spouse. Only when the household is headed by a woman alone is she considered the
head. If the family is a split-off family from a sampled family, then a new head is
selected.
Age. The age variable recorded in the PSID survey does not necessarily increase by
1 from one year to the next. This may be perfectly correct, since the survey date
changes every year. For example, an individual can report being 20 years old in 1990,
20 in 1991, and 22 in 1992. We thus create a consistent age variable by taking the age
reported in the first year that the individual appears in the survey and add 1 to this
variable in each subsequent year.
Education Level. In the PSID, the education variable is not reported every year and
it is sometimes inconsistent. To deal with this problem, we use the highest education
level that an individual ever reports as the education variable for each year. Since our
sample contains only individuals that are at least 25 years old, this procedure does not
affect our education variable in a major way.

Income
Individual Male Wages and Salaries. This is the variable used for individual income in the benchmark case. It is the answer to the question: How much did (Head)
earn altogether from wages or salaries in year t-1, that is, before anything was deducted for taxes or other things? This is the most consistent earnings variable over
43

time reported in the PSID, as it has not suffered any redefinitions or change in subcomponents.31
Individual Male Labor Earnings. Annual Total Labor Income includes all income from wages and salaries, commissions, bonuses, overtime and the labor part of
self-employment (farm and business income). Self-employment in PSID is split into
asset and labor parts using a 50-50 rule in most cases. Because this last component has
been inconsistent over time,32 we subtract the labor part of business and farm income
before 1993.
Individual Female Labor Earnings. There is no corresponding Wages and Salaries
variable for spouses. We use Wife Total Labor Income and follow a similar procedure
as in the case of heads.
Annual Hours. For heads and wives, annual hours is defined as the sum of annual
hours worked on main job, extra jobs, and overtime. It is computed using usual hours
of work per week times the number of actual weeks worked in the last year.
Pre-Government Household Labor Earnings. Head and wife labor earnings.
Post-Government Household Labor Earnings. Pre-government household earnings minus taxes plus public transfers, as defined below.
Taxes. The PSID reports own estimates for total taxes until 1991. For the remaining
years, we estimate taxes using TAXSIM.
Public Transfers. Transfers are considered at the family unit level whenever possible. We group social and welfare programs into three broad categories. Due to changes
in the PSID design, the specific definition of each program is different every year. We
give an overview below and leave the specific replication details for the online Data
Appendix.

Transfers
We refer to Table ?? in the main text for a description of the three groups of programs
considered, as well as their subcomponents. In the PSID, obtaining an annual amount
31

See Shin and Solon (2011) for a comparison of PSID male earnings variables in inequality analyses.
In particular, total labor earnings included the labor parts of farm and business income up to
the 1993 survey but not in subsequent waves.
32

44

of each type of benefits is almost wave-specific. Every few survey years, the level of
aggregation within the family unit and across welfare programs is different for at least
one of our groups. To impose some common structure, we establish the following rules.
For survey years 1970-199333 and 2005-2011, the total annual amount of each program is reported for the head, spouse, and others in the family unit. Occasionally,
the amount appears combined for several or all members.34 Because in those cases it
is impossible to identify separate recipiency of each member, we consider the benefit
amount of the whole family. That is, we add up all available information for all family
members, whether combined or separately reported.
In survey years 1994-2003, most benefits (except Food Stamps and OASDI) are
reported separately for the head and the spouse only. The way amounts are reported
changes as well. First, the reported amount ($X) received is asked. Second, the
frequency of that amount ($X per year, per month, per week, etc.) is specified. We
convert all amounts to a common frequency by constructing a monthly amount $x
using these time values. Finally, the head and spouse are asked during which months
the benefit was received. The final annual recipiency of transfers is then obtained by
multiplying $x by the number of months this benefit was received. For Food Stamps
and OASDI, we follow the rules described for the other waves.
Detailed Sample Selection
We start with an initial sample of 584,392 SRC individuals interviewed between 1976
and 2011. We then impose the next criteria every year. The number of individuals kept
at each stage in the sample selection is listed in Table A.1. Previous to this selection
process, we have cleaned the raw data and corrected duplicates and inconsistencies
(for example, zero working hours with positive labor income). We also require that
the individuals have non top-coded observations in income.
1. The individual must be from the original main PSID sample (not from the Survey
of Economic Opportunities or Latino subsamples).
2. In the benchmark individual sample, we select male heads of family. In the reference household sample, we require at least two adult members in the unit and
33

Our main sample refers to survey years 1977-2011, but complementary results are provided for
the annual subsample of the PSID, that is, for 1970-1997. We drop the first two waves in all cases,
since benefits such as OASDI, UI, and WC are only reported for the family head and benefits such
as SSI are not reported at all.
34
This is always the case for Food Stamps.

45

that individuals had no significant changes in family composition. More specifically, we require that they responded either “no change” or “change in family
members other than the head or wife” to the question about family composition
changes.
3. The household must not have missing variables for the head or wife labor income,
or for education of the head. The individuals must not have missing income or
education themselves.
4. The individual must not have income observations that are outliers. An outlier
is defined as being in the top 1% of the corresponding year.
5. We require the income variable of analysis to be positive.
6. Household heads must be between 25 and 65 years old.
Table A.1: Number of Observations Kept in Each Step: PSID
SRC
Family Composition
Non-Missing y or College
Positive Income
Outliers
Age Selection
Final #Obs for transitory changes
Final #Obs for persistent changes

Male Heads
586,187
90,106
83,039
63,875
63,065
54,593
42,623
34,985

Households
586,187
75,202
69,443
58,551
57,262
50,102
38,171
30,985

All Females
586,187
110,711
97,990
54,214
53,257
45,330
33,687
27,269

Note: Table lists number of person-year, or household-year, observations in the three panels for the
sample from PSID.

A.2

LINDA

Variables

Demographic and Socioeconomic
Head and Relationship to Head. LINDA is compiled from the Income Register
based on filed tax reports and other registers. Statistics Sweden samples individuals
and then adds information for all family members, where family is defined for tax
purposes. This implies that there is no information about “head of households.” We
therefore define the head of a household as the sampled male.
46

Age. As defined by Statistics Sweden.
Education Level. LINDA contains information about education from 1991 and onward. An individual is assigned “college” education if he/she has at least three years
of university education.
Private/Public employment An individual is defined as as working in the public
sector, if he/she works in public administration, health care or education. LINDA
contains consistent comparable information for the years 1991 and onward. For the
years 1991-1992, we use SNI90 codes 72000-72003, 90000-93999, and >=96000 to define
public sector employment. For 1993-2006, we use SNI92 codes 64110-64202, 7300074110, 75000-92000, 92500-92530, and >=96000. For 2007-2010, we use SNI2007 codes
64110-64202, 73000-74110, 75000-92000, 92500-92530, and >=96000.

Income
For the years 1985-2010, we use the measures suggested by Statistics Sweden to be
comparable between years in LINDA. We construct comparable measures for the years
1979-1984.
Individual Labor Earnings. Labor earnings consist of wages and salaries, the part
of business income reported as labor income, and taxable compensation for sick leave
and parental leave.
Pre-Government Household Labor Earnings. Defined as the sum of individual
labor income within the family.
Post-Government Household Labor Earnings. Post-government earnings is calculated as pre-government earnings minus taxes plus public transfers.
Taxes. LINDA provides observations of total taxes paid by the individual. Since
taxes paid on capital income constitute a small part of total tax payments, and since
we cannot separate taxes on capital income from those on labor income, we assume
that all taxes are labor income taxes.
Public Transfers. LINDA provides observations of total public transfers at the individual level (Statistics Sweden has individualized transfers given to families) and at
the household level. We also consider three subcategories of transfer as listed below.

Transfers
Transfers in subcategories 1 and 3 are individual-level transfers. Transfers in subcategory 2 are family level transfers but have been individualized by Statistics Sweden.
47

For each subcategory, we take all transfers received by all members of the households.
• HH-level transfers subcategory 1 (labor market transfers): sum of unemployment
benefits received by all members of household.
• HH-level transfers subcategory 2 (family aid): sum of transfers to support families
received by all members of household.
• HH-level transfers subcategory 3 (pensions): sum of old-age pensions received by
all members of household.
Detailed Sample Selection
To be included in the individual sample, the individual has to be sampled and between
25 and 60 years old. A family is included in the household sample if the sampled
individual is a man between 25 and 60 years old and there are at least two members
ages 25-60 in the family.

A.3

SIAB

We use the scientific use file SIAB-R7510 provided by the Institute for Employment
Research (IAB). The SIAB data from which the scientific use file is constructed are a
2% random sample of all individuals covered by a data set called IEB. This data set
is from four different sources, which can be identified in the data. For construction of
our sample, we use earnings data stemming from BeH (employee history) and transfer
data from LeH (benefit recipient history). Records in BeH are based on mandatory
social security notifications from employers and hence cover individuals working in
employment subject to social security, which excludes civil servants, students, and
self-employed individuals. A new spell starts whenever there is a new notification,
which happens when a new employment relationship changes, an ongoing contract
is changed, or a new calendar year starts. BeH covers all workers subject to social
security contributions, which excludes civil servants, self-employed individuals and
students. For details on the data set, see vom Berge et al. (2013).
Variables

Demographic and Socioeconomic
Head and Relationship to Head. SIAB does not contain information on households. We use only individual-level data.
48

Age. Birth year is reported consistently in SIAB data.
Education Level. Each individual spell in SIAB contains information on the highest degree of formal education as reported by the employer. In order to construct a
consistent measure of education we apply imputation rules proposed by Fitzenberger
et al. (2006).
Private/Public Employment. An individual is defined as working in the public sector, if he/she works in public administration, health care or education. SIAB
contains consistent comparable information for all years of the sample. We use the
classification WZ93 as provided in the data, which aggregates 3-digit codes of the original WZ93 classification into 14 categories. The industry of an employer is registered
once a year and assigned to the worker spells of that year. This implies that for some
individual spells, there is no information on the industry. For each year, a worker is
assigned the industry from the longest spell in that year. We classify as public employment those in sectors 13 (3-digit WZ93 801-804, 851-853: Education, social, and
health-care facilities) and 14 (751-753, 990: public administration, social security).

Income
Individual Labor Earnings. We calculate annual earnings as the sum of total
earnings from all valid spells for each individual. As marginal employment spells were
not reported before 1999, we drop marginal employment in the years where they are
reported in order to obtain a time consistent measure. For the same reason, we drop
spells with a reported average daily wage rate below the highest marginal employment
threshold in the sample period, which is 14.15 euros (in 2003 euros). The available data
have two drawbacks: the structural break of the wage measure in 1984 and top-coding.
Structural Break in Wage Measure. Since 1984 the reported average daily wage
rate from an employment spell includes one-time payments. We correct for this structural break following a procedure based on Dustmann et al. (2009): we rank individuals
from 1976 to 1983 into 50 quintiles of the annual full-time wage distributions. Then we
fit locally weighted regressions of the wage growth rate from 1982 to 1983 on the quintiles in 1983 and the same for 1983 to 1984. We then define as the correction factor the
difference between the quintile-specific smoothed value of wage growth between 1984
and 1983. The underlying assumption is that wage growth should be higher from 1983
to 1984 because the wage measure includes one-time payments. In order to control
for overall wage growth differences, we subtract the average of the correction factor of
49

the second to 20th quintiles. The resulting percentile-specific correction factor is then
applied to wages in 1976-1983.
Imputation of Top-Coded Wages. Before aggregating earnings from all spells, we
correct full-time wage spells for the top-coding. We therefore follow Daly et al. (2014)
and fit a Pareto tail to the cross-sectional wage distribution. The Pareto distribution is
estimated separately for each year by age group and sex. We define seven age groups:
25-29, 30-34,...,55-60. As a starting point for the Pareto distribution, we choose the
60th percentile of the subgroup-specific distribution. As in Daly et al. (2014), we
draw one random number by individual, which we then apply to the annual specific
distributions when assigning a wage to the top-coded workers. We apply the imputation
method to the annual distribution of average full-time wages, and hence an individual
can be below the cutoff limit if, for example, from two full-time spells in a year only
one is top-coded. We therefore define as the top-coding limit the annual specific limit
minus 3 DM (1995 DM) as in Dustmann et al. (2009).

Transfers
In SIAB we observe consistently over time unemployment benefits at the individual
level.
Detailed Sample Selection
To be included in the sample, the individual has to be between 25 and 60 years old
and earn a gross income above 520*0.5*minimum wage. We drop all workers that have
at least one spell reported in East Germany.

A.4

SOEP

Variables

Demographic and Socioeconomic
Head and Relationship to Head. For each individual in the sample, SOEP reports
the relationship to the head of household in any given wave. Whenever there is a noncouple household, (that is no spouse is reported), the reported head is classified as
head. Whenever we observe a couple household and the reported head is a male, we
keep this; when the reported head is a female and the reported spouse is a male, we
reclassify the male to be head and the female to be spouse.
Age. The age is measured by subtracting the year of birth from the current year.
50

Education Level. The education variable used categorizes the obtained maximum
education level by ISCED 1997. An individual with category 6 is assigned “college”
education; an individual with categories 1-5 is assigned “non-college.” Category 6
includes a degree obtained from a university, from technical college, from a university
abroad, and a PhD. An individual still in school (category 0) is assigned a missing
value. For a small number of individuals, the described procedure yields inconsistencies
in the sense that for some year t, the assignment is “college” and some later year t+s
the assignment is “non-college”; in these cases, we assign “college” to the later year.

Income and Hours
Individual Labor Income. Labor earnings are calculated from individual labor
income components and include income from first job, secondary job, 13th and 14th
salary, Christmas bonus, holiday bonus, and profit sharing. For consistency with the
PSID measure, we assign 50% of income from self-employment to labor income.
Household-Level Labor Income. Defined as the sum of individual labor income
of head and spouse.
Annual Hours. SOEP measures the average actual weekly hours worked and the
numbers of months an individual worked. From these measures SOEP, provides a
constructed measure of annual hours worked of an individual.
Pre-Government Household Labor Earnings. Head and spouse labor earnings.
Post-Government Household Labor Earnings. Pre-government household earnings minus taxes plus public transfers, as defined below.
Taxes. SOEP provides estimates of total taxes at the household level.
Public Transfers. Transfers are considered at the family unit level and at the individual level. We group social and welfare programs into three broad categories as
listed below.

Transfers
Transfers are partly observed at the individual level and partly at the household level.
For each subcategory, we take all transfers received by all members of the households.
51

• HH-level transfers: we use transfers received by all individual household members in order to calculate measures that are consistent over time. For each
individual, total transfers are the sum of the following components: old-age
pensions, widow’s pensions, maternity benefit, student grants, unemployment
benefits, subsistence allowance, unemployment assistance (up to 2004); at the
hh-level we measure received child allowances and the total unemployment benefits II received by all household members (since 2005 replacing unemployment
assistance).
• HH-level transfers subcategory 1 (labor market transfers): sum of unemployment
benefits received by all members of household.
• HH-level transfers subcategory 2 (family aid): sum of subsistence allowance of
all members, + sum of unemployment assistance received by all members (up to
2004), + hh-level measure of unemployment benefits II (since 2005).
• HH-level transfers subcategory 3 (pensions): sum of old-age pensions received by
all members of household.
Sample Selection
In order to be in the initial sample for a year, the individual or household head must
be between ages 25 and 60 and live in West Germany. In order to have a consistent
sample, we drop the immigrant subsample and the high-income subsample. This gives
initial sample sizes of 87,582 individual-year observations for the male sample, 76,249
individual-year observations for the female sample, and 76,051 household-year observations for the household sample (see Table A.2). The sample selection then follows the
steps listed below for each sample. All cross-sectional statistics are calculated using
appropriate cross-sectional individual or household weights, respectively.
1. drop if no info on education or if no degree obtained yet
2. drop if currently working in military
3. drop if no info on income
4. drop if no info on hours worked
5. keep if income > 0 and hours > 520
52

Table A.2: Number of Observations Kept in Each Step: SOEP
selection step
Male Heads
initial
87,582
drop if no coll. info
86,737
drop if in military
86,712
drop if no obs on ymin
79,547
drop if no obs on hours
79,547
keep if >=520 hrs and ymin>0
77,265
drop top 1% of ymin per year
76,404
drop if ymin<.5*520*min wage
76,268
Final #Obs for transitory changes 64,572
Final #Obs for persistent changes 38,399

Households All Females
76,051
76,249
75,310
75,270
75,293
75,268
75,070
50,374
75,070
50,374
71,389
42,245
70,627
41,830
70,097
41,434
59,209
31,612
34,792
16,792

Note: Table lists number of person-year, or household-year, observations in the three panels for the
sample from SOEP.

6. drop if in highest percentile (sample outliers)
7. drop if below 520*0.5*minimum wage, where minimum wage is set to be 6€ in
year 2000 euros
8. for transitory change measure: keep if in sample in t and t-1
9. for permanent change measure: keep if in sample in t and t-5

B

Cyclicality of Individual Earnings by Groups

Tables B.1 to B.7 show results of the individual level earnings regressions discussed in
Section 4 by subgroups.

53

Table B.1: Cyclicality of Male Earnings, by Education Groups
L9010
College Graduates
Non-College
College Graduates
Non-College
College Graduates
Non-College

–0.12
(–0.31)
–0.40
(–0.69)
–0.00
(–0.01)
–0.17
(–1.52)
0.62

(1.01)

0.10

(0.25)

Kelley
L9050
United States
0.97
0.36
(1.42)
(1.39)
2.37*** 0.83*
(4.29)
(2.04)
Sweden
1.80*** 0.42
(4.93)
(1.58)
4.03*** 0.99***
(3.86)
(3.39)
Germany (SIAB)
4.70*** 1.24**
(3.10)
(2.17)
5.26*** 0.89***
(5.41)
(3.07)

L5010
–0.48
(–1.15)
–1.23***
(–3.88)
–0.42***
(–5.72)
–1.26***
(–3.53)
–0.61**

(–2.29)

–0.79***

(–3.78)

Note: See Table I for explanations.

Table B.2: Cyclicality of Female Earnings, by Education Groups
L9010
College graduates
Non-college
College graduates
Non-college
College graduates
Non-college

–1.11

(–1.44)

0.91**
(2.77)
0.13

(0.31)

0.50*
(1.96)
0.01
(0.01)
0.32
(0.47)

Kelley
L9050
United States
1.70**
0.49
(2.61)
(0.94)
0.78*
0.91***
(1.75)
(2.91)
Sweden
1.15*** 0.64
(4.03)
(1.22)
1.81*** 0.75***
(3.40)
(2.78)
Germany (SIAB)
2.03
1.01
(1.65)
(1.12)
2.58**
0.77
(2.08)
(1.27)

Note: See Table I for explanations.

54

L5010
–1.60***

(–2.84)

–0.00
(–0.01)
–0.25

(–1.74)

–0.25**
(–2.71)
–1.00
(–1.39)
–0.45*
(–1.88)

Table B.3: Cyclicality of Individual Earnings, Public vs. Private Sector Employment,
Males
L9010

Kelley
L9050
United States
Private –0.39
2.26*** 0.82***
(–1.08)
(4.43)
(2.88)
Public
0.05
0.20
0.07
(0.23)
(0.29)
(0.36)
Sweden
Private
0.10
3.83*** 0.93***
(0.93)
(4.02)
(3.81)
Public
–0.45*** 2.10*** 0.17
(–3.93)
(6.55)
(1.64)
Germany
Private
0.03
5.55*** 0.88***
(0.08)
(6.44)
(3.55)
Public
2.50
0.30
1.45
(1.16)
(0.17)
(1.08)

L5010
–1.21***

(–4.03)

–0.01

(–0.07)

–0.83***

(–4.08)

–0.62***

(–9.11)

–0.85***

(–5.64)

1.06
(1.01)

Note: See Table I for explanations.

C

Robustness of the Empirical Results

We perform a number of robustness checks for the analyses based on SIAB data, which
deal with (i) top-coding of incomes and (ii) a structural break in the income measure
in 1984. In addition to Kelley skewness, we consider two alternatives: two versions
of Hinkley’s measure of skewness. Instead of L9050 and L5010, these measures relate
L8550 and L5015 or L8050 and L5020, respectively.
The first four rows of table C.1 show the results of the regressions for male and
female earnings wages, respectively. The results are the ones from the main text and
serve as a comparison to the robustness analyses. Columns 7-12 show the results for the
two versions of Hinkley’s skewness measures and the corresponding tails. Compared
to Kelley skewness and L9050 and L5010, the estimates show that the substantive
conclusion is also robust for these smaller log percentile differentials. Rows 5 and 6
show the results for the wage regressions when applying a less strict criterion of working
full-time for only 45 weeks in two consecutive years. Again, the results are very similar
to those reported for 50 weeks.
55

Table B.4: Cyclicality of Individual Earnings, by Sector of Employment, Females
L9010
Private
Public
Private
Public
Private
Public

0.85**
(2.64)
–0.43
(–0.69)
0.50*
(1.87)
0.18
(1.19)
0.01
(0.01)
1.17
(0.84)

Kelley
L9050
United States
1.47***
1.32***
(3.38)
(3.82)
–0.87
–0.44
(–0.94)
(–0.81)
Sweden
1.99***
0.78**
(3.02)
(2.81)
1.10***
0.34**
(3.29)
(2.43)
Germany
3.13**
0.73
(2.44)
(1.50)
0.95
0.85
(0.68)
(0.85)

L5010
–0.47
(–1.67)
0.01
(0.04)
–0.29**
(–2.43)
–0.16**
(–2.61)
–0.72***
(–3.15)
0.32
(0.59)

Note: See Table I for explanations.

In order to ensure that top-coding does not drive our results, we redo the analysis
using reduced samples in which an individual is considered in the distribution of income
changes from t to t+1 only if income is below the top-coding thresholds in both t and
t+1. About 11% and 2% of all observations are top-coded in the male and female
base samples, respectively. Table C.2 shows the results of the respective regressions
for earnings, wages, and wages of firm stayers for both males and females. Second,
we rerun the regressions completely ignoring top-coding, that is, all individuals from
the base sample are in the sample, but with their reported incomes again for earnings,
wages, and wages of stayers. Results are in Table C.3.
A rerun of the regression analysis using only observations after 1983, thereby dropping all years for which the reported income measure does not include one-time payments such as bonuses, does not change the results (see the lower panel of Table C.3).

56

Table B.5: Cyclicality of Earnings by Occupational Area: Germany (SIAB)
L9010
Farming and related
Mining, Mineral Extraction
Manufacturing, Fabrication
Technical Occupations
Service Occupations

4.56
(1.23)
2.62
(1.25)
0.17
(0.20)
0.13
(0.19)
0.59
(0.68)

Farming and related

2.90
(0.73)
Mining, Mineral Extraction -5.59
(-1.02)
Manufacturing, Fabrication -0.72
(-0.48)
Technical Occupations
-0.75
(-0.83)
Service Occupations
0.85
(0.59)
Note: See notes for Table I.

57

Kelley

L9050
Males
5.64
3.80
(1.51)
(1.52)
3.23
1.32**
(1.39)
(2.43)
11.39*** 2.00***
(5.53)
(3.21)
12.36*** 1.51**
(4.04)
(2.72)
8.89*** 1.76**
(3.92)
(2.41)
Females
0.96
2.06
(0.31)
(0.71)
12.26
1.61
(1.54)
(0.34)
10.59*** 2.48*
(4.95)
(2.00)
8.44**
1.41
(2.70)
(1.56)
4.09
1.45
(1.63)
(1.13)

L5010
0.76
(0.45)
1.30
(0.72)
-1.83***
(-3.99)
-1.38***
(-3.64)
-1.17***
(-3.09)
0.84
(0.61)
-7.20**
(-2.59)
-3.20***
(-6.01)
-2.16***
(-2.82)
-0.60
(-1.15)

Table B.6: Cyclicality of Earnings by Occupational Segments: Males, Germany (SIAB)
L9010 Kelley L9050 L5010
Distribution of Beta Coefficients
Mean
0.71
8.78 2.06
–1.35
P10
–0.83
3.68 0.90
–2.91
Median 0.46
8.35 1.75
–1.29
P90
2.62 13.09 3.29
–0.18
Min
–1.55
2.36 0.66
–7.09
Max
4.56 17.87 7.89
1.30
Distribution of t-Statistics
Mean
0.34
4.11 2.59
–2.21
P10
–0.90
1.39 1.43
–4.93
Median 0.46
3.23 2.46
–2.22
P90
1.19
7.73 3.73
–0.18
Min
–2.30
1.01 0.99
–6.62
Max
2.01 11.46 6.36
0.72
Note: The table displays moments of the distribution of beta coefficients
(upper panel) and t-statistics (lower panel) from separate regressions for each of
the 30 occupational segments. See notes for Table I.

58

Table B.7: Cyclicality of Earnings by Occupational Segments: Females, Germany
(SIAB)
L9010

Kelley

Distribution of

Mean
P10
Median
P90
Min
Max

–0.10
–3.33
0.12
1.97
–6.40
3.61

βm

6.87
0.96
6.30
12.26
–0.56
13.50

L9050

L5010

across Occupations

1.98
0.89
2.06
3.10
–4.13
3.80

–2.08
–4.45
–2.00
0.69
–7.20
0.84

Distribution of t-Statistics

Mean
P10
Median
P90
Min
Max

–0.11
–1.53
0.05
0.71
–2.06
0.95

2.35
0.31
1.81
5.41
–0.07
6.15

1.43
0.53
1.38
2.27
–0.72
4.04

–1.84
–4.28
–1.35
0.52
–6.30
0.61

Note: The table displays moments of the distribution of beta coefficients
(upper panel) and t-statistics (lower panel) from separate regressions for each of
the 30 occupational segments. See notes for Table I.

59

60
-0.08
(-0.54)

0.04
(0.25)

(0.27)

0.04
(0.72)

(0.18)

0.01

(0.66)

(-0.54)

0.03

(0.23)

0.04

-0.09

(0.48)

(0.47)

0.01

0.34

0.10

(0.36)

(0.42)

Note: See notes for Table I.

Male Wages
(45 weeks)
Female Wages
(45 weeks)

Female Wages

Male Wages

Female Earnings

Male Earnings

L9010
0.15

Std Dev
0.07

(2.02)

8.80*

(4.55)

13.20***

(2.02)

8.98*

(4.58)

14.55***

(1.77)

4.34*

(4.28)

Skew
14.42***

(5.21)

2.07***

(6.60)

4.65***

(5.11)

2.12***

(6.31)

4.73***

(2.05)

2.55**

(5.80)

Kelley
5.48***

(2.72)

0.17**

(3.90)

0.31***

(2.61)

0.17**

(3.77)

0.30***

(1.25)

0.80

(3.14)

L9050
0.95***

(-1.57)

-0.14

(-3.30)

-0.39***

(-1.58)

-0.14

(-3.20)

-0.39***

(-1.80)

-0.46*

(-4.11)

L5010
-0.80***

(4.85)

2.20***

(4.50)

4.88***

(4.79)

2.20***

(4.35)

4.94***

(2.62)

2.75**

(9.85)

Hinkley 1
5.84***

(4.72)

2.10***

(3.48)

4.85***

(4.67)

2.09***

(3.37)

4.88***

(3.85)

2.71***

(7.51)

Hinkley 2
5.85***

Table C.1: Sensitivity of Regression Results - SIAB I

(2.73)

0.14**

(2.70)

0.23**

(2.68)

0.14**

(2.59)

0.22**

(1.40)

0.43

(4.10)

L8550
0.51***

(2.66)

0.12**

(2.78)

0.18***

(2.65)

0.11**

(2.66)

0.18**

(1.65)

0.25

(3.57)

L8050
0.32***

(-1.23)

-0.09

(-2.61)

-0.29**

(-1.24)

-0.09

(-2.55)

-0.28**

(-2.56)

-0.24**

(-4.77)

L5015
-0.54***

(-0.84)

-0.05

(-2.09)

-0.20**

(-0.83)

-0.04

(-2.07)

-0.20**

(-1.87)

-0.14*

(-3.43)

L5020
-0.36***

Male Wages
(stayers)
Female Earnings

Male Wages

Male Earnings

Female Wages
(stayers)

Female Wages

61

(0.25)

(0.56)

(0.78)

3.87

(0.66)

2.04

(1.90)

4.67*

(5.77)

11.41***

(6.07)

8.76***

(4.26)

14.49***

Skew

Note: See notes for Table I.

0.03

0.02

(0.31)

(0.47)

(0.45)

(0.71)

0.33

0.09

0.05

(-0.52)

0.04

-0.08

-0.03

(-0.75)

(-0.29)

(-0.14)

(0.53)

-0.05

(0.41)

-0.01

0.26

L9010

0.08

Std Dev

(4.11)

2.17***

(4.42)

2.05***

(2.03)

2.54*

(9.09)

3.66***

(10.76)

3.39***

(4.28)

4.98***

Kelley

(3.16)

0.16***

(2.64)

0.17**

(1.24)

0.80

(4.12)

0.22***

(3.52)

0.23***

(2.53)

(-1.38)

-0.12

(-1.34)

-0.12

(-1.83)

-0.46*

(-2.96)

-0.30***

(-2.91)

-0.28***

(-3.07)

(4.04)

2.25***

(4.10)

2.11***

(2.57)

2.72**

(7.52)

3.67***

(8.43)

3.49***

(6.66)

(4.46)

2.18***

(4.56)

2.12***

(3.76)

2.67***

(7.65)

3.48***

(8.09)

3.36***

(8.86)

L5010
Hinkley 1 Hinkley 2
Not top-coded workers only:
0.96**
-0.70*** 4.83***
4.65***

L9050

(3.24)

0.13***

(2.77)

0.13***

(1.40)

0.43

(4.14)

0.17***

(3.74)

0.19***

(3.13)

0.48***

L8550

Table C.2: Sensitivity of Regression Results - SIAB II

(2.99)

0.10***

(2.74)

0.11**

(1.67)

0.25

(3.63)

0.13***

(3.49)

0.14***

(3.40)

0.31***

L8050

(-1.15)

-0.08

(-1.08)

-0.08

(-2.46)

-0.23**

(-2.42)

-0.21**

(-2.34)

-0.20**

(-4.06)

-0.44***

L5015

(-0.98)

-0.05

(-0.92)

-0.05

(-1.71)

-0.13*

(-2.10)

-0.14**

(-2.00)

-0.14*

(-3.08)

-0.28***

L5020

62

Note: See notes for Table I.

(0.39)

(0.21)

(-0.18)

(-0.26)

0.30

-0.07

-0.04

Male Earnings
0.04

(0.09)

(0.48)

Female Earnings

0.01

0.02

(0.16)

(0.48)

(0.48)
(0.65)

0.34

0.10
0.02

(-1.06)

0.03

-0.13

-0.04

(-0.69)

(-1.15)

-0.09

-0.01

(0.40)

(0.40)
(-0.27)

0.15

0.07

L9010

Female Wages
(stayers)

Female Wages

Male Wages
(stayers)
Female Earnings

Male Wages

Male Earnings

Std Dev

(1.51)

3.86

(3.84)

13.25***

(0.75)

3.52

(0.60)

1.91

(1.76)

4.36*

(3.47)

16.06***

(4.24)

13.36***

(4.30)

14.72***

Skew

(1.84)

2.46*

(5.85)

5.10***

(4.45)

2.20***

(4.79)

2.03***

(2.02)

2.51*

(6.67)

5.19***

(7.59)

4.93***

(5.70)

5.68***

Kelley

(1.10)

0.75

(2.96)

0.81***

(3.31)

0.14***

(2.64)

0.15**

(1.24)

0.79

(4.03)

0.27***

(4.59)

0.29***

(3.14)

0.91***

L9050

(-3.99)
(-1.65)

-0.46

(4.70)

2.35***

(4.68)

2.16***

(2.61)

2.70**

(4.63)

5.55***

(5.11)

5.40***

(10.66)

(2.46)

2.79**

(11.04)

5.82***

1984-2010:
-0.88***

(-1.58)

-0.13

(-1.51)

-0.13

(-1.78)

-0.45*

(-3.85)

-0.39***

(-3.86)

-0.38***

(-4.68)

(3.65)

2.88***

(9.21)

6.22***

(4.90)

2.27***

(5.10)

2.17***

(3.98)

2.63***

(3.51)

5.36***

(3.76)

5.38***

(8.02)

L5010
Hinkley 1 Hinkley 2
Ignore Top-Coding:
-0.76*** 5.97***
6.17***

Table C.3: Sensitivity of Regression Results - SIAB III

(1.24)

0.42

(3.83)

0.46***

(3.30)

0.12***

(2.74)

0.13**

(1.39)

0.41

(2.11)

0.19**

(2.57)

0.21**

(4.27)

0.48***

L8550

(1.49)

0.26

(3.12)

0.31***

(3.01)

0.10***

(2.68)

0.11**

(1.65)

0.24

(1.85)

0.14*

(1.95)

0.15*

(3.46)

0.30***

L8050

(-2.29)

-0.26**

(-5.48)

-0.61***

(-1.40)

-0.09

(-1.29)

-0.09

(-2.55)

-0.23**

(-3.58)

-0.31***

(-3.59)

-0.30***

(-5.60)

-0.52***

L5015

(-1.87)

-0.16*

(-4.33)

-0.42***

(-1.18)

-0.05

(-1.11)

-0.05

(-1.84)

-0.13*

(-3.17)

-0.22***

(-3.22)

-0.22***

(-4.51)

-0.37***

L5020

D

Long-Run Earnings Growth

Figures D.1 to D.3 characterize the distribution of long-run earnings growth, that
is, five-year changes for Germany and Sweden, and four-year changes for the United
States.

Figure D.1: Standard Deviation of Long-Run Earnings Growth: United States, Sweden, and Germany
(b) Sweden

(a) United States

(c) Germany

Note: See notes to Figure 2

63

Figure D.2: Kelley skewness of Long-Run Earnings Growth: United States, Sweden,
and Germany (SOEP)
(a) United States

(b) Sweden

(c) Germany

Note: See notes to Figure 2

64

Figure D.3: Standard Deviation, Kelley skewness, and Tails of Long-Run Earnings
Growth: Germany, IAB Sample
(b) Upper and Lower Tails

(a) Std. Dev. and Kelley skewness

Note: Linear trend removed, centered at sample average.

65

E

Details on the Estimation and Simulation
The vector of parameters to be estimated is
χ = (σξ,1 , σξ,2 , pξ,1 , µζ,2 , µζ,3 , σζ,1 , σζ,2 , pζ,1 , pζ,2 , φ2 , φ3 ) ,

which we estimate by simulated method of moments (SMM). We target the time series
of L9050 and L5010 of the 1, 3, and 5-year earnings changes distribution, the average of
the Crow-Siddiqui measure of kurtosis of 1-, 3-, and 5-year changes, as well as the age
profile of the cross-sectional variance from ages 25 to 60. The Crow-Siddiqui measure
of kurtosis (Crow and Siddiqui, 1967) is defined as
CS =

(P 97.5 − P 2.5)
.
(P 75 − P 25)

This gives 213 moments for our estimation of the income process for Sweden.
To construct the simulated income profiles over time, we write earnings growth as
a function of the shocks, using equation (3):

yt − yt−s = ξt − ξt−s +

s−1
X

ζt−j ,

(7)

j=0

for the different horizons s = 1, 3, 5.
The simulated series of the life-cycle variance profile of log earnings is computed
as follows. We assume a time-invariant distribution of shocks by imposing xt ≡ 0.
Notice that this assumes that the variance accumulates linearly over the life cycle. We
then normalize the series so that the variance at age 25 in the simulation is 0. Finally,
we rescale the resulting simulated profile to exhibit the same mean as its empirical
counterpart.
We simulate these profiles R = 10 times for I = 10, 000 individuals and compute
the moments corresponding to the aforementioned targets. To find χ̂, we minimize the
average scaled distance between the simulated and empirical moments. A weighting
matrix is used to scale the life-cycle profile. In particular, we weight the variance
profile with 0.2 and the remaining moments with 0.8. For the optimization part, we
use a global version of the Nelder-Mead algorithm with several quasi-random restarts,
as described in Guvenen (2011).
66

Simulation of Income Profiles
Let cm
n denote the empirical moment n (n = 1, · · · , N ) that corresponds to crosssectional target m
(m ∈ {L5010(∆1 yt ), L5010(∆3 yt ), L5010(∆5 yt ), · · · , var(yage=25 ), ..., var(yage=60 )}). In
each simulation, we draw a matrix of random variables
Xr = {ξ1i , ξ2i , ..., ξTi −1 , ξTi , ζ1i , ζ2i , ..., ζTi −1 , ζTi }Ii=1 , where T denotes the last year available
in the data. We simulate these profiles R = 10 times. For each simulation, we then
calculate the respective simulated moments dm
n (χ, Xr ) given the parameter vector χ.
Optimization
We minimize the scaled deviation F (χ) between each data and simulated moment
minχ F (χ)0 W F (χ)
where F is defined as

m
dm
n (χ) − cn
|cm
n|
R
1X m
d (χ, Xr )
dm
(χ)
=
n
R r=1 n

Fn (χ) =

Because our goal is to capture as closely as possible the business-cycle fluctuations
of idiosyncratic income risk, we impose the mean of the medium-run income changes
to be as in the data. We adjust the weighting matrix such that the cross-sectional
moments get a weight of 80% and the life-cycle moments get a weight of 20%.

Parameter Estimates and Model Fit
Parameter Estimates
As noted at the beginning of this section, we estimate income processes for pregovernment household labor income and, separately, for post-government household
income. Table E.1 shows the parameter estimates. Figures E.1 and E.2 compare the
simulated moments at these parameters and the empirical moments.

67

Table E.1: Estimated Parameter Values

Parameter
pξ,1
σξ,1
σξ,2
pζ,1
pζ,2
pζ,3
σζ,1
σζ,2
σζ,3
µζ,2
µζ,3
φ2
φ3
M

Description
Mixture prob. of ξ distribution
St. dev. of ξ distribution mix. comp. 1
St. dev. of ξ distribution mix. comp. 2
Weight of center of ζ distribution
Weight of right tail of ζ distribution
Weight of left tail of ζ distribution
St. dev. of center of ζ distribution
St. dev. of right tail of ζ distribution
St. dev. of left tail of ζ distribution
Mean of right tail of ζ distribution
Mean of left tail of ζ distribution
Aggregate risk transmission upper tail
Aggregate risk transmission lower tail
# moments targeted in estimation

Pre-Gov. Post-Gov.
0.892
0.877
0.055
0.047
0.628
0.401
0.981
0.981
0.010
0.009
0.010
0.009
0.086
0.057
0.020
0.009
0.020
0.009
0.002
0.008
-0.158
-0.065
1.186
1.240
0.467
0.229
213
213

Note: Estimated parameters for gross household labor income (Pre-Gov.) and household income
after taxes and transfers (Post-Gov.) in Sweden.

68

Figure E.1: Pre-Government Income Fit: Sweden
(a) P9050(yt − yt−1 )

(b) P9050(yt − yt−3 )

(c) P9050(yt − yt−5 )

(d) P5010(yt − yt−1 )

(e) P5010(yt − yt−3 )

(f) P5010(yt − yt−5 )

(g) KS(yt − yt−1 )

(h) KS(yt − yt−3 )

(i) KS(yt − yt−5 )

Note: Each panel shows the time series of a moment of short-run, medium-run, or long-run income
changes together with the corresponding moment implied by the estimated income process.

69

Figure E.2: Post-Government Income Fit: Sweden
(a) P9050(yt − yt−1 )

(b) P9050(yt − yt−3 )

(c) P9050(yt − yt−5 )

(d) P5010(yt − yt−1 )

(e) P5010(yt − yt−3 )

(f) P5010(yt − yt−5 )

(g) KS(yt − yt−1 )

(h) KS(yt − yt−3 )

(i) KS(yt − yt−5 )

Note: See notes to figure E.1.

70

F

Quantitative Model

Given estimates of the income process, we scale the parameters of the permanent shocks
ζ to feed them into the model; fraction λ is insurable and the rest is uninsurable. This
scaling implies that the first three standardized moments of the distribution of insurable
shocks are given as below: for the first three moments of the uninsurable shocks, simply
replace λ with 1 − λ.

E [ηt ] =
var [ηt ] =

3
X
i=1
3
X

pζ,i µη,i,t =

3
X

pζ,i λ

1/2

1/2

µζ,i,t = λ

i=1


2
pζ,i ση,i
+ µ2η,i,t − (E [ηt ])2 =

pζ,i µζ,i,t = λ1/2 E [ζt ] ≡ λ1/2 µζ,t

i=1
3
X


2
2
pζ,i λσζ,i
+ λµ2ζ,i,t − λ1/2 E [ζt ]

i=1

= λ

3
X

i=1

!

3
X


2
pζ,i σζ,i
+ µ2ζ,i,t − E [ζt ]2

= λvar [ζt ]

i=1

skew [ηt ] =
=
=
=

3
X

1
var [ηt ]

3/2

 2

pζ,i (µη,i,t − E [ηt ]) 3ση,i
+ (µη,i,t − E [ηt ])2

i=1
3
X

1
λ3/2 var [ζt ]3/2

i=1

1

3
X

λ3/2 var [ζt ]

3/2

3
X

1
3/2

var [ζt ]
= skew [ζt ]

pζ,i λ1/2 µζ,i,t − λ1/2 E [ζt ]

h
2 i
2
3λσζ,i
+ λ1/2 µζ,i,t − λ1/2 E [ζt ]



2
pζ,i λ1/2 (µζ,i,t − E [ζt ]) λ 3σζ,i
+ (µζ,i,t − E [ζt ])2

i=1

pζ,i (µζ,i,t − E [ζt ])

i=1

71



2
3σζ,i
+ (µζ,i,t − E [ζt ])2



