NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SEASONAL LIQUIDITY, RURAL LABOR MARKETS AND AGRICULTURAL
PRODUCTION
Günther Fink
B. Kelsey Jack
Felix Masiye
Working Paper 24564
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24564

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2018

We thank audience members at numerous seminars and conferences for comments and
suggestions. We are grateful to the Growth and Labor Markets in Low Income Countries (GLMLIC), the International Growth Centre, the Agricultural Technology Adoption Initiative (JPAL/
CEGA) and an anonymous donor for financial support, and to Innovations for Poverty Action for
logistical support. Many thanks to Rachel Levenson for careful oversight of the field work and to
Daniel Velez Lopez, Chantelle Boudreaux and Carlos Riumallo Herl for assistance with the data.
The project received IRB approval from the Harvard T. H Chan School of Public Health and the
University of Zambia, and is registered on the AEA trial registry as AEARCTR-0000130. A pilot
to this paper was circulated as NBER Working Paper No 20218. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Günther Fink, B. Kelsey Jack, and Felix Masiye. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Seasonal Liquidity, Rural Labor Markets and Agricultural Production
Günther Fink, B. Kelsey Jack, and Felix Masiye
NBER Working Paper No. 24564
April 2018
JEL No. D14,J2,J43,O13
ABSTRACT
Many rural households in low and middle income countries continue to rely on small-scale
agriculture as their primary source of income. In the absence of irrigation, income arrives only
once or twice per year, and has to cover consumption and input needs until the subsequent
harvest. We develop a model to show that seasonal liquidity constraints not only undermine
households’ ability to smooth consumption over the cropping cycle, but also affect labor markets
if liquidity-constrained farmers sell family labor off-farm to meet short-run cash needs. To
identify the impact of seasonal constraints on labor allocation and agricultural production, we
conducted a two-year randomized controlled trial with small-scale farmers in rural Zambia. Our
results indicate that lowering the cost of accessing liquidity at the time of the year when farmers
are most constrained (the lean season) reduces aggregate labor supply, drives up wages and leads
to a reallocation of labor from less to more liquidity-constrained farms. This reallocation reduces
consumption and income inequality among treated farmers and increases average agricultural
output.
Günther Fink
Harvard School of Public Health
Department of Global Health and Population
665 Huntington Ave.
Boston, MA 02115
guenther.fink@swisstph.ch
B. Kelsey Jack
Department of Economics
Tufts University
314 Braker Hall
Medford, MA 02155
and NBER
kelsey.jack@tufts.edu

An appendix is available at
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w24564
A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at
https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/130/

Felix Masiye
Department of Economics
University of Zambia
Lusaka, Zambia
fmasiye@yahoo.com

1

Introduction

A majority of rural households in developing countries continue to rely on small-scale farming as
their primary source of income, and on labor as the primary input to agricultural production. In the
absence of irrigation and advanced farming technologies, agricultural incomes arrive infrequently,
and have to cover both consumption and inputs until the subsequent harvest. Low returns to saving
and high costs of borrowing make smoothing from one harvest to the next more costly and raise
the relative price of consumption at times of the year most distant from the previous harvest, often
referred to as the “lean season” or “hungry season” in rural areas of developing countries.1 In this
paper, we show that seasonal liquidity constraints aﬀect not only hungry season consumption but
also local labor markets and agricultural production. In settings where family labor can either
be used on-farm or sold locally to other farms, hungry season labor sales can be used to finance
short term consumption needs. If these labor sales lower labor inputs on-farm, then hungry season
consumption is eﬀectively financed against future harvest income. We formalize this intuition in a
simple two-period agricultural household model, and show that a higher cost of accessing liquidity
in the first period (the hungry season) lowers on-farm labor inputs, increases labor supply and drives
down local wages. To the extent that liquidity during the hungry season varies within the labor
market, the result is an ineﬃcient allocation of labor across farms, with lower aggregate agricultural
output and greater local income inequality.
We test the key predictions of our model in a two-year randomized controlled trial with 3,139
small-scale farmers in 175 rural villages in Zambia’s Eastern Province. To relax liquidity constraints,
a sub-set of farmers in selected villages were oﬀered subsidized cash or food loans during the hungry
season, with repayment due after harvest.2 Our empirical setting and theoretical framework are
representative of many parts of sub-Saharan Africa. Agriculture is rain-fed, resulting in a single
harvest each year. Access to formal saving opportunities is limited, and alternatives such as grain
storage or livestock holdings are risky. Access to formal credit is reported by less than 5 percent
of our sample, while informal credit carries a reported average monthly interest rate of 40 percent.
High costs of access to capital markets are also reflected in the savings and consumption patterns
observed in our sample: both cash and food reserves and consumption are highly seasonal, peaking
after harvest, and reaching their nadir during the hungry season. When asked how they will cover
short-term needs (in addition to restricting consumption as the name “hungry season” suggests), a
majority of households in our sample say they will sell family labor in local labor markets. These
1

A substantial literature documents seasonality in grain prices and consumption (see, for example, Kaminski et al.
(2014); Devereux et al. (2013)). Note that grain prices will exhibit seasonality even where capital markets function
well, given storage costs and interest rates, though Gilbert et al. (2017) and Kaminski et al. (2014) argue that the
seasonal fluctuations observed in Africa exceed the level explained just by interest rates.
2
Oﬀering households a loan rather than a grant reduces the income eﬀect associated with the intervention. Of
course, subsidized credit still has a positive income eﬀect, so we include an additional “income eﬀect control” group in
our design, in which households receive a small cash grant roughly equal to the size of the income transfer associated
with the loans.

1

labor sales – locally referred to as ganyu – typically occur within a given village, with better-oﬀ
farmers hiring labor from relatively poor farmers at an individually negotiated rate. While these
labor flows could maximize aggregate output in principle, they will not if liquidity constraints force
farmers to sell their family labor for wages below the marginal product of labor on their own land.3
The intervention we study was designed to isolate the impacts of lowering the cost of accessing
liquidity – smoothing seasonal consumption – during the hungry season on local labor market
outcomes and agricultural production. In the first year of the study, selected households in twothirds of villages were eligible for hungry season loans; in the second year, 50 percent of villages
received the program, with rotation of treatment status between years (i.e., some villages received
two years of the program, some one year and some zero years).4 Despite an implicit interest rate
of 4.5 percent per month, more than 98 percent of eligible farmers took up the oﬀer. Close to 95
percent of loans were repaid in the first year, and 98 percent of farmers oﬀered the same loan in the
second year signed up again, highlighting both the high demand for hungry season credit and the
high cost of alternative financing options.
Consistent with our theoretical framework, we find that the intervention not only increased
hungry season consumption but also led to substantial adjustments in household labor allocation
among households eligible for treatment. The likelihood that a family sold any ganyu (labor)
during the hungry season fell by 3 percentage points (10 percent) in response to treatment, with a
23 percent reduction in hours sold, on average. The likelihood of hiring ganyu increased by around
2.6 percentage points (25 percent). As a result, average village-level wages, which we measure as
daily earnings, increased by about 2 Kwacha, or 15 percent relative to control villages. Agricultural
output increased by 8 percent in response to treatment.
We find no change in the use of other inputs, such as pesticides or fertilizer, suggesting that
changes in the quantity and quality of labor drive the impact on agricultural production. Back of the
envelope calculations indicate that about 50 percent of the loan value was used for additional labor
inputs on-farm, i.e. for reallocating family from ganyu to on-farm work and for hiring additional
labor, while the remainder went to other household expenditures, including increased hungry season
consumption. The measured increase in labor inputs fully explain the impact on agricultural output
at an marginal product of labor equal to the daily earnings associated with casual labor during the
hungry season.5 We observe the greatest impact on both labor inputs and agricultural output
3

A largely qualitative literature suggests that the local labor markets we study are often associated with deviations
from household income maximization (Kerr 2005; Bryceson 2006; Orr et al. 2009; Michaelowa et al. 2010; Cole and
Hoon 2013). These papers suggest that oﬀ-farm labor supply during the hungry season may instead be driven by
immediate consumption needs.
4
On average, around 50 percent of households, or up to 22 per village, were randomly selected for both data
collection and treatment. Treating only selected farmers within the village results in a “partial treatment, general
equilibrium” set-up, in which (unmeasured) labor supply responses by untreated households in treatment villages
dampen wage eﬀects. We discuss this feature of our design both in presenting our model and interpreting our results.
5
A large share of the increase in total labor inputs come from more family labor supplied to the household’s
own fields. The magnitude of this increase is larger than the measured reduction in oﬀ-farm labor sales, implying an

2

among the households with the fewest liquid resources at baseline, who report the highest interest
rates, and thus benefit most from subsidized loans.6
Overall, our results are consistent with the idea that frictions in capital markets contribute
to seasonal liquidity constraints, which drive local labor allocation during the hungry season. We
examine several alternative interpretations of our findings, and test other margins of adjustment.
First, we test whether the anticipation of seasonal constraints aﬀects decisions at planting by informing a subset of farmers about the loans at the beginning of the agricultural season in the second
year of the program. While our power to detect diﬀerential impacts in this subset is limited, we find
that knowing about the loans at planting time led to larger increases in agricultural output, due to
more cash crop production and more land cultivated. Second, we find little eﬀect of treatment on
other consumption smoothing strategies, including livestock or asset sales, green maize consumption or borrowing from friends and family, though we see some decrease in the likelihood of high
interest borrowing from moneylenders. Third, we rule out that the income transfer implicit in the
subsidized loans could explain the results. A sub-sample of 172 farmers across 11 villages were given
a cash transfer corresponding to the implicit value of the program measured in choice experiments.
Finally, we collect a number of checks for bias in our self reported outcome measures, and find no
evidence that mis-reporting contributes to our results.
Our paper is closely related to an extensive literature highlighting the links between credit
market frictions, agricultural labor markets, and aggregate output. Our theoretical model builds
on Jayachandran (2006), who shows that a lack of credit access leads to increased labor supply and
lower wages among landless rural laborers when the economy is exposed to aggregate productivity
shocks. Studying the general equilibrium eﬀects of a shock to borrowing costs in India, Breza and
Kinnan (2016) document reductions in credit supply lead to large reductions in local casual wage
rates and consumption. On the extensive margin, Bandiera et al. (2017) find that high borrowing
costs prevent poor women in Bangladesh from accessing high income labor market opportunities.
More directly related to our study, Pitt and Khandker (2002) show a link between seasonal hunger,
demand for microcredit and male labor supply in Bangladesh. Our model diﬀers from this literature
by explicitly focusing on households’ trade-oﬀ between labor inputs on their own land and the
period-specific value of revenue obtainable through labor sales on other farms.7 The critical role
increase in family labor supply, which contradicts the predictions of the model. Any extension to our model that adds
an additional cost to oﬀ-farm labor sales can reconcile these results. We speculate that several additional channels
may be at work, including search time and psychological costs of casual labor supply (Kerr 2005; Cole and Hoon
2013), and impacts of nutrition and health on energy for on-farm work (e.g., Pitt and Rosenzweig 1986; Strauss 1986;
Behrman et al. 1997; Schofield 2013).
6
Heterogeneity in eﬀective interest rates across farmers can either arise from a wedge between the interest rates
on saving and borrowing, where farmers able to consume out of savings face lower eﬀective borrowing costs, or from
heterogeneity in the cost of borrowing that depends, for example, on the amount borrowed or on available collateral.
These sources of heterogeneity will tend to result in higher interest rates for poorer farmers (Conning and Udry 2007).
7
Like Rosenzweig (1980) and others, we assume that labor markets are well functioning and that land owning
households (all of our sample) both buy and sell labor on local markets. Our model reflects the sequential nature of
agricultural production, which may be subject to period-specific constraints (Behrman et al. 1997; Skoufias 1996).

3

of family labor sales for smoothing consumption has been documented by others (Kochar 1995,
1999; Rose 2001; Ito and Kurosaki 2009).8 We extend this literature in two ways: first, we show
that family labor sales are not only important in the presence of unanticipated shocks, but also
to cover anticipated liquidity shortages.9 Second, we show that these liquidity-induced labor sales
lower future (agricultural) income and may result in an ineﬃcient allocation of labor across farms,
lowering aggregate output and increasing within-community inequality.
Our study also relates, more broadly, to recent literature testing the impacts of capital constraints on agricultural productivity. In Ghana, Karlan et al. (2014) find no evidence that capital
constraints impede agricultural investments. On the other hand, Beaman et al. (2014) find that
relaxing credit constraints through grants increases agricultural investment and yields among rice
farmers in Mali, but that the same is not true for loans. These studies focus on capital inputs
(seeds, fertilizer or pesticides) as the primary mechanism through which credit impacts yields; we
show that labor inputs can also be highly sensitive to capital access.
The results presented here also relate to a recent series of papers describing interventions targeting income, price and consumption seasonality in agricultural markets.10 Burke et al. (2018)
oﬀered farmers in Kenya loans at harvest that allowed them to exploit seasonal variation in maize
prices and find significant eﬀects on total maize revenues and household expenditures. Relatedly,
Aggarwal et al. (2017) subsidize better storage technologies to provide similar price arbitrage opportunities. Gross et al. (2017) stabilize lean season grain prices through improved (community
level) storage and find positive eﬀects on nutrition and health. Bryan, Chowdhury and Mobarak
(2014) show that providing credit and grants leads to large increases in seasonal labor migration
in Bangladesh, arguing that credit market failures and highly uncertain returns likely keep longdistance labor supply below optimal levels. Basu and Wong (2015) evaluate a seasonal food credit
and improved storage program in Indonesia; similar to the results presented here, they find that
food loans increase non-staple food consumption during the hungry season and income from crop
sales at harvest, but do not analyze impacts on within-community labor allocation or production.
Our findings contribute to this growing literature by providing the first direct evidence that hungry
season loans aimed largely at consumption smoothing aﬀect agricultural labor market outcomes,
aggregate output and inequality within communities. Fink et al. (2014) describe a pilot for the
8

This consumption smoothing role of local labor markets is also tied to the substantial literature on informal
smoothing strategies (see, for example, Morduch (1995) for a review), some of which – like labor sales – may carry
long run costs (e.g., Rosenzweig and Wolpin (1993)).
9
A small literature shows reductions in labor supply in response to (anticipated) cash transfers in both developing
(Edmonds 2006) and developed (Yang 2018) countries, and posits that liquidity constraints oﬀer the best explanation
for the observed patterns of behavior.
10
The relationship between income seasonality and consumption smoothing is a subject of some debate. While some
studies suggest that precautionary savings are suﬃcient to smooth consumption even if income is highly seasonal
(Paxson 1993; Chaudhuri and Paxson 2002; Jacoby and Skoufias 1998), others have highlighted the pronounced
consumption diﬀerences over the year as hard to reconcile with optimal smoothing (Dercon and Krishnan 2000;
Khandker 2012). We take consumption seasonality as given and are agnostic as to its origins, though both our model
and our empirical results show that high borrowing costs contribute to seasonal fluctuations in consumption.

4

current study, using a diﬀerent (smaller) sample and slightly diﬀerent intervention, and show results
consistent with those presented here.
From a policy perspective, our findings suggest large potential welfare gains from relaxing seasonal liquidity constraints for selected households in a village. We use our model to engage in
“structured speculation” (Banerjee et al. 2017) about eﬀects outside of our study sample and design. First, we simulate program impacts on untreated households in intervention villages, who
are aﬀected by treatment through changes in labor supply and demand among treated farmers.11
Among untreated farmers in intervention villages, consumption rises as a result of higher equilibrium
wages, but agricultural output falls due to lower labor inputs.12 Second, we simulate the eﬀects of
scaling up credit access to all households in a community, which leads to larger equilibrium wage
adjustments, since additional labor demand must be met by supply from other treated farmers.
Greater treatment coverage also implies a more homogenous interest rates with the village, resulting in greater reductions in income inequality. The potential for scaling up seasonal consumption
loans is hindered by high transaction costs. Bundling seasonal loans with other technologies, such
as digital borrowing platforms, or piggybacking on existing rural networks may help bring down
costs. Other strategies for lowering the cost of seasonal consumption smoothing, such as more secure
savings, may also decrease reliance on family labor for financing hungry season consumption.
The paper proceeds as follows. In the next section, we present a simple model that highlights the
links between seasonal liquidity constraints, labor allocation and agricultural output, and generates
testable predictions for our empirical analysis. Section 3 provides information on the local context
as well as the experimental design. We present the data and descriptive statistics in Section 4 and
the experimental results in Section 5. Section 6 reconciles magnitudes, shows robustness checks and
further explores alternative explanations. We discuss simulation results and welfare implications,
in Section 7. Section 8 concludes.

2

An agrarian economy with capital market frictions

We study a rural agricultural economy, in which farming households maximize utility over consumption and leisure, and have access to local labor and capital markets. The objectives of the model are
to 1) illustrate the links between seasonal liquidity, credit, labor markets and agricultural production in this setting, and 2) to generate predictions regarding household and village-level responses
to exogenous shifts in credit market interest rates.
11
Changes in grain prices would also aﬀect untreated farmers in treatment villages. We test for and find no impact
on grain prices as a result of treatment.
12
Note that, in the model, consumption is the most appropriate welfare proxy, and captures income from both
wages and agricultural production net of hiring costs.

5

2.1

Setup

Our theoretical framework builds on the agrarian labor market model introduced in Jayachandran
(2006).13 Each village economy has a finite number N of households that maximize utility over
two periods (t = 1, 2). Each household i has initial liquid resources Si0 .14 All households have the
same endowment of land, k, and time, h̄, which they allocate between labor, hi , and leisure, li ,
in period 1 (the farming period). In the second period (the harvest period), they consume their
harvest production net of outstanding debt. Production y is Cobb-Douglas in labor di and land k,
and proportional to the farm’s productivity Ai :
y(di , k) = Ai di k 1

(1)

.

Total on-farm labor input (farm-level labor demand) di includes both own (family) labor on farm
and hired labor;

2 (0, 1) defines the relative productivity of labor and land.

Households have Stone-Geary preferences over consumption and leisure. Period-specific utility
is given by
u(cit , li ) = log(cit

c) +

1

↵
↵

log(li ),

(2)

where ↵ 2 (0, 1), and c > 0 is the minimum (subsistence) level all households must consume. Utility
is additive and separable across the two periods; second period utility is discounted by a subjective
discount factor ⇢ < 1.
Households can save at a rate rs and borrow at a rate rib ; due to frictions in local capital markets

we assume that rib > rs .15 All farmers have access to the same saving technology. Interest rates on

borrowing may vary across farmers and are assumed to decrease with the farm’s initial resources,
Si0 , i.e.

@rib
@Si0

< 0.16 All borrowing needs to be repaid by the end of the second period. The labor

13
We modify Jayachandran’s model in two important ways to more closely match our setting: first, we assume that
all farmers own land and can thus create income both from their own farms and from selling labor to others. Second,
we assume that farming income is earned in the second period rather than the first to highlight the trade-oﬀ between
financing hungry season consumption and receiving greater output in the future.
14
This initial distribution of liquid resources can be thought of as the result of a stochastic process where all households start with an initial endowment of zero, and accumulate resources over time based on the farm’s (land and labor)
productivity and idiosyncratic shocks such as weather or pests. We assume that initial resources are predetermined
and positively correlated with farm productivity Ai (and verify this assumption empirically, see Appendix A.2). In
our model we abstract from the stochastic element in the production process. To achieve a stable distribution of
baseline reserves in a recursive model, a substantial degree of stochasticity or other form of income redistribution
would be necessary. We observe a fair amount of churning in within-village hungry season resources: across years,
the within-household correlation in hungry season liquid resource ranking is 0.49and in agricultural output is 0.63.
15
We discuss these frictions in greater detail in Section 4. For example, transaction costs in the formal credit
market include high transport costs, the absence of legal infrastructure, and low levels of assets to be used as
collateral. Informal saving options include the storage of grain and the purchase of livestock, both of which are
subject to substantial risk, including fire, theft and and pests or disease. Alternative borrowing strategies such as the
temporary sale of assets or livestock are also costly because of correlated rural shocks and large distances to urban
markets.
16
This assumption is consistent with any model where the expected ability to repay increases with collateral (which

6

market clears at the endogenous wage w such that average farm labor input equals average labor
supply:
N
X

N
X

di (w) =

i=1

2.2

(h

(3)

li (w)).

i=1

Household utility maximization

Rational households maximize utility from consumption cit and leisure li over two periods:
max log(ci1
c,l

c) +

1

↵
↵

log(li ) + ⇢log(ci2

c)

(4)

subject to
ci1  Si0 + (h̄
ci2  yi (di )

li

di )w + Bi

Bi [(1 + rib )1(Bi > 0)

(1 + rs )1(Bi < 0)],

where Bi is net resources borrowed (Bi > 0 implies borrowing and Bi < 0 implies saving) during
the first period. In period 1, households optimally choose labor inputs di on the farm and their
own labor supply, hi = h

li . In period 2, households receive harvest income yi . Period 2 net

income (and consumption) is given by harvest income plus period 1 borrowing or savings times
the respective interest rate. Period 1 consumption can be financed through initial savings (Si0 ),
labor income (the labor endowment, h̄, minus time allocated to leisure, li , and minus on-farm labor
inputs, di , times the wage rate, w), as well as through borrowing (Bi ).
2.2.1

Optimal labor input

For any given wage and interest rate farmers will always choose labor inputs such that the discounted
marginal product of labor earned in period 2 equals the period 1 wage:
@yi
k
= Ai ( )1
@di
di
where

= wrie

8
<1 + rb (S ) if B > 0
i0
i
e
ri =
:1 + r s
if Bi < 0

(5)

is the eﬀective interest rate. Re-arranging equation 5, optimal labor input can be expressed as
function of productivity Ai , wage w, and the eﬀective interest rate:
is proxied by Si0 ) and decreases with loan size (which is also a function of Si0 ).

7

d⇤i

=k

✓

Ai
wrie

◆

1
1

(6)

.

Since farmers choose labor inputs such that the return on labor matches the marginal cost of capital,
optimal labor inputs, and thus community level labor demand, decrease with interest rates.
2.2.2

Optimal consumption, labor supply and leisure

To maximize utility, the usual inter-temporal optimality condition for consumption must hold:
c2
⇢(c1

c
= rie .
c)

(7)

Taking the derivation of (4) with respect to leisure and consumption, we can derive an interior
li :17

solution for the optimal allocation of time toward labor, hi = h̄
h⇤i =
where Si⇤ = Si0 +

↵
1 ↵ (1

1
w

+ ⇢)h̄ +

h

c(1 +

1
rie )

Si⇤

(1 + (1 + ⇢) 1 ↵↵ )

i

,

(8)

d⇤i (rie , w)w are total household resources made up of the initial

1
⇤ e
rie yi (di (ri , w))

resources, Si0 , and the discounted value of farm production net of labor costs. Optimal consumption
levels in period 1 and period 2 are given by
c⇤1

=

and
c⇤2 =

c( r1e +
i

c( 1 1 ↵

↵
1 ↵

+ ⇢) + Si⇤ + hw

1
1 ↵

+⇢

rie ⇢) + ⇢rie Si⇤ + h⇢rie w
1
1 ↵

+⇢

(9)

(10)

respectively, where seasonality is defined as the ratio of period 2 to period 1 consumption.18
2.2.3

The eﬀect of lowering hungry season interest rates

Our experimental intervention subsidized credit access for a subset of small-scale farmers in randomly selected villages by oﬀering hungry season (period 1) loans at a specific interest rate, r̂ < rie .19
We derived the impacts on labor allocation, wages, agricultural output and consumption among the
17
See Appendix A.1 for derivations of the optimality conditions for household labor supply and period-specific
consumption.
18
Higher food prices in the hungry season may contribute to consumption seasonality. Note that this model
normalizes the price of consumption to one in all periods, and so suppresses the eﬀect of grain price fluctuations –
which may arise due to storage costs, for example – on consumption seasonality. We test for treatment eﬀects on
grain prices in Section 6.3.1.
19
We use loan takeup rates to validate this assertion.

8

subset of treated farmers (see Appendix A.1 for further derivations). We discuss the eﬀects on
untreated (without access to r̂) farmers in the same labor market, and the eﬀects of oﬀering r̂ to
all households in the market, in Section 2.2.4.
From equation (6) lower interest rates always increase demand for labor inputs, holding wages
constant, i.e., @d⇤i /@rie < 0. Similarly, by equation (8), and again holding wages constant, @h⇤i /@rei >
@S ⇤

0 because higher interest rates always reduce net disposable resources of borrowing farmers ( @rei <
0). For the labor market clearing condition to hold, wages must therefore rise in equilibrium.

i

Prediction 1: Labor demand increases and labor supply decreases among farmers who borrow at
r̂ < rie , causing equilibrium wages to increase.
The increase in on-farm labor demand d⇤i will increase agricultural output (@y ⇤ /@d⇤ > 0), as long
as the income eﬀects (reductions in labor supply in response to higher wages) are suﬃciently small
(see Appendix A.1).
Prediction 2: Agricultural output increases among farmers who borrow at r̂ < rie .
@S ⇤

Given that both income ( @rei ) and substitution (through equation 7) eﬀects are positive for first
i

period consumption, lower interest rates will always increase first period consumption. Deriving c⇤1
with respect to rie , yields
@c⇤1
=
@rie
Given that
seasonality

@Si⇤
@rie < 0, first period
(c2/c1 ) is given by

c
(rie )2
1
1 ↵

+

@Si⇤
@rie

+⇢

.

consumption will always increase as interest rates fall. Consumption

c( 1 1 ↵ rie ⇢) + ⇢rie Si⇤ + h⇢rie w
c⇤2
=
.
c⇤1
c( r1e + 1 ↵↵ + ⇢) + Si⇤ + hw

(11)

i

The derivative of this expression with respect to rie is positive because positive income eﬀects for
second period consumption are partially oﬀset by temporal substitution toward the first period.
Therefore, borrowing at r̂ < rie reduces consumption seasonality.
Prediction 3: Period 1 consumption increases and consumption seasonality decreases among farmers who borrow at r̂ < rie .
Since eﬀective interest rates are highest for the households with the lowest initial resources (Si0 ),
the change in interest rates induced by the intervention will decrease with Si0 ; accordingly, marginal
adjustments in consumption, labor inputs and output should be largest for the farmers with the
lowest Si0 . Since consumption and agricultural output are both increasing in Si0 , this also results
in a decline in consumption and agricultural income inequality among farmers borrowing at r̂.
9

Prediction 4: The impacts of borrowing at r̂ < rie are increasing in rie and decreasing in Si0 .
Among farmers borrowing at r̂ < rie , both the mean and the variance in eﬀective interest rates
decline with the introduction of r̂. Since the marginal product of labor shown in equation (5)
depends directly on rie , the variance in the marginal product of labor among farmers with access
to borrowing at r̂ will also decline, resulting in a more eﬃcient allocation of labor. Of course, if
other farmers within the same labor market do not have access to r̂, the overall eﬃciency impacts
are ambiguous. We turn to these next.
2.2.4

Credit access and general equilibrium eﬀects

Our predictions focus on treated farmers in a “partial treatment, general equilibrium” framework,
in keeping with our design and data collection. Quantifying the overall welfare impacts of programs
to address credit market frictions – which, like our intervention, often target only a subset of
households in a community – requires an assessment of spillovers to untreated farmers. In relative
terms, the expected changes on labor allocation and agricultural production are greatest for treated
households in a partial treatment setting, because some of their increased labor demand will be met
by untreated households in the same village, and wage response will be more moderate relative to
a full treatment scenario.20
In Section 7, we engage in “structured speculation” (Banerjee et al. 2017) to explore the broader
welfare implications of our experimental results. We use a numerical simulation of our theoretical
model, calibrated to our study setting, to (1) assess program impact on untreated farmers in our
partial treatment setup, and (2) to simulate outcomes under a scaled up policy version of the
intervention that lowers credit market interest rates for all households in a community.

3

Experimental design and implementation

We turn now to our experimental setting, design and implementation. We oﬀer further detail on
our study setting in Section 4.2.

3.1

Study setting

The study was implemented between October 2013 and September 2015 (with survey data covering
three agricultural cycles/years) in Chipata District, Zambia. Chipata District is located at the
southeastern border of Zambia, with an estimated population of 456,000 in 2010 (CSO 2010).
Three-quarters of the population lives in rural areas, with small-scale farming as primary source of
20

This partial treatment set up increases our power to detect impacts on labor and agricultural output. While we
could have also sampled untreated households in intervention villages, this would have come at the cost of a smaller
number of villages (or of treated farmers per village) in the sample.

10

income. According to the 2010 Living Conditions Monitoring Survey (CSO 2010), average monthly
expenditure of rural households in Chipata was estimated at USD 122 in 2010 (USD 0.8 per personday), or about one third of the national average (USD 389).
The study implementation targeted small-scale farmers, i.e., households growing crops on 5
hectares (12 acres) or less. The label “small-scale” is somewhat misleading since it suggests that
these farmers are unusually small; in fact, small-scale farmers represent the vast majority of rural
households in Zambia. In our study villages, we document that over 95 percent of households meet
this definition.
Study sample
We randomly sampled 5 villages from 50 of the 53 administrative blocks in the district, omitting
the those that contain Chipata town, using on village lists from the Ministry of Agriculture’s farm
registry and omitting villages with less than 20 or more than 100 farms. Study enumerators visited
sampled villages to screen for eligibility.21 Our final sample covers 175 villages.
Within each eligible village, households were sampled from the village rosters collected during the
initial screening visits. Only small farms – less than 5 hectares according to the Zambian Ministry
of Agriculture – were eligible for the program.22 Eligible households were randomly sorted and the
first 22 selected for the baseline survey. This resulted in 53 percent of households on average being
selected for the project; across all villages, the share of households enrolled in the study ranged
from 15 to 100 percent. A total of 3,701 households were sampled for the baseline and 3,139 were
surveyed at baseline (85 percent). The majority of households sampled but not interviewed either
had moved away from the village (N=219) or turned out to be ineligible because their plots were
too small or too large to be classified as small scale farmer (N=146).

3.2

Experimental design

The study took place over two years and was designed to coincide with the agricultural cycle
(see Appendix figure B.1), which starts with field preparation in September, followed by planting
activities around the time of the first rains in November. Planting is followed by weeding between
January and April, which is also the time referred to as the “hungry season” or “lean season”. In
April, early crops start to become available and harvest begins in earnest in May. Between August
21

Villages were ineligible if: (1) other projects had been conducted there in the recent past, (2) the village bordered
a village that was in the study pilot, (3) the village bordered a village already listed, (4) the village had fewer than
17 households, or (5) it was impossible to get a 4x4 vehicle within a 5km radius of the village during rainy season.
Out of an initial list of 201 eligible villages, 25 were eliminated for a failure to meet one or more of the eligibility
criteria that had been overlooked during the screening process. In addition, one village refused to participate in the
baseline survey.
22
We also restricted our sample to households with at least 2 acres of land to distinguish households with very
small scale home gardens from households engaged in crop production, and also to increase the likelihood of suﬃcient
harvest to repay the loan. Together, the land size restrictions excluded less than 0.5 percent of households.

11

and October, few agricultural activities take place. We refer to study year 1 as covering the 2013-14
agricultural cycle and study year 2 covering the 2014-15 agricultural cycle. The study design is
summarized in Appendix figure B.2.
The study included two main loan treatment arms: a cash loan treatment and a maize loan
treatment, both oﬀered at the start of the hungry season (January). Repayment was due at harvest
(July), and loans could be repaid in either cash or maize (or both). The two treatment arms
oﬀer trade-oﬀs. On the one hand, providing the staple food oﬀers a direct way of targeting food
shortages. On the other hand, cash oﬀers a more flexible alternative that can better address nonfood consumption needs, though it may be more prone to wasteful consumption than maize. In year
1, both treatment arms were rolled out in January 2014. Of the 175 study villages, 58 (1033 farms)
were assigned to a control group, which received no intervention, 58 (1092 farms) were assigned
to the cash loan treatment, and 59 (1095 farms) were assigned to a maize loan treatment in the
first year of the program. In the second year of the program, the treatment groups were rotated:
20 villages that were in the control group in year 1 were rotated to either the maize loan or cash
loan treatment arms (10 each), and 29 cash loan villages and 28 maize loan villages were rotated
to the control group. Treatment rotation was designed to investigate the persistence of the results
for villages phased out after one year, and to separate the impact of repeated treatment from first
time treatment.
To measure the extent to which farmers adjust their production plan with earlier knowledge of
hungry season credit, we also varied the timing of the loan announcement in the second year of
the program. Half (40) of the treated villages received notification before the start of the planting
season, in September, while the other half of treated villages was only informed about the loan
program in January. In addition to the loan treatments, a small number of villages (6 villages /
91 farms in year 1 and 5 villages / 81 farms in year 2) were assigned to an income eﬀect control
group, which provided a cash grant of 60 Kwacha, corresponding to the median value assigned to
participation in the loan groups in choice experiments.23 Cash grant villages were randomly selected
from villages initially assigned to the control group.
Details of the cash and maize loans
In the maize loan treatment arm, households were oﬀered three 50 kilogram bags of unpounded
maize. Maize is the staple crop in Zambia and 150 kilograms provides enough grain for a family of
five to cover its basic consumption needs for at least two months during the peak hungry season. In
the cash loan treatment arm, households were oﬀered 200 Kwacha (~ USD 33), which corresponded
approximately to the value of the three maize bags at oﬃcial government prices (65 Kwacha per
bag) at baseline. In both treatment arms, repayment was due in July when most harvest activities
were completed. In the first year of the program, households could repay either 4 bags of maize or
23

For further details on choice experiments, see Appendix C.2.

12

260 Kwacha (or a mix at K65 per bag). Villages randomly selected for the “cash only” repayment
program in the second year of the study had to repay 260 Kwacha.24 While both treatment arms
were designed to reflect an interest rate of about 30 percent over 5 months (or a roughly 4.5 percent
monthly interest rate), actual interest rates are hard to calculate due to substantial regional and
seasonal fluctuations in grain prices, and limited information on the transaction costs associated
with buying and selling maize locally. As shown in Appendix table B.1, interest rates in the maize
arm vary between -11 and 33 percent depending on which maize price is used in the calculation,
and on what repayment modality farmers chose.
To make the two loan programs as comparable as possible, we conducted a series of hypothetical
choice experiments in villages outside of the study sample but within the study area in November
2013. In these choice experiments, respondents (N=72) were asked a series of dichotomous choice
questions on whether they would prefer a loan of three bags of maize over a cash loan of x Kwacha,
with x varied between 50 and 600 Kwacha. 84.7 percent of respondents preferred a maize loan over
a cash loan of 175 Kwacha, while only 36 percent preferred the maize loan over a cash loan of 250
Kwacha. As part of these choice experiments, we also asked about timing and acceptable interest
rates. Specifically, respondents were asked if they would take up a maize (cash) loan that paid 3
bags (200 Kwacha) in January with a repayment of 4 bags (265 Kwacha) due in subsequent months.
While only 27.8 (maize) and 20.8 (cash) respondents were interested in a loan with repayments in
May, acceptance rate jumped to to 81.9 and 83.3 with repayment in June for maize and cash loans,
respectively. Responses to these questions determined final loan contract details. Further detail on
the implementation of the choice experiments is provided in Appendix C.2.

3.3

Implementation

Both loan treatments were administered under the “Chipata Loan Project (CLP)” to distinguish
loan operations from the survey visits conducted by Innovations for Poverty Action (IPA). This
distinction between the CLP and IPA brands and staﬃng was intended to assure participants that
survey responses would not aﬀect loan eligibility. We also ensured that staﬀ members working
on loan implementation did not do household surveys to minimize the risk of surveyor bias. All
study households in villages randomly selected for treatment were eligible for loans in the first year.
In year 2, the same rules applied. In villages treated in both years, i.e., in villages where loans
were oﬀered again in the second year of the study, eligibility was further restricted to households
who fully repaid in year 1. Loan program participation did not aﬀect any of the survey activities.
The loan intervention was announced to households during a village meeting to which eligible
24

Requiring cash repayment was tested in the second year for programmatic reasons, to see if administration
costs could be reduced without aﬀecting program impacts. We observe no eﬀect from this variant in repayment
requirements on take up, repayment or any of our main outcomes.

13

households were invited.25 At the meeting, project staﬀ described the terms of the loan and logistics
surrounding distribution and repayment. Loan enrollment and consent forms were provided to
eligible households.
Loans were distributed between 3 days and one week after the village meeting at a location
convenient for transportation. Project staﬀ registered attendees, confirmed their identity using
the national registration card,26 and collected their signed enrollment and consent forms. Before
finalizing the transaction, project staﬀ confirmed that the participant understood the terms of the
loan. The loans (cash or maize) were handed over and a receipt was provided to the household and
kept for project records.
Repayment was due in early July. Villages were notified in advance about the date of repayment
as well as the central locations at which repayment would be collected. Two attempts at collecting
repayment were made. Households were provided with a repayment receipt upon full repayment.
Throughout the project, households were told that the program might or might not continue in
future years, which accurately represented the study team’s knowledge. Further summary statistics
on repayment patterns are described below.
3.3.1

Randomization

In year 1, treatments were assigned at the village level using min-max T randomization (Bruhn and
McKenzie 2009), checking balance on both household and village characteristics. The approach relies
on repeated village-level assignment to treatment and selects the draw that results in the smallest
maximum t-statistic for any pairwise comparison across treatment arms. Balance was tested for
household level baseline variables, village size and geographic block dummies, with results described
in Section 5.1. The smallest p-value for the pairwise comparisons observed in the final draw was
p = 0.213. In year 2, treatment assignment was balanced on the same variables plus harvest output
from year 1, and stratified by year 1 treatment. In other words, year 2 treatment assignment was
carried out within each year 1 treatment arm, with assignment to both the main treatment arms
(control, cash loan and maize loan) and the sub-treatments (income eﬀect control, early notification
and cash repayment).
3.3.2

Attrition and selection

Appendix table B.2 reports the number of households sampled in each survey round, and the probability of being surveyed as a function of treatment. The coeﬃcients and standard errors are from
25
Ineligible households were not barred from listening in. Eligible households could send an adult representative
if the household head was not available to attend. All village headmen were eligible for the loan, even if they were
not sampled for the baseline survey (and are therefore not in our study sample). In addition, the baseline data for 3
households who were surveyed was lost. They are dropped from the sample.
26
In select cases, a household representative picked up the loan. In these cases, the representative needed to carry
the loan-holder’s NRC card with him or her.

14

OLS regressions for each survey round, with errors clustered at the village level. Overall, attrition
rates are low: 3,030 out of the 3,139 households (96.5 percent) enrolled at baseline completed the
endline survey. We do not find any diﬀerences in attrition overall or in the probability of participating in specific survey rounds across treatment arms.
We also examine whether household self-selection into the program varied by treatment. Appendix table B.3 shows the stages of program implementation. First, households were invited to
participate in the village meeting based on random sampling (year 1). To be eligible for borrowing, households had to both attend the meeting and hand in a consent form. The latter step was
completed after learning treatment status and so is the most susceptible to non-random attrition
(column 3). In year 1, there was no selection into meeting attendance or eligibility. In year 2, there
was some modest selection into meeting attendance (over 90 percent attendance in all treatments
and sub-treatments), and no further selection into eligibility. Column 4 of Appendix table B.3 also
previews our take-up results, which we turn to next.
3.3.3

Take up and repayment

Table 1 shows loan take up, which was over 98 percent in both years, suggesting that the borrowing
rates available through the intervention were well below those associated with comparable borrowing
opportunities in local markets. High repayment rates (94 percent) in year 1, followed by high take
up rates in villages treated in both years, indicate that high take up was not driven by expectations
of default.
Repayment was substantially lower in year 2, with an average repayment rate of 80 percent in
villages receiving the program for the first time. The decline in repayment appears to be driven
in part by worse rainfall patterns and lower overall agricultural output in 2015. In addition to
diﬀerences in harvest incomes, we also observed behavioral diﬀerences in villages treated for the
second time in year 2, with a 6 percentage point decline in repayment rates in villages where
nobody had previously defaulted, and a 29 percentage point decline in repayment in villages where
at least one farmer had defaulted in year 1. The particularly large drop in repayment in villages with
prior default also suggest some learning about enforcement. In the absence of legal consequences
– the only punishment was ineligibility in future years – defaulting on the loan may have been a
rational choice even if it excluded farmers from future borrowing.

4

Data and descriptive statistics

We start this section with further description of the data and our main outcome variables. Then
we turn to a set of descriptive results that provide contextual information and validate some of our
modeling choices.

15

4.1

Data and measurement

We rely on both household survey and administrative loan data in our analysis. Comprehensive
surveys of all study households were conducted at baseline (November-December 2013), harvest of
year 1 (July-August 2014) and harvest of year 2 (July-August 2015). We refer to these as long recall
surveys since they ask questions about the preceding agricultural cycle. Surveys on labor activities,
consumption and farming practices were collected on an ongoing rolling sample. For these surveys,
smaller survey teams visited a random (rotating) sample of villages each week. We refer to these
as short recall surveys since they primarily ask about activities in the past two days to two weeks.
Sample sizes for some outcomes vary because the length of the short recall survey varied over the
course of the project (see Appendix C.1). A total of 15,044 observations from the sample of 3,139
households were collected over the course of the study. Appendix C.1 summarizes sample sizes and
key content collected in each survey.
4.1.1

Outcome measures

We focus on three main outcome types, based on the predictions in our conceptual framework:27 (1)
labor allocation and daily earnings, (2) agricultural output, and (3) consumption. In many cases,
we focus on data collected during the hungry season (January - March) of each year.
We rely on the short recall survey rounds to construct labor allocation measures over the week
prior to the survey during the hungry season. Labor allocation outcomes include (a) family labor sold
to other farms (ganyu sold), (b) labor labor purchased (ganyu hired) and (c) family labor invested
on-farm. We construct measures on both the extensive margin and as a continuous measure, at the
household level. Our continuous measure is in hours, summed across all individuals in the household
(i.e. a total household hours measure), to account for the fact that ganyu does not always last the
full day and a partial day of ganyu sold might still allow for some time invested on-farm.
We also construct a measure of daily earnings during the hungry season. We again use the short
recall surveys, which ask respondents about earnings from ganyu sold by each household member
over the past week, and calculate average daily earnings at the household level based on days worked
and total earnings. We winsorize the top 1 or 5 percent of household-level average daily earnings
to address outlier observations and analyze daily earnings – as our proxy for local wages – first at
the household and then at the village level, where we further reduce noise by focusing on median
earnings within the village. Villages with no ganyu activities reported in a month receive a missing
value.
To measure agricultural output, farmers were asked to report, by crop, output in kilograms as
well as the the total value of the harvest, including early consumption and crops still on the field at
27

Our
data
collection
and
analysis
https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/130/.

follows

16

a

pre-analysis

plan

available

at

the time of the interview. We aggregate the total value across all crops, and calculate a constant
price series to remove fluctuations in crop value across survey rounds in our main specification. We
also construct an alternative value measure based on own reported prices to allow treatment to
aﬀect eﬀort seeking out better prices, for example.
Our main consumption measure is the number of meals consumed in a day by adult members
of the household, measured during our short recall data collection rounds. While this is a coarse
measure of consumption, reductions in the number of meals per day points to severe food shortages,
and has the advantage of being relatively easy to measure. We collected this outcome over a twoday recall period during the a short-recall surveys. We supplement the measure of meals consumed
with a measure of grain available for consumption, which we code as a binary indicator that equals
one if the household had fully depleted their grain reserves at the time of the survey. In addition,
we collect data on households’ perceived food security and construct an index of z-scores based on
responses in the control group.
In addition to these main variables, we analyze several additional outcomes in Section 6, which
we describe as they arise.
4.1.2

Heterogeneity measures

We categorize households by their liquid resources using baseline savings in grain (valued in Kwacha)
and cash. Conceptually, this is intended to represent the liquid resources available to the household
at the beginning of period 1 in the model, Si0 . Baseline survey data collection coincided with
planting, so this measure is net of early season investment and consumption decisions since the
previous harvest. Since the primary role of Si0 in the model is to generate variation in hungry season
interest rates, we also show results based on heterogeneity in reported interest rates on borrowing
at baseline. Of course, numerous other factors may influence households’ cost of borrowing during
the hungry season and interest rates are likely to be reported with considerable error.28 With this
in mind, we use reported interest rates at baseline to examine the robustness of our findings.
Appendix figure B.3 shows the correlation of initial resources with self-reported baseline interest
rates. The gradient is monotonically negative (higher resources correspond to lower reported interest
rates) for households with above median baseline resources, and flat for households with below
median resources (all of whom have very little liquid savings). The shape of this relationship helps
determine our functional form assumptions in our analysis of heterogeneity by initial resources.
28

We pre-specified analyzing heterogeneous treatment eﬀects by baseline grain and cash resources but not by
baseline reported interest rates. We also pre-specified analyzing heterogeneous responses to labor availability measured
as the baseline ratio of workers per acre. However, additional information about local land markets suggests that this
is not a good measure of labor constraints (see Section 4.2), since the allocation of land depends both on productivity
and favoritism. Results are available upon request.

17

4.2

Descriptive statistics

Seasonality in resources and consumption As illustrated in Figure 1, households draw down
their cash and grain reserves early in the year, and begin to replenish them in April and May.
The period between January and March is referred to as the “hungry season” throughout rural
Zambia. It also coincides with the time when farmers have crops on their fields and on-field activities
(particularly weeding) peak, as illustrated in the agricultural calendar shown in Appendix figure
B.1. This shortage of resources during the hungry season is anticipated by farmers: at baseline, 76
percent of households did not expect their maize reserves to last until the next harvest, and most
expected to run out of maize in January or February. While grain and cash reserves are low on
average, we document substantial variation in reserves and in households’ ability to smooth resources
and consumption across periods. Figure 1 shows seasonal patterns in cash and grain availability
and consumption for the top and bottom quartile of the control group in terms of baseline food and
cash reserves (liquid resources). The top panel shows median cash (left) and grain (right) reserves,
measured in 100 Kwacha, per month. The bottom panel shows median total liquidity (cash +
grain, left) and the mean number of meals consumed per day by adult members of the household
(right). These measures show considerable seasonality, which – consistent with the model described
in Section 2 – is more severe for households with low resource availability than for high resource
households.
Savings, credit and eﬀective interest rates As in many rural developing country settings,
access to formal savings and credit markets is limited in rural Zambia. At baseline, only 5.6 percent
of households report saving in a bank; slightly more (9.1 percent) report saving with friends, family
or employers. By far the most common savings strategy, reported by 76.7 percent of households,
is saving money at home. The median self reported cash savings (a measure likely to be reported
with substantial error) at the start of the planting season of the first year was 80 Kwacha or around
14 USD. Non-cash savings also occurs through grain storage, typically in a bamboo (62 percent of
respondents) or thatch (28 percent of respondents) granary. The median grain storage amount at
baseline was four bags, which would meet the maize needs of a typical family of five for about three
months. Sixty percent of households report storage losses in the past season.
Credit market access is also limited: only 5 percent of household respondents at baseline report
accessing formal cash loans from banks, credit unions, NGOs or government sources. Informal
borrowing channels are slightly more common: around 7 percent of baseline respondents report
taking high interest loans from money-lenders, locally referred to as kaloba. Informal loans from
friends and family are reported by around 8.5 percent of baseline respondents, though reported
interest rates on these are also high (around 30 percent per month, measured at endline). Transfers
between households are common at planting and harvest time, when around 40 percent of households
report recent transfers. During the hungry season, this number drops to 15 percent.
18

To measure interest rates, we ask households at baseline how much they would have to repay
in one month if they borrowed 50 Kwacha that day from a source other than a friend or family
member. The implied monthly interest rate is around 40 percent for households with low baseline
grain and cash reserves; measured interest rates decline slightly with baseline reserves for households
with above median reserves, though rates are still high (around 34 percent) for even the best-oﬀ of
our study sample (see Appendix figure B.3). In the hungry season, sixty percent of control group
households report that they would be unable to borrow 50 Kwacha in cash that day.
Participation in microcredit institutions, rotating savings and credit associations (ROSCAs) and
village savings and loan associations (VSLAs) are each reported by around 1 percent of baseline
respondents. In-kind input loans are more common than opportunities for borrowing in cash or food:
40 percent of baseline respondents accessed an in-kind input loan, typically seeds and chemicals
provided by outgrower companies or agro-dealers.
Local labor markets Local wage earning opportunities for study households are defined largely
by piece-wise labor contracts locally referred to as ganyu. In focus groups, respondents described
ganyu both as the most common strategy to cope with temporary cash needs and as an activity
most farmers would rather avoid if possible.29 In the baseline survey, the most common response
to why an individual in the household worked ganyu during the previous agricultural season was to
obtain food. The second most common reason was to access cash for a personal purchase, and the
third was to deal with an emergency. When asked what the household would do in the coming year
if they ran out of food, 56 percent reported that they would do ganyu. The next most common
answers included borrowing from friends or family (28 percent), using savings (22 percent) anding
sell assets or livestock (17 percent), all of which may be diﬃcult to rely on during the hungry season.
Typical ganyu contracts specify relatively small tasks (such as weeding an acre of land) that can
be completed by an individual within a working day; larger contracts also occur, and are typically
completed by families or groups of individuals. Further detail on how ganyu participation varies
with age and gender of household members is discussed in Fink et al. (2014), which describes a
pilot for the current study.30
Almost two thirds of farmers in our sample reported having engaged in ganyu activities in
the previous season at baseline. This number is decreasing in baseline grain and cash resources.
Appendix table B.4 shows how hours of ganyu sold over the previous week (and other baseline
variables) vary across quartiles of the distribution of baseline resources: 75 percent of households in
the bottom quartile did ganyu the previous season while only 46 percent of households in the top
29

In our baseline survey, around 90 percent of households disagreed with the statements “Doing ganyu increases
people’s respect for you in the community” and “Successful farmers do lots of ganyu”. Around 60 percent of households
agreed with the statements “Lazy people do lots of ganyu” and “People who can’t budget do lots of ganyu”.
30
Additional analysis of patterns of labor allocation by gender and the relationship between intrahousehold decisionmaking measures and outcomes for this intervention can be found in Hausdorﬀ (2016).

19

quartile did.31
At baseline, around two-thirds of households anticipate doing ganyu in the coming agricultural
season. These expectations appear reasonably accurate. Among control group households that
predicted at baseline that they would have to do ganyu in the coming year, around 76 percent did;
among those that predicted not doing ganyu, around 41 percent ended up working oﬀ-farm. At the
same time, the likelihood that a household sells ganyu is not constant across years. Among control
group households that did not engage in ganyu the year before the study, 40 percent sold ganyu the
following year. The anticipated nature of ganyu labor is an important departure from most of the
existing literature which has focused on family labor sales as an ex post mechanism for smoothing
transitory shocks (e.g., Kochar 1999).
Ganyu wage rates are typically negotiated on a case-by-case basis. The majority of casual
labor transactions take place in or near the worker’s own village, which may be explained by low
population density and a general absence of motorized transport. The majority (> 80 percent) of
farms hiring ganyu are small (i.e., fewer than 5 hectares of land), with some farms acting as both
buyers and sellers during a single season (though typically at diﬀerent points in the season). Given
that most labor transactions happen within a village, each rural community can be thought of as
its own labor market, where wages are determined endogenously.
Seasonal migration is uncommon in rural Zambia. In our sample, in any given month, only
around 3 percent of households report that someone who is typically a member of the household
moved away temporarily. This number peaks around and immediately after harvest, and is lowest during the hungry season when around 2 percent of households report temporary migration.
Permanent migration is more common, as suggested by data on remittances: around 20 percent of
households report that someone who does not live in the village contributes regularly to household
income.
Local land markets Land is still relatively abundant in Zambia, with a population density of
22 inhabitants per square kilometer (World Bank 2017). Land markets for sale or lease are largely
absent and most tenure is customary with annual land allocations by the village head person.
Anecdotally, these allocations are determined by a complex set of factors, including past production,
ability to use the land and favoritism. In general, most farmers do not appear to view land access
as a constraint to production. At baseline, over 60 percent of respondents said that they could
have farmed more land than than did in the previous season if they had more inputs. The average
acreage reported available for cultivation was 6.3, but on average only 4.5 acres of land were used
for growing crops. We therefore choose to abstract from per acre measures of agricultural output
31
Conditional on working, households sold an average of 12 person-hours of ganyu labor per week during the
hungry season. These numbers ignore the substantial additional time burden associated with searching for ganyu.
Surveys during the hungry season of year 1 of the project indicate that control group households spend around 3
hours searching for ganyu each week, conditional on searching.

20

(yield) and focus instead on total agricultural output at the household level.

5

Experimental results

In this section, we present our main experimental results. We start by outlining our empirical
strategy and then present key results on labor allocation, agricultural output and consumption.

5.1

Empirical strategy

We estimate intention-to-treat regressions, including all households regardless of whether they selected into the loan. High take up in both years means that these estimates are very close to the
treatment on the treated eﬀect. For our main outcomes, we begin with a pooled specification that
averages across years and loan treatment arms:
(12)

yivt = ↵ + loanvt + ⌧t + Xi0 + uivt

where yivt is an outcome of interest for household i located in village v at time t, loanvt indicates
that the village was assigned to one of the two loan treatments, ⌧t are time dummies and Xi0 are
household-level controls, measured at baseline. Time units t are years for our long recall surveys
and month-years for our short recall surveys. Treatment assignment varies over time according to
the treatment rotation between years, as described in Section 3.2, and our main analysis estimates
the average impact of first-time treatment in either year (i.e., we exclude villages treated in year
1 from the year 2 data). Errors are clustered at the level of the randomization unit, the village v,
which addresses both unobserved village level shocks and serial correlation across study years. We
also show separate results by treatment arm, using estimating equation (12) and allow

to diﬀer

for the cash and maize loans.
We provide a number of supplementary analyses to further investigate potential mechanisms
and also to address alternative interpretations of our main results. First, we test heterogeneous
treatment eﬀects by baseline resource availability. To estimate how treatment eﬀects vary over the
distribution of baseline grain and cash reserves, we estimate the following model:
yivt = ↵ +

1 loanvt

+

2 Si

+

2
3 Si

+

4 loanvt

⇥ Si +

5 loanvt

⇥ Si2 + ⌧t + uivt

(13)

where S are liquid resources as discussed in Section 4.1.2. We summarize the results by plotting adjusted predictions evaluated at the mean S in each quartile of the baseline distribution.32
32

We omit baseline controls to allow for other household characteristics correlated with baseline grain and cash
reserves to vary by quartile. We focus on year 1 in these figures because of the less precisely estimated main eﬀects in
year 2 and because baseline measures of available resources continue to predict year 2 outcomes in many cases, but
less strongly than for year 1. The set of figures presented in this section for year 2 (excluding villages treated in year
1) is shown in Appendix B. To examine robustness of these results, we also use reported interest rates at baseline

21

Standard errors for these adjusted predictions are calculated using the delta method. We examine
heterogenous treatment eﬀects for each of our main outcome measures.
Second, we examine the degree to which prior knowledge of seasonal shortages aﬀects agricultural
decisions by varying the timing of loan announcement (holding fixed the timing of loan delivery)
in the second treatment year. Third, we investigate persistence by phasing some farmers into and
some farmers out of the program in year 2. In our main results, we focus on villages assigned to
receive treatment for the first time and exclude year 2 data from villages that were treated in year
1. We analyze villages with repeated or discontinued programs separately to investigate persistence
of the treatment eﬀects by interacting an indicator for a loan treatment in year 2 with treatment
status in year 1.33 Finally, we show treatment eﬀects for the impacts of a small cash grant to rule
out income eﬀects.
Our regression estimates identify the causal eﬀect of the loan under the identifying assumption
that treatment assignment is orthogonal to uivt . Appendix table B.5 presents the means and
standard deviations of baseline survey characteristics among study households, by treatment arm
for years 1 and 2 (columns 1-3 and 4-6, respectively). Column 7 shows the largest pairwise t-statistic
and column 8 the largest pairwise normalized diﬀerence. Normalized diﬀerences are small and all
fall below the rule of thumb cutoﬀ of 0.25 (Imbens and Wooldridge 2009), despite some marginal
diﬀerences across treatments. Overall, the randomization successfully balanced households across
treatment arms. The variables shown in Appendix table B.5, up through crop diversity, were used
in the randomization to test balance; the extended set of control variables are used throughout the
analysis. Results are similar if only variables used in the randomization are included as controls.

5.2

Impact of lowering borrowing rates through seasonal loans

The model presented in Section 2 predicts labor, consumption and production impacts from changing
borrowing rates. We test the empirical predictions described in Section 2.2.4, based on access to
lower interest loans for a sub-set of farmers in the labor market.
Prediction 1: Labor demand increases and labor supply decreases, causing equilibrium
wages to increase We examine impacts on labor allocation in Table 2. Panel A shows the average
treatment eﬀect for both loan arms, and Panel B estimates separate eﬀects by treatment arm. We
present and discuss all of our average treatment eﬀect tables with a similar layout.
Our main prediction is that loans will reduce net labor supply for treated farmers through
instead of S in estimating equation 13.
33
Our pre-analysis plan was not clear about how we would analyze persistence. Our pre-specification of eﬀect of
persistence focused on results among villages treated in year 1 but not year 2 rather than the eﬀect of repeated
treatment. The analysis presented separately by first-time versus repeated treatment allows for clearer interpretation
of the results, particularly given the somewhat surprising counterproductive eﬀect of repeated treatment described
below.

22

decreases in family labor sales (ganyu sold) and/or an increase in hiring (ganyu hired). We test for
these responses using data from the short-recall surveys during the hungry season, where households
report on labor activities in the previous week. Labor outcomes are for the entire household. Column
1 shows that the likelihood of selling ganyu falls by around 3 percentage points, on average, oﬀ of a
mean of 31 percent in the control group. On average, this extensive margin eﬀect is not significantly
diﬀerent from zero, though the 4.2 percentage point decrease in the maize loan treatment arm (Panel
B) has a p-value < 0.10. Turning to the continuous measure of total family hours sold, treated
households sell an average of 0.9 fewer hours or 23 percent less ganyu per week (column 2), on
average. The eﬀect on hours sold is also (insignificantly) larger in the maize loan treatment arm.
Treatment has positive, and marginally significant, eﬀects on hiring, on both the extensive
margin (column 3) and continuous measures (column 4, collected only for a sub-set of households
in an extended hungry season survey module). The likelihood of any hiring (column 3) increased
by 2.6 percentage points, oﬀ of a mean of 10.5 percent, and the number of hours hired increases
by around 1.5 hours or 45 percent (column 4). The impact is insignificantly larger in the cash loan
arm (Panel B) for both outcomes.
The decreases in net labor supply predicted by the model reflect both lower labor supply and
higher on-farm labor demand. Hours of family labor invested on the farm over the past week increase
by around 6.1 hours or around 12 percent (column 5), with similar impacts across treatment arms.
Column 6 sums the total hours of labor (own and hired) invested on farm over the past week, and
shows a 13 percent increase relative to the control group average. The estimated impact on-farm
family labor inputs relative to the impact on family labor sales suggest that households actually
increase labor supply by over 5 hours per week on average, in contrast with the model’s predicted
decrease in labor supply due to positive income eﬀects from lowering eﬀective interest rates. Given
that ganyu work is strenuous and accompanied by substantial unmeasured search costs (and social
stigma), the costs of doing ganyu may be considerably higher than the number of hours spent
working; increased consumption may also have led to more energy for on-farm work. We oﬀer
further discussion of magnitudes in Section 6.
Table 3 shows our estimated wage impacts; since daily or hourly wages are not defined in the
piece rate work arrangements that we observe, we use daily earnings as our proxy for local wage
rates. With higher demand and lower supply, we find the expected increases in daily earnings.
Columns 1 and 2 show regression results using household level data, winsorizing the top 1 and 5
percent of observations within treatment and year, respectively. Earnings increase by 2.6 or 2.2
Kwacha per day on average, corresponding to an 15 to 17 percent increase over the control group
mean, on average (Panel A). Increases are larger in the maize arm for both measures (Panel B),
where the decrease in oﬀ farm labor sales was also higher. Column 3 shows village-level regressions
using median reported daily earnings at the village-month level, based on the household measure
winsorized at the 95th percentile. The magnitudes line up reasonably well with the household
23

level data. Given that equilibrium eﬀects should be proportional to treatment intensity, we show
estimated earnings impacts by the share of the village eligible for treatment in Appendix Figure B.4.
The estimates are noisy, but show a positive gradient, indicating that a higher treatment intensity
is associated with larger general equilibrium eﬀects.34
Prediction 2: Agricultural output increases We show average eﬀects on log of agricultural
output in Table 4. Panel A shows that agricultural production (as measured by total harvest
value using nominal (column 1) and constant (column 2) prices increased by 8.1 to 8.5 percent on
average, with larger, but not statistically diﬀerent, point estimates for the cash loan treatment arm
(11 percent vs. 5 to 6 percent increases). Given a control group mean of 3500 Kwacha at constant
prices, an 8 percent increase corresponds to a treatment eﬀect of around 280 Kwacha, which is
very similar in magnitude to the loan amount, and corresponds to about 15-20 days of daily labor
earnings. We discuss the relative magnitudes of the labor and input eﬀects in further detail in
Section 6 below.
Prediction 3: Period 1 consumption increases and consumption seasonality decreases
Table 5 shows the treatment eﬀect on consumption and food security measures, with a primary focus
on the hungry season, when constrained households reduce their consumption most, as shown in
Figure 1. To assess the impact of lower eﬀective borrowing rates, we analyze eﬀects on the number
of adult meals consumed per day in the past week and food availability in the home, along with an
index of food security.
We find substantial average improvements in consumption and food security outcomes in response to loan access. As shown in column 1, the likelihood of having any grain in the home
increased by 11 percentage points, an eﬀect that is almost entirely driven by maize loan arm. The
food security index improved by around one quarter of a standard deviation, on average, with larger
eﬀects in the maize loan arm (column 2). Adults eat more meals of the staple food during the hungry
season as a result of treatment, as shown in column 3. Daily meals increase by around 0.09 meals
on average, which corresponds to about three quarters of the diﬀerence between average meals consumed in the control group between the hungry season (column 3) and the harvest season (column
4).35 In contrast, at harvest, we see no eﬀect of loan access on consumption outcomes (column 4).
This means that the treatment increased consumption overall, with a shift in consumption towards
the hungry season, and an overall reduction in consumption seasonality.
34

The slope on share of village treated should not be interpreted causally: larger villages, which diﬀer on numerous
dimensions, will have a smaller share of the village treated, given our sampling strategy. That said, controlling for
important village-level labor market determinants, such as distance to road, does not substantially alter the result.
35
We also see positive but statistically insignificant eﬀects on child consumption of the staple food, and on both
adult and child consumption of protein. Note that child grain consumption demonstrates considerably less seasonality
than does adult consumption in the control group. Results are available upon request.

24

Prediction 4: Impacts are decreasing in liquid resources To the extent that poorer households – as measured by baseline grain and cash resources (see Section 4.1.2) – face higher interest
rates, they will also be relatively more aﬀected by a change in average interest rates. This analysis
focuses on year 1, for which the measure of baseline resources is most valid, and show results for
year 2 in Appendix figures B.5, B.6 and B.7. Robustness checks using baseline reported interest
rates and an alternative heterogeneity measure, are shown in Appendix figures B.8, B.9 and B.10.36
We begin with heterogeneity in labor adjustments. Figure 2 plots adjusted predictions at the
mean of each quartile of the baseline distribution of grain and cash reserves for our continuous
measures (total hours over the past week) of labor market adjustments for both the control and
treatment groups in year 1.37 The top panel shows eﬀects on hours of ganyu sold, the middle panel
shows the eﬀect on hiring, and the bottom panel shows total family hours spent on-farm. In the
bottom two quartiles, the primary adjustments are a shift from selling ganyu to working on-farm; in
the top two quartiles, increases in labor inputs come both from more ganyu hiring and more family
labor invested on-farm. Overall, households across the distribution increase on-farm labor inputs,
which suggests that non-treated farms absorb most of the additional labor demand. The estimated
average program impact in the bottom quartile is 5 additional hours of on-farm inputs (hired plus
family labor) per week, which is slightly below the cross sectional diﬀerence in labor inputs between
the bottom and the top quartile in the control group (6 hours).38
Second, Figure 3 shows that the average treatment eﬀect on agricultural output in year 1 is
largest in the bottom quartile, and declines with initial resources. Higher labor inputs among
households at the bottom of the distribution of initial resources may help equalize the marginal
product of labor across farms. While we cannot directly observe the marginal product of labor, we
speculate that the poorest households, who face the highest cost of hungry season borrowing, have
the highest marginal product of labor on their farms at baseline. As a result, a reallocation of labor
may help equalize the marginal product of labor across farms.
Finally, we compare our main measures of consumption (food availability and adult meals per
day) across the distribution of baseline resources for treatment and control villages during year 1
in Figure 4. The top panel of the figure shows that the likelihood that a household had any food
reserves during the hungry season is correlated with baseline resources, and that the treatment
eﬀect is largest at the bottom end of the resource distribution. In the top quartile, the treatment
eﬀect on food availability is statistically insignificant. The bottom panel of the figure shows similar
eﬀects on meals consumed during the hungry season in all quartiles. Given that base consumption
is substantially lower for the bottom quartile, this indicates a larger proportional improvement in
36
Note that baseline interest rates are negatively correlated with liquid resources, so we expect interaction terms
of the opposite sign for this alternative heterogeneity measure.
37
The underlying regression results for these analyses are shown in Appendix table B.6.
38
The diﬀerence in baseline resources between the bottom and top quartiles is almost 10 times the loan amount.
Baseline resources must cover a diverse set of expenditures including inputs, schooling and other household needs;
higher expenditure elasticities for unanticipated seasonal loans therefore seem plausible.

25

consumption for low resource households, and a reduction in consumption inequality as illustrated
by the substantially flatter resource-consumption relationship in Figure 4. The average increase
in consumption induced by the intervention in the bottom quartile of the resource distribution is
similar in magnitude to the cross-sectional diﬀerence in hungry season consumption between the
top and the bottom quartile in the control group.

6

Interpretation and robustness checks

To aid interpretation of the main results, we evaluate the plausibility of the magnitudes of our
findings and provide further evidence in this section. We then turn to a few alternative explanations
and robustness checks.

6.1

Magnitudes and mechanisms

Our main results suggest that a relative small loan, timed to coincide with seasonal shortages in
food and cash availability, led to substantial increases in on-farm labor inputs, agricultural output
and hungry-season consumption. While the consumption response is unsurprising given that loans
were subsidized and thus associated with both positive income and substitution eﬀects, the impacts
on labor and agricultural output are notable given both the size and timing of the loan. Rather
than a decrease in family labor supply due to the positive income eﬀects created by the loan, we
observe increases in family inputs on-farm that exceed the magnitude of the reduction in family
labor sales oﬀ-farm. This additional family labor supply may have been driven by improvements
in nutrition and energy (lower disutility from work), but could also reflect additional motivation to
repay the loan or supervision needs for hired labor. Our measure of hours of labor sold also neglects
search time, which is substantial. During the hungry season, households report spending two hours
looking for ganyu, with average work days of only 4 to 5 hours.
On average, we estimate that the loan program resulted in approximately 7 additional hours
of labor inputs per week on the family farm during the hungry season (Column 6, Table 2). This
increase is driven by increased hiring of external labor and well a substantial increase in family labor
on-farm. Taking the thirteen weeks of the hungry season from January to March as our temporal
reference frame, and assuming an average five hour work day on the field (as reported in our time
use questions), an additional 7 hours per week corresponds to approximately 18 additional days of
labor on the farm during the hungry season. We measure a treatment eﬀect on agricultural output
of around 280 Kwacha (Table 4), which implies an average marginal product of labor of around 15
Kwacha (assuming all other inputs remain fixed), which lines up almost exactly with average daily
earnings reported in Table 3.
Other adjustments, such as improvements in health and nutrition or increases in the use of
other inputs may have also contributed to additional family labor investments on-farm and higher
26

agricultural output. While we cannot precisely partition the output eﬀects according to these
other adjustments, we can use survey measures of health outcomes and other input use to test for
program impacts. Appendix table B.7 shows modest reductions in illness within the home and
improvements in mental health, suggesting that family labor inputs may have increased partially
due to fewer days lost to illness. Anthropometric measures are noisier and show little consistent
pattern. Appendix table B.8 reports impacts on (non-labor) inputs and shows small and mostly
negative changes as a result of treatment, suggesting that labor quantity and quality likely drive
the impacts on agricultural output.
We can also compare the size of the loan with the cost to the household of the labor market
adjustment we observe. On average, households in the control group sold 3.8 hours of ganyu per
week (Column 2, Table 2). With average daily earnings in the control group of 15 Kwacha, this
implies total earnings of around 148 Kwacha over the 13 weeks of the hungry season. The treatment
eﬀect on ganyu labor sales corresponds to an average of around 2.3 few days sold, or 40 Kwacha less
in ganyu earnings. Adding the average additional expenditure for ganyu hiring (66 Kwacha), this
implies that around 50 percent of the original loan amount (200 Kwacha) went to foregone earnings
plus wages paid to hired labor.
In addition to increasing hungry season consumption and on-farm labor, households may also
substitute away from other more expensive consumption smoothing strategies. We collect data on
several of these and show treatment eﬀects in Appendix table B.9. We analyze program impact on
six outcomes: formal loans (column 1), low interest informal loans from friends or family (column
2), informal high interest loans, typically from moneylenders (column 3), sales of assets (column 4)
and livestock (column 5) and consumption of green maize (column 6). All but the last of these were
reported retrospectively at the end of each season as part of the long recall surveys, and coded into
binary extensive margin variables, with villages treated in year 1 omitted from the year 2 data (i.e.,
we replicate the main specifications for these outcomes). Green maize consumption was recorded
during the hungry season with a two week recall period.
We find no eﬀect on input loans (column 1). The baseline mean rate of input loans is close to
40 percent, while all other forms of borrowing are relatively rare. Column 2 shows that informal
low interest borrowing declined insignificantly by about 1 percentage points, on average, relative
to a mean of 7 percent of control group households. Column 3 shows that the intervention had
the largest (relative) impact on high interest borrowing, which declined by around 2.6 percentage
points (40 percent) relative to a baseline mean of 6.5 percent, with larger eﬀects in the maize loan
treatment arm. Asset sales are unaﬀected, though column 5 shows small increases in livestock sales;
our long recall data collection does not allow us to determine whether these occurred during the
hungry season or at harvest (potentially to repay the loan). Green maize consumption (column 6)
was also unaﬀected by treatment.
Given that farmers had to repay 260 Kwacha after harvest, on average – which almost exactly
27

matches the estimated average increase in agricultural output– changes in farmers’ overall financial
situation at the end of the season were likely small, while welfare improvements associated with
better consumption during the hungry season may have been much larger.

6.2

Additional results

As outlined in our pre-analysis plan, our study design varied a number of other program features
to help understand underlying mechanisms.
6.2.1

Maize versus cash loans

In our main results, we show eﬀects for both the maize and cash treatment arms, and observe
generally statistically indistinguishable responses in both arms. That said, eﬀects on consumption
and some labor outcomes are slightly larger in the maize treatment arm, perhaps reflecting the
higher value of the loans during the hungry season. On the other hand, the estimated increase in
agricultural outputs is slightly higher in the cash treatment arm, due in part to the eﬀects in year
2 associated with early notification in this treatment arm. When we examine the main rationale
for maize loans – the lower anticipated likelihood of loan utilization for wasteful consumption –
we see very little diﬀerence in reported and observed behaviors. In Appendix table B.10 we show
estimates on treatment eﬀects with respect to a range of diﬀerent (potentially wasteful) expenditure
categories. We see little evidence of major expenditure adjustments in response to treatment overall,
and find no evidence of increased conspicuous consumption.39
6.2.2

Anticipated versus unanticipated loan availability

Table 6 reports the eﬀects of the year 2 sub-treatment that varied whether eligible households learned
about the loan program at the start of the hungry season (the same timing that was used in year 1)
or at planting time (early notification). If hungry season resource shortages (and interest rates) are
anticipated, farmers are likely to adjust production plans to accommodate outside labor activities.
Notifying farmers at the time they are making their production plans could increase the impact of
lower eﬀective borrowing rates, since farms can adjust crop mix and crop timing in anticipation of
loan availability. We interact treatment status with an indicator for early notification (the reference
timing is notification at the start of the hungry season) for our main outcomes (columns 1-5) and
for two supplementary outcomes relevant to planting season adjustments (columns 6-7): the acres
devoted to cash crops and the total value of capital inputs applied to the household’s fields. The
top set of results pools the cash and maize loan treatment arms; the bottom results shows eﬀects
for each treatment arm interacted with notification timing. To facilitate comparisons with the main
39

We see small increases in expenditure on sweets in the cash loan arm, driven entirely by families with young
children.

28

results, and to increase the distinction between early and late announcement timing, villages treated
in year 1 are excluded from the analysis.
While most estimates are imprecise due to the small sample size, we observe qualitatively larger
impacts on labor allocation and agricultural output value in villages notified at planting about
the loans (Panel A). Columns 6 and 7 suggest that some of this may be due to planting stage
adjustments: households apply more capital inputs if they know the loan is coming and devote
more acres to cash crops. Both the value of inputs used and the acres under cash crops in the
early notification treatment (i.e., the sum of the main eﬀect of the loan and the diﬀerential eﬀect
of early notification) is about 30 percent higher than in the control group. To put these numbers
into perspective, the 250 Kwacha of additional inputs is about the value of one 50 kilogram bag of
fertilizer (roughly half of the recommended fertilizer for one acre), and the impact on total acres
under production is around 5 percent of the average land area under production. Breaking the
results out by treatment arm (Panel B) oﬀers suggestive evidence that planting season notification
results in higher output value in the cash loan arm because of additional adjustment in inputs and
cropping decisions for this subgroup. This may suggest that the cash loan notification at planting
enabled some short run borrowing for planting stage investments, though we lack additional data
to back up that interpretation.
6.2.3

Persistence of treatment eﬀects

Table 7 shows the persistence of eﬀects from year 1 into year 2. Columns 1-5 show the eﬀects on our
main outcomes by year, while columns 6 and 7 show planting season outcomes that may have been
aﬀected if year 1 treatment eﬀects led to adjustments in production in the following year. Panel
A shows the eﬀects in year 1; Panel B breaks year 2 out by year 1 treatment status. Recall that
the main results described above pool year 1 treated villages with those treated for the first time in
year 2, i.e., they estimate the eﬀect of receiving the program for the first time.
Panel A of Table 7 shows that many of our main results are driven by outcomes in year 1.
Specifically, we see statistically significant decreases in hours sold (column 1), increases in hours
hired (column 2), increases in family hours spent on-farm (column 3), increases in output (column 4)
and consumption (column 5). Changes associated with planting season decisions show insignificant
eﬀects on agricultural inputs and acres devoted to cash crops in year 1, consistent with the timing of
loan notification that year. Panel B shows similar signs and magnitudes (given the wide confidence
intervals around most estimates) for villages treated for the first time for labor allocation, output
and consumption. Inputs and cash crops increase (insignificantly) more in year 2 than in year 1 for
villages treated for the first time, consistent with the notification timing results discussed above.
Panel B also shows year 2 results for villages treated in year 1, which are excluded from most of
the main analyses. While the estimates are imprecise, we find relatively little evidence of persistence,
though most signs are in the direction of the first-time treatment eﬀects. More surprisingly, we find
29

no eﬀect for villages treated twice, where farmers seem to have lower family labor on-farm and other
inputs, and lower output than farmers in in villages treated for the first time in year 2. In general
the total eﬀect of repeated treatment (sum of all three coeﬃcients in Panel B) is agricultural output
that is very similar to the pure control, i.e. villages that were never part of the loan program. It is
possible that the lack of repeated impact is simply a result of the small sample across year 2 subtreatments; it is however also possible that repeated loan availability led to behavioral adjustments
that were outside the scope of our data collection. Finally, we note that year 2 was a very diﬀerent
agricultural season than year 1: comparing the control group average output value shows that
farmers received about 12 percent lower income, on average, in year 2 than in year 1. Further
research is needed to better understand these dynamic eﬀects of lowering borrowing rates.

6.3

Alternative explanations and robustness checks

While our model and main results highlight the impact of lowering eﬀective borrowing rates on
households’ consumption and labor decisions, the provision of loans may have also have aﬀected
other household decisions, which may in turn have influenced both labor allocation and production.
We discuss other potential interpretations of our findings in this section, along with results that fall
outside of our model, including some robustness checks.
6.3.1

Grain prices and transactions

Households were told that they could do what they liked with the cash and maize provided to them
through the loans. Therefore, an increase in maize sales in maize loan villages and/or an increase
in maize purchases in cash loan villages may have changed the price of the staple crop, aﬀecting
the value of consumption or of output. Appendix table B.11 shows the treatment eﬀect, in year 2
only, for maize prices and transactions. Overall, we observe no eﬀect on either prices or transaction
probabilities, with point estimates very close to zero and standard errors that allow for adjustments
of up to around 25 percent of the control group mean price of 1 Kwacha/kg. These results focus on
year 2 since we did not start recording transactions carefully until after the year 1 harvest survey.
They average across all months to improve power, but if we restrict the regressions to the hungry
season months shortly after the loan was delivered, results are similar. A decline in prices does not
appear to drive the main consumption findings.
6.3.2

Income eﬀects

To distinguish temporal reallocation eﬀects from positive income eﬀects created by the loan intervention (due to below-market interest rates), we implemented a small cash transfer sub-treatment,
as described in Section 3.2. We calibrate the size of the income eﬀect in through a hypothetical
choice experiment (see Appendix C.2) in which households were asked to value the loan versus a
30

cash gift. In Table B.12, we test whether a transfer of 60 Kwacha at the start of the hungry season
led to a measurable eﬀect on our main outcomes. While our power is limited due to the small
sample size, we do not find any evidence for labor adjustments in response to the cash gift, which
suggests that the treatment eﬀects we measure are not driven by the relatively small net transfers
embedded in the loans.
6.3.3

Reporting bias

Given that we mostly rely on self-reported outcomes in our analysis, one obvious concern is that
household responses may have been aﬀected by reporting bias and thus threaten the validity of
our analysis. Even though we made an eﬀort to separate data collection from the loan program as
described above, it seems likely that at least some participating households associated the survey
with the loan program. Given that participants were generally happy with the loans (and wanted
more of them), responses could be biased by treated households responding more positively or by
making more eﬀort to provide the socially desired answer. We test for bias in our self reported
survey measures in two ways. First, we included a social psychology scale, adapted from Marlow
and Crowne (1961), designed to directly measure social desirability bias in a survey conducted
during the hungry season and in our endline survey. The module includes a series of questions
designed to prime social desirability bias, such as “Are you always courteous, even to people who
are disagreeable?” We construct a social desirability index based on responses to the eight questions
and test whether it is aﬀected by treatment, and then test whether there are any diﬀerences in the
response patterns across treatment arms. As a second robustness check, we also collected objective
measures of maize output in years 1 and 2 of the study. In year 1, enumerators visited the fields
of a sub-sample of respondents and measured the height of a typical maize stalk in the field. In
year 2, the approach was more systematic and involved sampling maize cobs and counting the
corresponding number of kernels. In both cases, we can directly compare objective measures of
output with reported measures, and test whether there are any systematic diﬀerences between the
two variables.
Results are shown in Table B.13. Panel A shows that the social desirability index is unaﬀected
by treatment in either survey round. The estimated treatment eﬀects are statistically insignificant
and very close to zero. We include no baseline controls in these regressions so that we can interpret
the R-squared associated with the regression. Treatment explains almost none of the variation in
the social desirability index measure.
In order to test whether treatment eligibility aﬀects reported agricultural output, we regress
self reported maize production on our objective measure of productivity, the loan treatment and
the interaction of the two, along with a measure of the share of the maize output that comes from
hybrid maize in Panel B. The interaction term is the regressor of interest, since it shows whether
the objective measure is diﬀerentially predictive of self reported outcomes among treated farmers.
31

If treatment leads to biased self reporting, we expect this term to be negative. In year 1, the sign
is positive. In year 2, it is negative, but small relative to the raw correlation between the objective
measure and the self report. Furthermore, the overall variation in the outcome explained by the
regressors is unchanged when the treatment variable is added (move from column 1 to 2 and 3 to
4). Both of these tests suggest that treatment status did not alter the reporting behavior of study
participants.

7

Model calibration and welfare implications

While our main results imply substantial benefits for treated farmers, the same is not necessarily true
for untreated farmers in intervention communities. Untreated farmers did not benefit from lower
borrowing costs, but were aﬀected indirectly through increases in labor demand and reductions in
labor supply of treated farmers. Higher equilibrium wages help cover hungry season consumption
needs for households that are net sellers of family labor, but also make it more expensive to hire
labor inputs. To provide a better sense of the welfare implications for both untreated farmers and to
explore eﬀects were the program scaled to cover all farmers in a village,40 we calibrate a simulation
of our model to the empirical values observed at baseline.
Specifically, we assume that output is determined by the Cobb-Douglas function as outlined
in Section 2, and that the distribution of farm productivity Ai is log-normal with mean µa and
standard deviation

a.

We then calibrate µa and

a

such that the distance between the empirically

observed and simulated baseline outputs is minimized. Appendix A.2 and Appendix table A.1
provide further details on the parametric assumptions made for the initial calibrations. In Figure 5,
we show simulated impacts on net labor supply, agricultural output value, consumption and utility
for both treated and untreated farmers in treatment communities, assuming that 50 percent of
farmers get access to subsidized loans. Results are summarized in Appendix table A.2. Similar to
our empirical findings, our simulations suggest a 10 percent increase in the equilibrium wage from
17.4 to 19.1 Kwacha. Figure 5 (top panel, right) shows the eﬀect on (gross) agricultural output value.
On average, agricultural output among treated farmers increases by 8.3 percent in our simulations
(almost identical to our treatment eﬀects) while the agricultural output of non-treated farmers falls
by 9.1 percent on average, since they supply more labor to the market and less to their own farms
in response to higher wages. This is illustrated in the top left panel of Figure 5: net labor supply
declines among treated farmers, and increases among untreated farmers in treated communities.
These adjustments by untreated households do not imply reductions in consumption and welfare.41 As illustrated by the two bottom panels of Figure 5, both hungry season consumption and
total utility show increases among untreated households due to positive wage income eﬀects. Hun40

In other words, we engage in “structured speculation” through the model calibration (Banerjee et al. 2017).
In our model framework, consumption over the two periods is a close proxy for welfare, since it accounts for
income from both wage earnings and agricultural output.
41

32

gry season consumption increases across the distribution of baseline resources for both treated and
untreated farmers, with substantially larger increases among treated (13 percent) than untreated
farmers (2 percent). Among untreated farmers, the utility gains are greatest at the bottom of the
initial resource distribution, and slightly negative among better oﬀ households. Among treated
farmers, utility gains are positive across almost the entire resource distribution, due to increases in
consumption and leisure.
While many microcredit programs lower interest rates for only a sub-set of the village (women
only or members of an agricultural cooperative, for example), an ideal policy intervention would
lower interest rates for all households through, for example, improvements in monitoring and enforcement technologies or changes in regulation. Figure 6 shows simulated impacts of lowering interest
rates for all households. Relative to the partial treatment case covered by our predictions, full
treatment further increases aggregate demand and supply eﬀects, and results in a larger aggregate
wage impact, with a simulated average daily wage of 20.7 Kwacha (compared to 19.1 Kwacha with
partial treatment). Compared to partial treatment, agricultural income impacts are more moderate
in this scenario: since all farmers have access to lower interest rates, labor reallocation consists
of a transfer from households with more baseline resources to those with fewer baseline resources.
As a result, agricultural incomes in the bottom quintile of baseline resources increase by about 6
percent, while agricultural incomes in the top 5 percentiles decrease by about 5 percent. Average
agricultural output increases by 3.2 percent, due to a more eﬃcient allocation of labor across farms.
Output inequality (Gini) falls from 0.37 to 0.35. The increase in wages as well as the positive income and substitution eﬀects of lower interest rates lead to a 15 percent increase in hungry season
consumption, on average. Total consumption increases by 3.7 percent, and consumption inequality
decreases by 5.7 percent from a Gini of 22.0 to a Gini of 20.7. Total utility also increases across the
distribution with the largest relative gains among the poorest.

8

Conclusions

The results presented in this paper highlight the importance of seasonal incomes, credit constraints,
and liquidity that varies across the agricultural calendar for labor markets and agricultural production. From a policy perspective, providing rural farmers with subsidized access to credit has several
attractive features: in addition to increasing financial inclusion, the results presented in this paper
suggest that loans targeted to poor farmers during the hungry season can improve food security and
increase average agricultural output, while reducing farmers’ reliance on stigmatized piece work labor. These improvements in welfare resulting from lower borrowing costs during the hungry season
appear particularly large among farmers with fewer resources going in to the hungry season. As
we show both in our theoretical framework and our empirical results, local labor market equilibria
respond strongly to decreasing labor market participation by poorer farmers, resulting in higher
33

wages and reduced farming revenue for farmers with relatively large capital endowments. Overall
output eﬀects are positive due to increased labor inputs and an overall more eﬃcient allocation of
labor.
In the specific study area analyzed in this paper – and presumably in many other similar settings
– the room for improvement in local credit markets is large, but not without challenges. Most
farmers in our study report monthly interest rates of around 40 percent. These self-reports are
backed up by the 98 percent take-up of the (high interest) loans we oﬀer, even in the second year
after farmers had repaid their year one loans. High interest rates should however not be equated
with ineﬃcient or failing credit markets. As our own project experience shows, transaction costs
involved in running rural lending schemes in settings with limited road infrastructure are large, and
enforcing loan repayment can be diﬃcult in the absence of collateral.
Thus, the loan intervention we study was not designed to maximize impacts on agricultural
production, but rather as a direct means of relaxing liquidity constraints during the hungry season
to test specific predictions around seasonal liquidity and agricultural labor markets. Further work
is needed investigate the returns to capital at diﬀerent points during the agricultural calendar, and
to test more cost eﬀective ways of lowering the costs of consumption smoothing in rural settings
with poor transportation infrastructure.

34

References
Aggarwal, Shilpa, Eilin Francis, and Jonathan Robinson, “Grain Today, Gain Tomorrow:
Evidence from a Storage Experiment with Savings Clubs in Kenya,” 2017.
Bandiera, Oriana, Robin Burgess, Narayan Das, Selim Gulesci, Imran Rasul, and Munshi Sulaiman, “Labor markets and poverty in village economies,” The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 2017, 132 (2), 811–870.
Banerjee, Abhijit V, Sylvain Chassang, and Erik Snowberg, “Decision Theoretic Approaches
to Experiment Design and External Validitya,” in “Handbook of Economic Field Experiments,”
Vol. 1, Elsevier, 2017, pp. 141–174.
Basu, Karna and Maisy Wong, “Evaluating seasonal food storage and credit programs in east
Indonesia,” Journal of Development Economics, 2015, 115, 200–216.
Bauer, Michal and Julie Chytilová, “The impact of education on subjective discount rate in
Ugandan villages,” Economic development and cultural change, 2010, 58 (4), 643–669.
Beaman, Lori, Dean Karlan, Bram Thuysbaert, and Christopher Udry, “Self-Selection
into Credit Markets: Evidence from Agriculture in Mali,” Mimeo, 2014.
Behrman, Jere R, Andrew D Foster, and Mark R Rosenzweig, “The dynamics of agricultural production and the calorie-income relationship: Evidence from Pakistan,” Journal of
Econometrics, 1997, 77 (1), 187–207.
Breza, Emily and Cynthia Kinnan, “Measuring the equilibrium impacts of credit: Evidence
from the Indian microfinance crisis,” Working Paper, 2016.
Bruhn, Miriam and David McKenzie, “In Pursuit of Balance: Randomization in Practice
in Development Field Experiments,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2009,
pp. 200–232.
Bryan, G., S. Chowdhury, and A.M. Mobarak, “Underinvestment in a profitable technology:
The case of seasonal migration in Bangladesh,” Econometrica, 2014, 82 (5), 1671–1748.
Bryceson, Deborah Fahy, “Ganyu casual labour, famine and HIV/AIDS in rural Malawi: causality and casualty,” Journal of Modern African Studies, 2006, 44 (2), 173.
Burke, Marshall, Lauren Falcao Bergquist, and Edward Miguel, “Sell Low and Buy High:
Arbitrage and Local Price Eﬀects in Kenyan Markets,” Working Paper, 2018.
Chaudhuri, Shubham and Christina Paxson, “Smoothing consumption under income seasonality: Buﬀer stocks vs. credit markets,” Mimeo, 2002.
Cole, Steven M and Parakh N Hoon, “Piecework (Ganyu) as an Indicator of Household Vulnerability in Rural Zambia,” Ecology of food and nutrition, 2013, 52 (5), 407–426.
Conning, Jonathan and Christopher Udry, “Rural financial markets in developing countries,”
Handbook of agricultural economics, 2007, 3, 2857–2908.
Dercon, Stefan and Pramila Krishnan, “Vulnerability, seasonality and poverty in Ethiopia,”

35

The Journal of Development Studies, 2000, 36 (6), 25–53.
Devereux, Stephen, Rachel Sabates-Wheeler, and Richard Longhurst, Seasonality, rural
livelihoods and development, Routledge, 2013.
Edmonds, Eric V, “Child labor and schooling responses to anticipated income in South Africa,”
Journal of development Economics, 2006, 81 (2), 386–414.
Fink, Günther, B. Kelsey Jack, and Felix Masiye, “Seasonal Credit Constraints and Agricultural Labor Supply: Evidence from Zambia,” NBER Working Paper, 2014, No. 20218.
Gilbert, Christopher L, Luc Christiaensen, and Jonathan Kaminski, “Food price seasonality in Africa: measurement and extent,” Food Policy, 2017, 67, 119–132.
Gross, Jeremie, Catherine Guirkinger, and Jean-Philippe Platteau, “Buy as You Need:
Nutrition and Food Storage Imperfections,” Working Paper, 2017.
Hausdorﬀ, Katharine, “Household Bargaining Power and the Eﬀect of Microloans,” 2016. MSc
Thesis, Department of Economics, Tufts University.
Imbens, G. and J.M. Wooldridge, “Recent developments in the econometrics of program evaluation,” Journal of Economic Literature, 2009, 47, 5–86.
Ito, Takahiro and Takashi Kurosaki, “Weather risk, wages in kind, and the oﬀ-farm labor supply
of agricultural households in a developing country,” American Journal of Agricultural Economics,
2009, 91 (3), 697–710.
Jacoby, Hanan G and Emmanuel Skoufias, “Testing theories of consumption behavior using information on aggregate shocks: Income seasonality and rainfall in rural India,” American Journal
of Agricultural Economics, 1998, 80 (1), 1–14.
Jayachandran, Seema, “Selling labor low: Wage responses to productivity shocks in developing
countries,” Journal of Political Economy, 2006, 114 (3), 538–575.
Kaminski, Jonathan, Luc Christiaensen, and Christopher L Gilbert, “The End of Seasonality? New Insights from Sub-Saharan Africa,” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper,
2014, (6907).
Karlan, Dean, Robert Darko Osei, Isaac Osei-Akoto, and Christopher Udry, “Agricultural decisions after relaxing credit and risk constraints,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2014,
129 (2).
Kerr, Rachel Bezner, “Informal Labor and Social Relations in Northern Malawi: The Theoretical
Challenges and Implications of Ganyu Labor for Food Security,” Rural sociology, 2005, 70 (2),
167–187.
Khandker, Shahidur R, “Seasonality of income and poverty in Bangladesh,” Journal of Development Economics, 2012, 97 (2), 244–256.
Kochar, Anjini, “Explaining household vulnerability to idiosyncratic income shocks,” The American Economic Review, 1995, pp. 159–164.
, “Smoothing consumption by smoothing income: Hours-of-work responses to idiosyncratic agri36

cultural shocks in rural India,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 1999, 81 (1), 50–61.
Marlow, David and Douglas P Crowne, “Social desirability and response to perceived situational demands.,” Journal of consulting psychology, 1961, 25 (2), 109.
Michaelowa, Katharina, Ralitza Dimova, and Anke Weber, “Ganyu Labour in Malawi:
Understanding Rural Household’s Labour Supply Strategies,” Mimeo, 2010.
Morduch, Jonathan, “Income smoothing and consumption smoothing,” Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 1995, 9, 103–103.
Orr, Alastair, Blessings Mwale, and Donata Saiti-Chitsonga, “Exploring seasonal poverty
traps: the ’six-week window’ in southern Malawi,” The Journal of Development Studies, 2009, 45
(2), 227–255.
Paxson, Christina H, “Consumption and income seasonality in Thailand,” Journal of Political
Economy, 1993, 101 (1), 39.
Pitt, Mark M and Mark R Rosenzweig, “Agricultural prices, food consumption and the health
and productivity of farmers,” Economic Development Center, 1986.
and Shahidur R Khandker, “Credit programmes for the poor and seasonality in rural
Bangladesh,” Journal of Development Studies, 2002, 39 (2), 1–24.
Rose, Elaina, “Ex ante and ex post labor supply response to risk in a low-income area,” Journal
of Development Economics, 2001, 64 (2), 371–388.
Rosenzweig, Mark R, “Neoclassical theory and the optimizing peasant: An econometric analysis
of market family labor supply in a developing country,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
1980, 94 (1), 31–55.
and Kenneth I Wolpin, “Credit market constraints, consumption smoothing, and the accumulation of durable production assets in low-income countries: Investments in bullocks in India,”
Journal of Political Economy, 1993, pp. 223–244.
Schofield, Heather, “The Economic Costs of Low Caloric Intake: Evidence from India,” Mimeo,
2013.
Skoufias, Emmanuel, “Intertemporal substitution in labor supply: Micro evidence from rural
India,” Journal of Development Economics, 1996, 51 (2), 217–237.
Strauss, John, “Does better nutrition raise farm productivity?,” The Journal of Political Economy,
1986, pp. 297–320.
World Bank, “World Development Indicators,” Technical Report 2017.
Yang, Tzu-Ting, “Family Labor Supply and the Timing of Cash Transfers: Evidence from the
Earned Income Tax Credit,” Journal of Human Resources, 2018, 53 (2), 445–473.
Zambian Central Statistics Oﬃce (CSO), “2010 Census of Population,” Government of the
Republic of Zambia, 2010.

37

Figures and Tables

38

Grain savings (x100 Kwacha)
10
20

30

1

0

Cash savings (x100 Kwacha)
.2
.4
.6
.8
0

Jan

Feb

Mar

Apr

May

Jun

Jan

Feb

Quartile of baseline reserves

Apr

May

Jun

Q4

Q1

May

Jun

Q4

0

1.6

Total liquidity (x100 Kwacha)
10
20
30

Number of meals per day
1.7
1.8
1.9
2

40

2.1

Q1

Mar

Quartile of baseline reserves

Jan

Feb

Mar

Apr

May

Jun

Quartile of baseline reserves
Q1

Jan

Feb

Mar

Apr

Quartile of baseline reserves

Q4

Q1

Q4

Figure 1: Seasonality in liquidity and consumption, by baseline cash and grain reserves
Notes: Monthly cash and grain holdings (top panel), total liquidity (bottom left) and consumption
measured in meals per day (bottom right), for the top and bottom quartile of the distribution of
baseline cash and grain reserves in the control group in year 1. Mean consumption in each quartile
is shown for the consumption graph; the other three plot quartile median consumption.

39

8
Hours of ganyu sold
4
6
2

Q1

Q2
Q3
Baseline grain and cash resources (quartiles)
Loan treatment

-5

0

Hours of ganyu hired
5
10

15

Control

Q4

Q1

Q2
Q3
Baseline grain and cash resources (quartiles)
Loan treatment

40

Hours of family labor on farm
45
50
55
60

65

Control

Q4

Q1

Q2
Q3
Baseline grain and cash resources (quartiles)
Control

Q4

Loan treatment

Figure 2: Eﬀect on labor market participation, by baseline reserves
Notes: Heterogeneous impacts on labor market outcomes in the hungry season of year 1, estimated
using a quadratic in baseline reserves. Plots show adjusted predictions at the mean in each quartile
of the baseline distribution, based on regressions that control for geographic variables only. 90
percent confidence intervals are plotted based on standard errors clustered at the village level. The
red line indicates the treatment group (shifted right). The same figures for year 2 of the project are
shown in the appendix.

40

10.5
Log agricultural output value
9
9.5
10
8.5

Q1

Q2
Q3
Baseline grain and cash resources (quartiles)
Control

Q4

Loan treatment

Figure 3: Eﬀect on log agricultural output, by baseline reserves, year 1
Notes: Heterogeneous impacts on agricultural output value in year 1, estimated using a quadratic
in baseline reserves. Plots show adjusted predictions at the mean in each quartile of the baseline
distribution, based on regressions that control for geographic variables only. 90 percent confidence
intervals are plotted based on standard errors clustered at the village level. The red line indicates
the treatment group (shifted right). The same figure for year 2 of the project is shown in the
appendix.

41

.8
.7
Any food reserves
.5
.6
.4
.3

Q1

Q2
Q3
Baseline reserves (quartiles)
Loan treatment

1.7

1.8

Adult meals per day
1.9
2

2.1

Control

Q4

Q1

Q2
Q3
Baseline reserves (quartiles)
Control

Q4

Loan treatment

Figure 4: Eﬀect on consumption variables, by baseline reserves, year 1
Notes: Heterogeneous impacts on consumption outcomes in the hungry season of year 1, estimated
using a quadratic in baseline reserves. Plots show adjusted predictions at the mean in each quartile
of the baseline distribution, based on regressions that control for geographic variables only. 90
percent confidence intervals are plotted based on standard errors clustered at the village level. The
red line indicates the treatment group (shifted right). The same figures for year 2 of the project are
shown in the appendix.

42

10

1

7

8

Ln(Output)

9

0
-1

Net labor supply

-2

6

-3

0

10

20

30
40
50
60
70
Baseline resource percentiles (S_i0)

90

100

0

20

30
40
50
60
70
Baseline resource percentiles (S_i0)

Control
Intervention (non-treated)

80

90

100

18

Intervention (treated)

16
12

14

Total utility

4000
3000
2000
1000

Hungry season consumption

10

Intervention (treated)

5000

Control
Intervention (non-treated)

80

0

10

20

30
40
50
60
70
Baseline resource percentiles (S_i0)

Control
Intervention (non-treated)

80

90

100

Intervention (treated)

0

10

20

30
40
50
60
70
Baseline resource percentiles (S_i0)

Control
Intervention (non-treated)

80

90

100

Intervention (treated)

Figure 5: Impacts with partial treatment
Notes: Figure shows estimated impacts on agricultural output (top left), net labor supply (top
right), period 1 consumption (bottom left) and utility (bottom right), for treated and untreated
farmers. Simulations calibrate the model to baseline grain and cash reserves, with productivity
parameters calibrated to match baseline wage and output levels.

43

Net labor supply

-2
-3

10

20

30
40
50
60
70
Baseline resource percentiles (S_i0)

80

90

100

0

10

20

Intervention (treated)

30
40
50
60
70
Baseline resource percentiles (S_i0)
Control

80

90

100

90

100

Intervention (treated)

16

Total utility

2000

12

1000

14

3000

18

4000

Control

Hungry season consumption

-1

0

1

10
9
8

Ln(Output)

7
6

0

0

10

20

30
40
50
60
70
Baseline resource percentiles (S_i0)
Control

80

90

100

Intervention (treated)

0

10

20

30
40
50
60
70
Baseline resource percentiles (S_i0)
Control

80

Intervention (treated)

Figure 6: Impacts with full treatment
Notes: Figure shows estimated impacts on agricultural output (top left), net labor supply (top right),
period 1 consumption (bottom left) and utility (bottom right) under a scenario of full treatment,
i.e. access to subsidized loans for all households in the community. Simulations calibrate the model
to baseline grain and cash reserves, with productivity parameters calibrated to match baseline wage
and output levels.

44

Table 1: Take up and repayment
Take up
Cash loan mean
Maize loan

0.99
-0.003
(0.007)

Full
% repayment
repayment
A. Year 1
0.93
0.94
0.013
(0.020)

0.015
(0.018)

Repaid any
cash
0.35
-0.225***
(0.035)

B. Year 2
Cash loan mean

0.98

0.76

0.78

0.55

Maize loan

-0.012
(0.015)

0.008
(0.058)

0.026
(0.052)

-0.084
(0.089)

Treated in year 1

0.018
(0.016)

-0.046
(0.069)

-0.062
(0.055)

-0.142
(0.098)

Any default in village in year 1

-0.025
(0.026)

-0.220***
(0.068)

-0.225***
(0.066)

-0.221**
(0.099)

Early notification sub-treatment

0.010
(0.016)

-0.019
(0.058)

-0.007
(0.052)

0.012
(0.090)

Cash repayment sub-treatment

-0.008
(0.015)

-0.049
(0.058)

-0.044
(0.052)

0.624***
(0.049)

Notes: Table shows take up and repayment statistics in the cash loan treatment in year 1 (panel
A) and year 2 (Panel B). Full repayment is a dummary variable that equals one if the loan was
fully repaid. The means for the cash loan treatment are shown in the first row of each panel and
coefficients on a dummy for the maize loan treatment are in each subsequent row. In year 2, each
row corresponds to a separate regression. Standard errors are clustered at the village level.

45

46
0.310
2573

-0.020
(0.026)
-0.042*
(0.025)

-0.030
(0.023)

3.855
2572

-0.733
(0.492)
-1.061**
(0.505)

-0.891**
(0.441)

(2)

(1)

0.105
2576

0.029*
(0.017)
0.022
(0.017)

0.026*
(0.014)

(3)

Any ganyu hired

3.321
1386

2.150*
(1.180)
0.783
(1.266)

1.516
(0.994)

(4)

Hours hired

49.753
2575

6.831**
(2.851)
5.382**
(2.660)

6.134**
(2.357)

51.806
2576

8.149***
(3.029)
5.916**
(2.880)

7.075***
(2.542)

Family hours on- Total hours onfarm
farm
(5)
(6)

Notes: Treatment effects on labor outcomes, measured during the short recall surveys during the hungry season. Extensive margin
outcomes (columns 1 and 3) indicate whether the household engaged in any of the labor activity over the past week. Other columns
show the number of hours allocated to each activity, include zeros and are winsorized at the 99th percentile. All specifications are
conditional on month fixed effects and include baseline controls, and cluster standard errors at the village level.

Control group mean
Observations

Maize

B. By treatment
Cash

A. Pooled treatments
Any loan treatment

Hours sold

Any ganyu sold

Table 2: Average treatment eﬀects: Labor

Table 3: Average treatment eﬀects: Daily earnings

A. Pooled treatments
Any loan treatment
B. By treatment
Cash
Maize

Individual-level daily
earnings
(top 1% winsorized)
(1)

Individual-level daily
earnings
(top 5% winsorized)
(2)

2.584*
(1.483)

2.172*
(1.172)

2.324*
(1.322)

1.612
(1.858)
3.777**
(1.699)

1.209
(1.428)
3.354**
(1.391)

1.842
(1.583)
2.859*
(1.628)

Village median daily
earnings
(3)

Control group mean
15.378
14.846
13.990
Observations
766
766
284
Notes: Treatment effects on reported daily earnings in Kwacha, restricted to the hungry season (Jan-Mar).
Column 1 shows the impact on reported earnings using household level data. Column 2 shows the village
level mean daily wage. Column 1 winsorizes the top 1 percent, Column 2 winsorizes the top 5 percent.
Column 3 uses the individual level winsorized measures in column 2 before averaging at the village-month
level. All columns include geographic controls, month-year fixed effects, and cluster standard errors at the
village level. Columns 1 and 2 also include household controls and a control for the hours worked per day.

47

Table 4: Average treatment eﬀects: Agricultural production

(1)

Log value - constant
prices
(2)

0.081**
(0.037)

0.085**
(0.035)

Log harvest value

A. Pooled treatments
Any loan treatment
B. By treatment
Cash

0.105**
0.117***
(0.041)
(0.040)
Maize
0.056
0.053
(0.044)
(0.040)
Control group mean
3462.496
3484.433
Observations
3969
3969
Notes: Treatment effects on agricultural output, measured in log ZMK. All
specifications include baseline controls, year effects (panel A), and cluster
standard errors at the village level.

48

Table 5: Average treatment eﬀects: Consumption and food security

Any grain
stocks
(1)
A. Pooled treatments
Any loan treatment
B. By treatment
Cash
Maize

Food security Meals per day Meals per day
(z-score)
Hungry season
Harvest
(2)
(3)
(4)

0.114***
(0.028)

0.245***
(0.073)

0.086***
(0.030)

0.025
(0.019)

0.005
(0.030)
0.232***
(0.034)

0.088
(0.078)
0.399***
(0.083)

0.072**
(0.031)
0.103***
(0.035)

0.032
(0.024)
0.017
(0.021)

Control group mean
0.531
0.000
1.874
1.985
Observations
2576
1649
1367
1029
Notes: Treatment effects on consumption outcomes, measured during the short recall surveys
during the hungry season (except column 5, which is measured at harvest). Outcome variables
are: an indicator for whether the household had any remaining grain reserves (col 1), an index
of food security (col 2), and the number of adult meals per day, where a meal is defined by
consumption of the staple food, nshima, in the hungry season (col 3) and at harvest (col 4). All
specifications are conditional on month fixed effects and include baseline controls, and cluster
standard errors at the village level.

49

50

0.130
(0.916)
-1.329*
(0.750)
-0.967
(1.012)
0.131
(0.930)

-0.578
(0.659)
-0.425
(0.656)

-2.858
(1.937)
-1.922
(2.665)
3.684
(2.969)
5.530
(4.603)

-2.470
(1.843)
4.609*
(2.363)

(2)

(1)

9.614
(8.575)
4.621
(8.393)
-0.602
(12.860)
8.859
(10.974)

7.020
(6.926)
4.128
(8.435)

0.031
(0.135)
0.079
(0.184)
0.105
(0.209)
0.002
(0.199)

0.055
(0.119)
0.052
(0.134)

Hours on
Log output
farm (family)
(3)
(4)

0.038
(0.040)
0.155***
(0.030)
-0.011
(0.055)
-0.026
(0.049)

0.092**
(0.035)
-0.018
(0.042)

(5)

Adult meals

-0.088
(0.201)
0.223
(0.241)
0.497*
(0.259)
-0.068
(0.240)

0.064
(0.165)
0.211
(0.169)

Acres cash
crops
(6)

147.412
(340.321)
83.357
(203.837)
262.319
(389.260)
23.831
(218.724)

127.564
(205.716)
120.079
(216.061)

(7)

Input value

Control group mean
3.855
3.321
49.753
7.700
1.874
1.003
756.987
Observations
606
608
608
958
590
969
961
Notes: Impacts of loan notification timing on main outcomes (columns 1-5) and planting season production decisions
(columns 6 and 7), in year 2 for newly treated villages only. The reference group (i.e. not-early loan) is the timing used to
announce the loans in year 1. Early notification involved informing farmers of the loan program at planting time in September.
The timing of the actual loan delivery was the same across the timing sub-treatments (January). The first set of results pool the
loan treatment arms; the second set show results by treatment arm. Note that all coefficients represent treatment effects for the
relevant subgroup. All specifications include baseline controls, month or year effects, and cluster standard errors at the village
level.

Maize x Early

Cash x Early

Maize

B. By treatment
Cash

Loan x Early

A. Pooled treatments
Any loan treatment

Hours hired

Hours sold

Table 6: Notification timing

51

-1.118**
(0.548)
4.531
1966

2.563**
(1.086)
2.428
778

(2)

(1)
4.963*
(2.616)
46.558
1967

Hours on
farm (family)
(3)
0.086**
(0.044)
3534.927
3011

(4)

Log output

0.058**
(0.024)
1.911
1633

(5)

Adult meals

0.043
(0.054)
0.918
3028

Acres cash
crops
(6)

72.297
(53.128)
842.568
3028

(7)

Input value

-0.799
0.231
10.458*
0.064
0.048**
0.186
190.321
(0.489)
(1.549)
(5.846)
(0.092)
(0.023)
(0.129)
(150.369)
Treated in year 1
0.708
0.340
7.872*
0.052
0.026
0.096
-43.514
(0.520)
(1.188)
(4.189)
(0.070)
(0.020)
(0.088)
(93.076)
Loan x Treated in year 1
-0.605
-1.201
-14.122**
-0.110
-0.017
-0.108
-188.994
(0.646)
(1.816)
(6.949)
(0.107)
(0.029)
(0.150)
(163.545)
Control group mean
2.747
3.885
54.967
3349.127
1.923
0.971
1382.330
Observations
1762
1764
1764
2977
2943
3005
2987
Notes: Impacts of treatment by year on main outcomes (columns 1-5) and planting season production decisions (columns 6 and 7).
The main results are restricted to the year 1 and households treated for the first time in year 2 (corresponding to the first line in
Panel B). The remainder of Panel B shows the persistent effects of being treated in year 1 on outcomes in year 2. The cash and
maize loan treatment arms are pooled throughout. All specifications include baseline controls, month or year effects, and cluster
standard errors at the village level.

B. Year 2
Any loan treatment

Control group mean
Observations

A. Year 1
Any loan treatment

Hours hired

Hours sold

Table 7: Persistence and dynamics

