                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            STRUCTURAL CHANGE IN INVESTMENT AND CONSUMPTION:
                          A UNIFIED APPROACH

                                       Berthold Herrendorf
                                        Richard Rogerson
                                        Ákos Valentinyi

                                       Working Paper 24568
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w24568


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2018




We thank Julieta Caunedo, V. Kerry Smith, Todd Schoellman and the participants of the ASU
Macro Workshop, the London School of Economics, the NBER Growth Group in San Francisco,
and the Universities of Köln, Lancaster,Western Ontario, and Windsor for comments and
suggestions. Valentinyi thanks the Hungarian National Research, Development and Innovation
Office (Project KJS K 124808). All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w24568.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Berthold Herrendorf, Richard Rogerson, and Ákos Valentinyi. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Structural Change in Investment and Consumption: A Unified Approach
Berthold Herrendorf, Richard Rogerson, and Ákos Valentinyi
NBER Working Paper No. 24568
May 2018
JEL No. O11,O14

                                         ABSTRACT

Existing models of structural change typically assume that all of investment is produced in
manufacturing. This assumption is strongly counterfactual: in the postwar US, the share of
services value added in investment expenditure has been steadily growing and it now exceeds 0.5.
We build a new model, which takes a unified approach to structural change in investment and
consumption. Our unified approach leads to three new insights: technological change is
endogenously investment specific; having constant TFP growth in all sectors is inconsistent with
structural change and aggregate balanced growth occurring jointly; the sector with the slowest
TFP growth absorbs all resources asymptotically. We also provide empirical support from the
postwar US for the first and third insight.

Berthold Herrendorf                            Ákos Valentinyi
W.P. Carey School of Business                  Economics, Arthur Lewis Building, 3rd floor
Department of Economics                        University of Manchester
Arizona State University                       Oxford Road
Tempe, AZ 85287-3806                           Manchester, M13 9PL
berthold.Herrendorf@asu.edu                    United Kingdom
                                               valentinyi.a@gmail.com
Richard Rogerson
Woodrow Wilson School of
Public and International Affairs
323 Bendheim Hall
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
rdr@princeton.edu
1       Introduction
A large, recent literature has proposed extensions of the one-sector growth model in order to
jointly study growth and structural change. While the standard framework in the literature
allows for multiple consumption goods and structural change among the sectors producing
them, it abstracts from structural change within investment and assumes instead that all invest-
ment reflects value added from the manufacturing sector.1 Given that one popular use of these
models is to help us understand the decline of the manufacturing sector observed in advanced
economies, it seems important to assess the assumption that all investment reflects value added
from the manufacturing sector. In this paper we show that the standard assumption is strongly
counterfactual and has important implications for the model’s predictions. In other words, we
show that abstracting from structural change in investment is neither empirically plausible nor
theoretically innocuous.
     Our analysis begins by presenting a decomposition of final investment expenditures in the
post WWII US into the value added shares coming from the goods sector and the services sector.
This analysis is the analogue of the analysis of final consumption expenditure in Herrendorf et
al. (2013). Two key findings emerge. First, although it is true that the share of goods value added
has always been much higher in investment expenditure than in consumption expenditure, we
show that the standard assumption is squarely at odds with the data. Specifically, the share of
services value-added in investment expenditure is large, and in fact now exceeds the share of
goods value added in investment expenditure. Second, and more importantly, there is structural
change within the investment sector and it features the same qualitative patterns as structural
change within the consumption sector: the expenditure share of services has increased at the
same time that the relative price of services has increased.
     Motivated by these facts, we develop a general equilibrium model of growth and struc-
tural change. Our framework can accommodate various levels of disaggregation, but, to best
highlight the key economic interactions, our core analysis focuses on the simplest two-by-two-
by-two structure, featuring two final expenditure categories (investment and consumption), two
underlying sectors that produce value added (goods and services), and two factor inputs in the
production of value added (capital and labor). Final investment and final consumption are pro-
duced by combining value added from the goods and services sectors which are in turn produced
by labor and capital. Notably, we take a unified approach and treat the production of consump-
tion and investment in a symmetric manner by assuming that each is a CES aggregator of goods
and services value added, with possibly different weights and elasticities of substitution.
     Having developed our new model, we proceed to examine the properties of its equilibrium.
    1
    This practice started with the early models of growth and structural change by Echevarria (1997) and
Kongsamut et al. (2001). See Herrendorf et al. (2014) for a review of the literature on structural change that
has emerged since then. An important recent exception is Garcia-Santana et al. (2016), which we discuss in more
detail below.

                                                      1
We show that our framework allows for a two-step procedure for analyzing structural change
and balanced growth. Specifically, one can first analyze balanced growth focusing purely on
aggregate consumption and investment, and then exam structural change after balanced growth
has been established. Key to this result is establishing the importance of a concept we call
effective TFP for the investment sector. This result generalizes the result in Herrendorf et al.
(2014) to a setting that also allows for structural change in investment. We provide necessary
and sufficient conditions for a generalized balanced growth path to exist.
    Structural change within each of consumption and investment is dictated by a standard
force: changes in relative prices combined with a less than unitary elasticity implies that ex-
penditure shares increase for the input whose relative price increases. We call this the intensive
margin of structural change. If investment and consumption have different value added shares
of goods and services, aggregate structural change can occur also via an extensive margin. The
extensive margin results from changes in the mix of consumption and investment, which lead
to structural change because investment and consumption have different value added mixes of
goods and services value added. We show that along a balanced growth path there is no ad-
justment along the extensive margin, so that all structural change comes from the intensive
margin.
    Taking a unified approach to structural change in investment and consumption leads to dis-
tinct conclusions along several key dimensions. In particular, three key insights emerge. First,
for empirically plausible parameter values, technological change is endogenously investment
specific. Second, we derive a necessary and sufficient condition for the existence of a balanced
growth path and show that constant (but possibly different) growth in each of the three TFP
terms is inconsistent with structural change and aggregate balanced growth occurring jointly.
Third, the sector with the slowest TFP growth absorbs all resources asymptotically.
    The CES aggregators in the consumption and investment sectors of our simple framework
are admittedly somewhat specialized, and so there may be concern about how well our speci-
fication performs quantitatively. We show that it can quantitatively capture most of the salient
features of structural change in the US data in the post WWII period, with the best fit coming
from a specification in which there is little scope for substitution between goods and services
in the production of both investment and consumption. This result extends the earlier analysis
of Herrendorf et al. (2013) to the case of structural change within the investment sector. This
specification captures structural change within investment remarkably well.
    We also carry out an empirical assessment of our theoretical condition that is necessary
for balanced growth. Our theoretical condition places a non-linear restriction on the evolution
of the sectoral TFPs in our model. We estimate the sectoral TFP growth rates using standard
growth accounting methods and evaluate the extent to which our theoretical condition holds
and the role of changes in each of the sectoral TFPs. We find that our theoretical condition


                                                2
holds approximately in the data. Interestingly, however, it holds despite the fact that the growth
rates of the sectoral TFP terms vary quite dramatically over time. This suggests that, contrary
to common practice, constant growth of sectoral TFPs is not a natural restriction to impose
on the parameters in the context of balanced growth in multi-sector models. We also find
that quantitatively most of the investment-specific technological change arises endogenously.
We conclude from this finding that our first insight (“technological change is endogenously
investment biased”) is far more than a theoretical curiosity.
    Our work is closely related to a recent paper by Garcia-Santana et al. (2016). They also
begin with the observation that investment is produced by a combination of goods and services
and that goods represent a higher share of value added for investment than for consumption.
Despite this similarity, the papers focus on distinct issues. We focus on analytically establishing
the existence and properties of a generalized balanced growth path with structural change in a
general equilibrium setting. Structural change in our analysis arises entirely from the intensive
margin, because we show that along a generalized balanced growth path the extensive margin is
not operational. In contrast, they focus on transition dynamics in a partial equilibrium setting,
and establish empirically that the extensive margin is a key driver of structural change away
from the balanced growth path. Specifically, they study how movements in the investment-to-
GDP ratio, for example during an investment boom, produce hump-shaped movements in the
value added share of the manufacturing sector in a large sample of countries.2
    An outline of the paper follows. In the next section we present the key facts from the US
time series data. Section 3 presents our model and Section 4 characterizes the key properties
of the competitive equilibrium. Section 5 studies the features of structural change along a
GBGP. Section 6 derives the three insights that result from our unified approach. Section 7
examines key aspects of the model and its theoretical properties from an empirical perspective.
Section 8 discusses extending the analysis to consider three different categories of investment
expenditure, and Section 9 concludes.


2       Evidence
In this section we offer a unified analysis of the structural-change facts for both final investment
and final consumption for the US over the post WWII period. This serves to both complement
existing presentations of the stylized facts of structural change and motivate the framework
that we develop in the next section.3 The basic strategy is to combine US industry data from
WORLD KLEMS with the annual input-output tables from the BEA and to then decompose
    2
     We will point further, more subtle differences between our work and their work as we go along.
    3
     Our evidence complements that presented in Garcia-Santana et al. (2016) for 40 developed countries covering
a recent time period. Whereas we plot the sectoral shares for a single country (the US) over a long period, they
pool short time series data for many countries to characterize how sectoral shares vary with GDP per capita.


                                                       3
                        Figure 1: Sector shares in consumption and investment

                    Final consumption expenditure                                                          Final investment expenditure
0.9                                                                              0.9

                                                    Services value added share
0.8                                                                              0.8

0.7                                                                              0.7
                                                                                              Goods value added share
0.6                                                                              0.6

0.5                                                                              0.5

0.4                                                                              0.4
                                                                                              Services value added share
0.3                                                                              0.3

0.2                                                                              0.2
                                                     Goods value added share

0.1                                                                              0.1

0.0                                                                              0.0
      1950   1960     1970     1980     1990        2000           2010                1950    1960           1970         1980   1990    2000   2010




final expenditures into its value added components. One can implement this decomposition at
various levels of disaggregation, but to best highlight the novel implications of our analysis we
consider two final expenditure categories – consumption and investment – and two value-added
components – goods and services. In a later section we present evidence for an alternative
decomposition in which we consider three categories of investment – structures, equipment and
intellectual property product.
    In generating these decompositions we define the goods sector to consist of agriculture,
construction, manufacturing, mining, and public utilities.4 Services consists of the remaining
industries – business services, government, personal services, transportation, wholesale and
retail trade. Our analysis in the following sections focuses on the case of a closed economy.
To connect the closed economy model to the data requires allocating net exports between con-
sumption and investment. Because net exports are not that large, the rule for allocating them
is not of first-order significance. In what follows we allocate all of net exports to consump-
tion. One benefit of this choice is that the notion of investment and capital in the model will
correspond to the notion of investment and capital as measured in the data.
    We decompose each final expenditure category into the value added from different sectors
following the methodology developed in Herrendorf et al. (2013), which involves the use of
input–output relationships and total requirement matrices. Note that while in Herrendorf et
al. (2013) we decomposed final consumption expenditure into the value added from agricul-
ture, manufacturing, and services, here we decompose final investment expenditure and final
consumption expenditure into the value added components produced in the goods and services
sectors.
      4
     Much of the structural change literature considers three sectors: agriculture, non-agricultural goods (typically
referred to as manufacturing) and services. Because we focus on the US during the post World War II period
when agriculture is relatively unimportant, we have chosen to combine agriculture and manufacturing into a single
goods producing-sector. We hope that this facilitates exposition.



                                                                             4
                                          Figure 2: Relative prices

                                                             1947=1, log scale
                             2.0

                                                                                          Price of services relative to goods




                             1.5




                             1.0


                                                 Price of consumption relative to investment




                                   1950   1960        1970           1980          1990            2000            2010




    Figure 1 shows the key facts for this two–by–two decomposition. While investment has a
significantly higher goods-valued-added share than does consumption, we see that both con-
sumption and investment exhibit an increase in the services-value-added share and a decrease
in the goods-value-added share.
    We stress three key properties relative to the existing literature on structural change. First,
assuming that investment is produced entirely by the goods sector is strongly at odds with the
data; in fact, by the end of the sample the goods value added share is less than the services value
added share in investment.5 Second, the value added shares exhibit important changes over
time in both investment and consumption. This suggests that any analysis of structural change
at the aggregate level needs to confront the reality that structural change occurs both within the
investment–producing sector and the consumption–producing sector. Third, the value added
shares of goods differ significantly between investment and consumption, suggesting that it is
important that consumption and investment be modelled separately.
    Because relative prices will play an important role in the analysis to come, we also present
evidence on two key relative price movements over time. In particular, Figure 2 displays time
series evidence on the prices of services relative to goods and consumption relative to invest-
ment. The Figure reveals two key secular trends that are familiar from the existing literature.
First, there has been a marked increase in the price of services relative to goods. The somewhat
unusual behavior of this relative price in the 1970s is driven by a dramatic spike in the prices
of agricultural products and oil during the early 1970s. While this suggests that a more de-
tailed analysis might warrant further disaggregation, the somewhat anomalous behavior of the
1970s should not distract us from the clear secular trend over the entire postwar period. Second,
there is also a marked increase in the price of consumption relative to investment. Notably, the
   5
    As noted in Herrendorf et al. (2013), a different but related problem with the standard assumption is that in
recent years, the value of US investment has exceeded the value added produced in the goods sector.



                                                                     5
behavior is quite distinct between the pre- and post-1980 periods, with little trend in the first
subperiod and a marked positive trend in the second subperiod.


3       Model
We build a multi-sector extension of the standard one-sector neoclassical growth model, formu-
lated in continuous time. Motivated by the presentation in the previous section, our approach is
to start with sectoral valued-added production functions and to model the production for final
expenditure categories by aggregating the sectoral value added.
    Specifically, we assume that goods and services value added (denoted by Ygt and Y st , re-
spectively) are each produced according to Cobb-Douglas production functions with the same
capital shares but potentially different rates of technological progress:

                                          Y jt = A jt K θjt L1−θ
                                                             jt ,   j ∈ {g, s},

where θ ∈ (0, 1) and the A jt represent exogenous technological progress. The assumption that
the underlying production functions are Cobb-Douglas with identical capital shares is common
in the literature on structural change, as it allows for the existence of a balanced growth path.6
Moreover, Herrendorf et al. (2015) show that this case also does a reasonable job of replicating
the labor allocation across sectors in the postwar US.
    The outputs of the goods and services sectors are in turn combined to produce final con-
sumption and final investment using CES aggregators:
                                         1 εc −1                         εc
                                                                 εc −1  εc −1
                                                             1
                                    Ct = ωc Cgt + (1 − ωc ) εc C st
                                          εc  εc                   ε c
                                                                               ,                                     (1)

                                            1 εx −1                            εx
                                                                     ε x −1  ε x −1
                                                                 1
                                  Xt = A xt ω x Xgt + (1 − ω x ) x X st
                                              εx   εx           ε      εx
                                                                                     ,                               (2)

where ε j ∈ [0, ∞) is the elasticity of substitution between goods and services in the production
of final expenditure category j and ω j ∈ [0, 1] determines the relative weight of inputs from the
goods sector into the production of final expenditure category j, for j ∈ {c, x}. The standard
case in which investment is entirely produced in the goods sector is captured as the special
case in which ω x = 1.7 A xt represents exogenous investment–specific technological change.
Any common TFP component for these two aggregators is equivalent to higher TFP in the
goods and services production functions and so is not separately identified. For this reason we
    6
      In a different context, Acemoglu and Guerrieri (2008) and Alvarez-Cuadrado et al. (2017) study a model
in which the two technologies have different capital shares and show that a balanced growth path exists only
asymptotically.
    7
      Note that ω j and 1 − ω j are raised by 1/ε j so as to ensure that the limit for ε j → 0 is a Leontief with weights
ω j and 1 − ω j .


                                                             6
normalize the TFP level for the consumption aggregator to unity. We assume that the growth
rates of the three TFP terms are all bounded.
    While these CES specifications are analytically convenient, we show later that they also do
a reasonable job of capturing the empirical patterns presented in the previous section. A key
feature of our model is that we treat the production of consumption and investment symmetri-
cally.
    We make two remarks concerning the specification for Ct . First, our consumption aggrega-
tor is homothetic. The literature has argued that non-homotheticities account for at least part of
the structural change in consumption and, as we will see in Section 7, our specification will not
be able to account for all of the structural change within consumption.8 We nonetheless adopt
a homothetic aggregator for consumption because it allows us to better focus on the novel im-
plications of our formulation of investment. Importantly, our specification does a very good job
of capturing structural change within final investment expenditure.
    Second, it does not matter whether we think of the household buying goods and services
in the market and combining them itself to produce Ct , or alternatively, that a stand-in firm
purchases goods and services, combines them into the aggregate Ct , and then sells the aggregate
consumption good to the household. The advantage of the latter formulation is that it provides
an explicit market price for the consumption aggregate, which will be useful for the analysis
that follows. We will therefore view relationship (1) as a production function for a firm that
operates in the market.
    There is an infinitely lived representative household with preferences represented by the
utility function                        Z            ∞
                                                         e−ρt log(Ct )dt,
                                                 0

where ρ > 0 is the discount rate. The household is endowed with one unit of time at each
instant, which is supplied inelastically, and a positive initial capital stock, K0 > 0.
    Capital depreciates at rate δ ∈ (0, 1], so the law of motion for capital is given by:

                                                 K̇t = Xt − δKt .

Capital and labor are freely mobile across sectors. Feasibility then requires:

                                    Kgt + K st ≤ Kt ,            Lgt + L st ≤ 1,
                                    Cgt + Xgt ≤ Ygt ,            C st + X st ≤ Y st .
   8
     Several papers have recently studied the role that income effects play for structural change. In addition to the
early paper by Kongsamut et al. (2001), recent examples include Herrendorf et al. (2013), Boppart (2014), Comin
et al. (2015), and Duernecker et al. (2017b).




                                                             7
4       Equilibrium
We study the competitive equilibrium for the above economy. We assume four representa-
tive firms, one for each of goods, services, consumption and investment, and assume that the
household accumulates capital and rents it to the firms. At each point in time there will be six
markets: four markets for the firm outputs and two markets for production factors. Rental prices
for capital and labor are denoted by Rt and Wt respectively, the prices for goods and services are
denoted by Pgt and P st , respectively, and the prices of final consumption and final investment
are denoted by Pct and P xt . We normalize the price of the final investment good to one in each
period. Arbitrage implies that the interest rate will equal Rt − δ. Given that the equilibrium
concept is standard, we do not provide a formal definition of equilibrium.9
     In the remainder of this section, we provide a partial characterization of the equilibrium. We
first derive analytic expressions for the prices of the four outputs in terms of model primitives.
As a by product of the first step we also generate expressions for relative expenditure shares on
inputs in each of the final sectors in terms of model primitives. Lastly, we derive alternative
representations to characterize production in equilibrium that provide a connection between our
model and more standard two-sector versions of the growth model.


4.1     Output Prices
We start with the first-order conditions for capital and labor for the two firms producing goods
and services. For j ∈ {g, s} these are given by:

                                             θP jt A jt K θ−1
                                                          jt L jt = Rt ,
                                                              1−θ
                                                                                                              (3)
                                         (1 − θ)P jt A jt K θjt L−θ
                                                                 jt = Wt .                                    (4)

Taking the ratio of the two first-order conditions for a given sector j and rearranging gives:

                                               K jt     θ Wt
                                                    =          .                                              (5)
                                               L jt   1 − θ Rt

It follows that capital-labor ratios are equalized. Given that aggregate labor is one, it follows
that K jt /L jt = Kt for all t. Using this fact, the two first-order conditions for capital imply that
relative prices are the inverse of relative TFPs:

                                                   Pgt A st
                                                       =                                                      (6)
                                                   P st Agt
    9
    Because the equilibrium allocation of our model is efficient, we could instead study the planner problem. But
since the evidence on relative prices in Figure 2 provides important information regarding parameter values, it is
useful to study the competitive equilibrium directly.



                                                        8
This is a standard result in the structural change literature when the sector production functions
are Cobb Douglas with the same capital-share parameter.
    Next we derive expressions for Pct and P xt in terms of Pgt and P st . To do this we use the
fact that constant-returns-to-scale production functions imply that profits must equal zero in a
competitive equilibrium. It follows that Pct must equal the minimum cost to produce a unit of
consumption, and similarly that P xt (which is normalized to one) must equal the minimum cost
of producing a unit of investment. Straightforward calculation yields:
                                                                         1
                                    Pct = ωc P1−εgt
                                                    c
                                                       + (1 − ωc )P1−ε
                                                                    st
                                                                        c 1−εc
                                                                                 ,                               (7)
                                                                           1
                                            ω x P1−ε
                                                 gt
                                                     x
                                                       + (1 − ω x )P1−ε
                                                                     st
                                                                         x 1−ε x

                                     1=                                           .                              (8)
                                                           A xt

   The three equations (6), (7), and (8) allow us to fully characterize the three prices Pgt , P st
and Pct in terms of primitives. Specifically, equations (6) and (8) are two equations in the two
unknowns Pgt and P st .10 Straightforward algebra yields:

                                                                                  1
                                           A xt ω x Aεgtx −1 + (1 − ω x )Aεstx −1 εx −1
                                               
                                  Pgt =                                                   ,                      (9)
                                                                Agt
                                                                                  1
                                           A xt ω x Aεgtx −1 + (1 − ω x )Aεstx −1 εx −1
                                               
                                  P st =                                                  .                    (10)
                                                                A st

Substituting these equations into equation (7) gives:
                                                                              1
                                       A xt ω x Aεgtx −1 + (1 − ω x )Aεstx −1 εx −1
                                           
                                  Pct =                                    1 .                               (11)
                                               εc −1                 εc −1 εc −1
                                           ωc Agt + (1 − ωc )A st

4.2     Expenditure Shares
The cost minimization problems for the production of final consumption and final investment
also generate standard expressions for relative expenditures on inputs in each of the two final
expenditure sectors:
                                                                        !1−εc
                                           PgtCgt     ωc   Pgt
                                                   =                            ,                              (12)
                                           P stC st 1 − ωc P st
                                                                        !1−εx
                                           Pgt Xgt     ωx    Pgt
                                                    =                           .                              (13)
                                           P st X st 1 − ω x P st
  10
    Note that the zero-profit condition for the investment sector can be rewritten as an expression linking the price
of goods and the relative price of goods to services. Since this relative price is determined by relative TFPs, this
equation gives us the price of goods in terms of primitives.


                                                            9
These expressions describe the nature of structural change within consumption and investment
as a function of the relative price of goods to services and the elasticities of substitution. Given
data on relative prices and relative expenditure shares, these expressions can be used to infer
values for the ω j and the ε j . We carry out this exercise in Section 7.
    Combined with our previous result about the price of goods relative to services in equation
(2), we can also express expenditure shares purely as a function of model primitives:


                                                                !1−εc
                                  PgtCgt       ωc   A st
                                           =
                                  P stC st   1 − ωc Agt
                                                                !1−εx
                                   Pgt Xgt       ωx    A st
                                             =
                                   P st X st   1 − ω x Agt

4.3    Alternative Representations of Production
Our formulation of technology involved a two-level structure in which we started with value-
added production functions for goods and services, and then produced final-expenditure cate-
gories by combining valued added from the goods and services sectors. A common alternative
formulation of the two-sector growth model is to directly posit value added productions for
each of consumption and investment. More concretely, this approach would assume:



                                        Ct = Ãct Kctθ Lct1−θ
                                        Xt = Ã xt K xtθ L1−θ
                                                          xt


A simple prediction of this model is that in equilibrium, the price of consumption relative to
investment is equal to Ã xt /Ãct , so that relative TFP growth of the two sectors can be inferred
directly from data on relative price changes. Additionally, a balanced growth path exists as long
as Ã xt grows at a constant rate.
    This formulation abstracts from the process of structural transformation, a feature that is the
focus of our analysis. However, because the analysis of balanced growth is well established in
this setting it is instructive to provide a connection between this formulation and our two-level
formulation, a task that we turn to in this subsection.
    To develop this connection we derive the mappings between equilibrium inputs of capital
and labor to equilibrium outputs of consumption and investment. Intuitively, given equilibrium
prices, we can solve for the optimal input mix of goods and services for each of C and X.
Because we know the equilibrium capital-labor ratios in each of goods and services, we can
then infer the relative inputs of capital and labor used to produce the optimal mix of goods and
services in each of C and X. The next proposition characterizes this mapping.


                                                 10
Proposition 1 Along any equilibrium path, the following hold:

                                                    Xt = A xt K xtθ L1−θ
                                                                     xt ,                                      (14)
                                                    Ct = Act Kctθ Lct1−θ ,                                     (15)

where
                                                     1                Xgt      X st
       A xt ≡ A xt ω x Aεgtx −1 + (1 − ω x )Aεstx −1 εx −1 ,
                  
                                                                L xt ≡     θ
                                                                             +          ,   K xt ≡ Kt L xt ,   (16)
                                                                      Agt Kt   A st Ktθ
                 εc −1
                                           1                          Cgt      C st
                       + (1 − ωc )Aεstc −1 εc −1 ,
            
       Act ≡ ωc Agt                                             Lct ≡      θ
                                                                             +          ,   Kct ≡ Kt Lct .     (17)
                                                                      Agt Kt   A st Ktθ
Proof. See the Appendix.
    The two expressions (14) and (15) have the appearance of production functions, with the
A jt as TFPs. But because they are relations that hold only in equilibrium we will refer to
them as pseudo production functions and we will refer to the A jt as effective TFPs. Our model
posits Cobb-Douglas production functions at the sector level, whose outputs are aggregated in
non-linear ways to produce final consumption and final investment. Interestingly, these pseudo-
production functions show that the Cobb-Douglas property is preserved with regard to inputs of
labor and capital and that the non-linear aggregation only affects the expressions for effective
TFPs.
    Note that given the definition of the effective TFPs, equation (11) is equivalent to:

                                                                A xt
                                                        Pct =        ,
                                                                Act

which is the analogue of the result that holds in the more standard formulation of the two-sector
growth model. Importantly, and a point that we will return to later, the ratio of effective TFPs
is a non-linear function of all three TFPs in our model, and is not the same as A xt , the TFP for
production of investment relative to consumption.
    It is also instructive to derive another pseudo production function, this one for aggregate
final output, where we define aggregate final output as measured in units of final investment:
Yt = Xt + PctCt .11 In the context of the standard two sector model it is easy to show that one
obtains Yt = Ã xt Ktθ . See, for example the derivations in Herrendorf et al. (2014). We next
develop the analogous relationship for our model. Because payments to inputs will exhaust
income for each of the investment- and consumption-producing firms, we can also write:

                Yt = Pgt Xgt + P st X st + PgtCgt + P stC st = Pgt (Xgt + Cgt ) + P st (C st + X st ).
  11
     Duernecker et al. (2017a) stress that this is not the way in which output is defined in NIPA and that one needs
to be careful when mapping model output into data output. We nonetheless use this definition of output because it
allows us to analytically characterize the equilibrium path of the model as a generalized balanced growth path.



                                                               11
Feasibility requires that Xgt + Cgt = Ygt and X st + C st = Y st . Substituting these conditions and
using the fact that Pgt Agt = P st A st gives:

                                      Yt = Pgt Agt Kgtθ Lgt
                                                         1−θ
                                                             + P st A st K stθ L1−θ
                                                                                st
                                                        θ 1−θ       θ 1−θ
                                                                             
                                         = Pgt Agt Kgt Lgt + K st L st .

Using Kgt /Lgt = K st /L st = Kt and Lgt + L st = 1, we have:12

                                                     Kgt θ
                                                           !            !θ 
                                                                    K st
                                      Yt = Pgt Agt          Lgt +
                                                                                  
                                                                           L st 
                                                        Lgt         L st
                                         = Pgt Agt Ktθ Lgt + L st
                                                                 

                                         = Pgt Agt Ktθ .

Using the previously derived expression for Pgt in terms of primitives from equation (9) gives:

                                                                        1
                            Yt = A xt ω x Aεgtx −1 + (1 − ω x )Aεstx −1 εx −1 Ktθ = A xt Ktθ .
                                     
                                                                                                                    (18)

where A xt is the effective TFP in the investment sector as defined earlier. Note that the aggregate
input of labor does not feature explicitly in equation (18) because it equals one.
    This expression is the natural generalization of the relation that one obtains in benchmark
two-sector models with exogenous sector-specific technical change formulated directly with
value added production functions for consumption and investment. As noted above, the key
difference is that in our framework the level of effective TFP in the investment sector is a non-
linear function of all three fundamental TFP levels in our economy and so is not simply equal
to Ã xt .
    Recalling that we have normalized the price of investment to unity, it is straightforward to
show that in competitive equilibrium, factor prices are given by:



                                                 Rt = θA xt Ktθ−1
                                                Wt = (1 − θ)A xt Ktθ


5        Structural Change and Balanced Growth
We are now ready to explore the implications of our model for structural change and aggregate
balanced growth.
    Note that since Pgt Agt = P st A st the last step in this derivation could also be written using the price of services
    12

and TFP in the service sector.


                                                           12
5.1   Measuring Structural Change
The dimension of structural change that concerns us is the composition of aggregate economic
activity across goods and services. This can be measured either as changes in sectoral value
added shares or changes in sectoral employment shares. In our model these two measures are
identical in equilibrium, a property shared by many models in the literature. To see this, note
that the nominal value added shares for goods and services, which we denote as V jt ( j ∈ {g, s}),
are given by:
                                        P jt Y jt        P jt Y jt
                                 V jt ≡           =                     .
                                          Yt        Pgt Ygt + P st Y st
The second equality derives from the fact that with constant returns to scale, payments to factors
of production exhaust all income. Substituting the sectoral production functions and using the
facts that in equilibrium Pgt Agt = P st A st and Kgt /Lgt = K st /L st = Kt , we have:

                                              P jt A jt Ktθ L jt           L jt
                           V jt =                                      =           = L jt .
                                     Pgt Agt Kt Lgt + P st A st Kt L st Lgt + L st
                                              θ                  θ


In other words, sectoral nominal value added shares equal sectoral employment shares and we
can restrict our attention to characterizing the former.


5.2   Intensive and Extensive Margins of Structural Change
Given we have only two sectors, it is sufficient to focus on the behavior of V st . Using Y st =
C st + X st and carrying out some simple manipulations gives:

                                   PctCt P stC st Xt P st X st
                            V st =               +
                                    Yt PctCt        Y t Xt
                                   PctCt      P stC st        Xt P st X st
                                 =                        +
                                    Yt PgtCgt + P stC st Yt Pgt Xgt + P st X st

This can be written as:

                      PctCt                   1                       Xt                     1
         V st =                                        +                                              .
                       Yt            (P C )/(P C ) + 1                Yt            (P X )/(P X ) + 1
                      |{z}           | gt gt {zst st }               |{z}           | gt gt {zst st }
                  extensive margin       intensive margin        extensive margin      intensive margin


   We previously solved for the ratio of the expenditure shares of goods to services in terms of




                                                            13
primitives:
                                                             !1−εc
                                    PgtCgt     ωc   A st
                                            =                        ,                          (19)
                                    P stC st 1 − ωc Agt
                                                             !1−εx
                                    Pgt Xgt     ωx    A st
                                             =                       .                          (20)
                                    P st X st 1 − ω x Agt

Hence, within each final expenditure sector, structural change is driven by the standard forces
that operate in the presence of uneven technological change: if A     bgt > A
                                                                            bst and εc , εc ∈ [0, 1),
then the expenditure share on goods is decreasing and the expenditure share on services in both
final consumption and final investment. We call this the intensive margin of structural change,
as it operates within each final expenditure category. Note that although the intensive margin of
structural change has the same driving force within each final expenditure category, as long as
ω x and ωc are different, the magnitude of intensive margin structural change will differ across
the two categories.
    From the perspective of the overall economy, structural change is also potentially influ-
enced by the extensive margin that arises from changes in the composition of final expenditure
between investment and consumption. If the final expenditure shares are constant over time,
then the above effects imply that labor is moving systematically from the goods-producing sec-
tor to the services-producing sector. But if there is a change in final expenditure shares between
consumption and investment, then one cannot infer the nature of structural change without addi-
tional assumptions. This is because expenditure could be reallocated to investment – the sector
with a higher goods share – at a sufficiently high rate so that the overall goods share could rise
even though it declines within each sector.
    In the next subsection we show that along a generalized balanced growth path (GBGP), the
final expenditure shares are indeed constant so that only the intensive margin operates and the
nature of structural change along such a path can be inferred without additional assumptions. In
contrast, Garcia-Santana et al. (2016) focus on changes in the extensive margin associated with
dynamics away from the balanced growth path. Specifically, they show that investment booms
associated with high growth episodes can give rise to hump-shaped manufacturing shares.


5.3    Generalized Balanced Growth
We previously derived properties that will hold along any equilibrium path. In this subsection
we examine the properties of our model along a GBGP. As mentioned in the introduction,
balanced growth is too strict an equilibrium concept to impose in settings with structural change,
since sectoral labor inputs cannot feasibly grow at a constant yet different rates forever. The
term generalized balanced growth relaxes balanced growth by requiring that aggregate variables
grow at constant rates or remain constant without restricting the growth of sectoral variables.

                                                 14
We adopt the definition of Kongsamut et al. (2001), who defined a GBGP as an equilibrium
path along which the rental price of capital is constant.13
    To this point, our analysis has only made use of equilibrium conditions from the production
side of the economy. To characterize the properties of a GBGP, we will also need to use the
equilibrium conditions that arise from the household side of the equilibrium. The household
seeks to maximize the present discounted integral of utility subject to its budget equation:

                                              Et + K̇t + δKt = Rt Kt + Wt ,                                           (21)

where Et ≡ PctCt denotes consumption expenditure. Using “hats” to denote growth rates, the
Euler equation and the transversality condition for the household can be written as:

                                                     bt = Rt − δ − ρ,
                                                     E                                                                (22)
                                                              Kt
                                                     lim e−ρt = 0.                                                    (23)
                                                     t→∞      Et

    The first proposition establishes that if a GBGP exists, it must be the case that Kt , Xt , Yt , and
Et all grow at the same constant rate, which is determined by the right-hand side of the Euler
equation. Note that whereas both Kt and Xt are physical quantities, the other two terms – Yt and
Et – include both prices and quantities.

Proposition 2 If a GBGP exists and R is the rental rate along the GBGP, then it must be that

                                            bt = X
                                            K    bt = b
                                                      Yt = E
                                                           bt = R − δ − ρ.
Proof. See the Appendix.
    Having established the properties of a GBGP in Proposition 2, we can now revisit the issue
of structural change along the GBGP. As noted in the previous subsection, although knowing
the direction of relative price changes for goods and services together with the elasticity of
substitution between goods and services in production is sufficient to determine the intensive
margins of structural change within consumption and investment individually, changes in the
composition of final output between consumption and investment could create an opposing
effect via the extensive margin. But what we have just shown is that along a GBGP the com-
position of final expenditure is constant, and thus there is no opposing effect from composition
changes. It follows:

Proposition 3 If a GBGP exists, ε x , εc ∈ (0, 1), and Abgt > Abst , then the shares of the services
sector in total value added and total employment will increase over time. The value added
share of the services sector will also increase for both final consumption and final investment.
   13
        This is equivalent to a constant real interest rate, which equals the rental price of capital minus the depreciation
rate.

                                                              15
    The previous propositions characterized what happens along a GBGP assuming that such a
path exists. The next proposition provides necessary and sufficient conditions for the existence
of a GBGP.

Proposition 4 A GBGP exists if and only if A xt grows at a constant rate.

    To show the claims of this proposition, we use the pseudo aggregate production function
derived previously:
                                         Yt = A xt Ktθ .

Taking the derivative with respect to capital, the requirement that the rental price of capital be
constant becomes:
                                      Rt = R = θA xt Ktθ−1 .                                  (24)

We previously showed that along a GBGP, Kt necessarily grows at a constant rate. It follows
that if Rt is constant then A xt must also grow at a constant rate. Conversely, suppose that A xt
grows at a constant rate. Given that Kt must grow at rate R − δ − ρ there is a unique value of R
that is consistent with a constant rental rate given the constant growth rate of A xt . Evaluating
equation (24) at time zero pins down K0 . A final issue is to guarantee that the present discounted
value of utility is finite. With log utility this is indeed the case as long as all of the growth rates
are bounded from above.14
    It is worth emphasizing that condition (24) remains surprisingly tractable. In fact, it has the
same functional form as the condition for GBGP in the model of Ngai and Pissarides (2007).
This is surprising given the fundamental difference between their model and our model. Specif-
ically, Ngai-Pissarides assumed that all investment is manufacturing output, whereas in our
model investment is a composite of value added from the goods and services sectors. There are
two reasons why the functional form of condition (24) is nonetheless the same in both models.
The sectoral production functions are of the Cobb-Douglas form with the same capital-share
parameter in both models, implying that in equilibrium the sectoral capital-labor ratios equal
the aggregate capital-labor ratio. This implies that one can aggregate in both models, and so the
GBGP condition can be written in terms of the aggregate capital-to-labor ratio. For our model,
Proposition 1 above shows that this also implies that investment output can be written in terms
of a sectoral pseudo-production function of the Cobb-Douglas form with the same share param-
eter. Given that the rental price of capital is the derivative of that sectoral pseudo-production
function with respect to capital, sectoral variables enter the GBGP condition only through the
effective TFP term and the sectoral composition does not enter the GBGP condition at all. This
equilibrium property makes our model analytically tractable.
  14
     To see this note that with log utility, the present value of discounted utility is finite as long as the growth rate
of consumption is bounded. Given that A xt grows at a constant rate, the growth rate of consumption is bounded
by the difference between this growth rate and the growth of the price of consumption relative to investment. If all
TFP growth rates are bounded then this rate will also be bounded.

                                                          16
   Put somewhat differently, our analysis shows that one can study structural change separately
from balanced growth. That is, the analysis of balanced growth relies sole on the pseudo pro-
duction functions for aggregate consumption and investment, just as in a standard two-sector
model. Conditional on establishing a balanced growth path, one can then analyze structural
change. This result requires that one identifies the important role played by A xt , the effective
TFP of the investment sector.


6     Three Insights from our Unified Approach
In this section, we present three insights that arise from our unified approach to structural
change in investment and consumption. As mentioned in the introduction, these are: that
technical change is endogenously investment-biased; that constant TFP growth in all sectors
is inconsistent with structural change and aggregate balanced growth; and that the sector with
the slowest TFP growth absorbs all resources asymptotically. Although we derived a represen-
tation of our model that makes it appear like a standard two-sector model, the first two insights
are in direct contrast to the predictions of that model. In both cases the key point that explains
the divergence in predictions is that the effective TFPs in our two-sector representation are in
turn non-linear functions of the three primitive TFPs. The third insight relates to structural
change and so has no counterpart in the standard two sector model. But our result is in contrast
to models of structural change that abstract from structural change in investment.


6.1    Insight 1: Investment-Biased Technological Change
Recall the expression we derived previously for Pct – the price of consumption relative to in-
vestment – as a function of primitives:
                                                                         1
                                  A xt ω x Aεgtx −1 + (1 − ω x )Aεstx −1 εx −1
                                      
                             Pct =                                    1
                                      ωc Aεgtc −1 + (1 − ωc )Aεstc −1 εc −1

As noted previously, in the standard two-sector model one obtains that Pct = Ã xt /Ãct , i.e., the
relative price of consumption equals the TFP of the investment sector relative to the consump-
tion sector. The change in Ã xt /Ãct over time is a measure of investment-biased technical change,
and the previous result says that relative price movements directly reflect this bias in technical
change.
    One can see from equation (11) that in the special case in which ωc = ω x and εc = ε x , our
model would similarly predict that Pct = A xt . Recall that since we have normalized Act to unity,
this has the same form as in the standard model. But in general, our model features additional
forces that impact on this relative price and one cannot say whether the additional forces lead

                                                    17
to higher or lower growth in Pct . But for now, consider the case in which ω x > ωc , εc = ε x and
Agt grows faster than A st . We argue later that this specification is empirically reasonable. In this
case, equation (11) implies that Pct would increase even absent any change in A xt . This effect is
driven by the endogenous input choices for the firms producing consumption and investment.
Because the investment producing firm chooses to have a greater ratio of goods to services, a
given decrease in the relative price of goods leads to a greater decline in their minimum cost and
hence a decline in their relative price. Because the literature has identified investment biased
technical change with the exogenous movements in A xt we refer to this additional channel in
our model as endogenous investment biased technical change.15 We note that this result holds
along any equilibrium path and is not restricted to behavior along a GBGP.
     As additional perspective on this result, recall that we also showed that the equilibrium price
of consumption relative to investment is the inverse of the effective TFP levels in our pseudo
production functions. Importantly, exogenous investment-biased technical change (i.e., A xt ) is
only one component of this ratio.
     Garcia-Santana et al. (2016) also note that the price of investment relative to consumption
is influenced by the relative prices of the outputs of the underlying sectors in addition to exoge-
nous investment specific technical change. Our analysis goes one level deeper by linking this
relative price to underlying TFP levels.16 Below, we will evaluate this mechanism empirically.


6.2     Insight 2: Sectoral TFP Growth and GBGP
In the standard model, all that is required for the existence of a GBGP is that Ã xt grows at a
constant rate that is not too large. In particular, one can look for a GBGP assuming that both
Ã xt and Ãct grow at constant rates. Put somewhat differently, one can impose that all TFPs grow
at constant but potentially different rates when looking for a GBGP. While our model has the
seemingly analogous requirement that constant growth in A xt is required, it turns out that his
has a very different implication for what is allowed for the primitive TFPs. In particular, the
next Proposition establishes that constant though potentially different growth rates in all TFPs
are inconsistent with a GBGP that exhibits structural change.

Proposition 5 If ε x , 1, a necessary condition for the existence of a BGP with structural
change is that at least one of the growth rates A
                                                bxt , A
                                                      bgt , A
                                                            bst is not constant.
  15
     In the introduction, we referred to sector-specific TFP as “effective TFP”.
  16
     A similar insight is noted in Duernecker and Herrendorf (2015). They show that if sectoral labor input is a
CES aggregator of two labor inputs that are subject to different technological progress, then sectoral differences in
the relative weights of the labor inputs imply that technological progress becomes endogenously sector specific.
Be that as it may, they also show that it matters for aggregate productivity growth which sector takes over, if one
measures GDP as the BEA does by a Fisher index.




                                                        18
       As previously noted, for the existence condition to be satisfied,

                                 A xt = A xt (ω x Aεgtx −1 + (1 − ω x )Aεstx −1 ) εx −1
                                                                                    1




must grow at a constant rate. And a necessary condition for structural change to occur is
that ε x , 1. It then follows that if structural change occurs along a GBGP, then at most two
of the three growth rates of A xt , Agt , and A st can be constant in general. Specifically, if we
were to restrict attention to constant rates of investment-specific technological change and of
technological change in both the goods and services sector, the existence condition could only
hold if both the goods and services sectors experienced the same rate of technological progress.
But that would imply that there would not be any changes in the price of services relative to
goods and hence there would not be any structural change.
    While the literature on structural change and balanced growth has tended to focus on the
case in which sectoral TFPs grow at constant rates, there is no natural reason to favor this case.
In a one-sector model, constant growth at the aggregate level necessarily requires constant
growth in aggregate TFP. But in a multi–sector model with non-linear aggregators, the fact that
certain aggregates grow at (approximately) constant rates does not translate to (approximately)
constant rates of growth in sectoral TFPs. In fact, the previous result shows that not only is
it restrictive to only consider constant growth rates in sectoral TFPs, but that imposing this
restriction will make it impossible to find a GBGP that exhibits structural change.17 In the next
section, we examine the behavior of A xt and its various components in the data.


6.3       Insight 3: Asymptotic Behavior
Baumol (1967) was the first to note that if resources move systematically from sectors with high
productivity growth to sectors with low productivity growth, then the economy will exhibit a
secular decline in aggregate productivity growth. Taken to the extreme, this argument suggests
that if there is one sector with low, or even zero, productivity growth, it will eventually dominate
the entire economy. Importantly, Baumol’s formal analysis abstracted from capital.
    In contrast, Ngai and Pissarides (2007) built a model of structural change with capital and
showed that it has a different asymptotic implication. Among the many sectors of their model,
each of which produces a different consumption good, only one sector is assumed to produce
capital. Since the capital-to-output ratio is constant along a GBGP, the capital-producing sec-
tor does not disappear, even asymptotically. Making the usual assumption that the capital-
producing sector is manufacturing, and noting that in the data the manufacturing sector has
stronger productivity growth than many stagnant services sectors, their model implies that while
  17
     Herrendorf and Valentinyi (2015) construct a model of endogenous technological change that is consistent
with this implication of the current model, in that the endogenous equilibrium growth rates of the sectoral TFPs
are not constant in their model.


                                                          19
the sector with the slowest productivity growth will dominate consumption, it will not dominate
the entire economy.
    To translate this result to our setting, recall that we have only two value–added producing
sectors, that is, the goods sector and the services sector. A version of their result obtains in
our model if we assume that investment is produced only with goods, that goods and services
are complements in the production of consumption, that TFP grows more strongly in the goods
sector, and that in the limit the growth rate of goods TFP is larger than the growth rate of services
TFP. While the service sector then takes over consumption asymptotically, the goods sector
continues to produce investment. Since along the GBGP, investment constitutes a constant
fraction of GDP, the share of the goods sector will converge to that of investment, and so the
goods sector will not disappear asymptotically.
    Consider instead our more general specification in which both goods and services are used
to produce investment. Additionally, assume again that goods and services are complements
in the production of both investment and consumption, that TFP grows more strongly in the
goods sector, and that in the limit the growth rate of goods TFP is larger than the growth rate
of services TFP. Under these assumptions, it remains true that investment will be a constant
fraction of output, but the value added share of services will approach one for both consumption
and investment. Therefore, all labor will asymptotically be in the services sector, which in our
model is the sector with the slowest TFP growth. The next proposition summarizes this result:

Proposition 6 If the parameters are such that a GBGP exists, ε x , εc ∈ [0, 1), A
                                                                                bgt > A
                                                                                      bst ,
       bgt > limt→∞ A
limt→∞ A            bst , then there are two cases
                              P st Y st C
         • ω x = 1:        lim         =      (standard result);
                           t→∞ Yt        Y
                              P st Y st
         • ω x ∈ [0, 1):   lim          =1    (novel result).
                           t→∞ Yt


    The proposition implies that if one takes structural change in investment into account, then
the sector with the slowest productivity growth will take over out simple two-by-two-by-two
economy asymptotically. This result is important when one seeks to understand the role that
structural change plays for the productivity slowdown.18


7         Empirical Analysis
In this section we complement the preceding theoretical analysis of the model of Section 3 with
an empirical assessment of two questions. First, to what extent are the CES aggregators in our
    18
    In related work, Duernecker et al. (2017b) point out that in a more disaggregated setting, the sector with the
slowest productivity growth may not take over the economy asymptotically, because services with fast and slow
productivity growth turn out to be substitutes, instead of complements.

                                                       20
                      Table 1: Preference and technology parameters


                                     ωx           ωc         εx    εc
                                    0.52      0.19       0.00     0.00




formulation able to capture the secular trends in the post WWII US data? Second, to the extent
that we observe something that looks like approximate balanced growth in the data, what is the
nature of the technological change that accounts for this. Put somewhat differently, what is the
behavior of the various terms in the theoretical condition necessary for generalized balanced
growth?


7.1   Fit of the CES Aggregators
We begin with the first question. Our analysis focuses on the expressions for goods and services
expenditure shares by final expenditure sector that we previously derived, which we repeat here
for convenience:
                                          !1−εx                                      !1−εc
                 Pgt Xgt     ωx    Pgt                        PgtCgt     ωc   Pgt
                          =                            and            =                      .
                 P st X st 1 − ω x P st                       P stC st 1 − ωc P st

    To assess whether the assumed CES structure is empirically reasonable we ask whether
there are values for the share and elasticity parameters (the ω j and ε j ) such that when taking
relative prices as given by the data, we are able to capture the key secular changes in expendi-
ture shares. To implement this we use the data as presented in Section 2 and calibrate the share
and elasticity parameters to minimize the sum of squared deviations between the implied ex-
penditure shares and the expenditure shares in the data. This is effectively the same procedure
that we used in Herrendorf et al. (2013) when estimating a CES aggregator for consumption
with three components–agriculture, non-agricultural goods, and services. The implied values
for the current exercise are presented in Table 1.
    As expected, the relative weight of goods is estimated to be higher in investment than in
consumption; compare Figures 1. The striking result is that both elasticity parameters turn out
to be zero, implying that both aggregators are Leontief. While the result that εc = 0 is somewhat
expected given the results obtained earlier in Herrendorf et al. (2013), it is perhaps surprising
that the aggregator in the investment sector features a similarly low degree of substitutability.
    To understand why Leontief aggregators provide the best fit for the composition of final
expenditures in the postwar US we consider the ratio of the real inputs of goods to services
in each sector. With CES aggregators and inputs being complements, real ratios move in the

                                                       21
                       Figure 3: Real composition of final expenditures

                                       Real services value added over real goods value added
                                                              1947=1
                          2.2
                                                                               Final consumption expenditure
                          2.0

                          1.8

                          1.6

                          1.4

                          1.2
                                                                                Final investment expenditure

                          1.0

                          0.8

                          0.6
                                1950       1960     1970      1980      1990       2000          2010




opposite direction of expenditure shares. That is, with an elasticity of substitution less than
unity, an increase in the relative price of services implies that the expenditure share of services
increases, but that the ratio of real services to real goods decreases. Intuitively, the reallocation
of relative real quantities serves to the dampen the change in expenditure shares, but it does not
overturn the initial impact of the change in prices. In the extreme case of a Leontief aggregator,
there is a constant ratio for real quantities.
     With this in mind Figure 3 displays the time series for ratios of real inputs. The figure shows
that for investment, the ratio of real services to real goods inputs increases modestly. Given that
the relative price of services to goods increases quite dramatically over the period of investi-
gation, this points to a Leontief specification, which keeps the real composition unchanged.
This suggests that the Leontief specification actually seems to be the natural specification for
modeling structural change in investment.
     Moving to consumption, we observe that the ratio of real services to real goods inputs
increases significantly at the same time that the relative price of services to goods also increases
significantly. Given our earlier discussion, a CES aggregator is unable to capture this, because
the most extreme case is the Leontief specification, in which case the real composition remains
unchanged in the face of a large change in relative prices. In all other specifications with an
elasticity of substitution less than unity, the real quantity of services would in fact decrease.
This suggests that, again, the Leontief specification will do the best possible job, though it will
still miss an important part of the changes in the real composition of inputs into consumption.
However, as we noted earlier, the latter result is to be expected since we have abstracted from
income effects by virtue of considering a homothetic aggregator. Given that our earlier work
that focused solely on consumption did find a role for income effects, including them would
add a force leading to an increase in the ratio of real services to real goods in the production of
consumption.


                                                             22
                                           Figure 4: Expenditure shares – data versus model

                              Final investment expenditure                                        Final consumption expenditure
0.9                                                                           0.9
                                                                                                                                  Services value added share
0.8                                                                           0.8

0.7              Goods value added share                                      0.7

0.6                                                                           0.6

0.5                                                                           0.5
                                                                                                           Data      Model
0.4                                                                           0.4
                 Services value added share
0.3                                                                           0.3

0.2                                                                           0.2
                                                                                                                                   Goods value added share

0.1                                                                           0.1
                                              Data     Model
0.0                                                                           0.0
       1950       1960           1970           1980    1990   2000   2010          1950   1960     1970     1980     1990        2000           2010




    Figures 4 show the fitted values for the expenditure shares along with their corresponding
values in the data. As suggested by the previous discussion, we find that the fitted values track
the secular change within the investment sector very well, whereas the fitted values for con-
sumption explain only about half of the change in expenditure shares within consumption.19
Additionally, recall that we have aggregated agriculture and manufacturing into a single goods
sector and that nonhomotheticities are typically found to be of particular importance for the
decline of agriculture. Given that our primary focus in this paper was on structural change
within investment, and that we abstracted from non-homotheticities within consumption in or-
der to facilitate transparency, we are not overly concerned about missing an important part of
the structural change in consumption here. Importantly, the figures show that our CES aggrega-
tor does a very good job of capturing the secular change within investment in the US over this
time period.


7.2           Behavior of A xt
We now turn our attention to the necessary condition for balanced growth – that the effective
TFP in the investment sector, A xt , grow at a constant rate – from an empirical perspective. To
do this we use the estimated values for ω x from the previous exercise and compute series for the
A jt 0 s using standard growth accounting methods as in Solow (1957). Specifically, to solve for
A jt ( j ∈ {g, s}), we set A j0 = 1 and calculate the growth rates by using the information provided
by WORLD KLEMS on nominal value added, capital services, labor services in efficiency unit,
and factor shares:
                                                      Rt K jt        WL
                                   P[jt Y jt = A jt +
                                               b                bjt + t jt b
                                                                K              L jt .
                                                      P jt Y jt      P jt Y jt
      19
           We note that adding net exports to consumption tends to worsen the fit of the model.




                                                                             23
                                              Figure 5: Exogenous TFPs

                                                                   1947=1, log scale
                                2.4
                                                                                                              Goods TFP




                                1.6



                                                                                                            Services TFP




                                1.0

                                                                        Exogenous investment-specific TFP



                                      1950      1960        1970         1980        1990          2000       2010




Since all terms except for A  bjt are observable, we can solve for A
                                                                   bjt and, given the normalization
A j0 = 1, construct A jt . To estimate TFP growth in the investment sector we use:20

                                                               Pgt Xgt
                                             bt = A
                                             X    bxt +                bgt + P st X st X
                                                                       X               bst
                                                                Xt             Xt

to compute the implied growth rate series for A
                                              bxt . Using this series together with the series for
        bst and our calibrated parameter values, we can uncover the series for A xt from the
bgt and A
A
expression that defines A xt :
                                                                                                                            ε 1−1
                                                                           ω x Aεgtx −1 + (1 − ω x )Aεstx −1
                                                                          
                              A xt              ≡          A xt                                                               x
                                                                                                                                      .
                             |{z}                         |{z}            |                 {z                                    }
                      investment-specific TFP          first component                      second component


Note that we impose our functional forms only when we compute A       bxt , but not when we compute
A     bst , and A
bgt , A         bxt .
     Figure 5 shows the implied series for the level of each TFP term. The graph has the interest-
ing implication that there is little “pure” investment-specific technological change arising from
the first component of A xt . Instead, higher TFP growth in the investment sector is driven by
the second component. As we explained in Insight 1, technological progress is endogenously
investment biased in our model because the effective TFP puts a higher weight on goods in
investment than in consumption, and goods have higher TFP growth than services.
     Given our estimates of ω x j for j ∈ {g, s} and ε x , plus our estimated series for the A jt for
 j ∈ {x, g, s}, it is straightforward to compute the value of A xt . Recall that constant growth in
this quantity is necessary in order to have a GBGP. The left panel of Figure 6 plots the log of
this value over time. The figure shows that this term indeed grows on average at a constant rate
  20
       The continuous–time divisia index was approximated with the Törnqvist index in the data.



                                                                       24
                                                 Figure 6: Investment TFPs

                           1947=1, log scale                                                             1947=1, log scale
2.4                                                                           2.4

                                                    Investment-specific TFP
2.0                                                                           2.0                                                     Second component



1.7                                                                           1.7



1.4                                                                           1.4



1.2                                                                           1.2
                                                                                                                                        First component


1.0                                                                           1.0


      1950   1960   1970        1980      1990     2000         2010                1950   1960   1970        1980      1990   2000         2010




over the postwar period.
    We emphasize two points. First, the construction of this figure did not directly use the
information that the average growth of chained GDP in the US data is approximately constant.
Second, although A xt does grow at an approximately constant rate over the time period being
studied, none of the individual TFP terms exhibits approximate constant growth. In particular,
while the growth in A st declines over time, the growth in A xt actually increases over time. Note
moreover, that the increase in A xt is rather small.


8        Disaggregating Investment
To this point we have assumed a single consumption good and a single investment good in
order to best illustrate the main insights that derive from considering structural change within
the investment sector. In this section we consider a further disaggregation within the investment
sector to assess the extent to which the previously documented patterns reflect compositional
changes across categories of investment versus changes within specific categories. To this end
we disaggregate total investment into three categories: structures, equipment, and intellectual
property product (IPP henceforth). The BEA counts three types of IPP investments: software,
research and development, and artistic products.
    Figure 7 shows the evolution of the shares of total investment accounted for by each of these
three categories. The dominant secular pattern is a steady decline in the share of investment
accounted for by structures, totalling roughly fifteen percentage points since 1947. There is also
a steady downward trend for the share of total investment that is accounted for by equipment,
though this series also has some low frequency fluctuations. Offsetting these two downward
trends is the steady increase in the share of investment accounted for by IPP. While at the
beginning of the sample structures accounts for more than half of total investment and IPP


                                                                        25
                    Figure 7: Expenditure Shares of Subcategories of Investment

             Composition of final investment expenditure                                                      The share of equipment in equipment and structures
0.7                                                                                              0.7


0.6                                                                                              0.6
                            Share of structures in investment
0.5                                                                                              0.5


0.4                                                                                              0.4

                             Share of equipment in investment
0.3                                                                                              0.3


0.2                                                                                              0.2

                                         Share of intellectual property products in investment
0.1                                                                                              0.1


0.0                                                                                              0.0
      1950   1960    1970            1980           1990          2000           2010                  1950      1960     1970      1980     1990     2000         2010




accounts for less than ten percent, at the end of the sample structures accounts for roughly
40% of the total with each of the other two categories accounting for roughly 30% each. For
future purposes, we show in the right panel of Figure 7 that if we focus purely on structures
and equipment, the share of this total accounted for by structures is relatively constant over the
sample period.
    The three panels in Figure 8 display the extent of structural change within each of the three
investment categories. Interestingly, we see that structural change occurs within both equip-
ment and IPP, but is absent in structures. Additionally, note that the initial share of services is
much higher for IPP than for the other two categories. As of the end of the sample period, ser-
vices accounts for more than half of final equipment expenditure and for over 90% of final IPP
expenditure. To first approximation, the series for equipment mimics the series for aggregate
investment that we displayed earlier in the paper.
    The left panel of Figure 9 displays the evolution of prices for structures and IPP relative
to equipment. The key message from this figure is that the price of structures has increased
dramatically relative to the prices of the two other categories. While the price of IPP has also
increased relative to equipment, the increase is quite modest compared to the increase in the
relative price of structures.
    Combining data on relative shares and relative prices we can assess the secular trends in the
quantity of investment in each of the three categories. This information is presented in the right
panel of Figure 9, where we have normalized the initial level for each category equal to unity.
As the figure shows, IPP and equipment are both increasingly important in terms of accounting
for the quantity of investment.
    We draw two main messages from the above empirical patterns. First, the phenomenon of
structural change within the investment sector is strongly present in both equipment and IPP.
That is, structural change within investment is not purely a phenomenon of changing composi-


                                                                                          26
                                   Figure 8: Sector Shares in the Subcategories of Investment

                                 Final investment expenditure                                                                                Final investment expenditure
                                                 Equipment                                                                                                 Structures
1.0                                                                                                              1.0

0.9                                                                                                              0.9

0.8                                                                                                              0.8
             Goods value added share
                                                                                                                                                                                            Goods value added share
0.7                                                                                                              0.7

0.6                                                                                                              0.6

0.5                                                                                                              0.5

0.4                                                                                                              0.4

0.3                                                                                                              0.3
             Services value added share                                                                                                                                                    Services value added share
0.2                                                                                                              0.2

0.1                                                                                                              0.1

0.0                                                                                                              0.0
      1950           1960           1970           1980             1990           2000            2010                  1950      1960       1970          1980            1990           2000           2010

                                                                                           Final investment expenditure
                                                                                                 Intellectual property products
                                                       1.0

                                                       0.9

                                                       0.8

                                                       0.7                   Services value added share

                                                       0.6

                                                       0.5

                                                       0.4

                                                       0.3                   Goods value added share

                                                       0.2

                                                       0.1

                                                       0.0
                                                                1950           1960             1970          1980          1990      2000       2010




                                  Figure 9: Relative Prices of the Subcategories of Investment

                        Relative price of investment expendtitures                                                                             Quantity of investment
                                              1947=1, log scale                                                                                         1947=1, log scale
5.0                                                                                                              62


                                                             Structures relative to equipment
                                                                                                                 32
3.3
                                                                                                                                                Intellectual property products
                                                                                                                 16
2.2                                                                                                                                                                                        Equipment
                                                                                                                     8

1.5
                                                                                                                     4
                                                                                                                                                                              Structures
                                                                             Intellectual property products
1.0                                                                              relative to equipment               2


      Intellectual property products relative to equipment and structures
                                                                                                                     1
      1950           1960           1970           1980             1990           2000            2010                  1950      1960       1970          1980            1990           2000           2010




                                                                                                              27
tion within investment. Second, there are important secular trends in both the composition of
investment across categories and the relative prices of the three categories of investment.
    Our previous analysis abstracted from compositional changes within the investment sector.
Given that the extent of structural change varies across the three categories we think the above
empirical facts do suggest that it is of interest to extend our analysis to consider three different
categories of investment. We leave a full analysis of this to future work, because disaggregating
investment destroys the analytical tractability of our simple two-by-two-by-two structure and
implies that one needs to simulate the model. We leave this for future work, because our point
in this paper is to characterize in the simplest, most intuitive way the key forces that are at work
with structural change in investment. In what follows, we therefore only map out a formulation
of the more general model that is motivated by the above empirical patterns.
    As a first step in extending the previous framework, we note that it is straightforward to
assume that there are now four categories of final expenditure: consumption and the three cat-
egories of investment. Consistent with our previous framework, we can express the production
of each of these four categories of final expenditure as CES functions of value added from the
goods and services sectors. In particular, we would have:

                                         1     ε xi −1                      ε xi −1
                                                                                      ! ε εxi−1
                                                                      1                  xi
                                        ε xi     ε xi                         ε xi
                          Xit = A xit ω xi Xgit          + (1 − ω xi ) X sit
                                                                     ε xi




where i ∈ {1, 2, 3} and the three indices reflect structures, equipment and IPP respectively. Note
that we allow the weights and the elasticity of substitution to vary across the three categories, as
well as for each category to have its own level of technical progress. As noted previously, in the
face of large changes in the price of services relative to goods, the expenditure share for services
has increased in both equipment and IPP, but has remained constant in structures. The same
logic that we applied previously would lead us to conclude that the elasticity of substitution
is less than unity for both equipment and IPP but is equal to unity for structures. That is, the
aggregator for structures is Cobb-Douglas. Similarly, the weight on services will be greatest for
IPP and smallest for structures. Finally, given these parameters, the behavior of relative prices
of the three categories would provide information on the category specific rate of technical
progress.
    The second step in the extension needs to specify how the three types of capital enter into the
production function. The existing literature has considered this for the case in which there are
two categories of capital – equipment and structures, and used different formulations. Green-
wood et al. (1997) effectively used a Cobb-Douglas aggregator to aggregate the two types of
capital into a single capital good. In contrast, Krusell et al. (2001) allowed for two different
labor inputs and assumed that equipment and structures had differential substitutability with
the two different types of labor, and so do not aggregate the two capitals into a single stock.
    For present purposes we continue to assume a single type of labor and look to aggregate

                                                         28
the three capital categories into a single stock. The previously presented facts suggest that
a single elasticity of substitution between the three categories will not be sufficient. To see
why note that both IPP and equipment have decreasing prices relative to structures, but that
whereas expenditure on equipment is roughly constant relative to structures, expenditure on
IPP increases quite dramatically. In view of this there are of course multiple ways to nest the
aggregation of the three different capitals. Here we present one simple form that seems intuitive
given the empirical patterns noted above. In particular, the fact that the share of equipment in
the aggregate of equipment and structures is roughly constant in the face of large changes in
the relative price of the two, suggests a Cobb-Douglas aggregator of the two. This aggregate
would then be combined with IPP using a CES aggregator. The previous evidence suggests
that this aggregator would have an elasticity of substitution greater than unity. Specifically, the
IPP share in total investment rises while the price of IPP relative to the structures/equipment
composite falls; compare the left panels of Figures 7 and 9.
     The above discussion suggests an empirically reasonable specification for an analysis that
wants to consider a disaggregation of investment into three categories. Given these functional
forms, it is not possible to derive analytic expressions to characterize the aggregate behavior
and so any further analysis will require numerical simulations. We leave this analysis for future
work.
     As final point we note one other issue that the disaggregation of investment into structures,
equipment, and IPP naturally brings up. This issue is that IPP capital is part of intangible cap-
ital, which has some nonrival components because the underlying ideas can often be used by
everyone.21 To avoid confusion of what this means in the context of IPP capital, it is crucial to
make the distinction between the concepts of nonrival and excludable. Nonrivalry is a feature
of nature whereas excludability is a feature of the institutions chosen by society. Nonrivalry
means that the use of an idea by one person does not diminish its usefulness for other persons.
Excludability means that property rights allow the legal restriction of use to one person. Irre-
spective of whether IPP capital is rival or nonrival, it is excludable. That is, the BEA counts as
IPP capital only those investments that result in well defined property rights and have observ-
able market prices. For software, property rights are established by copyrights and by tailoring
the software to the particular user; for research and development, property rights are established
by patents; and for artistic products property rights are established by copyrights. The fact that
IPP capital has well defined property rights implies that, in the context of the standard growth
model, one may treat its stock in the same way as we treat the stock of any other type of capital.
  21
       For recent attempts to model intangible capital, see McGrattan and Prescott (2009,2010) and Xi (2016).




                                                        29
9    Conclusion
In this paper, we have proposed a new framework for studying structural change and growth
that treats consumption and investment in a symmetric manner. In particular, we have modelled
production at the level of sector value added and have treated both final consumption and final
investment as aggregates of the underlying sectoral value added. We have studied a simple
form of this framework with two final demand sectors – consumption and investment – and
two underlying sectors producing value added – goods and services. We have focused on this
simple framework to best able to illustrate its distinctive features. First, for empirically plausible
parameter values technological change is endogenously investment specific. Second, constant
growth in all sectoral TFPs is generically inconsistent with aggregate balanced growth. Third,
the sector with the lowest productivity growth asymptotically dominates the entire economy.
Lastly, we have shown that a version of the model with a CES aggregator in the investment
sector can account for the salient trends in the value-added composition of final investment.
    We believe that richer versions of this model will prove useful in refining our view of the
nature of structural change and the forces that drive it. In particular, we think it will be of
interest to pursue more fully a formulation that separates investment into the three components
of structures, equipment and IPP. We believe this framework will help us better isolate the
underlying sources of TFP growth.
    Lastly, in this paper, we have abstracted from non-homotheticities in the aggregator of value
added from different sectors to final consumption. Our empirical analysis has confirmed that
these non-homotheticities play a quantitatively important role. It is therefore of interest to ex-
plore to what extent one can integrate them in the present framework without losing tractability.
We plan to turn to this task next.


References
Acemoglu, Daron and Veronica Guerrieri, “Capital Deepening and Non–Balanced Economic
  Growth,” Journal of Political Economy, 2008, 116, 467–498.

Alvarez-Cuadrado, Francisco, Ngo Van Long, and Markus Poschke, “Capital–Labor Sub-
  stitution, Structural Change, and Growth,” Theoretical Economics, 2017, 12, 1229–1266.

Baumol, William J., “Macroeconomics of Unbalanced Growth: The Anatomy of the Urban
  Crisis,” American Economic Review, 1967, 57, 415–426.

Boppart, Timo, “Structural Change and the Kaldor Facts in a Growth Model with Relative
  Price Effects and Non–Gorman Preferences,” Econometrica, 2014, 82, 2167–2196.



                                                 30
Comin, Diego, Martı́ Mestieri, and Danial Lashkari, “Structural Transformations with
  Long–run Income and Price Effects,” Manuscript, Northwestern University 2015.

Duernecker, Georg and Berthold Herrendorf, “Occupations, Barriers to Entry and Hours
 Worked in the U.S. and Germany,” Manuscript, University of Mannheim and Arizona State
 University 2015.

    ,     , and Ákos Valentinyi, “Quantity Measurement and Balanced Growth in Multi–
  Sector Models,” Manuscript 2017.

   ,     , and     , “Structural Change within the Service Sector and the Future of Baumol
  Disease,” Manuscript 2017.

Echevarria, Cristina, “Changes in Sectoral Composition Associated with Economic Growth,”
  International Economic Review, 1997, 38, 431–452.

Garcia-Santana, Manuel, Josep Pijoan-Mas, and Lucciano Villacorta, “Investment De-
 mand and Structural Change,” Manuscript 2016.

Greenwood, Jeremy, Zvi Hercowitz, and Per Krusell, “Long-run Implication of Investment-
 Specific Technological Change,” American Economic Review, 1997, 87, 342–362.

Herrendorf, Berthold and Ákos Valentinyi, “Endogenous Sector–Biased Technological
 Change and Industrial Policy,” Discussion Paper 10869, CEPR, London 2015.

    , Christopher Herrington, and Ákos Valentinyi, “Sectoral Technology and Structural
  Transformation,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2015, 7, 1–31.

    , Richard Rogerson, and Ákos Valentinyi, “Two Perspectives on Preferences and Struc-
  tural Transformation,” American Economic Review, 2013, 103, 2752–2789.

    ,     , and      , “Growth and Structural Transformation,” in Philippe Aghion and
  Steven N. Durlauf, eds., Handbook of Economic Growth, Vol. 2, Elsevier, 2014, pp. 855–
  941.

Kongsamut, Piyabha, Sergio Rebelo, and Danyang Xie, “Beyond Balanced Growth,” Review
 of Economic Studies, 2001, 68, 869–882.

Krusell, Per, Lee E. Ohanian, José-Vı́ctor Rı́os-Rull, and Giovanni L. Violante, “Capital-
 Skill Complementarities and Inequality: a Macroeconomic Analysis,” Econometrica, 2001,
 68, 1029–1054.

McGrattan, Ellen R. and Edward C. Prescott, “Openness, Technology Capital and Develop-
 ment,” Journal of Economic Theory, 2009, 144, 2454–2476.

                                            31
    and     , “Unmeasured Investment and the Puzzling US Boom in the 1990s,” American
  Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2010, 2, 88–122.

Ngai, L. Rachel and Christopher A. Pissarides, “Structural Change in a Multisector Model
  of Growth,” American Economic Review, 2007, 97, 429–443.

Solow, Robert, “Technical Change and the Aggregate Production Function,” Review of Eco-
  nomics and Statistics, 1957, 38, 312–320.

Xi, Xican, “Multi-Establishment Firms, Misallocation and Productivity,” Manuscript, Fudan
   University 2016.
    We emphasize that characterizing a GBGP is more challenging in our framework than usual,
because we have structural change in both the consumption sector and the investment sector. In
contrast, existing models of structural change typically abstract from structural change within
the investment sector. Doing this has the advantage that it “anchors” the economy and makes it
fairly straightforward to obtain a constant rental price of capital by imposing that TFP growth in
investment, which is a primitive of the existing models, is constant. Things are rather different
in our framework in which TFP in investment is an endogenous, non–linear aggregator of the
other TFPs.


Appendix

Proof of Proposition 1
We show the claim for Xt only. The proof for Ct follows the exact same steps. We start by
rewriting the production function of Xt :
                                                                  ! εxε−1  εxε−1
                                                                                  x
                                        1                1 X st
                                                                        x 
                          Xt = A xt ω xεx + (1 − ω x ) εx                       Xgt ,
                                                                             
                                                              Xgt
                                                                               

                                                    ε −1                     εxε−1
                                                                                  x
                                          1 Xgt ! xεx
                                         
                                                                         1 
                                                                            
                          Xt = A xt ω xεx            + (1 − ω x ) εx        X st .
                                               X st

Equation (20) implies that:
                                              !εx                                            !ε x
                      X st 1 − ω x A st                         Xgt    ωx    Agt
                          =                           and           =                               .
                      Xgt    ωx    Agt                          X st 1 − ω x A st




                                                        32
Combining the last two sets of equations, we obtain:
                                                                               εx
                                              1 1 − ω A !εx −1  εx −1
                                                                 x      st
                               Xt = A xt ω xεx + εx −1                       Xgt ,
                                                                    A            
                                                        ωx    εx        gt
                                                                       !εx −1                     εxε−1
                                                                                                       x
                                                    ω x            Agt                       1
                               Xt = A xt                                    + (1 − ω x ) εx        X st .
                                                                                               
                                                                                                  
                                                          ε x −1
                                                (1 − ω x ) εx      A st


Rearranging gives:

                                                                                            ε ε−1
                                                                                                 x Xgt
                                     ω x Aεgtx −1 Xt        A xt ω x Aεgtx −1           ω x )Aεstx −1
                                                                  
                                                   =                   + (1 −                  x
                                                                                                        ,
                                                                                                   Agt
                                                                                            εx X st
                             (1 − ω x )Aεstx −1 Xt = A xt ω x Aεgtx −1 + (1 − ω x )Aεstx −1 εx −1
                                                         
                                                                                                        .
                                                                                                   A st

Adding these two equations, we obtain:
                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                          1+ 1    Xgt X st
             ω x Aεgtx −1            ω x )Aεstx −1              A xt ω x Aεgtx −1            ω x )Aεstx −1 εx −1
                                                                    
                            + (1 −                       Xt =                       + (1 −                            +
                                                                                                                   Agt A st

Dividing through the first term on the left–hand side and using the definitions of A xt , K xt , and
L xt proves the claim. QED


Proof of Proposition 3
Note first that if Rt is constant, the household’s Euler equation (22) implies that Et must grow
at a constant rate. Denoting this rate by γ, we have that γ satisfies:

                                                                γ = R − δ − ρ.

    Second, because both the goods and services sectors have Cobb-Douglas production func-
tions with the same capital share, total payments to capital will be a fraction θ of total output:
RKt = θYt . A constant value for R thus also implies that Yt /Kt is constant. Using this expression
to substitute for R in the Euler equation gives:

                                                                Yt   γ+δ+ρ
                                                                   =       .                                                      (25)
                                                                Kt     θ

    The fact that Yt and Kt grow at the same rate does not necessarily imply that they grow
at constant rates. But we next show that along a GBGP it is indeed the case that Kt grows
at a constant rate, and furthermore that this rate is γ. Using K̇t = Xt − δKt with the resource




                                                                          33
constraint Xt = Yt − Et gives:
                                          bt = Yt − δ − Et .
                                          K
                                               Kt       Kt
Substituting for Yt /Kt using equation (25) gives:

                                      bt = γ + δ + ρ − δ − Et .
                                      K                                                            (26)
                                               θ           Kt

To show that K bt is constant and equal to γ, we argue by way of contradiction. First, assume that
at some time T K  bt > γ. Since Et grows at rate γ this implies that Et /Kt is decreasing. Equation
(26) then implies that K                          bt will exceed γ for all t greater than T . It follows
                        bt is increasing, so that K
that the limit of Et /Kt must be zero and hence that:

                            bt =   γ+δ+ρ     γ+ρ 1−θ
                        lim K            −δ=    +    δ > γ + ρ.
                        t→∞          θ        θ   θ

But this implies that the transversality condition, which requires that Kbt < γ + ρ, is violated.
    Suppose alternatively that at some time T we have K   bt < γ. Arguing as above, Et /Kt is now
increasing, implying that K                               bt will be less than γ for all t > T . This
                           bt must be decreasing, so that K
implies that Et /Kt will tend to infinity and hence that:

                                                bt = −∞.
                                            lim K
                                            t→∞


It follows that the growth rate of Kt is negative and bounded away from zero beyond some finite
date, implying that Kt must become negative in finite time. This violates feasibility.
     We conclude that Kt grows at the constant rate γ. Since Yt grows at the same rate as Kt it
follows that Yt also grows at the same constant rate γ. It remains to show that Xt grows at rate
γ. Combining K̇t = Xt − δKt with the fact that Kt grows at the constant rate γ gives:

                                              Xt
                                                 = γ + δ,
                                              Kt

                                                              bt = γ. QED
so that X/K is constant. It follows that it must also be that X




                                                  34
