                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          MEANS OF PAYMENT IN TAKEOVERS:
                           RESULTS FOR THE U.K. AND U.S.




                                 Robert S. Harris

                                  Julian Franks

                                   Cohn Mayer




                              Working Paper No. 2456




                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 1987




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research project on Mergers and
Acquisitions. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of
the National Bureau of Economic Research. Support from the Seaver Institute is
gratefully acknowledged.
                                                 NBER Working Paper #2456
                                                 December 1987

       Means of Payment in Takeovers: Results for the U.K. and U0S.


                                  ABSTRACT


     This paper examines means of payment in over 2,500 acquisitions in the UK

and US over the period 1955 to 1985. Data on financing proportions, bid

premia and postmerger performance are used to test the validity of tax and

information hypotheses. It is difficult to explain many of the results in

terms of tax effects. Capital gains tax does not appear to be a primary

determinant of financing patterns in the UK in a period in which there were

substantial variations in the tax rate. As well the tax motivated "trapped

equity" model is inconsistent with several observations on financing patterns.

     In both countries much larger acquiree bid premia are associated with

cash than equity bids, consistent with information models suggesting that high

valuing bidders make cash offers and low valuing bidders make securities

offers. Even after controlling for the form of takeover (tender versus

merger) and whether the bid is contested, cash offers provide substantially

higher wealth gains to target shareholders. In the US bidders using all

equity suffer significant abnormal losses at the time of the bid announcement

consistent with the findings on the wealth effects of seasoned new equity

offerings in the US. In the UK, however, no such losses are evident, perhaps

reflecting the fact that in the UK equity bids are typically underwritten.

Finally, we find that acquirors making cash offers have better postmerger

shareprice performance than do those using equity. These results are

consistent with the hypothesis that bidders are motivated to use overvalued

equity to acquire other firms.


Robert S. Harris      Julian Franks            Cohn Mayer
School of Business   London Business School    City University Business School
University of N.C.   Sussex Place, Regents Pk. London
Chapel Hill, NC       London, NW1 England      England
                     Means of Payment in Takeovers:
                      Results for the U.K. and U.S.




                             Julian R. Franks

                             Robert S. Harris

                               Cohn Mayer




First Draft, January 1987

Sixth Draft, June 14, 1987




     We thank Claude Wolff, Richard Boebel and Pat Rowan for collecting

some of the data, Nick Grattan and Ed Bachmann for programming

assistance. We also acknowledge financial support from the Leverhulme

Trust and The Frank Hawkins Kenan Institute for Private Enterprise.

Cohn Mayer is supported by the Center for Economic Policy Research

project on "An International Study of Corporate Financing". This paper

was prepared for an NBER Conference on "The Economic Effects of Mergers

and Acquisitions" at Key Largo, Florida (February, 1987) and was also

presented at seminars at UCLA, UNC at Chapel Hill, Oxford University and

the London Business School. We thank participants for their comments and

suggestions including Mike Brennan, Jennifer Conrad, Bob Conroy, Gene

Fama, Mark Flannery, Mark Grinblatt, David Hirshleifer, Paul Marsh, S.I.
Ornstein, Eduardo Schwartz, Sheridan Titman, and Walter Torous. We are

especially grateful for suggestions made by Artur Raviv and Rick Ruback.

      Julian R. Franks is National Westminster Bank professor of finance

at the London Business School and visiting professor at UCLA. Robert S.

Harris is professor of finance at the University of North Carolina at

Chapel Hill. Cohn Mayer is professor of finance at City University

Business School.
                      Means of Payment in Takeovers:
                    Results for the U.K. and the U.S.


1.   INTRODUCTION

     While many aspects of acquisitions have received extensive

investigation, there has been little analysis of their means of

financing. This is a notable omission in view of the substantial

expenditures involved in takeovers. Franks and Harris (1986b) record

that acquisitions in the UK represented 6 percent of the extant capital

stock in 1985. By any account these are substantial investments whose

method of financing warrants careful scrutiny. This paper provides a

detailed empirical assessment of acquisition finance.

     Although a descriptive analysis of acquisitions is interesting in

itself, there are more fundamental reasons for pursuing the subject.

Over the past few years several theories of acquisition finance have

appeared. As in other areas of corporate finance, these theories have

emphasized the influence of taxation and information asymmetries. To

date, however, there is little empirical work examining their validity.

An examination of these theories may be of value not only for

understanding the acquisition process but also for assessing the

relevance of information and tax considerations to more general corporate

capital structure issues.

     Following a summary of the paper's results in Section 2, Section 3

surveys theories of acquisition financing, and Section 4 summarizes

existing empirical studies. The data set and methodology are described

in Section 5. Spanning the period 1955 to 1985, the data include over

2,500 acquisitions in the UK and the US. This is probably one of the


                                     1
largest firm data sets employed in an analysis of acquisitions. Interest

in the results is further enhanced by international comparisons, since

there are some well documented differences between the UK and US in the

response of share prices to announcement of new issues of equity. One

interesting question is whether similar differences are observed in

equity financed acquisitions. In addition, there are significant

institutional differences between the countries in regulations relating

to corporate financing activities and taxation that should affect the

preferred means of payment for acquisitions. For example, there has been

a much more liberal attitude to share repurchases in the US than in the

UK over most of the period of the study. As a consequence, at least one

set of theories would anticipate different financing patterns between the

two countries.

     Section 6 examines the forms of finance that have been used in

acquisitions over the 30 years of the study. These financing patterns

are related to salient tax and institutional considerations. Section 7

describes share price responses around the announcement date of the

acquisition and reports the wealth gains to bidders and targets in cash

and equity financed acquisitions. Previous studies have recorded

performance variations by class of acquisition. For example, bid premia

in tender offers have been observed to be greater than those in mergers.

Section 7 assesses whether these differences can be attributed to the

forms of financing or the type of acquisition. Section 8 reports post-

merger performance for up to two years after the acquisition. Finally,

Section 9 summaries the results and discusses how the deficiencies of the

current methodology could be avoided in a broader cross-sectional study.


                                      2
2.   SUMMARY OF RESULTS

2.1 Means of Payment

(i) Just over half of the sample of acquisitions in the UK were either

"all equity" or "all cash" bids, with an approximately equal distribution

between the two. Almost two-thirds of US acquisitions were either all

equity or all cash.

(ii) The higher proportion of "mixed bids" in the UK is in part

accounted for by the provision of cash alternatives to equity offers.

These cash alternatives are frequently underwritten.

(iii) In the latter half of the 1960's approximately half of US

acquisitions were effected by an offer of convertibles, although their

use dropped significantly by the 1970's.

(iv) Cash acquisitions in the US increased from a negligible proportion

during the 1950's to just under 60 percent by number during the 1980's.

(v) There has not been a similar discernible upward trend in the use of

cash in the UK.

2.2 Returns Around the Announcement of a Merger

(i) Returns to bidder shareholders are similar in cash and equity

financed acquisitions in the UK during the six months prior to (but not

including) the announcement month. In the US, acquirors offering equity

slightly outperform those offering cash in the pre-bid period.

(ii) Bid premia to target shareholders in cash acquisitions are

significantly in excess of those accruing to shareholders in equity

acquisitions in both the UK and the US.(iii) In the UK, neither cash nor

equity acquisitions display significant abnormal returns to bidder




                                      3
shareholders in the month of an acquisition. Gains to acquisitions thus

accrue to target shareholders.

(iv) In the US, there are significant positive gains to bidder

shareholders in cash acquisitions and significant losses in equity

acquisitions.

2.3 Post Merger Returns

(i) Post merger returns (measured two years after the merger is

finalized) are not significantly different from zero in cash acquisitions

in either the UK or US.

(ii) There is evidence of abnormal losses sustained by shareholders in

the US in the two years after an equity acquisition.

2.4 Results Relating to Theories of Acquisition Finance

CaDital Gains Tax Theories

(i) The larger gains to target shareholders in cash compared with

equity acquisitions may be consistent with the theory that target

shareholders have to be compensated for capital gains taxes levied on

cash but not on equity acquisitions.

(ii) However, differences in bid premia in cash and equity financed

acquisitions in the UK were observed before 1965, prior to the

introduction of capital gains tax. Bid premia can therefore at best only

be partially explained by capital gains tax.

(iii) Furthermore, this proposition is not supported by other evidence,

where the means of payment is shown to be unresponsive to appreciable

changes in capital gains tax rates in the UK.




                                       4
"Trapped Equity" Theories

(iv) Theories (King (1986)) which treat acquisitions as a tax efficient

method of making distributions to shareholders predict a reduction in

cash acquisitions when the costs of alternative forms of distributions

(such as dividends) fall. The proportion of acquisitions financed with

cash is not affected by the introduction of the imputation tax system in

the UK in 1973 which reduced the costs of dividend payments.

(v) Despite the fact that repurchases of shares were not feasible in the

UK over the period of the study, the proportion of acquisitions financed

with cash in the UK was less than in the US in recent years. Since

repurchases are as tax efficient as cash acquisitions, trapped equity

theories would predict a larger use of cash in the UK. The availability

of a stepped up basis on depreciable assets may have provided a tax

incentive for the higher use of cash in the US.




                                     5
Information/Agency Theories

(vi) The proposition (Fishman (1986)) that cash is used in high valued

acquisitions to preempt competing bids is consistent with larger bid

premia paid in cash than in equity acquisitions.

(vii)     However, the evidence that cash is more commonly employed in

contested bids is not consistent with the view that cash is preemptive.

(viii) The abnormal losses incurred by shareholders of bidding companies

(in the US, at least) upon announcements of equity acquisitions, and the

post-merger abnormal losses associated with equity acquisitions, are

consistent with asymmetries in information encouraging the issue of

overvalued equity by acquirors.

2.5 Explaining Previous Results

(i) A significant proportion of the difference in bid premia between

tender and non-tender offers is attributable to a greater use of cash in

tender offers.

(ii) Negative post-merger performance, which has been observed in some

previous studies, appears to be closely associated with the use of

equity.

2.6 International Comparisons

(i) In the US, acquirors using equity incur abnormal losses on the bid

announcement, whereas those using cash make abnormal gains. In the UK,

in contrast, no significant gains or losses are incurred by bidders using

cash or equity. These results are similar to those found in event

studies of new (seasoned) equity issues in the UK and US respectively.




                                       6
ii) Underwriters in the UK play a much more important role in

acquisition finance than in the US. They may not only play a role in

financing acquisitions where the bidder lacks cash but also where the

bidder requires external validation of the valuation of its offer.

3.   THEORIES OF MEANS OF PAYMENT IN ACQUISITIONS

     In complete markets with symmetric information and in the absence of

taxes, shareholders should be indifferent to the means of payment used in

acquisitions: share price responses should reflect only changes in

fundamental values induced by the merger. However, the tax system and

specific features of the capital market encourage the use of particular

forms of finance. This section surveys theories of choice of finance in

acquisitions. Section 3.1 discusses tax based models, and Section 3.2

agency and information theories.

3.1 The Influence of Taxation on the Medium of Exchange

     Choice of means of exchange affects the tax liabilities of the

acquired firm's shareholders. In an equity acquisition, the investor's

acceptance of the stock of the acquiring company avoids the realization

of any capital gain and does not therefore impose an immediate capital

gains tax liability on the acquired company's shareholders. Such taxes

are deferred until the shares are ultimately sold. In a cash purchase,

any gain must be realized immediately for tax purposes thus creating a

tax liability at the capital gains tax rate. In the absence of other

considerations, we would not expect to observe cash acquisitions.

However, the payment of capital gains taxes is dependent on the tax

status of investors, and the full capital gains tax rate may be mitigated

by exemptions and allowances. The rate will be smallest for targets with


                                     7
"marginal" investors that are tax exempt or have unutilized allowances.

For these investors, personal tax considerations will bear little

relation to the desired means of payment.

     Where a capital gains tax liability is created, additional

considerations must justify the use of cash. For example, in the US a

cash acquisition permits the acquiring company to "write up" certain

assets of the acquired firm to their fair market values. Such a "write

up" produces higher tax deductible depreciation allowances not available

in all equity bids. This corporate tax advantage of cash bids is

somewhat tempered by recapture taxes due on written-up values of tangible

assets when the acquisition is consolidated by the acquiror. Thus the US

tax laws can provide an incentive for cash bids in cases in which market

values exceed book values of acquired firms' assets. Such a "stepped up"

basis is not available in the UK. For target shareholders to be

indifferent to the use of cash and non-taxable forms of payment, cash

purchases must create pre-tax gains, as measured by bid premia, which are

in excess of those associated with equity purchases. The net gain to the

bidder is then the value of the "write up," less the increment to the bid

premium.

Hi: Bid premia are higher in cash than equity financed acquisitions.

Ceteris paribus. the use of cash in acquisitions is inversely related to

the capital gains tax rate of acquired firms' shareholders and directly

related to the potential for writing up depreciable assets.

     The above disincentives to use cash in acquisitions may be offset by

considerations of the tax position of the acquiring firm's shareholders.

Cash acquisitions may afford tax savings because dividend payments are


                                      8
taxed at shareholders' personal income tax rates. Thus, cash

acquisitions may be more tax efficient than dividend payments if capital

gains taxes are smaller than personal income taxes on dividend income.

According to the models of Auerbach (1979) and King (1977), under

conditions in which a firm's marginal valuation ratio (referred to below

as q) is less than unity, but in excess of the value of a unit dividend

distribution to shareholders, there are disincentives to paying cash

dividends. Distributions to shareholders could be achieved at a lower

tax cost by share repurchases or voluntary liquidation (see Edwards and

Keen (1985)). In the UK, share repurchases have only been permitted

since 1985. In the US, share repurchases have been permitted for the

period of our study and have now become widespread (see Shoven and Simon

(1987)). However, it is possible that even in the US restrictions on the

tax status of repurchases may favor alternative routes of distributing

cash-- through, for example, acquisitions.

H2: The incentives to use cash in acQuisitions are greater in

circumstances where share repurchases are prohibited or costly.

     In King (1986) the tax incentive to make cash acquisitions has been

made more precise. He argues that, in the absence of share repurchases,

cash acquisitions are a tax efficient way of distributing trapped equity

to stockholders. Companies make cash acquisitions because the cost of

purchasing assets traded in the corporate sector is less than purchasing

(equivalent) assets in the unincorporated sector. The difference in cost

is accounted for by the tax wedge between income taxed in the corporate

and personal sectors. More formally, let Ca and C be the costs of

adjustment associated with a unit purchase of capital through acquisition


                                     9
and capital investment respectively. Equality at the margin of the cost

of purchases through cash acquisition and investment requires that:

                        q+C=l+Cj                                                  (1)

assuming that financial markets place a value of q on an additional unit

of capital (which costs $1 to purchase in the absence of adjustment

costs) once it is in the corporate sector. King's model focuses on the

implications of having $1 in the corporate sector (generated from, say,

previously profitable investments) which is worth q* in financial

markets; q* may be less than unity due to the double layers of corporate

and personal taxes. As these dollars are used to purchase capital (at a

cost of 1 +   C)   equality at the margin requires that

                        q=q* (l+C)                                                (2)

Substituting (2) into (1) and simplifying yields,

                        Ca =         1)                                    (3).
                               q

If profits in the corporate sector are taxed more heavily than those in

the personal sector, q* is less than unity, and the expression on the

right hand side of (3) is increasing in q. Thus under reasonable

descriptions of the cost of adjustment function, Ca, acquisitions are

increasing in q. For example, letting A represent dollars spent on

acquisitions and K the capital stock, quadratic costs of adjustment are

described as Ca =       + 1(A/qK).        Substituting into (3) yields equation

(4).

                A/K =    - (48q/8)   +    (1/)q2((l   -
                                                          q*)/q*)                 (4)

       The driving force behind King's description of acquisitions is the

undervaluation at the margin of $1 in the corporate sector - -       the   so-

called "trapped equity" model of acquisitions. For example, if the

                                             10
corporate tax rate is t and the personal tax rate is m, then under a

classical system of taxation q*     q(l -    t),   and, under an imputation

system with imputation rate of m, q* = (1      -
                                                   t)/(l   -
                                                               m), which creates an

incentive to acquire so long as t > rn.1



H3: The tax incentive to make cash acquisitions is increasing in the

value of the tax wedge (1 -   q)   and the square of the marginal valuation

of capital ratio. q.

3.2 Information and Agency Models

     If all parties to an acquisition are not equally well informed about

future prospects, then the choice of finance may be influenced by

considerations other than taxation. In particular, asymmetries in

information encourage the pursuit of opportunistic gains. In

acquisitions, two types of asymmetries in information might be

anticipated: either the acquiror or the acquiree could have superior

information about valuations of their own respective assets. In the

former case, there is an incentive for the acquiror to undertake equity

acquisitions during periods in which its shares are overvalued- -or at

least not undervalued. In the latter case, there is an incentive for the

acquiree to accept offers during periods in which its equity is perceived

to be overvalued.

     Myers and Majluf (1984) have examined the influence of misvaluations

on the incentives for firms to make new equity issues. They argue that

there is a disincentive for firms to use new equity as a means of funding

new investments. If managers have superior information about the value

of existing assets and investment opportunities, then they will wish to


                                        11
restrict sales of shares to periods when current and prospective

investments are not undervalued by new investors. New shareholders in

turn appreciate this incentive to sell overvalued equity and as a result

downgrade their valuation of firms that make new equity announcements.

Furthermore, since firms have an alternative form of finance available

(say, cash or debt) that avoids the adverse selection problem, any new

issues of equity must be prompted by overvaluation.2 Riskiess securities

will be issued in preference to equity, thereby creating the "pecking

order" hypothesis of Myers (1984) in which retentions are used in

preference to debt, which is in turn issued in preference to equity.

Smith (1986) reviews studies demonstrating negative average price impacts

when a new stock issue is announced.

     In the context of acquisitions there are two implications of the

Myers and Majluf model. The first is that the use of equity will be

discouraged in circumstances in which bidders are better informed about

their own asset valuation.   The second is that bidders will be

discouraged from buying shares in target companies if the targets are

better informed about their own valuations than are bidders. In this

case, the target is the issuer of equity facing the adverse selection

problem. In sum, asymmetries in information about the value of targets

discourage acquisitions, and asymmetries in information about the value

of the bidder discourage the use of equity finance. These information

asymmetries give rise to the following share price response.




                                       12
H4: The announcement of eQuity as the medium of exchange in acquisition

leads to a fall in the share price of the bidder (i.e.. the issuer) while

the use of cash leads to an increase in share price.

     Changing assumptions about the information structure leads to rather

different predictions. If information about the quality of the acquiror

or acquiree only becomes evident after the bid announcement, then

subsequent revaluations will occur and there will be incentives to use

particular types of finance. There are three possibilities discussed in

the literature:

(i) If the acquiror is better informed about the value of its own

equity, and misvaluations are only revealed after the acquisition, then

there is an incentive for the acquiror to use equity during periods of

overvaluation. When equity is undervalued, acquirors will offer cash

(Myers and Majluf (1984)).

(ii) If the acquiree is better informed about its own value and its true

valuation is only revealed after the acquisition, then equity offers will

be preferred to cash when equity is believed to be undervalued (Hansen

(1984,1987)). Acquirees prefer to retain an equity participation in the

merged firm in order to capture some of the subsequent gains when the

undervaluation is revealed.

(iii) If pre-merger appraisals make the acquiror well informed about the

high value of the acquiree, then it will offer cash in the acquisition.

This follows from the desire of the acquiror to capture the benefits of

high value acquisitions and to avoid sharing these gains with the

acquiree. Conversely, when it is uncertain about acquiree valuations, it

will wish the acquiree to retain an equity holding. This diminishes the


                                     13
adverse selection problems associated with better informed acquirees

(Fishman (1986)).

     Fishman also argues that cash will be associated with high offers

and high bid premia provided by the acquiror. He assumes some fixed

costs for collecting information about the value of the prospective

target which encourages acquirors who establish high value acquisitions

to make preemptive bids.3 These preemptive bids deter other companies

from paying for information and initiating competing offers. Cash offers

should therefore be associated with high bid premia for the target, low

levels of competition, and positive abnormal performance for the bidder

after the bid announcement.

     In sum, theories of acquisition finance have some clear implications

for (i) means of payment, (ii) bid premia and (iii) share price movements

after bid announcement. In the remainder of the paper, we examine how

well each of the theories explains the empirical results.

4.   PREVIOUS EMPIRICAL WORK

4.1 Means of Payment

     Two US studies have examined the choice of finance used in

acquisitions, incorporating, at least to some extent, personal tax

considerations. Applying a conditional logit model, Carleton et al

(1983) examine the financial accounts of acquired firms to study the

probability of three events: 1) being acquired in a cash offer, 2) being

acquired in a securities exchange or 3) not being acquired. Using a

sample of companies from 1976-77, they find that "lower dividend payout

ratios and lower market-to-book ratios increase the probability of being

acquired in a cash takeover relative to being acquired in an exchange of


                                     14
securities" (p. 825). The authors conclude that on the assumption that

book values measure the basis on which capital gains liabilities are

calculated, the finding on market-to-book ratios is consistent with a

personal tax disadvantage to cash offers. They also discuss the

possibility that a market-to-book ratio may proxy for other effects such

as inefficient management of the target. The authors find no

satisfactory explanation for their findings on dividend payout.

     Niden (1986) provides an extensive discussion of tax issues in US

takeovers and examines the choice between taxable (essentially all cash)

and nontaxable (forms of equity) consideration based on variables

proxying for the tax position of each of the combining firms. While her

logit models have small explanatory power, no relationship is found

between the tax paying circumstances of target shareowners and the form

of consideration.

4.2 Bid Premia

     A recent (unpublished) study by Asquith, Bruner and Mullins (1986)

has focused directly on the impact of form of financing on merger

returns. Using a sample of 343 US mergers over the period 1975-83, they

find that equity offers are associated with significantly smaller returns

to both bidders and targets than are cash offers. For targets, they

report bid premia of 27.5 percent and 13.9 percent for cash and equity

bids respectively. For bidders, those using cash earned 0.2 percent and

those using equity earned -2.4 percent, although for relatively large

targets the figures are 0.95 percent and -5.39 percent respectively.

They find that abnormal losses are positively related to the relative

size of the acquisition. They also suggest that differences in merger


                                     15
returns between alternative forms of financing can completely explain the

differences recorded between returns in mergers and tender offers.

     Controlling for whether a merger was horizontal or conglomerate in

nature, Wansley, Lane and Yang (1983) find acquiree bid premia of 31.5

percent in 102 cash bids and 16.8 percent in 87 "securities" offers.

They conclude that higher bid premia in cash acquisitions are required to

compensate for capital gains tax liabilities. Niden (1986) also finds

higher bid premia to acquirees in taxable acquisitions. Dividing US

acquisitions over the period 1963-1977 into 230 taxable (largely all

cash) and 318 tax-free (mainly all equity) acquisitions, she reports bid

premia of 25.4 percent and 11.9 percent respectively.

     There are no existing UK studies of the relationship between medium

of exchange and shareholder wealth effects. However, Eckbo and Langohr

(1986) have examined bid premia in French takeovers during the period

1966 to 1980. They report that in 50 cash offers, there are

significantly higher average offer premia (53 percent) than in 49

exchanges of securities (20 percent).

     The most consistent result to emerge from previous studies is

therefore that bid premia in cash acquisitions are significantly in

excess of those in equity offers. We provide further evidence on this

below.

5.   DATA AND METHODOLOGY

5.1 Sample

     Our sample contains data from both the UK and US, constructed in

parallel fashion. In the UK we start with an exhaustive set of almost

1900 acquisitions as recorded in the London Share Price Database (LSPD)


                                        16
for the period January 1955 to June 1985 (see Franks and Harris, 1986a).

LSPD includes all UK companies quoted in London since 1975. Prior to

1975, approximately two thirds of UK quoted companies are recorded, with

a bias in favor of larger companies. For each acquisition we then gather

data on the means of payment from the Stock Exchange Year Book which

reports information from offer documents only where the acquiror is

quoted. Financing data exist for 954 acquisitions.

     In the US, we extract data on all firms on the Chicago Research in

Security Prices (CRSP) files where the firm disappeared through

acquisition during the period January 1955 to December 1984. CRSP

covers all companies on the New York and American Stock Exchanges since

1962 and all NYSE firms since 1926. We obtain means of payment from the

Capital Changes Reporter. Our final US sample contains 1555 acquired

firms with financing data and 850 bidders.

     In cases where several acquisitions were made by the same bidder,

the bidder is counted separately by each acquisition made.




                                     17
5.2 Merger Dates

     For each UK acquisition, we have up to four key dates. The first

approach date is the date when the Stock Exchange is first informed that

merger talks are underway. The first bid date gives the date of the

first formal merger offer. This is followed by an unconditional date

when a sufficient proportion of shares has been pledged to the acquiring

company to guarantee legal control. Finally, the LSPD date shows the

last date for which stock returns data are available for the target,

usually the delisting date. The first three dates are taken from records

of the EXTEL Company, which collects and records data. There may not be

four distinct dates for all acquisitions. For example, the first bid

date may not be preceded by a formal announcement of talks. For each US

acquisition we obtained three key dates. The first mention of an

acquisition in The Wall Street Journal Index was taken to be the

announcement date. This date is often the actual bid date but may also

be a positive indication of a forthcoming bid. We record dates of bid

revisions, as well as the final bid date, the date of the bid that was

ultimately successful. Finally, we record the delisting date for the

acquiree's stock.

5.3 Share Price Data

     Monthly rates of return are taken from LSPD and CRSP. In the UK,

these are calculated using jobbers' (i.e., market makers) price quotes

(average of bid and ask) at the end of the final trading day of the

month. While traded prices are available, the order of prices during a

day is not, thereby prohibiting identification of end-of-day traded

prices. Jobbers' quotes may not be available on the last day of the


                                     18
month, either because the company's stock has been suspended or because

the shares were not traded that day. If there are no jobbers' quotes on

the end day of the month, returns are calculated using a randomly

selected traded price on the day of the month when the stock was last

traded. The results were not appreciably affected when we used traded

prices only, instead of the average of the jobbers' bid and ask price.

5.4 Abnormal Returns and Tests

     To assess the effects of mergers on share prices, we use variations

of event study methodology. Specifically, for any company j we define an

abnormal return (arjt) as

          arjt =   rjt   -
                             cjt                                         (5)

where rjt is the continuously compounded realized return (log form) in

month t (dividends plus capital gains) and cjt is a control return which

calculates an estimate of shareholder returns in the absence of a merger.

Time, t, is defined relative to an event date. For UK mergers we use the

first available of either the first approach, first bid, unconditional or

LSPD dates. In the US we use the announcement date. Since specification

of the control returns is controversial, we define control return in

three alternate ways as described later in this section.

     Company abnormal returns are then aggregated to form a portfolio

abnormal monthly return (ARt) defined as,

                                                                        (6)
          AR.




where N is the number of companies in a particular portfolio, e.g., the

portfolio of acquirees. The statistical significance of ARt is assessed

with the statistic TARt = ARt/u where a is the standard deviation of the
                                     19
ARt'S (assumed to be normally distributed) for a time period assumed to

be unaffected by the merger. In results reported a is calculated for the

period t     -71 to t =   -12.   Given these procedures, TARt is distributed

according to student's t distribution with 59 degrees of freedom. This

procedure provides crude adjustment for cross sectional dependence as

discussed by Brown and Warner (1980). Alternatively, the statistical

significance of ARt is tested non-parametrically using the percentage of

the arjt that are positive. This is accomplished by comparing the

positive percentage to a binomial distribution when the probability of a

positive return is 0.50.

     To measure returns over a number of months a cumulative abnormal

return (CARt) is calculated as

                    t
           CARt                                  (7)
                   itb
where tb is the month at which the cumulation begins. Under the

assumption that the ARt's are independent, the significance of CARt can

be assessed using the statistic TCARt = CARt/ciGAR where ciGAR

and a is estimated as described above. TCARt is approximately a standard

normal variate under the null hypothesis that CARt has a zero mean.

     Though CAR is frequently used for assessing multi-period returns, it

can be unsatisfactory when companies disappear from the analysis due to

nontrading or because companies are delisted or suspended close to the

bid date. As an alternative to CAR we construct company-specific




                                         20
multi-period returns. These company "bid premia" (bpt) are aggregated

into portfolio bid premia (BPt) defined as

                                      t
          BP =     > bp.                  ar..                            (8)
                  j=l          j=l itb
where the cumulation process begins at time tb and includes those monthly

abnormal returns which are observed up to and including month t.    For

example, if in month +1 two companies obtain an average residual of 10%

and in month +2 only one survives (or is traded) and obtains a residual

of 5 percent, the CAR for the 2 months according to equation (7) is 15

percent, compared with 12 1/2 percent using equation (8). We assess the

statistical significance of RP using the statistic TSP   BP/a5p where UBP

=ajT and T is the average (across companies) number of months for which

return data are available to form BP. TSP is the analogue of TCARt shown

above.

     The calculation of TBP and TCAR both use a calculated as the

standard deviation of abnormal returns for some time period removed from

the merger. It can be argued that there are transitory (or permanent)

risk shifts associated with mergers that might not be captured by our

calculation of a. As an alternative procedure, we calculated statistics

based on the cross-sectional standard error of company-specific bid

preniia (bpjt). This "cross-sectional" t is calculated as SF/SE where SE

= SD/JN and SD is the cross-sectional standard deviation of the bid

premia for the N companies averaged to get BP. In general, the results

using these cross-sectional t statistics are quite comparable to those

using TSP and TCAR discussed above.




                                      21
5.5 Control Returns

        Brown   and Warner's simulation results (1980, 1985) on both monthly

and daily data suggest that relatively straightforward procedures are as

powerful as more elaborate tests in detecting abnormal returns (see,

also, Brown and Weinstein (1985)). To see whether the specification of

control returns affects our results, we use three alternate models to

determine cjt using the following equation:

               cjt =   aj   + i9jrm

In    the first model, the market model, values for a and     are estimated by

regressing of rjt on rmt for the sixty month period beginning at t        -71

in the US. Due to documented effects of infrequent trading in the UK on

estimated parameters (Dimson and Marsh (1983)), a and       for UK companies

are adjusted for thin trading using Dimson's method (1979) for the same

sixty month period.4 In the second model we set a        0 and      1 for all

firms. The third model is based on the CAPM and sets cjt         rft +
-
     rft)   where   is from the market model and rft is the yield on a

government obligation. For the UK we use the yield on three month

Treasury obligations converted to a one month yield basis. For the US we

use yields on one month Treasury bills.

6.      FORMS OF FINANCING IN ACQUISITIONS IN THE US AND UK

        Section 6.1 describes the different forms of financing used in our

samples of US and UK acquisitions, the importance of each form, and the

trends over the thirty year period. Section 6.2 assesses whether these

patterns of financing are consistent with the predictions of the theories

in Section 3.

6.1 Means of Payment


                                         22
     Table 1 shows that all cash offers and all equity offers have been

the two most widely used means of payment in both countries. Together,

                       (Insert Table 1 about here)

these two types of offers constitute almost one half of successful

takeovers in the UK and in excess of two-thirds of US offers. In the UK

an additional one in five acquisitions has involved either a combination

of cash and equity or the seller's option to receive either all cash or

all equity. In the "all cash or all equity" case, each shareholder of

the target may elect to receive all cash or all equity. The bidder will

provide the cash from its own resources, or the cash will be provided by

an underwriter. In the latter case, shareholders of the target tender

their shares to the bidder, which issues new shares to the underwriter

(on the basis of the bid terms), which then remits the amount prescribed

by the cash alternative to the tendering stockholders.

     These "all cash or all equity "   offers   have become increasingly

prevalent since 1979. One reason is that they provide shareholders who

are liable to pay capital gains taxes on realized gains (if they receive

cash) with an equity alternative, and others, who do not want the

bidder's paper in their portfolio, with cash. The offer is tax and

transaction cost efficient. The role of the underwriter may be two-fold:

1) it simply provides a source of cash for a cash-hungry bidder; and 2)

it provides a signal to the market of the value of the bidder's equity

from an informed (or partially informed) trader.      This informed trader

must agree to purchase any shares at a predetermined price whenever a

target shareholder elects to take the cash alternative. This role may be




                                       23
especially important where the acquisition is relatively large and where

there is great uncertainty as to the value of the offer to the bidder.

     Unlike the UK, the cash alternative and cash-equity combinations

have not been significant in the US. All debt offers are rare in both

countries, and combination offers involving debt are infrequent, though

more common in the UK. A striking contrast between the two countries is

in the use of convertibles securities. In the US, 11.8 percent of

takeovers have involved full payment with convertibles (e.g. convertible

preferred stock), and an additional 7.3 percent have been combinations of

equity and convertibles. In the UK the use of convertibles has been

negligible.

     Panel B shows that, compared with the US, a larger proportion of UK

takeovers have involved at least some cash or some debt. Also, a

slightly larger proportion of UK offers have involved at least some

equity. These figures reflect the greater use of combination offers in

the UK.

     Table 2 divides the entire thirty year period into five-year blocks,

and Figure 1 displays the results by year. In the US all-cash takeovers

were not

                    [INSERT TABLE 2 ABOUT HERE]

observed in our sample until 1965, but since then have become

increasingly important.5 At the same time, all equity offers fall from

three quarters of US takeovers in the late 1950's to less than one

quarter in the 1980's. This striking increase in the use of cash

occurred over a period in which the Williams Act (1968) and its extension

(1970) imposed more stringent requirements on cash offers. In contrast,


                                     24
in the UK financing proportions have fluctuated considerably over the

thirty years of the study.

                    [INSERT FIGURE 1 ABOUT HERE]

     Table 2 also demonstrates that the heavy use of convertibles in the

US is largely a phenomenon of the 1960's. During the period 1965-69,

fully one half of US bids involved convertible securities. By the

1980's, the proportion had fallen to only 5.4 percent. The downturn in

takeover financing with convertibles is probably due to changes in US tax

law and accounting standards. Enactment of Section 279 of the tax code

in 1969, eliminated the tax deductibility of interest payments on

convertible debt expressly issued for acquisitions. In addition,

Accounting Principles Board Opinion Number 15 required the reporting of

earnings per share on a fully diluted basis. Such a change may have

reduced the incentive to issue convertibles because of the impact of

earnings dilution on contractual arrangements, for example, in bond

covenants. Also, managers and investment bankers may have been

apprehensive about investor reaction to even cosmetic reductions in EPS.



     The proportions in both Tables 1 and 2 have been calculated on an

equally weighted basis. Table 3 provides the proportions of all cash and

all equity offers based on the market value of the acquisitions.

                    [INSERT TABLE 3 ABOUT HERE]

For the US, the proportion of bids that are all cash on a value weighted

basis is almost identical to the equally weighted proportion for the

period 1955 to 1974. After 1974, cash offers constitute a smaller

proportion on a value weighted basis than on an equal weighted basis,


                                     25
suggesting that cash offers are used more frequently in smaller

acquisitions. For all equity offers, equal and value weighted results

are very close, except for the period 1980-84.

     In the UK, the proportion of all cash offers on a value weighted

basis is appreciably lower than on an equally weighted over the period

1955 to 1969. The converse is true for the period 1970 to 1984. Over

the entire thirty year period, the proportion of bids that are all cash

is 0.25 on both an equally weighted basis and a value weighted basis.

For the all equity figures, there is no consistent relationship between

the value and equal weightings. In aggregate, the all equity proportion

on a value weighted basis is 0.20 compared with 0.25 on an equally

weighted basis.

6.2 Theoretical Predictions and Evidence

     Some support is provided for the prediction of hypothesis 1 that the

use of cash in acquisitions should be inversely related to the capital

gains tax rate. In the UK the introduction of capital gains in 1965

coincided with a decline in the proportion of cash financed acquisitions

from an average of 29.2 percent in 1960-64 to 18.6 percent in 1965-69.

However, this decrease was short-lived, and by 1975-79 the proportion had

returned to 33.6 percent.

     The proposition that cash acquisitions are more prevalent in an

environment such as the UK where share repurchases are prohibited

(hypothesis 2) is contradicted by the finding that the proportion of all

cash bids has been greater in the US than in the UK. But in large part,

cash acquisitions in the US are a phenomenon beginning in the 1970's.

Their marked growth may reflect more widespread election of stepped-up


                                     26
basis. Rising inflation in the 1970's increased the benefits of raising

the basis for determining depreciation allowances from historic to

current prices. Since the stepped-up basis is not available in the UK,

an equivalent trend did not occur.

     UK financing proportions are most informative about the trapped

equity hypotheses. Since the trapped equity model is a description of

the incentives to make cash distributions through acquisitions, it is

worth recalling that a high proportion of acquisitions use "all equity"--

as large as the proportion of "all cash". The theory cannot explain the

"all equity" class of acquisitions. More strikingly, the cycles of

merger activity that have been widely observed, and which are an

important component of the empirical relationship that King (1986)

estimates between the value of acquisitions and stock market prices, do

not appear to coincide with peaks in cash financed acquisitions.

According to Figure 1, the particularly large merger booms in the UK in

1968 and 1972 have not coincided with large upswings in the proportion of

cash financed acquisitions.

     Still more worrying for the trapped equity hypothesis is the poor

association of the tax disincentive for dividend distributions and the

level of acquisitions using cash. Recall from hypothesis 3 that the

incentive for cash acquisitions is increasing in the tax wedge. Over the

period of the study a number of important tax changes in the UK should

have affected this wedge. Most obviously, the introduction of

corporation tax in 1965 is associated with an increase in the tax price

of retaining assets in the corporate sector. The incentive to distribute

cash thus rose appreciably in 1965. However, from Figure 1, it can be


                                     27
seen that this coincided with a period during which the proportion of

cash financed acquisitions declined. Also, the introduction of

imputation tax in the UK in 1973 would be expected to lessen the tax

price of retaining assets in the corporate sector. Imputation is a tax

credit attributed to shareholders for the payment of corporation tax on

the profits underlying a distribution. In 1973, 35 percent of the 52

percent corporation tax was imputed to investors' personal income tax.

The corporate tax wedge was therefore only 17 percent, compared with 40

percent prior to 1973. However, Figure 1 records that the introduction

of imputation is associated with a period in which there was a sharp

increase in the proportion of cash acquisitions, peaking in 1976.6

     To summarize, financing proportions provide little support for the

trapped equity model, and some tentative support for an influence from

capital gains tax. The appreciable rise in cash financed acquisitions in

the US can be attributed, at least in part, to tax benefits from stepped-

up basis.

7.   WEALTH EFFECTS FOR BIDDER AND TARGET AROUND THE ANNOUNCEMENT DATE

     In this section we examine bid premia associated with different

means of payment. In Section 7.1 we focus on bid premia around the

announcement date in "all cash" and "all equity" offers. In Section 7.2

we examine share price changes prior to the announcement. In 7.3 we

report results for "mixed bids," such as equity with cash alternatives

and convertibles. Since the means of payment may be associated with

other characteristics of takeover, in Section 7.4 our sample is

partitioned by whether the bids are revised or contested and whether the

bids are tender offers.   Section 7.5 reports a cross-sectional

regression controlling for these bid characteristics.


                                     28
7.1    Bid Premiums In All Cash and All Equity Offers

      Table 4 presents bid premia for all cash and all equity offers for

both countries. Since results are essentially the same using all three

models of control returns, only those for the market model are reported.

Panel B shows that in the US, acquiring companies are 7 times as large as

targets in all cash and 9 times as large in all equity offers. In the

UK, the relative size of the bidder to the target is 12 in all cash

offers and 6 in all equity offers.

                      [INSERT TABLE 4 ABOUT HERE]

Target Shareholders

      Panel A shows that for both countries all cash offers have markedly

higher bid premia for target shareholders than do all equity bids. For

example, using month 0 results for the UK, targets with cash offers earn

a 30.2 percent bid premium which is significantly higher than the 15.1

percent premium in equity offers. The t-statistic7 comparing the two

figures is 9.49. In the US, the differences are even more dramatic, with

the month 0 premium of 11.1 percent in all equity offers being less than

half the all cash figure of 25.4 percent. We thus find strong evidence

that target shareholders receive larger wealth gains in all cash

takeovers than those involving all equity. This observation is

consistent with (a) the capital gain tax thesis that higher bid prenila

are required in cash offers to compensate for the capital gains tax

liability (hypothesis 1); (b) the Myers and Majluf argument that there

are negative signals associated with equity offers (hypothesis 4); and

(c) the Fishman argument that cash offers coincide with high value

acquisitions.


                                       29
     Comparing results in the two countries, all cash bids appear to

coincide with slightly higher bid premia in the US than in the UK over

the 6 month period (.363 versus .305), and the differences are

statistically significant at better than the .10 level (t   1.92).

Comparing the month 0 and month -4 to +1 figure a greater proportion of

the US bid premium in cash offers appears to come prior to month 0.

Turning to all equity bids, the UK bid premia are somewhat higher than

those in the US (.182 versus .156), though not statistically so when

measured over the six month period (t        0.85).

Acquiror Shareholders

     For UK offers, acquiror shareholders appear to earn negligible

returns in the bid month for both cash and equity offers. Over a 6 month

period, however, small (statistically significant) gains accrue for all

cash offers. Whether this gain is a result of the bid, or whether the

bidder times the offer to correspond to favorable developments in its

stock price is uncertain. However, there is no evidence of significant

losses to bidders in UK takeovers around the merger announcement date.

The results for equity offers are similar to those found by Marsh (1979)

in the month following the rights issue announcement (where he finds

small abnormal losses at the time of the announcement).

   In the US, there is a striking difference in performance for bidders

between cash and equity acquisitions. In all cash offers, bidders earn

significantly positive gains of 2 percent in month 0. In contrast, in

all equity offers, acquiror shareholders experience a significant loss of

0.9 percent. These wealth effects are also significantly different from

one another (t =   4.19).8

                                        30
     In summary, our US results suggest that equity in acquisitions

conveys bad news while cash is interpreted as good news. This role for

the medium of exchange is consistent with theoretical predictions (eg.

Miller and Rock (1985)) and empirical evidence on new equity issue

announcements. Smith (1986),surveying an extensive literature on new

equity issues, reports a weighted average loss of 1.6 percent. The

results strongly support Myers and Majluf's predictions described in H4.

     In UK equity offers, the returns to bidders in the bid month are

negative but not statistically different from zero. It is interesting to

consider the institutional differences between the two countries. In the

UK underwriters play a much more important role in equity issues in the

UK than in the US. For example, in the UK virtually all new equity

issues have taken the form of rights issues and virtually all have been

underwritten (see Marsh (1979)). According to Heinkel and Schwartz

(1985) the underwriter may avoid some of the information problems that

would otherwise be associated with equity issues.

     Table 5 compares bid premia around the announcement date of

acquisitions in the UK for the periods 1955 to 1964 and 1965 to 1985.

The significance of 1965 is that this is the year in which a capital gain

tax was introduced in the UK. According to capital gain tax hypothesis

(Hi), bid premia in cash acquisitions should have differed from those in

equity acquisitions only for the period after 1965. Table 5 reveals that

while the difference is larger for the latter period, bid premia in cash

offers are significantly higher than those in equity offers (t = 2.26 in

announcement month) before the introduction of capital gain tax.




                                     31
The hypothesis that capital gain taxes can entirely explain differences

in bid premia is therefore rejected.




                                       32
                    [INSERT TABLE 5 ABOUT HERE]



7.2 A Comparison of Pre Merger Performance of Bidders Using All Cash and

     All Equity

     Anecdotal evidence from investment bankers both in the UK and US

strongly suggests that they believe the choice of equity or cash is

influenced by perceptions of over or under valuation of the bidder's

shares. Some evidence that the pre-merger valuation of the acquiror may

have influenced the choice of financing may be sought in the pre-inerger

share price performance of bidders. If overvalued acquirors choose

equity, then the pre-merger performance of acquirors offering equity

might be expected to be superior to that of acquirors offering cash.

     The table below reports acquiror abnormal returns for the six month

period beginning six months prior to the bid and ending one month before

the bid. It records a small difference in performance over the pre-bid

period between acquirors offering equity and cash in the US with equity

outperforming cash offers. The pre-bid performance of the two types of

bidders is reversed in the UK. Only very limited support is thereby

provided for the hypothesis that overvaluation can be established from

pre-merger data.




                                      33
Acquirors
                             BP
     UK                 -6to-l
          All Cash           .050      198
                        (t=2.31)

       All Equity            .034      150
                        (t=l.28)

     US
       All Cash         -   .006          201
                        (t=- .45)

       All Equity           .024          442
                        (t=2.50)

7.3 Other Types of Bids

     In preceding sections the focus was on all cash and all equity bids

since they comprise the two main types of bids in both the UK and US (see

Table 1). Table 6 presents additional estimates of wealth effects in

other types of bids.

Cash or Equity Offers

     Combination offers provide the seller with the opportunity to accept

either cash or stock. Such an option should reduce any detrimental

personal tax effects associated with an all cash offer. As shown in

Table 1, these offers have been used frequently in the UK but less in the

US. In the UK, target bid premia in these offers are quite similar to

the patterns found in all cash offers (Table 4). For example, the 28.4

percent target bid premium (-4 to +1) in cash or equity offers is very

close to the 30.5 percent figure shown in Table 4 for all cash bids. The

small sample size for US results (N = 20) prevents any definitive

statements, though target bid premia appear to be between those for all

cash and all equity offers (Table 4). In neither country do these "cash

                                     34
or equity" offers coincide with significant bidder share price

performance.

                     [INSERT TABLE 6 ABOUT HERE]

     These results are further evidence that personal tax considerations

do not provide a satisfactory explanation of higher target bid premia in

cash offers since the equity or cash option, although tax efficient,

leads to bid premia comparable to those in all cash offers. Thus, the

evidence contradicts Hi.

Cash and Equity

     These bids provide the seller with a combination of cash and equity

and have been used frequently in the UK. They appear to offer smaller

bid premia to targets than do "cash or equity" or all cash bids, but

higher gains than in all equity bids. Furthermore, there are no

significant wealth effects to bidders in acquisitions involving a

combination of cash and equity. The pattern in these bids thus appears

to be an average of results for the all cash and all equity offers

discussed earlier.

Convertibles

     Convertibles have been extensively used in the US in the 1960's (see

Table 2). As shown in Table 5, bids involving convertibles (either alone

or in combination with equity) coincide with target bid premia very close

to those found in all equity bids. For example, in the US, the month 0

target bid premium is 11.1 percent in all equity bids (Table 4), 11.7

percent in all convertible bids and 10.1 percent in bids involving equity

and convertibles. A major difference relates to bidders. While, as

noted earlier, in the US all equity bids are associated with a negative


                                      35
wealth effect in month 0 for acquirors, bids involving solely

convertibles appear to be associated with significant positive acquiror

gains (1.8 percent) in the bid month.

7.4 Bid Premia: Further Analysis

Time Variations

     Differences in bid premiums between all cash and all equity offers

in Table 4 may be attributable to variations over calendar time in the

performance of acquisitions. This issue is less important in the UK data

since all cash and all equity offers occur over the entire 30 year

period.

     In Panel A of Table 6, we break our US data into three five-year

periods beginning with 1970, the onset of significant use of all cash

offers. As the figures show, the month 0 bid premium estimates for

targets are higher in cash offers in each of the five year periods. The

same patterns hold for six month bid premia though the results are not

shown. In addition, in all equity offers, acquiror wealth effects are

consistently lower and are negative in both the 1975-79 and 1980-84

periods, though significantly so only in the latter period. Table 7

shows that the differences between wealth effects of all equity and all

cash bids in the US cannot be attributed to a particular time period.

                    [INSERT TABLE 7 ABOUT HERE]

Tender and Non Tender Offers

     Earlier work in the US indicates that shareholder wealth effects may

be different in tender offers and mergers. For example, surveying a

number of studies, Jensen and Ruback (1983) report acquiree bid premiums

of 30 percent in tenders but only 20 percent in mergers; for acquirors


                                        36
the figures are 4 percent and 0 percent respectively. In Panel B of

Table 7 we use US data to investigate whether the disparity between

wealth effects in all cash and all equity can be attributed to a greater

use of cash in tenders. Panel B shows that cash bids result in higher

acquiree bid premia, whether the takeover is a tender or not.

Furthermore, Panel B suggests that after having controlled for the medium

of exchange, a difference in bid premia remains between mergers and

tenders. For example, the 28.3 percent premia in cash tenders (month 0)

is significantly higher than the 24.3 percent figure in all cash offers

that are not tenders (t =    3.60).   Panel B also shows that a high

proportion of tenders use cash as the form of finance.

     Turning to the results for acquirors in Panel B, the announcement

month wealth effect to acquirors making all equity bids is negative in

both tender and nontenders, though the sample size is small for all

equity tenders. In contrast, announcement month wealth effects are

positive in all cash offers whether the bid is a tender or not. Panel B

therefore suggests that the medium of exchange and the response of

acquirors' share prtces are related.

Revised and Unrevised Bids

     In Table 8 we use US data to test whether the differences in all

cash and all equity bid premiums (partitioned by tender and merger) are

due to the contested nature of the bids. We have evidence from Franks

and Harris (1986a) that bid revisions, even when unaccompanied by

contestants, show similar wealth effects to contested bids. As a result

we partition offers into those that are 1) unrevised and uncontested and

2) revised or contested.


                                         37
                     [INSERT TABLE 8 ABOUT HERE]

In Panel A, for unrevised bids, target bid premia in all cash tenders are

slightly higher than in all cash mergers (six month bid premia of .384

and .345 respectively). Acquiree bid premia are significantly higher in

all equity tenders (.258) than in all equity mergers (.154). For bids

that are revised or contested a similar pattern emerges, although the

difference between tenders and mergers is larger. We can conclude (a)

all cash bids still provide much larger bid premia than all equity bids,

even after controlling for the form and contested nature of the merger;

(b) tenders still provide larger bid premia than mergers.

     Table 8 records that a larger proportion of all cash than all equity

bids are revised. Using the medium of exchange in the final bid, 28.4%

of cash bids were contested or revised compared with only 16.5% for all

equity. From Fishman's model we might have expected the converse result:

his model predicts that contested bids will occur more frequently in low

value equity bids than in high value cash bids. In the latter case, the

bidder has a high value for the target and uses a cash offer to preempt

competing bids. In fact, competition appears to be more closely

associated with cash than equity offers. It should be noted, however,

that a final cash bid may have evolved from an initial equity bid.

     In Panel B of Table 8 we show wealth gains for bidders. Gains to

bidders appear small and if anything they are larger in all cash

takeovers than in all equity bids.

7.5 Cross-Sectional Analysis

    To investigate further the patterns in acquiree bid premia, we

estimate the following cross-sectional regression


                                     38
                  BP = a0 + a1D1 + a2D2 + a3D3 + a4D4 +

     where     BP is the estimated bid premium
                  = 1 if all cash offer, 0 otherwise
               D2   1 if tender offer,   0 otherwise
                  = 1 if contested bid, 0 otherwise
                    1 if revised bid,    0 otherwise
               e   = a random error term with zero mean.

Only all cash and all equity offers in the US are included in the

regression. Furthermore, since regression results are qualitatively

similar for all three models of forming control returns, we report only

results using the market model and bid premiums over the period -4 to

+1. Figures in parentheses are t-values.

          BP = .163    +     .148D1 +     .081D2 +   .O38D3 + 25D4
            (14.94)        (6.43)       (3.15)    (1.66)   (.98)

                             R2 =   .08, F = 20.8
Though the regression has a low R2, in part due to the measurement error

for individual company bid premia, the F value of 20.8 is statistically

significant at better than the .001 level. The results show that

acquiree bid premiums are larger in contested or revised bids and are

significantly larger in tender offers (coefficient of .081).           Even

having controlled for these effects, however, cash offers appear to

coincide with larger acquiree bid premia. The coefficient of .148 (14.8

percent) is significantly different from zero at better than the .001

level. In fact, the medium of exchange has a larger impact than any of

the other three effects. The regression results thus suggest that in the

US the medium of exchange is significantly related to bid premia and that

this result is not an artifact of other commonly studied characteristics

of the data.




                                             39
     We found qualitatively similar regression results for UK data after

controlling for schemes of arrangement, contested or revised bids, and

time period (a series of dummy variables). The coefficient on D1 was

.104 with a t   statistic   of 2.74.

8.   POSTMERGER PERFORMANCE

     Jensen and Ruback (1983) report a number of US studies finding

negative returns subsequent to merger, and suggest possible reasons for

such results, concluding that "explanation of the post-event negative

abnormal returns is currently an unsettled issue" (p. 22). Table 9

reports estimates of postmerger performance in all cash and all equity

bids. The results are calculated as the average cumulative return (BP

from equation (8)) over the two year period covering months +1 to +24.

For the purposes of measuring postmerger performance in the UK, month

zero is the date when the merger was unconditionally accepted, and for

the US, month zero is the date of the final bid. Four methods of forming

control returns are used to test the robustness of the results.

                      [INSERT TABLE 9 ABOUT HERE]

United States

     Panel A Table 9 shows that in the US there is a marked difference

between postmerger performance in all cash and all equity bids.

Acquirors using all cash do better postmerger than all equity bidders, no

matter what control return is used. The control returns (benchmarks) do,

however, give rise to quite different figures for whether postmerger

performance is positive, zero or negative. These results highlight the

importance of forming an efficient benchmark (see Grinblatt and Titnian

(1986)).


                                       40
     Using either a market model with 'tpremerger't estimated parameters

(calculated from 6 years to 1 year prior to the bid) or a simple a =       0,    /9


= 1.0 model, postmerger abnormal returns are essentially zero in all cash

offers but significantly negative in all equity acquisitions. It can be

argued, however, that such results reflect use of an inappropriate

benchmark since there may be shifts in a firm's expected returns and

risks associated with acquisitions.1-        Therefore, we estimated a and /9

values   in the market model from a postmerger period producing essentially

zero postulerger returns for all equity offers and positive (though not

statistically significant) postmerger returns in all cash offers. These

changes stem from the noticeable reductions in estimated a values when

going from the premerger (6 to 1 year prior to the bid) to the postmerger

period (3 to 5 years after the bid). The average postmerger a values are

negative for both all cash and all equity offers.

     In summary, in all cash bids, acquirors on average do not suffer

postmerger losses and do better than bidders making all equity offers.

Whether all equity bidders have postmerger losses depends on the

benchmark employed. Compared with their premerger performance,

postmerger returns are negative. However, using a benchmark based on

postmerger parameters acquirors using all equity do not experience

abnormal losses in the two years subsequent to an acquisition, but they

do record negative a's 3 to 5 years after the acquisition.

     Given the heavy use of equity in the 1960's, a possible explanation

of these differences between cash and equity offers is that they are due

to the date of the takeover rather than the medium of exchange.11

However, qualitatively similar results (using premerger parameters) were


                                         41
found when the sample was divided into five year subperiods (post 1970).

The results suggest that in the US the medium of exchange plays an

important role in understanding postmerger performance of acquiring

firms. We can speculate that such a role may be related to information

asynnnetries which may motivate equity rather than cash bids in situations

in which the acquiror's equity is overvalued by the market.

United Kingdom

     Panel B of Table 9 shows that postmerger performance results in the

UK are highly dependent upon the formation of control returns. As in the

US, all equity offers have significantly worse postmerger performance

than do all cash offers. The difference appears to be in the 11 to 15

percent range. For example, using the market model, postmerger

performance in all equity offers is -9.4 percent which is 11.1 percent

points less than the 1.7 percent return in all cash offers.

     The issue which is not settled fully, however, is whether postmerger

performance in all equity takeovers is less than zero. The significant

negative figures resulting from use of the market model are essentially

the result of the very high pre-merger values for acquirors in all

equity deals (cK =   0.011 per month or over 12 percent per year). If one
applies the CAPM, all equity takeovers appear to have small positive

bidder returns postmerger, and in all cash offers bidders have large

positive returns of 17.5 percent. As is the case in the US, further

exploration of these results is required)-2

9.   CONCLUSION

     This paper examines means of payment of a large set of acquisitions

in the UK and US over the period 1955 to 1985. Data on financing


                                       42
proportions, bid premia and postmerger performance are used to test the

validity of tax and information hypotheses. One finding is that it is

difficult to explain many of the results in terms of tax effects.

Capital gains tax does not appear to be a primary determinant of

financing patterns in the UK in a period in which there were substantial

variations in the tax rate. The tttrapped equity" model is inconsistent

with several empirical observations on financing patterns. Stepped-up

basis could not be rejected as an explanation of the substantial increase

in cash financing proportions in the US, but insufficient data were

available to provide a convincing test.



     The second set of empirical results examine wealth gains around the

announcement of mergers. In both countries we observed that much larger

bid premia are associated with cash than equity bids. This is consistent

with Fishman's model that high valuing bidders make cash offers, and low

valuing bidders make securities offers. After controlling for the form

of finance, much of the difference in bid premia between tenders and

mergers disappeared. We examined whether the effects of revised or

contested bids could explain the higher bid premia to targets in cash

offers. Results indicate that after controlling for the form of takeover

(tender versus merger) and the contested nature of the bid, cash offers

still provide substantially higher wealth gains to shareholders.

Additionally, bidders in the US which used all equity suffered

significant abnormal losses at the time of the bid announcement

consistent with the findings on the wealth effects of seasoned new equity

offerings in the US. Finally, we found that acquirors making cash offers


                                     43
had better postmerger performance than did those using all equity. These

results support an over-valuation hypothesis, but are inconsistent with

efficient capital market theories.

     Several directions for future work are suggested by these findings.

First, given that our results on postmerger performance are sensitive to

the benchmark used, further investigation is warranted (see Loderer and

Mauer, 1986). Second, our work has focused on the means of payment in

takeover. Further insights into the relationships between financing

decisions and acquisition performance could be obtained by incorporating

detailed information on the capital structures of the merging firms.




                                     44
                                       REFERENCES


Asquith, Paul., R. Bruner, F. Mullins, 1986. "Merger Returns and the Form of

     Financing," Unpublished Manuscript Harvard Business School, October 1987.

Auerbach, A.J., 1979. "Wealth Maximization and the Cost of Capital," Quarterly

     Journal of Economics, 93, 443-446.

Auerbach, A.J,,, and Reishus, 1987. "The Effect of Taxation on the Merger

     Decisions," unpublished paper NBER.

Brown, Stephen J., and Jerold B. Warner, 1980. "Measuring security price

     performance," Journal of Financial Economics, 8, 205-258.

Brown, S.J., and J.B. Warner, 1985. "Using daily stock returns: The case of event

     studies," Journal of Financial Economics, 14, 3-31.

Brown, S.J. ,   and M. Weinstein, 1985. "Derived factors in event studies,"

     Journal of Financial Economics, 14, 491-6.

Capital Changes Reporter, Commerce Clearing House Inc.

Carleton, W., D. Guilkey, R. Harris, and J. Stewart, 1983. "An Empirical Analysis of

     the role of the Medium of Exchange in Mergers," Journal of Finance, June,

     813-826.

Dimson, E., 1979. "Risk Measurement when shares are subject to infrequent

     trading," Journal of Financial Economics, June, 197-226.

Dimson, E., and P. Marsh, 1983. "The stability of U.K. risk measures and the

     problem of thin trading," Journal of Finance, 38, 735-783.

Dimson, E., and P. Marsh, 1986. "Event Study Methodologies and the Size Effect: The

     Case of U.K. Press Recommendations," Journal of Financial Economics, September.




                                              45
Dodd, P., and R. Ruback, 1977.     "Tender Offers and Stockholder Returns: An

     Empirical Analysis," Journal of Financial Economics, December, 351-374.

Eckbo, E., and H. Langohr, 1986. "Disclosure Regulations and Determinants of

     Takeover Premiums," UCLA working paper, May.

Edward, S.J., and M.J. Keen, 1985. "Taxation, Investment and Marginal Q," Review

     of Economic Studies, 52, 665-679.

Fama, E., L. Fisher, M.C. Jensen, and R. Roll, 1969. "The Adjustment of Stock

     Prices to New Information," International Economic Review, February.

Fishman M.J., 1986. "Pre-emptive Bidding and the Role of the Medium of Exchange in

    Acquisitions," mixneo, July.

Franks, J., and R. Harris, 1986a "Shareholder Wealth Effects of Corporate Takeovers:

     The U.K. Experience 1955-85," University of North Carolina and London Business

     School Working paper, November.

Franks, J., and R. Harris, 1986b       "The Role of the Mergers and Monopolies Commission

     in Merger Policy," Oxford Review of Economic Policy, Winter.

Grinblatt, M., and S. Titman, 1987. "A Comparison of Measures of Abnormal Performance

     on a Sample of Monthly Mutual Fund Returns," mimeo, UCLA, February.

Grossman, S.J., and O.D. Hart, 1982. "Corporate Financial Structure and

    Managerial Incentives," in J. McCall, ed., The economics of information

     and uncertainty, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL, 107-140.

Hansen, R.C., 1984. "Informational Asymmetry and the Means of Payment in Auctions,"

    Working Paper, Darthmouth College, Amos Tuck School.

Hansen, R.G., 1987. "A Theory for the Choice of Exchange Medium in Mergers and

    Acquisitions," Journal of Business, 60, no. 1, January.

Heinkel, R., and E. Schwartz, 1985. "Rights versus Underwritten Offerings: An

    Asymmetric Information Approach," Journal of Finance, March.


                                              46
Jensen, M.C., and R. Ruback, 1983. "The Market for Corporate Control: The

     Scientific Evidence," Journal of Financial Economics, 11, 5-50.

Jensen, N., 1986. "Agency Costs of Free Cash Flow, Corporate Finance and Takeovers,"

     American Economic Review, May, pp. 323-329.

King, M.A., 1977. Public Policy and the Corporation, London, Chapman and Hill.

King, M.A., 1986. "Takeovers, Taxes and The Stock Market," London School of

     Economics, mimeo.

Loderer, C.F., and D. Mauer, 1986. "Acquiring Firms in Corporate Mergers: The

     Post Merger Performance," Unpublished manuscript, Purdue University and

     University of Wisconsin.

Marsh, P., 1979. "Equity Rights Issues and the Efficiency of the U.K. Stock

     Market," Journal of Finance, September, 34, No. 4: 839-62.

Marsh, P., 1982. "The Choice Between Equity and Debt: An Empirical Study," Journal

     of Finance, 37, March, 121-144.

Mikkelson, W., and R. Ruback, 1985. "An empirical study of the inter-firm equity

     investment process," Journal of Financial Economics, 14, 4, 523-554.

Mikkelson, W., and R. Ruback, 1986. "Targeted Repurchases and Common Stock

    Returns," Alfred P. Sloan School of Management MIT, Working Paper #1707-85.

Miller, M. and K. Rock, 1985. "Dividend Policy Under Asymmetric Information,"

    Journal of Finance 40, September 1031-51.

Myers, S.C., 1984. "The Capital Structure Puzzle," Journal of Finance, 39, no. 3,

    July, 575-592.

Myers, S.C., and Majluf, 1984. "Corporate Financing and Investment Decisions

    when Firms have Information that Investors Do Not Have,t' Journal of

    Financial Economics, 13, 187-222.




                                            47
Niden, C., 1986. "The Role of Taxes in Corporate Acquisitions: Effects on

     Premium    and   Type of Consideration," University of Chicago, minieo.

Roll, R. ,   1986.    "The Hubris Hypothesis of Corporate Takeovers," Journal of Business,

     59, no. 2, 197-216.

Shoven, J.B., and L.B. Simon, 1987. "Share Repurchases and Acquisitions: An

     Analysis of Which Firms Participate," NBER Working Paper.

Smith, C. Jr., 1986. "Investment Banking and Capital Acquisition Process,"

     Journal of Financial Economics, 15, 3-29.

Wansley, J., W. Lane, and H. Yang, 1983. "Abnormal Returns to Acquiring Firms

     By Type of Acquisition and Method of Payment," Financial Management,

     Autumn, 16-22.




                                                 48
Table 1:      PROPORTION OF US AND UK ACQUISITIONS FINANCED WITH A PARTICULAR
              MEDIUM OF EXCHANGE

A. ____________
   Method of Payment                                 UK          US

All    Cash                                      .253           .306

Cash or Debt                                     .016           .003

All Debt                                         .014           .014

All Cash or (Cash Plus Equity)                   .035           .001

Cash Plus Equity                                  101          .009

Cash       Equitya                               .100           .013

Convertibles                                                    .118

Equity plus Debt                                 .048           .003

Equity plus Convertibles                                        .073

All equity                                        246           .371

Other                                             189           .090

                                  Total          1.00           1.00

B. Use of Cash. Equity and Debtb

At least some equityC                            .660            601

At least some cash or some debt                  .633           .404

At least some cash                               .538           .356



a
              denotes that the seller has the option to receive either form of payment.

The option to receive "cash or equity" has become increasingly popular since         1978.

Pre-1978 the ratio of "all equity" to "all cash or all equity" was 3.27,        but during

1978-84 it fell to 1.17. The "other" category includes various mixtures of cash,

equity and/or debt. In addition, it includes cases where other types of payment are

used (e.g. preference stock). In the UK, the largest single category involves

mixtures subsequent to recapitalizations (.083).

                                                49
b    Categories are not mutually exclusive so that proportions sum   to   more than unity.

     Data includes mixture offers after recapitalizations.

c    For purposes of this tabulation, securities convertible into common equity are

treated as equity.




                                            50
Table 2: TIME SERIES OF THE MEANS OF PAYMENT IN UK AND US rAKEOVERSa: EQUALLY
          WEIGHTED BASIS (Entry is proportion of total).




                      All      All                    All          All         Some Use ofb
 Period        N      Cash    Equity                  Cash        Equity      Convertibles

 1955-59       65     .354    .354           69        .000        .768           .072

 1960-64       89     .292    .404           121        .008        .669           .248

 1965-69      156     .186    .244           386        .013        .381           .500

 1970-74      139     .230    .237           177        .192        .599           .107

 1975-79      247     .336    .231           373        .491        .247           .070

 1980-84      205     .205    .190           429        .585        .228           .054

     1985      53     .094    .170                -           -           -              -

 AVERAGEC     954     .253    .246           1555        .306        .371           .191




 a Entries are proportions of the sample (N) with a type of offer.
 b
     These are offers that are equity plus securities convertible into equity or              which

 are solely convertible.
 C
     Averages are weighted by number of mergers.




                                            51
            Figure 1: Time Series ot ficquisition
                      Pugment Tgpe




55
     1960
                   1965
                              1970
                                        3975
                                                    1980
                                                              li
                             Year




     1960                    1970                   s,eo   3984


                            Yrar
TABLE 3: MEANS OF PAYMENT IN UK AND US TAKEOVERS ON A VALUE WEIGHTED BASISa
                       (Entry is proportion of total)



                             UK                           US



                  All Cash     All Eciuity     All Cash        All Equity

1955-59               0.23          0.67           0.0              0.84

1960-64              0.08           0.67           0.0              0.61

1965-69              0.08           026            0.01             0.37

1970-74              0.28           0.12           0.21             0.60

1974-79              0.38           0.30           0.38             0.28

1980-84              0.35           0.14           0.39             0.38



a Weights are based on market value of the shares of the acquired company.




                                    52
         Table 4: BID PREMIA AND MARKET CAPITALIZATION IN ALL CASH AND ALL
                   EQUITY OFFERS Entries are Bid Premium (t-statistic)



A. Bid Premiaa           Month 0                      Months -4 to +1

    Acquirees      U.K.            U.S                U.K.              U.S.
    All Cash      .302         .254                    .305              .363
                 (28.07)      (42.29)                 (11.56)           (24.67)

    All Equity    .151         .111                    .182              .156
                 (12.88)      (25.90)                  (6.34)           (14.86)


    Acquirors         U.K.         U.S.               U.K.              U.S.
    All Cash      .007         .020                    .043              .026
                 (.75)        (3.56)                  (1.98)            (1.89)

    All Equity    -   .011     -   .009                 .018              .006
                  (-.95)      (-2.23)                   (.63)             (.61)


B. Market Valueb (millions of units)

                    U.K. (pounds)                              U.S. (dollars)
                 All Cash      All Equity                     All Cash All Equity
Acquirees          11.1           10.6                          144.4            134.8

Acquiror          136.1                   64.3                 1019.0           1177.0



a Bid premia are calculated using the market model. In the UK month 0

is the earliest available of the first approach, first bid, unconditional

or LSPD date. In the US, month 0 is the announcement date as defined                     in

the text.
b   These are market value of equity prior to takeover (in millions of pounds

    in the U.K. and millions of dollars in U.S.).




                                                 53
C Cross   sectional t   values   for bidder wealth gains are:

                          Month 0                Months -4 to +1

                        UK       US               UK        US

     All Cash           .95      2.99             3.05     2.05

     All Equity      -1.27       -2.14             .97      .67

  where the t-value is calculated as EP/SE and where SE = SD/JN and SD is

   the cross-sectional standard deviation.

d For US acquirors with all equity offers, where the BP's are -0.009 for

  month zero, only 45.7% of the 443 acquisitions are positive. The results

  using a model with a 0 and             = 1 are virtually identical.




                                            54
       Table 5:   COMPARISON OF BID PREMIA IN THE UK PRE-AND POST 1965
                    Entries are Bid Premiunia (t-statistic)



                            Month 0                 Month -4 to +1
                  1955-64             1965-85     1955-64     1965-85

Acquirees

All Cash          .185                .327        .260        .317
                  (6.28)              (29.26)     (3.60)      (11.60)

All Equity        .108                .166        .194        .177
                  (6.39)              (11.17)     (4.67)      (4.86)


Acquirors

All Cash          .032                .001        .072        .037
                  (1.80)              (0.09)      (1.66)      (1.59)

All Equity        .005                -   .017    .058        .002
                  (0.30)              (1.22)      (1.32)      (0.07)




a Bid premia are calculated using the market model. In the UK month 0 is the

   earliest available of the first approach, first bid, unconditional or LSPD

   date. In the US, month 0 is the announcement date as defined in the text.




                                             55
           Table 6: WEALTH EFFECTS IN OTHER TYPES OF OFFERS
                     Bid Premiwna (t - statistic)



      Type of Offer                    Acquirees                          Acquirors


1. Cash or Equity               Q         -4 to +1                 Q                  .1



    U.K.    (N   95)          .276         .284               .007              .075
                             (14.79)       (6.21)             (.49)             (2.26)

    U.S. (N      20)          .180          .266              -   .002          -0.010
                             (8.41)        (5.07)             (-.09)            (-.18)


2. Cash and Equity
    U.K. (N = 100)            .238         .271               .003              .054
                             (18.70)       (8.71)             (.23)             (1.63)

    U.S. (N =     15)         .099         .212               .057              .015
                             (3.24)        (2.83)             (1.88)            (.20)


3. All Convertible            .117         .176               .018              .031
    U.S. only (N = 184)      (21.34)      (13.11)             (2.80)            (1.97)


4. Equity plus convertible    .101         .143               -   .004          .009
    U.S. only (N  115)     (12.50)         (7.23)             (-   .42)         (.39)




a Bid premia are calculated using the market model. In the UK month 0 is the

   earliest available of the first approach, first bid, unconditional or LSPD

date. In the US, month 0 is the announcement date as defined in the text.




                                         56
     Table 7:    WEALTH EFFECTS IN U.S. ACQUISITIONS PARTITIONED BY TIME
                             AND BY TENDER VERSUS NON TENDER


A. Time Period
                                Target                                   Bidder
                           N aMOflth 0      (t-stat)            N        BP Month 0   (t-stat)

1970-74   All Cash        34    .252            (12.35)         21       .066         (3.41)
          All Equity     107    .127            (10.88)         80       .006         (   .57)
1975-79   All Cash       185    .304            (27.84)         85       .012         (1.31)
          All Equity      92    .169            (12.45)         75   -   .014         (-1.46)

1980-84 All Cash         249    .220            (32.39)         90       .018         (1.73)
          All Equity      97    .145            (13.79)         64   -   .039         (-3.99)



B. Tender versus Nontender
                                  Target                                 Bidder

                          N    Month 0     -4 to +1        N             Month 0           -4 to +1
Tenders All Cash         135     .283       .411          78              .014             .025
                               (35.20)     (20.87)                       (1.84)            (1.34)

Tenders All Equity        29     .201      .243           23              -   .019         -   .060
                               (12.50)     (6.17)                         (-1.13)          (-1.46)

Nontender All Cash       340     .243      .343           123             .024            .026
                               (31.66)     (18.24)                        (3.00)          (1.33)

Nontender All Equity     548     .106      .151           419             -   .008        .009
                               (22.75)     (13.23)                        (-2.02)         (.93)



a Bid premiums (BP) are calculated using the market model.




                                           57
TABLE 8: BID PREMIA FOR MULTIPLE BIDS (REVISED OR CONTESTED) VERSUS SINGLE BIDS
          (UNREVISED AND UNCONTESTED) PARTIONED BY TENDER AND MERGER - US DATA
                        Entries are Bid Premiuma -    (t-statistic)
                                     Month 0                    Months -4 to +1

A. Targets          Unrevised and       Revised or     Unrevised and       Revised or
                     Uncontested        Contested       Uncontested        Contested

    Mergers
      All Cash                .247         .240                .345               .328
                          (29.80)         (19.77)          (21.62)            (11.95)
                          N=297          N=85              N=297             N=85
      All Equity              .106         .116                .154            .136
                          (19.49)         (10.62)          (11.93)            (4.02)
                          N5O5           N89               N=505             N89
    Tenders
      All Cash                .267         .265                .384               .466
                          (31.43)         (23.88)          (13.97)            (14.52)
                          Nl03           N74               N=103             N=74
      All Equity              .242         .192             .258                  .293
                          (11.22)         (9.52)           (3.85)                 (.71)
                          N=18           N=14              N18               N=14
B. Bidders

    Mergers
      All Cash             .026               .016          .029                  .023
                          (3.13)              (.93)        (1.57)                 (.61)
                          N111           N=32              N=lll             N=32
      All Equity          -   .005        -   .023          .012             -    .024
                          (-1.12)         (-2.07)          (1.20)                (.95)
                          N=389          N68               N=389             N=68
    Tenders
      All Cash             .016               .011          .026              .045
                          (1.96)              (.97)        (1.48)            (1.73)
                          N=67           N=38              N67               N38
      All Equity          -   .031       -    .021         -   .076          -   .092
                          (-1.19)       (-1.04)           (-1.26)           (-1.18)
                          N=14           N12               N=14              N12
a Bid premia are calculated using the market model. Month 0 is the announcement date

as defined in the text.



                                                 58
   Table 9:    POSTMERGER PERFORMANCE IN ALL CASH AND ALL EQUITY ACQUISITIONS
                            Entries are BP for Months +1 to
                              (tstatistic,b percent positive)


A. United States
                         Pre-Merger                                               Post-Merger
                         a,                                                       a,
                         Market Modeic             l.O              CAPMd         Market Model

All Cash                  .028                         -   .036      -   .034     .094
                          (.70,55)                     (-1.03,52)   (-.95,51)     (1.59,53)


All Equity                -   .184                     -   .179      -   .178     -   .018
                          (-7.73,36)                   (-9.31,34)    (-8.97,34)   (-.69,46)



All Cash Premerger             -   .003    .99   201
           Postinerger         -   .007   1.04   127

All Equity Premerger               .000    .99   442
           Postmerger          -   .006    .99   392




B. United Kingdom

                         Pre -Merger
                          a,
                              Market
                              ModelC                       CAPMd
All Cash: N22l                 .017                  .175
a=.O08, =.l.O7            (.50, 53)               (6.09, 65)


All Equity: N=207         -0.094                   .042
x.0ll, =l.O7             (-2.31, 51)              (1.23, 64)



a In the UK results month zero is the unconditional date of the merger. In the

  US month zero is the date of the final bid.

b For this table, the t statistic is calculated as BP/SE where SE is the

   standard error of the mean.




                                                   59
CA   market value weighted average of a and        fi   values   for the acquiree and

   acquiror are also used as parameters in the market model to determine

   control returns. They show very similar results as the unweighted

  parameters.

d When fi   is   estimated as the market value weighted average of betas for the

  acquire and acquiror, the results are similar.

e Post merger a's and 's for US calculated over period t                +25 to +60

   (with a minimum of 24 months of data).




                                              60
                                                   FOOTNOTES


         1. There is no feature in his model that distinguishes acquisitions from

         new investment.

         2. It is crucial to Myers and Majiuf's argument that all projects have a

         zero or positive NPV (see Pages 203-4). If projects could have a

         negative NPV,

         giving up a new project and not issuing equity may not be good news.



3. Jensen's (1986) theory of Free Cash Flow could also be used to yield the same

prediction since increasing the debt ratio of the bidder (via a cash offer) enables

managers to bond their promise to pay future cashflows. See, also, Grossman and Hart

(1982)

4. During the earliest calendar years of our UK analysis prior data were unavailable

to calculate a and .       In   these cases companies were assigned a   0,   1.0. Our

adjustment for thin trading regresses company returns on the market return and one

month leads and lags on the market. The three coefficients in the multiple regression

were summed to obtain .

5.   Data from W.T. Grimm show the same upward trend in the use of cash in US

acquisitions (and the same decline in the use of stock) beginning around 1970.

However, Grimm data reveal that cash was used in the 1960's, (their series begins in

1964). Differences in samples probably account for variations in financing

proportions. Grimm data include acquisitions and divestitures of both public and

private companies whereas our data are limited to acquisitions of exchange listed

companies. The latter are, on average, larger concerns.




                                                  61
6. An examination of the Department of Trade and Industry data on the financing of

acquisitions reveals similar changes in financing proportions around the major tax

changes discussed here. The two data banks differ primarily in the population from

which their samples are drawn. Our data refer to acquisitions by companies that are

quoted on the London Stock Exchange. The DTI data are obtained from reports in the

British financial press about mergers and acquisitions. We would argue that there is

some merit in using a quoted company data bank in a study of the financing of

acquisitions, on the grounds that the impediments to choice of finance are less for

quoted than unquoted companies. A comparison of the two samples is outlined below.



                            Proportion financed by cash:

                        Our Sample       (Value Weighted)

          1970-74          0.28                              0.32

          1975-79          0.38                              0.59

          1980-84          0.47                              0.54*



*Up to third quarter of 1983 only

7. Significance tests for differences in two cell means (M1 - M2) are based on a t-



statistic calculated as t = (M1   -
                                      M2)/SD where SD        a and a is the standard

deviation used to calculate TBP for the cell mean, i.e. a1 =    BP   for cell 1.

8. As confirming statistical tests we examined the percentage of companies with

positive returns and an alternate method of calculating of a t-statistic. For the 200

acquirors making all cash bids , 59 percent had positive abnormal returns in month

zero whereas, while only 46 percent of the 442 acquirors in all equity bids had

positive abnormal returns in that month. We also calculated a t-statistic defined as


                                                62
the mean abnormal return divided by the standard error of the mean. For month 0, this

produced t = 2.99 in all cash bids and t =   -2.14   in all equity bids.

9.In our UK sample, over 90 percent of the acquisitions take a form similar to US

tenders (see Franks and Harris 1986a), the remainder being schemes of arrangement

which require a shareholders' meeting convened under a court's direction. In schemes

of arrangement, the merger can be consummated if more than 75 percent of votes are

cast in favor by those present and voting. Due to the relatively small number of

schemes of arrangement, any differences in results for this type of merger are not

likely to have a large effect on our UK results. Nonetheless, we partitioned our UK

data into schemes of arrangement which were all cash bids and those that were all

equity bids. In schemes of arrangement, target bid premiums were significantly lower

in all equity bids than in all cash bids (results not reported due to small sample size.)

10. For example, the merger is combining two firms and hence may change

the business mix of the acquiror (but see footnotes c and d of Table 9). In

addition, a cash offer may be accompanied by an increase in financial leverage

thus increasing risk. As some support for this, in all cash offers the

postmerger beta (1.04) exceeds the premerger beta (.99).

       11. We also examined use of a value weighted market index in measuring

       post-merger performance in the U.S. Using an = 0,            1.0 model with a

      value weighted indexa11 cash acquirors had positive (.06) abnormal

       returns over the 24 month period (t =   1.71),   whereas all equity acquirors

       still displayed significant negative post-merger performance (PM? of -

       .111, t = -5.54).   To further examine the role that firm size may play in

       the post-merger performance in the US, we subdivided the sample into

       quintiles and measured the post-merger performance of each portion. The

       smallest acquirors appear to be outperforming the largest acquirors,


                                               63
       using both a market model (with post-merger a 's and 48's) and an a = 0

       and   = 1 model. The results are set out below.



                        Performance Based on Size (Total Sample)



                                             a 0          Postmerger

                         Ranking by Market   8 1          Market

                         Capitalization      N  195      Model



                         1    Smallest       - .078        .009           N=l53

                         2                   - .102        .030           N=l64

                         3                   - .135        .063           N=169

                         4                   - .194      - .104           N=165

                         5    Largest        - .174      - .098           N=145



12. One possible explanation of our postmerger performance results may be related to

size effects not captured in our formation of control returns (see Dimson and Marsh,

1986). We have some evidence suggesting that such a size effect cannot fully explain

our results. As shown in Table 4, in the US the average size of all equity and all

cash acquirors is quite similar both before and after merger. In the UK, acquirors

using cash are larger than all equity acquirors. As a result we cannot explain poorer

postmerger performance of all equity acquirors on the basis of their being larger than

all cash acquirors. Second, our use of postmerger parameters (a and fi)   should
capture, at least in part, changes in a firm's return generating process due to an

increase in size as of the merger date. See footnote 11.




                                             64
