NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MORAL NIMBY-ISM? UNDERSTANDING SOCIETAL SUPPORT FOR MONETARY
COMPENSATION TO PLASMA DONORS IN CANADA
Nicola Lacetera
Mario Macis
Working Paper 24572
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24572

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2018

The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Nicola Lacetera and Mario Macis. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Moral NIMBY-ism? Understanding Societal Support for Monetary Compensation to Plasma
Donors in Canada
Nicola Lacetera and Mario Macis
NBER Working Paper No. 24572
May 2018
JEL No. C93,D91,H41,I18,K00,Z1
ABSTRACT
The growing demand for plasma, especially for the manufacture of therapeutic products, prompts
discussions on the merits of different procurement systems. We conducted a randomized survey
experiment with a representative sample of 826 Canadian residents to assess attitudes toward
legalizing payments to plasma donors, a practice that is illegal in several Canadian provinces. We
found no evidence of widespread societal opposition to payments to plasma donors. On the
contrary, over 70% of respondents reported that they would support compensation. Our Canadian
respondents were more in favor of paying plasma donors elsewhere than in Canada, but the
differences were small, suggesting a weak role for moral “NIMBY-ism” or relativism. Moral
concerns were the respondents’ main reason for opposing payments, together with concerns for
the safety of plasma from compensated donors, although most of the plasma in Canada does
come from paid U.S. donors. Among those in favor of legalizing payments to donors, the main
rationale was to guarantee a higher domestic supply. Finally, roughly half of those who declared
to be against payments reported that they would reconsider their position if domestic supply plus
imports did not cover domestic demand. Most Canadians, therefore, seem to espouse a
consequentialist view on issues related to the procurement of plasma.

Nicola Lacetera
University of Toronto
Institute for Management and Innovation
3359 Mississauga Road, Room KN 235
Mississauga, ON L5L 1C6
CANADA
and NBER
nicola.lacetera@utoronto.ca
Mario Macis
Johns Hopkins University
Carey Business School
100 International Drive, Office 1333
Baltimore, MD 21202
and IZA
and also NBER
mmacis@jhu.edu
A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at AEARCTR-0002413

I
INTRODUCTION
The legal status and regulation of economic transactions does not depend only on considerations
about their economic efficiency, but also on the societal support for a particular exchange to
occur through a market (if at all). Widely held concerns that the individuals engaging in certain
transactions may be exploited or unduly influenced, that the terms of trade may not be fair, or
that some transactions violate human dignity, the sanctity of life, or traditional institutions may
lead a society to prohibit certain trades. 1 These principles may represent sacred values that take
priority over material considerations and contribute to defining common identities or a collective
conscience that allows complex societies to be tied together. 2 Alvin Roth defines as “repugnant”
those transactions that third parties wish to prohibit even if the underlying exchanges may be
beneficial for the parties directly involved. 3
Examples of transactions that raise or have raised moral concerns often leading to their
prohibition include prostitution, same-sex marriage, indentured servitude, and markets for human
organs for transplantation. 4 As one considers this (incomplete) list of examples, one observation
that emerges is that the legal treatment of several of these transactions has changed over time in
many countries. For instance, same-sex marriage, which until recently was nearly universally
prohibited because it was regarded as in conflict with religious and traditional values, is now
legal in several countries. 5 Additionally, countries that otherwise share many similarities in terms
of social structure, level of economic development, and historical and cultural roots treat certain
transactions differently. For example, prostitution is legal in Germany but illegal in France, and
commercial surrogacy is legal in several jurisdictions in the United States 6 but illegal in Canada. 7
These legislative choices raise several questions as to whether the different legal treatments
of certain transactions actually reflect different levels of societal support for those activities

1. See DEBRA SATZ, WHY SOME THINGS SHOULD NOT BE FOR SALE : THE MORAL LIMITS OF MARKETS 94–98 (Samuel Freeman
ed., 2010) (listing four primary indicators of noxious markets: extremely harmful outcomes for participants or third parties, extremely
harmful outcomes for society, highly asymmetric knowledge on the part of participants, and extreme vulnerabilities of transacting
parties).
2. See EMILE DURKHEIM, THE DIVISION OF LABOR IN SOCIETY 38–39 (Anthony Giddens ed., W.D. Halls trans., 1984) (arguing
that society’s shared moral values create a “collective consciousness,” and acts are considered criminal when they offend this shared
consciousness).
3. See Alvin E. Roth, Repugnance as a Constraint on Markets, 21 J. ECON. PERSP. 37, 38 (2007).
4. Id. at 39.
5. Gay Marriage Around the World, PEW RES. CTR. (Aug. 8, 2017), http://www.pewforum.org/2017/08/08/gay-marriage-aroundthe-world-2013/.
6. See Kimberly D. Krawiec, Altruism and Intermediation in the Market for Babies, 66 WASH. & LEE L. REV. 203, 225 (2009)
(“Some states, either through statute or court decisions, take approaches relatively friendly to commercial surrogacy arrangements, for
example, by analyzing the parties’ intent at the time of the contract.”).
7. Assisted Human Reproduction Act, S.C. 2004, c. 2 (Can.).

across countries, and if so, why. Moreover, seeming inconsistencies introduce additional
challenges to our understanding of what explains support for, or opposition to, morally
contentious transactions. This article will focus on one such apparent inconsistency: the case of
plasma donations in Canada and the United States. The United States allows payments for
plasma donors and the establishment of for-profit plasma centers. In most provinces of Canada,
in contrast, payments to plasma donors are illegal. Canadian policy makers justify the ban on
compensation on the basis of moral considerations and on concerns regarding the safety of
plasma collected from paid donors. However, Canada relies on imported plasma from American
paid donors to meet its need for plasma-derived therapies. For example, approximately 83% of
immunoglobulin, which is used in Canada (and elsewhere) to treat several immune, blood and
neurological disorders, is made from plasma imported from American for-profit plasma centers. 8
Evidence about the degree of social support (or disapproval) for morally controversial
activities is scant. Even less evidence is available regarding whether the social support is general
or country specific; for example, whether the moral opposition that a society may have toward a
certain trade refers only to allowing that trade in that same country, or everywhere. In particular,
individuals may display some form of “moral NIMBY-ism”; that is, they may wish to reap the
benefits from a contested transaction (compensated plasma donation) while outsourcing the
moral costs of it. Thus, with specific reference to the case of plasma donations in Canada, this
paper asks the following questions:
• How prevalent is the opposition to compensating plasma donors in Canada?
• What are the main reasons for and against payments? What is the relative importance of
moral concerns, of concerns regarding safety, and of considerations about the importance
of guaranteeing a sufficient supply to cover medical needs?
• Are Canadians opposed to paying all plasma donors, or just Canadian plasma donors?
• Do the majority of Canadians exhibit “consequentialist” preferences (that is,
considerations about the practical impacts of allowing payments are important to their
attitudes toward payments), or “deontological” preferences (meaning their opposition to
compensating plasma donors reflects a “sacred” value that cannot be sacrificed)?
We conducted a randomized survey experiment with a representative sample of 826
Canadian residents. In the survey, respondents were randomly assigned to express their opinion
in favor or against compensating plasma donors in one of three countries: Canada, the United

8. Our Commitment to Increasing Plasma Sufficiency in Canada, CAN. BLOOD SERV., https://blood.ca/en/blood/plasmasufficiency (last visited Mar. 1, 2018).

2

States, or Australia. Similar to Canada, compensation to plasma donors is not allowed in
Australia, and Australia also relies on imported plasma to satisfy its domestic needs. 9 Next,
according to whether the subjects were in favor or against paying plasma donors, we asked how
much the respondents agreed with a set of possible motivations for their position. The sentences
that expressed these motivations stressed the morality of allowing or not allowing payments, the
risk of attracting donors with transmittable diseases if payments were legal, and the importance
(or lack thereof) of guaranteeing a sufficient domestic supply. By asking a representative sample
from one country about support for payments in their own country or elsewhere, we can
determine whether attitudes are general or specific to a person’s country of residence. The
additional questions about the individuals’ motives behind their stance further help to identify
not only the differential relevance of these motives, but also the weight assigned to them when
referring to one’s own country as opposed to other countries.
Part II provides details on plasma uses and collection in Canada, Australia, and the United
States. Part III describes our experimental design. Part IV presents our results, and Part V draws
conclusions.

II
INSTITUTIONAL DETAILS
A. Plasma Uses and Plasma Donation
Plasma is the liquid part of blood that remains after removing red blood cells, white blood cells,
platelets, and other cellular components. 10 It consists of water, salts, enzymes, antibodies and
other proteins (such as albumin, fibrinogen, and globulins), and it performs several functions,
including clotting blood and fighting infections.
Plasma is used for direct transfusion. It is also used in the production of therapies to treat
people with chronic diseases and disorders such as primary immunodeficiency, hemophilia and
genetic lung disease, and in the treatment of trauma, burns and shock. Source plasma is plasma
that is collected from healthy, voluntary donors through a process called plasmapheresis and is
used for further manufacturing into final therapies (a process called fractionation). 11 Recovered
plasma is collected through whole blood donation in which plasma is separated from its cellular
components. Recovered plasma may also be used for fractionation. Producing all of these

9. Robert Slonim, Carmen Wang & Ellen Garbarino, The Market for Blood, 28 J. ECON. PERSP. 177, 185 (2014).
10. What is Plasma?, DONATING P LASMA, http://www.donatingplasma.org/donation/what-is-plasma (last visited Feb. 18, 2018).
11. Slonim et al., supra note 9, at 183.

3

therapies requires a large number of plasma donations. For example, the annual treatment of one
single patient with hemophilia requires 1,200 plasma donations. 12
During a source plasma donation, blood is drawn from one arm and channeled through an
automated machine that collects the plasma and returns the remaining blood components (white
blood cells, red blood cells, and platelets) to the donor. It typically takes between one and three
hours to donate source plasma.
Stringent regulations are in place for the screening and testing of plasma donors. Moreover,
the manufacturing process for plasma products includes multiple, mandatory steps that remove
or inactivate any contaminants, including viruses that could be present. These viral inactivation
steps have proven to be effective at eliminating new pathogens such as West Nile Virus, which
has been transmitted by blood transfusion but never by use of plasma products. More generally,
over the last few decades, plasma product manufacturing technology has evolved, and many of
the identified risks from the past have been mitigated or eliminated. 13

B. Plasma Collection in Canada, Australia, and the United States
Compensation for plasma donors—specifically, for the supply of plasma to be used for
fractionation—and the establishment of for-profit plasma centers are legal activities in several
countries, such as the United States, Czech Republic, and Austria. Many other countries prohibit
payments. 14 A common feature of most countries that ban compensation is that they run a deficit
of plasma for domestic uses; therefore, they rely on imports, most often of plasma collected in
countries where compensation is legal because, typically, these countries have a surplus of
available plasma. 15 The different legal status of payments to donors around the world and the
international plasma procurement and allocation patterns are somewhat exemplary of the
challenges in defining repugnant trades and in determining the reasons for bans to compensation.
In Canada, most provinces prohibit compensation to plasma donors. Ontario and Alberta
passed legislation that prohibits compensation for plasma in 2014 and 2017, respectively. 16 In

12. GRIFOLS, P LASMA: A SOURCE OF LIFE, https://www.grifolsplasma.com/en/web/plasma/about-plasma-donation/plasma-asource-of-life (last visited Feb. 18, 2018).
13. Plasma Donation in Canada, GOV ’T CAN. (Jan. 5, 2018), https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/drugs-healthproducts/biologics-radiopharmaceuticals-genetic-therapies/activities/fact-sheets/plasma-donation-canada.html.
14. Slonim et al., supra note 9, at 185.
15. See Blood Safety and Availability—Fact Sheet, WORLD HEALTH ORG. (June 2017),
http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs279/en/. See generally PLASMA FRACTIONATION REVIEW COMMITTEE, COMMONWEALTH
OF AUSTRALIA, REVIEW OF AUSTRALIA’S PLASMA FRACTIONATION ARRANGEMENTS 69–83 (2006),
https://www.health.gov.au/internet/main/publishing.nsf/Content/B3B4E1D741764DD2CA257BF000193A6F/$File/plasma_FINAL%20a
s%20at%2030%20November%202006.pdf (describing several countries’ processes for acquiring the necessary amount of plasma).
16. Voluntary Blood Donations Act, S.A. 2017, V–5 (Can.); Voluntary Blood Donations Act, S.O. 2014, c. 14 (Can.).

4

Quebec, payments to plasma donors have been illegal since 1994, 17 and currently, British
Columbia and Nova Scotia are considering similar legislation. 18 Private plasma centers that pay
donors are active in Saskatchewan though. 19 However, there is a debate about banning
compensation for plasma donors at the federal level. 20
Canadian Blood Services and Héma-Québec are the only organizations that collect plasma
(and blood) for transfusion, and they do so exclusively from unpaid donors.21 Plasma collected
from volunteers in Canada is sufficient for transfusions across the country. However, the
domestic supply of plasma for the production of therapies and pharmaceutical products is not
sufficient to meet the domestic demand. Imported plasma products make up for the difference. 22
In Australia, Australian Red Cross Blood Service (ARCBS) is the only organization that
collects plasma (and blood) for transfusion and fractionation, and they do so exclusively from
unpaid donors because payments to donors are not allowed. The biopharmaceutical company
CSL Limited fractionates plasma from ARCBS donations and supplies a range of
immunoglobulin, hyper-immune products, clotting factors and albumin, for domestic use.
Similar to Canada, plasma collected from Australian volunteers is sufficient for blood
transfusions in the country. However, the domestic supply of plasma for the production of
therapies and pharmaceutical products is not sufficient to meet the domestic demand, so
Australia must import plasma products to fulfill the medical needs of its patient population. 23
In contrast, plasma donors in the United States receive compensation. Individuals can donate
a maximum of two times within a seven-day period, 24 receiving about $30 per donation. 25 In the
United States, the supply of plasma is sufficient to meet the domestic demand; 26 moreover, the

17. Civil Code of Québec, CQLR c CCQ-1991 art. 25 (Can.).
18. See Debates and Proceedings on Bill No. 37, Voluntary Blood Donations Act Before the House of Assembly of Nova Scotia,
1064–1080 (2017) (Can.) (debating the merits of the proposed bill, the Voluntary Blood Donations Act); Kelly Grant, Blood Agency
Seeking $855-Million in Funding to Boost Plasma Supply, Document Reveals, GLOBE & MAIL (Aug. 14, 2017),
https://beta.theglobeandmail.com/news/national/blood-agency-seeking-855-million-in-funding-to-boost-plasma-supply-documentreveals/article35980339/?ref=http://www.theglobeandmail.com&.
19. See Canadian Plasma Clinic That Pays Donors $25 per Visit Opens in Saskatoon, CBC NEWS (Feb. 19, 2016),
http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/saskatoon/plasma-clinic-opens-saskatoon-1.3453062.
20. The Canadian Press, NDP: Plasma Clinics That Pay Donors Should Be Banned by Federal Government, HUFFINGTON POST
(Jan. 15, 2016), http://www.huffingtonpost.ca/2016/01/15/ndp-wants-federal-ban-on-plasma-clinics-that-pay-donors-but-saskatchewanoks-it_n_8992022.html.
21. See CANADIAN BLOOD SERVICES, HÉMA-QUÉBEC, https://blood.ca/en/news-tags/hema-quebec (last visited Feb. 18, 2018).
22. Backgrounder Paper—Plasma Donations in Canada, GOV’T CAN. (June 27, 2013), https://www.canada.ca/en/healthcanada/services/drugs-health-products/public-involvement-consultations/biologics-radiopharmaceuticals-genetictherapies/backgrounder-paper-plasma-donations-canada.html.
23. See NAT’L BLOOD AUTHORITY AUSTL., ANNUAL REPORT 2015–16 39 (2016) (explaining the National Blood Authority’s
contracts with plasma suppliers to complement domestic supply when domestic plasma production cannot meet demand).
24. 21 C.F.R. § 640.65 (2017).
25. See, e.g., Alexa Valiente, Mark Abdelmalek & Lauren Pearle, Why Thousands of Low-Income Americans “Donate” Their
Blood Plasma to For-Profit Centers, ABC NEWS (Jan. 13, 2017), http://abcnews.go.com/US/thousands-low-income-americans-donateblood-plasma-profit/story?id=44710257.
26. Slonim, et al., supra note 9, at 185.

5

United States exports plasma to other countries, including Canada and Australia. 27 For
example, approximately 83% of immunoglobulin used in Canada is made from American paid
plasma donors. 28 Similarly, Australia imports 43% of its immunoglobulin from outside of
Australia. 29

III
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN
We conducted a survey experiment with a sample of 826 Canadian respondents recruited by
ResearchNow, a market research data company. The recruitment protocol was such that the
sample would be representative of the Canadian population for such features as gender, age, and
geographical location.
Figure 1 outlines the flow of the survey. All participants first read a text of about 320 words
that included general information about plasma and plasma donation: what plasma is, what its
medical uses are, the different ways of collecting plasma from donors, some basic features of the
process of plasma fractionation and the manufacturing of plasma products, and some information
on the quantity of plasma needed to address certain diseases.
The survey then introduced a random-experimental component with a 2-by-2 design. With
ex-ante 50% probability, we assigned respondents to one of two texts. The first text provided a
description of the plasma procurement and allocation system in Canada—we refer to this group
as the “Canada text” group. The text explained that the majority of Canadian provinces,
including the largest ones, prohibit compensation to donors as well as the establishment of forprofit plasma centers. It also included a summary of the different positions in the debate about
legalizing compensation. Proponents of compensating plasma donors argue that payments would
increase supply, and that there have been no instances of contaminated plasma from paid donors
in the past twenty years. Among the arguments against payments were the concerns that
compensation may hamper the voluntary system, attract donors with communicable diseases, and
violate human dignity because certain transactions should be kept out of the market. Finally, the
text noted that about 83% of plasma for fractionation used in Canada is imported from the United
States, where payments to plasma donors are legal.

27. See Gilbert M. Gaul, The Blood Brokers—America: The OPEC of the Global Plasma Industry, PHILA. INQUIRER (Sep. 28,
1989), http://www.bloodbook.com/part-5.html (“More than half the estimated 12 million liters of plasma used in medicines worldwide
comes from the United States.”).
28. CANADIAN BLOOD SERVICES, supra note 8.
29. NAT ’L BLOOD AUTHORITY AUSTL., supra note 23, at 33.

6

The remaining respondents read a similar text with information about plasma procurement
and allocation in Australia, another country that does not allow payments to donors (we refer to
this group as the “Australia text” group). The information provided was specific to the Australian
case, but the structure of the text, including information about imports from countries that allow
payments (for example, the United States), was the same as the text about Canada.
We then further divided the participants in each of the two groups into two subgroups, again
with ex-ante 50% probability for each respondent. Within the “Canada text” group, we asked one
subgroup to express their opinion about whether payments to plasma donors should be allowed
in Canada (we refer to this subgroup as the “Canada text & Canada vote” group). We asked the
other subgroup whether payments to plasma donors should be allowed in the United States—the
“Canada text & US vote” group. Similarly, for the “Australia text” group, we asked one
subgroup to express their opinion about whether payments to plasma donors should be allowed
in Australia (the “Australia text & Australia vote” group), and we asked the other subgroup
whether payments to plasma donors should be allowed in the United States (“Australia text &
US vote” group). The respondents could check one of two options: “I think payments to plasma
donors should be allowed in Canada/Australia/the United States,” or “I think payments to plasma
donors should not be allowed in Canada/Australia/the United States.”
Because all respondents were Canadian residents, this design allowed us to assess both the
support for compensation to plasma donors in their own country and the support for payments in
other countries. We chose Australia as one of these other countries because, in addition to having
cultural similarities and a level of economic development comparable to Canada’s, compensation
to plasma donors is illegal in Australia, and it imports plasma for fractionation just like Canada.
We also included the United States because compensation is legal in the United States and the
country runs a vast supply surplus that allows for exports of plasma. Canada relies on this
imported plasma. to produce a range of therapies. We could therefore determine whether any
support or opposition to compensation was general or specific to the country of residence of the
population of interest (Canadians), and whether the current legal framework in a country
correlated with the level of agreement or aversion toward compensation.
After the participants answered about their support for compensating plasma donors, the
survey directed them to different sets of questions, according to whether they expressed
opposition or favor, and according to the country on which they expressed their view. These
questions contained statements that reported a set of reasons for being in favor of or against
payments. For each of the listed reasons, we asked the respondents to give a rating from 0 to 100
to indicate how important that reason was in motivating their position.

7

For the “Canada text & Canada vote” and the “Australia text & Australia vote” groups, we
proposed the following three reasons to those who opposed payments to plasma donors:
• “It is immoral to provide monetary payments to plasma donors in Canada/Australia—
donations should be unpaid”
• “Monetary payments may attract donors who carry transmittable diseases”
• “Increasing domestic supply of plasma is not a priority, Canada/Australia can rely on
imports”
For those who did not support payments in the United States (respondents in the “Canada text
& US vote” or “Australia text & US vote” groups), we replaced the third statement above, which
is not applicable to the United States because the United States does not rely on imports, with the
following:
• “The US produces more plasma than their domestic needs, so paying plasma donors is
unnecessary”
For the respondents in the “Canada text & Canada vote” and the “Australia text & Australia
vote” groups who expressed favor towards payments to plasma donors, we presented the
following reasons, again asking the respondents to rate them from 0 to 100 depending on how
important each statement was in motivating them to be in favor of payments:
• “It is morally appropriate to provide monetary payments to plasma donors in
Canada/Australia—they incur costs in terms of time spent donating and physical
discomfort to supply a valuable resource”
• “Monetary payments to plasma donors would increase the availability of domestic plasma
and reduce Canada’s/Australia’s dependence on other countries”
• “Plasma donors receive monetary payments in some other countries, such as the United
States, therefore they should be paid also in Canada/Australia”
Finally, we provided a list of five reasons to participants in the “Canada text & US vote” and
“Australia text & US vote” groups who favored compensating plasma donors:
• “It is morally appropriate to provide monetary payments to plasma donors in the United
States—they incur costs in terms of time spent donating and physical discomfort to
supply a valuable resource”
• “Monetary payments to plasma donors increase the availability of domestic plasma and
ensure that the US does not depend on other countries”

8

• “Some countries, such as Canada/Australia, rely on imported plasma from paid donors in
the US”
• “Plasma donors receive monetary payments in some other countries, therefore they should
be paid also in the United States”
• “It is currently legal to pay plasma donors in the US, so things should stay as they are”
We chose these motives to encompass some of the main arguments that recur frequently in
the debate about the legalization of compensation in Canada and elsewhere: moral
considerations, concerns about the safety of plasma donated by paid donors, and the effects of
compensation on domestic supply. Because payments are already legal in the United States, we
modified the statements accordingly, and also added some statements that were specific to the
U.S. case.
We then proposed an additional question only to the respondents who had expressed
opposition to payments in the form of a hypothetical scenario. Participants expressed their favor
or opposition to the following statement: “If there was a shortage of plasma (i.e., the domestic
supply plus the imports were not sufficient to satisfy [Canada’s/Australia’s/the US’] need for
plasma), then I would consider supporting the introduction of monetary payments to plasma
donors in Canada/Australia/the US.” The reason for having this additional question was to
collect more evidence on the underlying motives for opposing payments; a disagreement with the
hypothetical statement above would indicate a strong form of opposition, one that reflects
deontological preferences and thus is not amenable, for example, to making trade-offs between
different values or objectives. Conversely, an agreement with the statements would indicate that
although the respondent currently opposes payments to plasma donors, her preferences are more
consequentialist, which implies that she is willing to make trade-offs between moral arguments
and supply considerations.
The last part of the survey, common to all respondents, included a series of sociodemographic questions. We asked participants to report their age, gender, ethnicity, religious
beliefs, household income, education level, marital status, job market status, geographical area of
residence within Canada, whether they had children, their views about social and economic
issues, and whether they had volunteered or donated to charity in the previous two years.

9

Figure 1: Experimental design flow

10

IV
DATA AND RESULTS
A. Sample and Balance Checks
Table 1 reports some summary features of the 826 respondents. Consistent with our design, the
sample is reasonably representative of the distributions by gender, age, ethnicity, geographic
region, religious attitude, education, work status, family status, income, and political orientation
of the Canadian population. To check whether the sample was well-balanced across the four
experimental conditions, we estimated a multinomial logit regression of the four treatment
conditions on indicators for various socio-demographic features; we found that the participants’
characteristics are unrelated to the treatment to which the participants were assigned (p > chi2 =
0.957).
Table 1: Descriptive statistics. This table reports the distribution of the socio-demographic characteristics of the
826 survey respondents.

N. of respondents

826

Women

52.2%

College degree

50.4%

Age 18-34
Age 35-54
Age 55+

27.8%
38.5%
33.7%

Employed
Retired

53.9%
21.2%

Caucasian/White
East Asian
Other

74.2%
9.3%
16.5%

Married
With children
Income > $50K

53.1%
53.1%
69.2%

Atlantic
Ontario
Quebec
West

7.4%
37.9%
22.0%
32.8%

Liberal on social issues
Conservative on social issues
Liberal on economic issues
Conservative on economic issues

43.5%
18.1%
33.7%
23.4%

Atheist
Christan
Jewish
Muslim
Other

25.6%
54.9%
3.0%
13.8%
2.7%

Volunteer/donates to charity

74.3%

11

B. Results
Result 1: The vast majority of respondents support the legalization of payments for plasma
donors.
Figure 2 reports the attitudes of the respondents toward legalizing payments for plasma donors.
Each column represents the share of participants who expressed support for legal payments in
each of the four experimental conditions. The main finding is that the large majority of
respondents are in favor of legalizing payments to plasma donors. We estimate that 72.6% of
Canadians are in favor of compensating plasma donors in Canada (95% c.i. 66.4%–78.8%),
78.7% (95% c.i. 73.5%–84%) are in favor of compensating plasma donors in Australia, and
76.4% (95% c.i. 72.1%–80.6%) are in favor of paying donors in the United States (combining
the data from respondents who were given information about the demand and supply of plasma
in Canada and those who were given information about Australia). The first-order implication of
these results is that a representative sample of Canadians widely supports payments to plasma
donors. The differences in support rates for different countries are relatively small and only
marginally statistically significant when comparing Canada and Australia (one-tailed t test:
p=0.07, two-tailed t test: p=0.14). The stronger support for payments in the U.S. may suggest
that respondents display some form of “NIMBY-ism” whereby people enjoy the benefit of a
given transaction but do not want to carry the ethical costs of it. The higher support for payments
in Australia may suggest some moral relativism, meaning individuals might be more in favor of
allowing morally contentious activities if they occur farther away. However, the small
differences described above suggest that these mechanisms play only a minor role, if any at all.

12

Figure 2: Support for compensation to plasma donors.The figure reports the percentage of respondents in each
condition who expressed support for legalizing compensation for plasma donors. Error bars represent 95%
confidence intervals (±1.96 * s.e.).

Table 2 reports estimates from Ordinary Least Squares regression models where the outcome
variable is a binary indicator for support for plasma donor payments. Estimates in the first
column are from a model that included only the indicators for the treatment conditions (as such,
these estimates coincide with the statistics reported in Figure 1). The estimates in the second
column are from a model that includes controls for the individual characteristics listed in Table
1. Consistent with the random assignment (and the balance of the sample as discussed above),
the inclusion of these additional controls did not meaningfully change the estimates of the
coefficients on the treatment indicators. Moreover, none of the estimates of the parameters on the
indicators for the various individual characteristics is statistically significant at the 5% level or
less. This implies that the support rates for compensating plasma donors are very similar across
the main socio-demographic categories of the Canadian population.

13

Table 2: Support for payments to plasma donors—regression analysis. This table reports estimates from
Ordinary Least Squares regressions. The dependent variable is equal to one if the respondent expressed support for
plasma donor payments and zero otherwise. The main explanatory variables of interest are indicators for the
experimental conditions. Column (2) also includes control variables. The omitted treatment indicator (represented by
the constant in column (1)) is “Canada text & Canada vote”; the omitted age category is Age 55+; the omitted region
category is Atlantic; the omitted religion is Jewish. Standard errors are in parentheses (** p<0.01, * p<0.05, +
p<0.1).
Outcome variable:

Supports payments

Explanatory variables:

(1)

(2)

Canada text & US vote

0.029
(0.045)
0.061
(0.041)
-0.044
(0.060)

0.035
(0.045)
0.062
(0.042)
-0.053
(0.061)
0.044
(0.054)
-0.017
(0.047)
-0.051
(0.031)
-0.108+
(0.065)
-0.012
(0.043)

Australia text & Australia vote
Australia text & US vote
Age 18-34
Age 18-54
Woman
East Asian
White

(continues in next page)

14

(continued from previous page)
Ontario

0.726**
(0.032)

-0.041
(0.060)
-0.057
(0.062)
-0.010
(0.059)
-0.037
(0.036)
0.042
(0.036)
-0.069
(0.084)
-0.051
(0.080)
-0.163+
(0.091)
-0.191
(0.126)
0.033
(0.033)
0.015
(0.039)
-0.046
(0.058)
-0.053
(0.036)
0.027
(0.043)
-0.017
(0.056)
0.002
(0.044)
0.012
(0.050)
0.030
(0.035)
0.855**
(0.130)

826
0.003
-0.000744

824
0.032
0.000817

Quebec
West
Married
With children
Atheist/agnostic
Christian
Muslim
Other
College degree
Employed
Retired
Income > $50K
Liberal on social issues
Conservative on social issues
Liberal on economic issues
Conservative on economic issues
Volunteer/donates to charity
Constant

Observations
R-squared
Adjusted R-squared

15

Result 2: Respondents who oppose compensation for plasma donors are mainly concerned
about moral issues and the safety of plasma coming from paid donors.
Figure 3 shows cumulative distribution functions of the ratings assigned by respondents who
opposed paying plasma donors to the set of motives described in the previous section. For each
line, a given point (x on the horizontal axis, y on the vertical axis) indicates the share y of
respondents who rated a particular motive x or less. Among respondents who expressed
opposition to payments in Australia and Canada, there was a similar distribution of relevance
given to morality and safety concerns. The average ratings for the concerns about morality and
safety were, respectively, 69.2 and 68.4 for Canada, and 72.6 and 68.9 for Australia. As
mentioned above, organizations and authorities that source plasma from countries where donors
receive compensation consider the imported plasma to be as safe as the plasma obtained
domestically. However, our results indicate a widespread perception among Canadians that paid
plasma poses a health threat. At the individual level and especially for those who expressed
opposition about paying donors in Canada, there is a strong positive correlation between the
concerns for morality and safety (correlation coefficient = 0.54, significant at the 5% level).
Conversely, the possibility for a country to rely on imported plasma was a much less important
reason for the respondents’ opposition to allowing payments in that country. The average rating
was 35.6 among respondents opposed to paid donors in Canada, and 46.4 among those opposed
to paid donors in Australia (two-sided p-value for difference in means = 0.06; p-value from
Kolmogorov-Smirnov test for differences in distributions = 0.053). A possible interpretation of
this difference is that Canadians might be reluctant to reveal that they oppose payments to
domestic plasma donors because they know that their country can rely on imported plasma from
the United States, whereas they might be more likely to reveal this belief when referring to
another country. The respondents who were against compensating donors in the United States
rated concerns for morality and safety of the collected plasma very similarly to respondents who
opposed payments in Canada and Australia. The ratings for these concerns were also similar to
the ratings for a third motive that we proposed to these respondents, namely that payments are
not needed because the country already runs a supply surplus.

16

Figure 3: Ratings of reasons against compensation. The graphs below report cumulative distribution functions of
the ratings (between 0 and 100) that respondents opposed to legalizing compensation to plasma donors gave to three
reasons: “It is immoral to provide monetary payments to plasma donors in Canada/Australia/United States—
donations should be unpaid” (labeled “Immoral” in the graphs); “Monetary payments may attract donors who carry
transmittable diseases” (labeled “Diseases”); “Increasing the domestic supply of plasma is not a priority,
Canada/Australia can rely on imports” (labeled “Can rely on imports”); and, “The US produces more plasma than
their domestic needs, so paying plasma donors is unnecessary” (labeled “No need, supply is plentiful”).

Canada text & Canada vote

Australia text & Australia vote

Canada text & US vote

Australia text & US vote

Result 3: Respondents who are in favor of payments to plasma donors place great
importance on guaranteeing a robust domestic supply of plasma.
Figure 4 presents cumulative distribution functions of the ratings assigned by respondents who
favored paying plasma donors to the set of motives described in the previous section. The three
motives (labeled “Moral”, “Domestic supply”, and “Paid elsewhere” in the graphs) all received
high ratings and were strongly correlated at the individual respondent level. Securing a higher
domestic supply was significantly more important than the other reasons, suggesting that
respondents who are in favor of paying plasma donors might be characterized as having more

17

consequentialist (outcome-oriented) views. The respondents who expressed support for the paiddonor system in the United States gave similar ratings to all of the motives they were asked to
consider. Again, the importance of guaranteeing a sufficient domestic supply was the reason that
received the highest ratings.

Figure 4: Rating of reasons for compensation. The graphs below report cumulative distribution functions of the
ratings (between 0 and 100) that respondents in favor of compensation to plasma donors gave to the following
reasons: “It is morally appropriate to provide monetary payments to plasma donors in Canada (Australia, the United
[S]tates)—they incur costs in terms of time spent donating and physical discomfort to supply a valuable resource”
(labeled “Moral” in the graphs); “Monetary payments to plasma donors would increase the availability of domestic
plasma and reduce Canada’s/Australia’s dependence on other countries,” or, for the United States, “Monetary
payments to plasma donors increase the availability of domestic plasma and ensure that the US does not depend on
other countries” (labeled “Domestic supply”); “Plasma donors receive monetary payments in some other countries,
therefore they should be paid also in Canada/Australia/the United States” (labeled “Paid elsewhere”); “Some
countries, such as Canada/Australia, rely on imported plasma from paid donors in the US” (labeled “Other countries
rely on US imports”); and, “It is currently legal to pay plasma donors in the US, so things should stay as they are”
(labeled “Status quo”).
Canada text & Canada vote

Australia text & Australia vote

Canada text & US vote

Australia text & US vote

18

Result 4: About half of the respondents who opposed payments would reconsider their
position in the case of a supply shortage.
As shown in Figure 5, between 43.5% (Canada or Australia text & US vote) and 51% (Australia
text & Australia vote) of the participants who opposed payments reported that they would be
willing to support compensating plasma donors in the case of a supply shortage, that is, if the
domestic supply plus imports were insufficient to meet domestic demand. The differences
between the treatment groups, however, are not statistically significant both because the
differences are not large and because of the relatively small sample sizes of the four groups.
These positions were similar across the various socio-demographic characteristics of our
respondents, as shown by the regression estimates in Table 3.

Figure 5: Percentage of respondents against plasma donor compensation who would reconsider their position
in the case of a supply shortage. The figure reports the shares of respondents who indicated opposition to legal
compensation for plasma donors, but who responded that they would consider supporting payments in the case of a
supply shortage. Error bars represent 95% confidence intervals (±1.96 * s.e.).

19

Table 3: Support for payments in case of supply shortage—regression analysis. This table reports the estimates
from an Ordinary Least Squares regression. The dependent variable is equal to one if the respondent answered, “Yes
I would be in favor of paying plasma donors in case of a supply shortage”—that is, if the domestic supply plus
imports were insufficient to meet the domestic needs. The main explanatory variables of interest are indicators for
the experimental conditions. Column (2) also includes control variables. The omitted treatment indicator
(represented by the constant in column (1)) is “Canada text & Canada vote”; the omitted age category is Age 55+;
the omitted region category is Quebec; the omitted religion is Other. Standard errors are in parentheses (** p<0.01,
* p<0.05, + p<0.1).

Outcome variable: Support if shortage
Explanatory variables:
Canada text & US vote
Australia text & Australia vote
Australia text & US vote
Age 18-34
Age 18-54
Woman
East Asian
White
Atlantic
Ontario
West

-0.105
(0.106)
0.024
(0.099)
0.008
(0.145)
0.240+
(0.125)
0.078
(0.111)
-0.084
(0.080)
-0.124
(0.143)
-0.106
(0.113)
0.183
(0.171)
0.005
(0.098)
0.099
(0.102)

(continues on the next page)

20

(continues from previous page)
Married
With children
Atheist/agnostic
Christian
Jewish
Muslim
College degree
Employed
Retired
Income > $50K
Liberal on social issues
Conservative on social issues
Liberal on economic issues
Conservative on economic issues
Volunteer/donates to charity
Constant

Observations
R-squared
Adjusted R-squared

-0.159+
(0.085)
0.028
(0.090)
-0.060
(0.215)
-0.121
(0.212)
-0.213
(0.329)
0.064
(0.219)
0.011
(0.081)
-0.082
(0.099)
0.030
(0.138)
-0.024
(0.090)
0.053
(0.123)
-0.272+
(0.155)
0.074
(0.126)
0.275+
(0.142)
0.275**
(0.085)
0.438+
(0.256)
195
0.175
0.0475

21

As a further attempt to study whether those who were willing to reconsider their opposition to
payments held different views and values towards compensation, we compared the ratings they
attributed to the various reasons proposed (Figure 6). Overall, and both for respondents who
opposed payments in Canada and in Australia, those who would not support compensation, even
in case of plasma supply shortage, gave higher importance to moral and safety concerns.

Figure 6: Ratings of reasons for being against payments and whether respondents would reconsider their
position in case of supply shortage. The graphs below report cumulative distribution functions of the ratings that
respondents who were against compensating plasma donors gave to the three motives the survey asked them to rate
(between 0 and 100), separately for those who would support payments in case of supply shortage and those who
would still oppose payments even in case of a shortage. “Immoral” stands for the survey statement: “It is immoral to
provide monetary payments to plasma donors in Canada/Australia/United States—donations should be unpaid.”
“Diseases” stands for: “Monetary payments may attract donors who carry transmittable diseases.” “Can rely on
imports” (only for Canada and Australia) stands for: “Increasing domestic supply of plasma is not a priority,
Canada/Australia can rely on imports.”

Immoral (N=190)

Diseases (N=187)

Can rely on imports (N=100)

22

V
CONCLUSION
The first-order finding from our study is that the vast majority of respondents expressed
support for compensation to plasma donors. We found no evidence of widespread societal
opposition to payments to plasma donors. Although the support of our Canadian respondents was
higher for paying plasma donors in Australia and the United States than in Canada, the
differences were small, suggesting a weak role for “moral NIMBY-ism” or moral relativism in
explaining the findings. Moreover, there were no differences across the different categories of
respondents—for example, by gender, religious attitude, geographical location, age, education,
or political orientation. This suggests that attitudes towards payments to plasma donors reflect
deep-seated individual traits that observable socio-demographics are unable to predict and that
go beyond, for example, gender differences or left–right political preference divides.
Second, moral concerns were the highest-rated reason that respondents gave for being against
payments. Respondents also gave high importance to concerns for the safety of plasma supplied
by compensated donors, although most of the plasma in Canada does come from compensated
American donors. Furthermore, the organizations in charge of the procurement and allocation of
plasma have repeatedly assured (and proven) that plasma from American paid donors is as safe
as plasma from Canadian unpaid donors. Because safety concerns are unjustified by the
evidence, appropriate informational campaigns could help dispel this misconception. More
opportunistic considerations, such as the fact that the supply surplus from the United States
allows Canada to rely on imports without the need to pay donors domestically, had a much less
important role as motivation for opposing compensation.
In contrast, among those in favor of legalizing compensation for donors (in Canada as well as
in Australia), the highest-rated motive was to guarantee a higher domestic supply. The majority
of the respondents who were in favor of legalizing compensation also agreed that compensation
would not run against mainstream Canadian moral and societal values. Most Canadians,
therefore, seem to espouse a consequentialist view to issues related to the procurement of
plasma.
Because roughly half of those who declared to be against payments reported that they would
reconsider their position if the domestic supply and imports were insufficient to meet domestic
demand, we may conclude that up to about 85% of our Canadian respondents share a
consequentialist view regarding the regulation of the demand and supply of plasma. Conversely,
the remaining approximately 15% of respondents who continued to oppose payment even when
faced with a hypothetical supply shortage can be characterized by deontological preferences:

23

prohibiting payments is a value of a higher order than guaranteeing an adequate supply of
plasma. The finding that the attitudes of Canadians toward compensating plasma donors are very
similar regardless of whether donors are in Canada or elsewhere is consistent with the attitudes
reported in the survey and the stated motivations, representing general moral values of the
respondents.
In addition to advancing our understanding of individuals’ attitudes and social support for
morally contentious transactions, our study contributes to the current debate in Canada and
elsewhere about whether payments to plasma donors should be legal. The growing demand for
plasma, especially for the manufacture of therapeutic products, creates an urgent need for a
careful discussion on the relative merits of different procurement and allocation systems in a way
that addresses the increasing demand while abiding by the prevailing moral values in a society.
We hope that the evidence from this study will provide insights to address these questions of
relevance for public health.
More generally, we see our study as supporting a broader philosophy about the role of
research in informing societal debates and choices. Many political decisions are thorny because,
for example, they involve conflicts between competing societal and moral values and interests
that policymakers are called to resolve. Examples include legislation about gestational surrogacy;
physician-assisted death; same-sex unions; the donation of organs, blood, plasma and gametes;
prostitution; and the treatment of animals in farms, among others. Other political questions,
ranging from redistribution policies to the treatment of migrants and refugees, also touch upon
rooted beliefs and customs of individuals and societies. In these and similar cases, our view is
that a primary role for empirical social scientists is to devise rigorous methodologies to elicit the
actual beliefs of the population of interest. Because the choices to be considered often concern
activities that are not legal or policies still to be implemented, surveys of individual opinions are
often based on hypothetical scenarios and, as such, require some care in interpreting the results.
Notwithstanding this caveat, with proper methodological approaches it is possible to provide
reliable evidence about the prevailing opinions on complex, morally-charged topics. Of course,
in a representative democracy, it is a prerogative of policymakers to not follow the prevailing
positions of a population. However, we believe that reliable evidence on these opinions should
be, whenever available, considered in the political decision process.

24

