                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       THE FINANCE UNCERTAINTY MULTIPLIER

                                          Iván Alfaro
                                        Nicholas Bloom
                                           Xiaoji Lin

                                      Working Paper 24571
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24571


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    May 2018




We would like to thank our formal discussants Nicolas Crouzet, Ian Dew-Becker, Simon
Gilchrist, Po-Hsuan Hsu, Howard Kung, Gill Segal, Toni Whited, and the seminar audiences at
the Adam Smith Conference, AEA, AFA, Beijing University, BI Norwegian Business School,
CEIBS, Econometric Society, European Finance Association, Macro Finance Society Workshop,
Melbourne Institute Macroeconomic Policy Meetings, Midwest Finance Association,
Minneapolis Fed, NY Fed, Society for Nonlinear Dynamics and Econometrics, Stanford, The
Ohio State University, UBC Summer Finance Conference, University College London,
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, University of St. Andrews, University of Texas at
Austin, University of Texas at Dallas, University of Toronto, Utah Winter Finance Conference,
World Congress. The NSF and Alfred Sloan Foundation kindly provided research support. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Iván Alfaro, Nicholas Bloom, and Xiaoji Lin. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Finance Uncertainty Multiplier
Iván Alfaro, Nicholas Bloom, and Xiaoji Lin
NBER Working Paper No. 24571
May 2018
JEL No. E0,G0

                                           ABSTRACT

We show how real and financial frictions amplify the impact of uncertainty shocks. We build a
model with real frictions, and find adding financial frictions roughly doubles the impact of
uncertainty shocks. Higher uncertainty alongside financial frictions induces the standard real-
options effects on investment and hiring, but also leads firms to hoard cash, further reducing
investment and hiring. We then test the model using a panel of US firms and a novel
instrumentation strategy for uncertainty exploiting differential firm exposure to exchange rate and
price volatility. These results highlight why in periods with greater financial frictions uncertainty
can be particularly damaging.

Iván Alfaro                                       Xiaoji Lin
Department of Finance                             Department of Finance
BI Norwegian Business School                      Ohio State University
Nydalsveien 37                                    2100 Neil Ave
N-0484 Oslo                                       Columbus, OH 43210
Norway                                            lin.1376@osu.edu
ivan.alfaro@bi.no

Nicholas Bloom
Stanford University
Department of Economics 579
Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305-6072 and
NBER
nbloom@stanford.edu
1     Introduction

This paper seeks to address two related questions. First, why are uncertainty shocks in some
periods - like the 2007-2009 global financial crisis - associated with large drops in output, while
in other periods - like the Brexit vote or 2016 US election - are accompanied by economic
growth? Second, as Stock and Watson (2012) noted, uncertainty shocks and financial shocks
are highly correlated. Are these the same shock, or are they distinct shocks with an interrelated
impact, in which uncertainty is amplified by financial frictions?
    To address these questions we build a heterogeneous firms dynamic model with two key
extensions. First, real and financial frictions: on the real side investment incurs fixed cost,1 and
on the financing side issuing equity involves a fixed cost.2 Second, uncertainty and financing
costs are both stochastic, with large temporary shocks. The model is calibrated, solved and
then simulated as a panel of heterogeneous firms.
    We show two key results.        Our first key result is a Finance Uncertainty Multiplier
(hereafter FUM). Namely, adding financial frictions to the classical model of stochastic-
volatility uncertainty shocks - as in Dixit and Pindyck (1994), Abel and Eberly (1996) or
Bloom (2009) - roughly doubles the negative impact of uncertainty shocks on investment and
hiring. In our simulation an uncertainty shock with real and financial frictions leads to a peak
drop in output of 2.3%, but with only real frictions a drop of 1.2%. So, introducing financial
costs roughly doubles the impact of uncertainty shocks on output.
    Our second key result is that uncertainty shocks and financial shocks have an almost
additive impact on output. In our simulations, uncertainty shocks or financial shocks in
models with real and financial frictions each individually reduce output by 2.3% and 2.1%
respectively, but jointly reduce output by 3.5%.
    We summarize these two results below. This reports the peak drop in aggregate output in
our calibrated model with only real frictions and an uncertainty shock is 1.2% (top left box).
   1
     For example, Bertola and Caballero (1990), Davis and Haltiwanger (1992), Dixit and Pindyck (1994),
Caballero, Engel, and Haltiwanger (1995), Abel and Eberly (1996), or Cooper and Haltiwanger (2006).
   2
     See, for example, Hennessy and Whited (2005), Hennessy and Whited (2007), Bolton, Chen, and Wang
(2013), Eisfeldt and Muir (2016), etc.

                                                  2
Adding financial frictions almost doubles the size of an uncertainty shock to 2.3% (bottom left
box). Finally, adding a financial shock (as well as an uncertainty shock) increases the impact
by another one half, yielding a drop in output of 3.5% (bottom right). So collectively going
from the classic uncertainty model to one with financial frictions and simultaneous financial
shocks roughly triples the impact of uncertainty shocks, and can help explain why uncertainty
shocks during periods like 2007-2009 were associated with large drops in output.


                                 Key results in simulation

                                              Uncertainty              Uncertainty
                                                   shock         + financial shocks
             Real frictions                         1.2%                        n/a
             Real+financial frictions               2.3%                       3.5%

   Notes: Results from simulations of 30,000 firms in the calibrated model (see section 3.4.1).

   Alongside the negative impact of uncertainty and finance shocks on investment and
employment, the model also predicts these shocks will lead firms to accumulate cash and
reduce equity payouts, as higher uncertainty causes firms to take a more cautious financial
position. As Figure 1 shows this is consistent with macro-data. It plots the quarterly VIX
index - a common proxy for uncertainty - alongside aggregate real and financial variables.
The top two panels show that times of high uncertainty (VIX) are associated with periods of
low investment and employment growth. The middle two panels show that cash holding is
positively associated with the VIX, while dividend payout and equity repurchase are negatively
related to the VIX. The bottom panels also considers debt and shows that the total debt (the
sum of the short-term and long-term debt) growth and the term structure of the debt growth
(short-term debt growth to long-term debt growth ratio) are both negatively related with the
VIX, implying firms cut debt (and particularly short-term debt) when uncertainty is high.
   The additional complexity required to model: (a) real and financial frictions, and (b)
uncertainty and financial shocks, required us to make some simplifying assumptions. First, we
ignore labor adjustment costs - including these would likely increase the impact of uncertainty
shocks, since labor accounts for 2/3 of the cost share in our model. Second, we ignore general

                                                3
equilibrium (GE) effects - including these would likely reduce the impact of uncertainty shocks
by allowing for offsetting price effects. As a partial response to this we also run a pseudo-GE
robustness test where we allow interest rates, prices (of output and capital) and real wages
to move after uncertainty shocks following typical changes observed in the data, and find our
results on the negative impact of uncertainty-finance shocks on output are about 30% smaller
but qualitatively similar.3
       The second part of the paper tests this model using a micro-data panel of US firms with
measures of uncertainty, investment, employment, cash, debt and equity payments. To address
obvious concerns over endogeneity of uncertainty4 we employ a novel instrumentation strategy
for uncertainty exploiting differential firm exposure to exchange rate, factor price and policy
uncertainty. This identification strategy works well delivering a strong first-stage F-statistics
and passing Hansen over-identification tests. We find that higher uncertainty significantly
reduces investment (in tangible and intangible capital) and hiring, while also leading firms
to more cautiously manage their financial polices by increasing cash holdings and cutting
dividends, debt, and stock-buy backs, consistent with the model (and macro data).
       Our paper relates to three main literatures. First, the large uncertainty literature studying
the impact of heightened uncertainty and volatility on investment and employment.5 We build
on this literature to show the joint importance of real and financial frictions for investment,
   3
     One reason is that wages and real interest rates do not move substantially over the cycle (e.g. King and
Rebelo (1999)), and second increased uncertainty widens the Ss bands so that the economy is less responsive
to price changes (e.g. Bloom, Floetotto, Jaimovich, Saporta-Eksten, and Terry (2016)).
   4
     See, for example, Nieuwerburgh and Veldkamp (2006), Bachmann and Moscarini (2012), Pastor and
Veronesi (2012), Orlik and Veldkamp (2015), Berger, Dew-Becker, and Giglio (2016), and Falgelbaum, Schaal,
and Taschereau-Dumouchel (2016), for models and empirics on reverse causality with uncertainty and growth.
   5
     Classic papers on uncertainty and growth included Bernanke (1983), Romer (1990), Ramey and Ramey
(1995), Leahy and Whited (1996), Guiso and Parigi (1999), Bloom (2009), Bachmann and Bayer (2013),
Fernandez-Villaverde, Quintana, Rubio-Ramirez, and Uribe (2011), Fernandez-Villaverde, Guerron-Quintana,
Kuester, and Rubio-Ramirez (2015), and Christiano, Motto, and Rostagno (2014). Several other papers look at
uncertainty shocks - for example, Bansal and Yaron (2004) and Segal, Shaliastovich, and Yaron (2015) look at
the consumption and financial implications of uncertainty, Handley and Limao (2012) look at uncertainty and
trade, Ilut and Schneider (2014) model ambiguity aversion as an alternative to stochastic volatility, and Basu
and Bundick (2017) examine uncertainty shocks in a sticky-price Keynesian model, and Berger, Dew-Becker,
and Giglio (2016) study news vs uncertainty. A related literature on disaster shocks - for example, Rietz
(1988), Barro (2006), and Gourio (2012) - is also connected to this paper, in that disasters can be interpreted
as periods of combined uncertainty and financial shocks, and indeed can lead to uncertainty through belief
updating (e.g. Orlik and Veldkamp (2015)).



                                                      4
hiring and financial dynamics, and importantly how adding financial shocks can roughly double
the impact of uncertainty shocks.
        Second, the literature on financial frictions and business cycles.6 We build on this literature
to argue it is not a choice between uncertainty shocks and financial shocks as to which
drives recessions, but instead these shocks amplify each other so they cannot be considered
individually.
        Finally, the finance literature that studies the determinants of corporate financing choices.7
We are complementary to these studies by showing that uncertainty shocks have significant
impact on firms’ real and financial flows, examined in both calibrated macro models and well
identified micro-data estimations.
        The rest of the paper is laid out as follows. In section 2 we write down the model. In
section 3 we present the main quantitative results of the model. In section 4 we describe the
instrumentation strategy and international data that we use in the paper. In section 5 we
present the empirical findings on the effects of uncertainty shocks on both real and financial
activity of firms. Section 6 concludes.



2         Model

The model features a continuum of heterogeneous firms facing uncertainty shocks and financial
frictions. Furthermore, financial adjustment costs vary over time and across firms. Firms
choose optimal levels of physical capital investment, labor, and cash holding each period to
maximize the market value of equity.
    6
      For example, Alessandri and Mumtaz (2016) and Lhuissier and Tripier (2016) show in VAR estimates a
strong interaction effect of financial constraints on uncertainty. More generally, Gilchrist and Zakrajšek (2012),
Jermann and Quadrini (2012), Christiano, Motto, and Rostagno (2014), and Gilchrist, Sim, and Zakrajsek
(2014), Arellano, Bai, and Kehoe (2016), show that financial frictions are important to explain the aggregate
fluctuations for the recent financial crisis. Caggiano et al (2017) show that uncertainty shocks have a bigger
impact during recessions.
    7
      For example, Rajan and Zingales (1995), Gomes (2001), Welch (2004), Moyen (2004), Hennessy and
Whited (2005), Riddick and Whited (2009), DeAngelo, DeAngelo, and Whited (2011), Bolton, Chen, and
Wang (2011), Rampini and Viswanathan (2013), Chen, Wang, and Zhou (2014), and Chen (2016) study the
impact of various frictions on firms’ financing policies, including equity, debt, liquidity management, etc.



                                                        5
2.1        Technology

Firms use physical capital (Kt ) and labor (Lt ) to produce a homogeneous good (Yt ). To save
on notation, we omit the firm index whenever possible. The production function is Cobb-
Douglas, given by
                                                   Yt = Zet Ktα L1−α
                                                                 t   ,                           (1)

in which Zet is firms’ productivity. The firm faces an isoelastic demand curve with elasticity
(ε),
                                                      Qt = BPt−ε ,                               (2)

where B is a demand shifter.                       These can be combined into a revenue function
                         1−1/ε 1/ε α(1−1/ε)
R (Zt , B, Kt , Lt ) = Zet    B Kt          (Lt )(1−α)(1−1/ε) . For analytical tractability we define
                                                                       1−1/ε 1/ε
a = α (1 − 1/ε) and b = (1 − α) (1 − 1/ε) , and substitute Zt1−a−b = Zet    B . With these
redefinitions we have
                                         S (Zt , Kt , Lt ) = Zt1−a−b Kta Lbt .                   (3)

Wages are normalized to 1 denoted as W̄ . Given employment is flexible, we can obtain optimal
labor.8 Note that labor can be pre-optimized out even with financial frictions which will be
discussed later.
       Productivity is defined as a firm-specific productivity process, following an AR(1) process


                                                 zt+1 = ρz zt + σ t εzt+1                        (4)


in which zt+1 = log(Zt+1 ), εzt+1 is an i.i.d. standard normal shock (drawn independently across
firms), and ρz , and σ t are the autocorrelation and conditional volatility of the productivity
process.
       The firm stochastic volatility process is assumed for simplicity to follow a two-point Markov
                                                               1
                                          b
                                              Zt1−a−b Kta
   8
                                                             1−b
       Pre-optimized labor is given by   W̄
                                                                    .




                                                                6
chains
                      σ t ∈ {σ L , σ H } , where Pr (σ t+1 = σ j |σ t = σ k ) = π σk,j .    (5)

Physical capital accumulation is given by


                                        Kt+1 = (1 − δ)Kt + It ,                             (6)


where It represents investment and δ denotes the capital depreciation rate.
   We assume that capital investment entails nonconvex adjustment costs, denoted as Gt ,
which are given by:
                                            Gt = ck St 1{It 6=0} ,                          (7)

where ck > 0 is constant. The capital adjustment costs include planning and installation costs,
learning to use the new equipment, or the fact that production is temporarily interrupted.
The nonconvex costs ck St 1{It 6=0} capture the costs of adjusting capital that are independent
of the size of the investment.
   We also assume that there is a fixed production cost F ≥ 0. Firms need to pay this cost
regardless of investment and hiring decisions every period. Hence firms’ operating profit (Πt )
is revenue minus wages and fixed cost of production, given by


                                          Πt = St − W̄ Lt − F.                              (8)



2.2      Cash holding

Firms save in cash (Nt+1 ) which represents the liquid asset that firms hold. Cash accumulation
evolves according to the process


                                       Nt+1 = (1 + rn ) Nt + Ht ,                           (9)




                                                      7
where Ht is the investment in cash and rn > 0 is the return on holding cash. Following
Cooley and Quadrini (2001) and Hennessy, Levy, and Whited (2007), we assume that return
on cash is strictly less than the risk free rate rf (i.e., rn < rf ). This assumption is consistent
with Graham (2000) who documents that the tax rates on cash retentions generally exceed
tax rates on interest income for bondholders, making cash holding tax-disadvantaged. Lastly,
cash is freely adjusted.


2.3       External financing costs

When the sum of investment in capital, investment adjustment cost and investment in cash
exceeds the operating profit, firms can take external funds by issuing equity. External equity
financing is costly for firms. The financing costs include both direct costs (for example,
flotation costs - underwriting, legal and registration fees), and indirect (unobserved) costs due
to asymmetric information and managerial incentive problems, among others.9
       Because equity financing costs will be paid only if payouts are negative, we define the
firm’s payout before financing cost (Et ) as operating profit minus investment in capital and
cash accumulation, less investment adjustment costs


                                         Et = Πt − It − Ht − Gt .                                         (10)


Furthermore, external equity financing costs vary over time and across firms.10 The micro-
foundations of time-varying financing conditions include endogenous time-varying adverse
selection problems in Eisfeldt (2004), Kurlat (2013), and Bigio (2015) who show that
uncertainty increases the adverse selection cost from equity offerings (raising financing costs),
   9
     These costs are estimated to be substantial. For example, Altinkilic and Hansen (2000) estimate the
underwriting fee ranging from 4.37% to 6.32% of the capital raised in their sample. In addition, a few
empirical papers also seek to establish the importance of the indirect costs of equity issuance. Asquith and
Mullins (1986) find that the announcement of equity offerings reduces stock prices on average by −3% and
this price reduction as a fraction of the new equity issue is on average −31%.
  10
     Erel, Julio, Kim, and Weisbach (2012) show that firms’ access to external finance markets also changes
with macroeconomic conditions. Kahle and Stulz (2013) find that net equity issuance falls more substantially
than debt issuance during the recent financial crisis suggesting that shocks to the corporate credit supply are
not likely to be the cause for the reduction in firms’ capital expenditures in 2007-2008.


                                                      8
agency frictions varying over time as in Bernanke and Gertler (1989) and Carlstrom and
Fuerst (1997), and time-varying liquidity as in Pastor and Stambaugh (2003). Furthermore,
empirically, Choe, Masulis, , and Nanda (1993) find that the adverse selection costs measured
as negative price reaction to SEO announcement is higher in contractions and lower in
expansions, suggesting changes in information symmetries between firms and investors are
likely to vary over time. Lee and Masulis (2009) show that seasoned equity issuance costs are
higher for firms with poor accounting information quality.
   As such, we use η t to capture the time-varying financing conditions that also vary across
firms; it is assumed for simplicity to follow a two-point Markov chain


                       η t ∈ {η L , η H } , where Pr η t+1 = η j |η t = η k = π ηk,j .
                                                                           
                                                                                                    (11)


We do not explicitly model the sources of the equity financing costs. Rather, we attempt to
capture the effect of the costs in a reduced-form fashion. The external equity costs Ψt are
assumed to scale with firm size as measured by the revenue:


                                       Ψt = φ (η t , σ t ) St 1{Et <0} .                            (12)


Firms do not incur costs when paying dividends or repurchasing shares. So φ (η t , σ t ) captures
the marginal cost of external financing which affects both optimal investment and cash holding
policies, similar to Eisfeldt and Muir (2016) who model a time-varying financing condition by
an AR(1) process.
   Finally, note that the marginal external equity financing cost depends on both time-varying
financing condition η t and time-varying uncertainty σ t . This assumption captures the fact that
periods of high external financing costs are associated with heightened uncertainty, consistent
with Caldara, Fuentes-Albero, Gilchrist and Zakrajšek (2016) who document that change in
VIX and change in CDS spread are positively correlated. As such, we assume φ (η t , σ t ) = η t +λ
with λ > 0 when σ t = σ H , and φ (η t , σ t ) = η t when σ t = σ L , to capture the positive correlation


                                                      9
between financing cost and uncertainty shock in the data.


2.4      Firm’s problem

Firms solve the maximization problem by choosing capital investment, labor, and cash holding
optimally:
                            Vt =        max             [Et − Ψt + βEt Vt+1 ] ,             (13)
                                   It ,Lt ,Kt+1 ,Nt+1


subject to firms’ capital accumulation equation (Eq. 6) and cash accumulation equation (Eq.
9), where Et − Ψt captures the net payout distributed to shareholders.



3        Main results

This section presents the model solution and the main results. We first calibrate the model,
then we simulate the model and study the quantitative implications of the model for the
relationship between uncertainty shocks, financial shocks, and firms’ real activity and financial
flows.


3.1      Calibration

The model is solved at a quarterly frequency. Table 1 reports the parameter values used in the
baseline calibration of the model. The model is calibrated using parameter values reported
in previous studies, whenever possible, or by matching the selected moments in the data. To
generate the model’s implied moments, we simulate 3, 000 firms for 1, 000 quarterly periods.
We drop the first 800 quarters to neutralize the impact of the initial condition. The remaining
200 quarters of simulated data are treated as those from the economy’s stationary distribution.
Firm’s technology and uncertainty parameters. We set the share of capital in the production
function at 1/3, and the elasticity of demand ε to 4 which implies a markup of 33%. The
capital depreciation rate δ is set to be 3% per quarter. The discount factor β is set so that
the real firms’ discount rate rf = 5% per annum, based on the average of the real annual S&P

                                                        10
index return in the data. This implies β = 0.988 quarterly. We set the return on cash holding
rn = 0.8rf to match the cash-to-asset ratio at 5% for the firms holding non-zero cash in the
data. The fixed investment adjustment cost ck is set to 1% and the fixed operating cost F
is set to 20% of average revenue (set as the 20% of the median revenue on the revenue grid),
consistent with the average SGA-to-sales ratio of 20% in the data. Wage rate W̄ is normalized
to 1. We set the persistence of firms’ micro productivity as ρz = 0.95 following Khan and
Thomas (2008). Following Bloom, Floetotto, Jaimovich, Saporta-Eksten, and Terry (2016),
we set the baseline firm volatility as σ L = 0.051, the high uncertainty state σ H = 4 ∗ σ L , and
the transition probabilities of π σL,H = 0.026 and π σH,H = 0.94.

Financing cost parameters. We set the baseline external equity financing cost parameter
η L = 0.005 and the high financing cost state η H = 10η L = 0.05.11 Because there is no readily
available estimate for the transition probabilities of financial shock in the data, and to keep
this symmetric with uncertainty to facilitate interpretation of the results, we set them the same
as those of the uncertainty shock.12 In addition, we set λ = 4% so that the implied correlation
between the external financing cost and the uncertainty is 69%, close to the correlation between
Baa-Aaa spread and the VIX in the data in our sample. The calibrated financial costs are
also average 1.78% of the sales (conditional on firms issuing equity), within the range the
estimates in Altinkilic and Hansen (2000) and Hennessy and Whited (2005).


3.2     Policy functions

In this section, we analyze the policy functions implied by two different model specifications:
1) the model with real fixed investment costs only (real-only), and 2) the benchmark model
with both real fixed investment costs and fixed financing costs (real and financial - the
benchmark). Figures 2A and 2B plot the optimal investment policies associated with low
and high uncertainty states of the real-only model (top left) and the benchmark model (top
  11
      We have also solved the model with η H /η L = {2, 5, 8, 16, 20} and find the quantitative results remain
robust.
   12
      We also solved the model with different transition probabilities for financial shocks, e.g., π ηL,H = 5% and
  η
π H,H = 50%. The quantitative result is similar to the benchmark calibration.

                                                       11
right), respectively. In both figures, we fix the idiosyncratic productivity and cash holding at
their median grid points and the financial shock at the low state.13 In the real-only model,
optimal investment displays the classic Ss band behavior. There is an investing region when
the firm size (capital) is small, an inaction region when the firm size is in the intermediate
range, and an disinvestment region when the firm is large. Moreover, the Ss band expands with
higher uncertainty, due to the real-option effects inducing greater caution in firms investment
behavior. Turning to the benchmark model, we see that the Ss band associated with high
uncertainty state is bigger than the low uncertainty state, similar to the real-only model.
However, optimal investment in the benchmark model displays a second flat region, which
arises when the firm is investing but only financed by internal funds. This happens because
firms are facing binding financial constraints (Et = 0), and are not prepared to pay the fixed
costs of raising external equity. When uncertainty is higher the real-option value of this
financing constraint is larger, so the binding constraint region is bigger. This shows how real
and financial constraints interact to expand the central region of inaction in Ss models.
       Figure 2C plots the payout of the benchmark model (bottom left) of low and high
uncertainty by fixing the idiosyncratic productivity and cash holding at their median grid
points and financial shock at its low state. We see that firms both issue less equity and
payout less in high uncertainty state.


3.3       Benchmark model result

In this subsection, we compare panel regression data from the model simulation with
specifications, and also compare this to the real data. Specifically, we regress the rates of
investment, employment growth, cash growth and payout-to-capital ratio (defined as positive
payout scaled by capital) on the growth of volatility (∆σ t ) at quarterly frequency, alongside
a full set of firm and year fixed-effects. Using the true volatility growth in the model allows
us to mimic the IV regressions for the real data regressions.
  13
    Note that in the model with fixed investment costs only, optimal investment policies do not depend on
cash holding since optimal cash holding is zero. Thus, figure 2A does not vary with different values of cash.


                                                     12
       Table 2 starts in Row A by presenting the results from the real data (discussed in section
5) as a benchmark. As we see investment, employment and equity payouts significantly
drop after an increase in uncertainty while cash holdings rises.14 Row D below presents
the benchmark simulation results (Real+financial frictions), and finds similar qualitative
results with again drops in investment, employment and equity payouts and rising cash
holdings15 . In Row B we turn to the classic real frictions only model and see that the impact
of uncertainty on investment and employment growth falls from −0.080 to −0.042 and −0.028
to −0.014 respectively. This implies a finance-uncertainty-multiplier of 1.90 (= 0.080/0.042)
for investment and 2.0 (= 0.028/0.014) for employment. So introducing financial frictions to
the classic uncertainty model roughly doubles the impact of uncertainty shocks.
       In Row C we instead simulate a model with just financial frictions, and interestingly we
still get a (smaller) negative impact of uncertainty on investment and employment, driven by
firms desire to hoard cash when uncertainty increases, alongside a (larger) impact on increasing
cash and cutting dividends. Hence, both the “real only” and “financial only” adjustment cost
models have similar implications that uncertainty shocks reduce investment, employment and
dividends and increase cash holdings. But, the real model has larger real (investment and
employment) impacts and smaller dividend impacts and no cash impacts (without financial
costs cash is zero). Finally, Row (E) models firms with no adjustment costs, resulting in very
small positive Oi-Hartman-Abel impacts on investment and employment, no cash impacts,
and larger dividend impacts due to more fluctuations in equity payouts.


3.4       Inspecting the mechanism

In this section, we inspect the model mechanism by first studying the impulse responses of the
real and financial variables in the benchmark model and then compare them to the real-only
model and the model with fixed financial costs only (financial-only). Furthermore, we also
  14
     All results in this table are significant at the 1% (with firm-clustered standard errors), hence we do not
report t-statistics for simplicity.
  15
     The real data results (Row A) and benchmark results (Row D) have similar quantitative magnitudes
noting we did not calibrate our parameters to meet these moments.


                                                      13
run panel regressions in different model specifications to understand the marginal effect of
real and financial frictions.


3.4.1   Impulse responses

To simulate the impulse response, we run our model with 30, 000 firms for 800 periods and
then kick uncertainty and/or financing costs up to its high level in period 801 and then let
the model to continue to run as before. Hence, we are simulating the response to a one period
impulse and its gradual decay (noting that some events - like the 2007-2009 financial crisis -
likely had more persistent initial impulses).
   Uncertainty shocks           Figure 3 plots the impulse responses of the real and financial
variables of the benchmark model to a pure uncertainty shock. Starting with the classic “real
adjustment cost” only model (black line, x symbols) we see a peak drop in output of 1.2% and
a gradual return to trend. This is driven by drops and recoveries in capital, labor and TFP.
Capital and labor drop and recover due to increased real-option effects leading firms to pause
investing (and thus hiring by the complementarity of labor and capital), while depreciation
continues to erode capital stocks. TFP falls and recovers due to the increased mis-allocation of
capital and labor after uncertainty shocks - higher uncertainty leads to more rapid reshuffling
of productivity across firms, which with reduced investment and hiring leads to more input
mis-allocation. Dividend payout rises because firms with excess capital disinvest more with
high uncertainty and hence payout more.
   Turning to the benchmark model (red line, triangle symbols) with “real and financial
adjustment costs” we see a much larger peak drop in output of 2.3%, alongside larger drops in
capital and labor. This is driven by the interaction of financial costs with uncertainty which
generates a desire by the firms to increase cash holdings (dividend payout falls but the drop
is rather small) when uncertainty is high. Hence, we again see that adding financial costs to
the classic model roughly doubles the impact of uncertainty shocks.
   Finally, the model with only “financial adjustment costs” (blue line, circles) leads to a



                                                14
similar 1.0% peak drop in output. This is driven by a similar mix of a drop in capital as
financial adjustment costs leads firms to hoard cash after an uncertainty shock, labor also
drops (since this is complementary with capital), as does TFP due to less investment and
hiring raising mis-allocation. The one notable difference in the impact of uncertainty shocks
with real vs financial adjustment costs is the time profile on output, capital and labor. Real
adjustment costs lead to a sharp drop due to the Ss band expansion which freezes investment
after the shock, but with a rapid bounce-back as the Ss bands contract and firms realize pent-
up demand for investment. With financial costs the uncertainty shock only reduces investment
by firms with limited internal financing, but this impact is more durable leading to a slower
drop and recovery.
   Financial shocks       Figure 4 in contrast analyzes the impact of a pure financial shock -
that is a shock to the cost of raising external finance, η, in equation (11) - for the simulation
with real, financial and real+financial adjustment costs.
   Starting first with real adjustment costs only (black line, x symbol) we see no impact
because there are no financial adjustment costs in this model. Turning to the financial frictions
but no real frictions model (blue line, circle symbols) we see only small impacts of financial
shocks of 0.7% on output. The reason is with financial (but no real) frictions firms can easily
save/dis-save in capital, so they are less reliant on external equity. Firms increase cash holdings
and cut dividend payout due to increased financing costs. Finally, in the benchmark model
(red line, triangle symbols) we see that, as before, the impact is roughly twice the size of the
no financial costs model, with a drop in output of up to 2%, with similar falls in capital and
labor. The reason is intuitive - if financial costs are temporarily increased firms will postpone
raising external finance for investment, which reduces the capital stock and hence labor (by
complementarity with capital). Moreover, cash holding and dividend payout displays sharper
and more persistent rise and drop, respectively. TFP also shows a more modest drop due
to the increase in mis-allocation (as investment falls), although this is smaller than for an
uncertainty shock as firm-level TFP does not increase in volatility.



                                                15
   Combined uncertainty and financial shocks              As Stock and Watson (2012) suggest
combined financial and real shocks are a common occurrence, and indeed these both occurred
in 2007-2009, so we examine the impact of this in Figure 5. This plots the impact in the
benchmark model of an uncertainty shock (black line, + symbols), a financial shock (blue
line, circle symbols) and both shocks simultaneously (red line, triangle symbols).
   The main result from Figure 5 is that both uncertainty and financial shocks individually
lead to drops in output, capital, labor and TFP of broadly similar sizes (financial shocks
cut capital and labor a bit more, uncertainty cuts aggregate TFP more; on financial flows,
financial shocks increase cash holding and cut dividend payout much more than uncertainty
shocks). But collectively their impact is significantly larger and more persistent - for example,
the drop in output from an uncertainty or financial shock alone is 2.3% and 2.1% respectively,
while jointly they lead to an output fall of 3.5%. This highlights that combined financial
and uncertainty shocks lead to substantially larger drops in output, investment and hiring,
alongside increases in cash holdings and reductions in equity payouts. As we saw in Figure 1
this occurred in 2007-2009, suggesting modeling this as a joint finance-uncertainty shock in a
model will come closer to explaining the magnitude of this recession.


3.4.2   Robustness

In this section we consider - changes in parameter values and general equilibrium. These are
plotted in Figure 6 and presented in Table A1.
   Changes in parameter values          We start by evaluating one-by-one changes a series of
the parameter values listed in Table 2. The broad summary is that while the quantitative
results vary somewhat across different parameter values, the qualitative results are robust -
uncertainty shocks lead to drops and rebounds in output, capital and labor (alongside rises
in cash and drops in equity payouts), and these are roughly doubled by adding in financial
adjustment costs.
   In particular, we lower the high financing-cost-state-to-low-cost-state ratio (η H /η L ) from



                                               16
10 to 5 (while keeping the low financial cost state η L = 0.005). This leads to a similar drop in
output but with a faster recovery as it is now less expensive for constrained firms to finance
investment (dark blue line with squares, Figure 6). Next, rather than set the transition
probabilities of the financial shock to be the same as the uncertainty shock we set π ηL,H = 0.05
and π ηH,H = 0.5, which implies that financial shocks expected every 5 years and the average
time of the economy in high financing cost state is 10% (similar to the calibration of the credit
shocks in Khan and Thomas (2013)). As we see (black line, circles) this leads to a very similar
drop but faster recovery from the uncertainty-finance shock because the finance shocks is now
less persistent.
   We also try reducing the fixed production cost (F ) to 10% of the sales rather than 20%
in the baseline calibration. We see (blue-dash line, crosses) this produces almost identical
drop and recovery of output to the baseline calibration from the uncertainty-finance shocks
because financial constraints are not significantly loosened with a smaller fixed operating
leverage. Furthermore, we increase the investment adjustment cost (ck ) to 2% of the sales
instead of 1% in the baseline and we see this change also leads to a similar drop of output to
the baseline but somewhat faster recovery (yellow line, stars). Lastly, we increase the share
of capital in the production function (α) to 1 rather than 1/3 in the baseline calibration.
Effectively, the share of labor, the costlessly adjustable input in the baseline, is zero. This
implies that all factors (capital here) are costly to adjust. We see that setting α = 1 leads
to a bigger peak drop in output to around 4.2% (3.5% in the baseline) and a slower recovery
after the uncertainty-finance shock (black-dash line, right triangles).
   General equilibrium         Currently the model is in a partial equilibrium setting. A
general equilibrium set-up would require a Krusell and Smith (1998) type of model with its
additional loop and simulation to solve for prices and expectations. In prior work, for example
Bloom, Floetotto, Jaimovich, Saporta-Eksten, and Terry (2016), this reduced the impact of
uncertainty shocks by around 1/3 but did not radically change their character. The reason
is two-fold: first, prices (interest rates and wages) do not change substantially over the cycle,



                                               17
and second the Ss nature of the firms’ investment decision makes the policy correspondence
insensitive in the short-run to price changes. However, to investigate this we do run a pseudo-
GE experiment, whereby we allow prices to change by an empirically realistic amount after
an uncertainty shock. In particular, we allow interest rates to be 10% lower, prices (of output
and capital) 0.5% lower, and wages 0.3% lower, during periods of high uncertainty. We find
broad robustness of our results on the impact of uncertainty shocks with a slightly smaller
drop but somewhat faster rebound (pink-dash line with pluses in Figure 6).



4     Data and instruments

We first describe the data and variable construction, then the identification strategy.


4.1    Data

Stock returns are from CRSP and annual accounting variables are from Compustat. The
sample period is from January 1963 through December 2016. Financial, utilities and public
sector firms are excluded (i.e., SIC between 6000 and 6999, 4900 and 4999, and equal to or
greater than 9000). Compustat variables are at the annual frequency. Our main firm-level
empirical tests regress changes in real and financial variables on 12-month lagged changes
in uncertainty (i.e., lagged uncertainty shocks), where the lag is both to reduce concerns
about contemporaneous endogeneity and because of natural time to build delays. Moreover,
our main tests include both firm and time (calendar year) fixed effects. The regressions of
changes in outcomes on lagged annual changes in uncertainty restricts our sample to firms
with at least 3 consecutive non-missing data values. The firm fixed effect further eliminates
singletons. To ensure that the changes are indeed annual, we require a 12 month distance
between fiscal-year end dates of accounting reports from one year to the next. We drop any
firm-year observations having zero or negative employment, total assets, and/or sales.
    In measuring firm-level uncertainty we employ both realized annual uncertainty from CRSP



                                              18
stock returns and option-implied uncertainty from OptionMetrics. Realized uncertainty is the
standard-deviation of daily cum-dividend stock returns over the course of each firm’s fiscal
year (which typically spans roughly 252 trading days).16 For implied volatility we use the 252-
day average of daily implied volatility values from OptionMetrics. Data from OptionMetrics is
available starting January 1996. Our daily implied volatility data corresponds to at-the-money
365-day forward call options. Additional information about OptionMetrics, Compustat, and
CRSP data is provided in Appendix ( B).
       For changes in variables we define growth following Davis and Haltiwanger (1992), where
for any variable xt this is ∆xt = (xt − xt−1 )/( 21 xt + 12 xt−1 ) , which for positive values of
xt and xt−1 yields growth rates bounded between -2 and 2. The only exceptions are CRSP
stock returns (measured as the compounded fiscal-year return of daily stock returns RET from
CRSP) and capital formation. For the latter, investment rate (implicitly the change in gross
                                Ii,t
capital stock) is defined as   Ki,t−1
                                      ,   where Ki,t−1 is net property plant and equipment at the end
of fiscal year t − 1, and Ii,t is the flow of capital expenditures (CAP X from Compustat) over
the course of fiscal year t. After applying all filters to the data, all changes and ratios of real
and financial variables are then winsorized at the 1 and 99 percentiles.
       Our main tests include standard controls used in the literature on both real investment
and capital structure. In particular, in addition to controlling for the lagged level of Tobin’s Q
we follow Leary and Roberts (2014) and include controls for lagged levels of firm tangibility,
book leverage, return on assets, log sales, and stock returns. The Appendix ( B) details the
construction of these variables.


4.2       Identification strategy

Our identification strategy exploits firms’ differential exposure to aggregate uncertainty
shocks in energy, currency, policy, and treasuries to generate exogenous changes in firm-level
  16
    We drop observations of firms with less than 200 daily CRSP returns in a given fiscal year. Our sample
uses securities appearing on CRSP for firms listed in major US stock exchanges (EXCHCD codes 1,2, and 3
for NYSE, AMEX and the Nasdaq Stock Market (SM)) and equity shares listed as ordinary common shares
(SHRCD 10 or 11).


                                                     19
uncertainty. The idea is that some firms are very sensitive to, for example, oil prices (e.g.
energy intensive manufacturing and mining firms) while others are not (e.g. retailers and
business service firms), so that when oil-price volatility rises it shifts up firm-level volatility in
the former group relative to the latter group. Likewise, some industries have different trading
intensity with Europe versus Mexico (e.g. industrial machinery versus agricultural produce
firms), so changes in bilateral exchange rate volatility generates differential moves in firm-level
uncertainty. Finally, some industries - like defense, health care and construction - are more
reliant on the Government, so when aggregate policy uncertainty rises (for example, because
of elections or government shutdowns) firms in these industries experience greater increases
in uncertainty.
   Our estimation approach is conceptually similar to the classic Bartik identification strategy
which exploits different regions exposure to different industry level shocks, and builds on the
paper by Stein and Stone (2013).
   Estimation of sensitivities          The sensitivities to energy, currencies, treasuries, and
policy are estimated at the industry level as the factor loadings of a regression of a firm’s
daily stock return on the price growth of energy and currencies, return on treasury bonds,
and changes in daily policy uncertainty. That is, for firms i in industry j , sensitivityic = β cj
is estimated as follows


                                   risk adj
                                                     X
                                  ri,t      = αj +        β cj · rtc + i,t                      (14)
                                                      c

       risk adj
where ri,t      is the daily risk-adjusted return on firm i (explained below), rtc is the change
in the price of commodity c, and αj is industry j’s intercept. The sensitivities are estimated
at the industry level using 3-digit Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) codes. Estimating
the main coefficients of interest, β cj , at the SIC 3-digit level (instead of at the firm-level)
reduces the role of idiosyncratic noise in firm-level returns, and thus increases the precision
of the estimates. Moreover, we allow these industry-level sensitivities to be time-varying
by estimating them using 10-year rolling windows of past daily data. Further, as explained


                                                 20
below, we exploit these time-varying factor exposures to construct pre-estimated sensitivities
and instruments that are free of look-ahead bias concerns in our main regressions, which run
second-stage 2SLS specifications of real and financial outcomes on past uncertainty shocks.
       The risk-adjusted returns in (14) are the residuals from running firm-level time-series
regressions of daily CRSP stock returns on the Carhart (1997) four-factor asset pricing model.
In particular, using the same 10-year rolling window used in (14) we define firm daily risk-
adjusted returns as the residuals of regressing firms’ excess return on the daily Carhart factors:


  excess
 ri,t    = αi + β i,mkt · M KTt + β i,HM L · HM Lt + β i,SM B · SM Bt + β i,U M D · U M Dt + εi,t (15)


       excess
where ri,t    is firm i’s daily CRSP stock return (including dividends and adjusted for delisting)
in excess of the t-bill rate, M KT is the CRSP value-weighted index in excess of the risk free
rate, HM L is the book-to-market factor, SM B is the size factor, U M D is the momentum
factor. These factor data are obtained from CRSP.
       We adjust returns for risk to address concerns over whether the sensitivities to energy,
currencies, treasuries, and policy - β cj in equation (14)- are capturing systematic ”risks” rather
than exposure to the prices of interest. Our main results are fairly similar when we use longer
or shorter rolling windows, of 15 and 5 years, in both (14) and (15) and raw or risk adjusted
returns.
       The daily independent variables in (14) are the growth in crude-oil prices (which proxies
for energy shocks), growth in the exchange rates of 7 widely traded currencies defined as
                                                  17                                                        18
”major” currencies by the Federal Board                , the return on the US 10-year treasury note              ,
and the growth in economic policy uncertainty from Baker, Bloom, and Davis (2016). For
these 10 aggregate market price shocks (oil, 7 currencies, treasuries, and policy) we need not
  17
      See http://www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/bulletin/2005/winter05_index.pdf . These include: the
euro, Canadian dollar, Japanese yen, British pound, Swiss franc, Australian dollar, and Swedish krona. Each
one of these trades widely in currency markets outside their respective home areas, and (along with the U.S.
dollar) are referred to by the Board staff as major currencies.
   18
      The treasury return is estimated from the first-order approximation of duration, i.e., by multiplying the
first difference of the yield by minus 1.



                                                        21
only their daily returns (for calculating the sensitivities β cj in equation (14)) but also their
implied volatilities σ ct as measures of aggregate sources of uncertainty.
    Construction of instruments                 To instrument for firm-level uncertainty shocks, ∆σ i,t ,
we also require data on aggregate uncertainty shocks, ∆σ ct . We define the annual uncertainty
on oil, currency, and 10-year treasuries as the 252-day average of daily implied volatility of
oil and currencies from Bloomberg and for treasuries we use the 252-day average of daily
implied volatility for the 10-year US Treasury Note from the Cboe/CBOT (ticker TYVIX).
Likewise, for annual policy uncertainty we employ the 365-day average of the US economic
policy uncertainty index from Baker, Bloom, and Davis (2016). These 10 annual aggregate
uncertainty measures, σ ct , are used in constructing cross-industry exposures to aggregate
uncertainty shocks, | β c,weighted
                        j          | ·∆σ ct .
    We do this in two steps. First, we adjust the factor sensitivities estimated in (14) for their
statistical significance. In particular, within each industry we construct significance-weighted
sensitivities β c,weighted
                j          = ω cj · β cj , where the first term is a sensitivity weight constructed from
the ratio of the absolute value of the t-statistic of each instrument’s sensitivity to the sum
                                                                                         abs(tcj )
of all t-statistics in absolute value of instruments within the industry, ω cj =        c             . Thus,
                                                                                          abs(tcj )
                                                                                        P

we adjust the sensitivities within each industry by their statistical power in (14). However,
in constructing the weights ω cj we first set to zero each individual t-statistic for which the
corresponding sensitivity is statistically insignificant at the 10% level. This is done both
before taking the absolute value of each t-statistic and the sum of their absolute values. Thus,
the significance-weighted sensitivities β c,weighted
                                          j          can be zero for certain industries. However,
recalling that the raw sensitivities β cj in (14) are estimated in rolling windows, the significance-
weighted sensitivities β c,weighted
                         j          need not be zero at every moment in time. Indeed, our sample
shows that 3-SIC industries fluctuate both in their extensive and intensive exposure to the each
of our 10 instruments over time. Our weighting scheme captures and exploits both margins.
    Second, we construct 10 composite terms | β c,weighted
                                                j          | ·∆σ ct , which we refer to as the
industry-by-year exposure for uncertainty shocks, where the first term is the absolute value



                                                      22
of the significance-weighted sensitivity explained above and ∆σ ct is the annual growth in the
aggregate implied volatility of the instrument. Thus, our instrumental variables estimation
uses 10 instruments, the oil exposure term, the seven currencies exposure terms, the 10-
year treasury exposure term, and the policy-uncertainty exposure term. These 10 composite
industry-by-year exposure for uncertainty shocks are the instruments used in our 2SLS
regressions that instrument for firm-level uncertainty shocks.
    Finally, to disentangle second moment effects from first moment effects of our 10
instruments, we also include as controls in the second stage of the 2SLS regressions the
exposure to the returns of each instrument (i.e., first moment controls). That is, in the
regressions we also include 10 first moment composite terms β c,weighted
                                                              j          · rtc .19 Thus, our
empirical examination focuses on the effects of uncertainty shocks above and beyond first
moment effects. At the firm-level, our main set of controls further includes each individual
firms’ measure of first moment effects, i.e., the CRSP stock return of the firm, ri,t (which
accounts for discount rate channel effects).



5       Empirical findings

We start by examining how volatility shocks relate to firm-level capital investment rates,
followed by other real outcomes -intangible capital investment, employment, and cost of goods
sold- and then by financial variables -debt, payout, and cash holdings.


5.1     Investment results

Table 3 examines how uncertainty influences future capital investment rates. Column 1
presents the univariate Ordinary Least Squares regression results of investment rate on lagged
annual realized stock return volatility shocks. We observe highly statistically significant
coefficients (t-stat of 20.075) on return volatility, showing that firms tend to invest more when
   19
      For economic policy uncertainty we measure rtc as growth from one year to the next in the 4-quarter
average of the level of government expenditure as a share of GDP. For currencies, oil, and treasuries returns
rtc are the 252-day average of daily returns.

                                                     23
their firm-specific uncertainty is low. Column 4 presents the corresponding OLS univariate
regression results of investment rate on lagged firm-level implied volatility shocks (from
OptionMetrics). The sign of the coefficient is consistent with realized volatility shocks, but
the size is more than twice as large, potentially because implied volatility is a better measure
of uncertainty.20
       One obvious concern with these OLS regressions is endogeneity - for example, changes in
firms’ investment plans could change stock-prices. Using lagged uncertainty mitigates some
of these concerns, but given stock prices are forward looking movements in returns still suffer
from endogeneity concerns. Therefore. we try to address endogeneity concerns with our
instrumentation strategy. In particular, columns 2 and 3 instrument lagged realized volatility
shocks using the full set of 10 instruments while columns 5 and 6 instrument lagged implied
volatility shocks. Columns 2 and 5 are univariate while 3 and 6 are multivariate with a full set
of controls. In all cases we find that uncertainty shocks lead to significant drops in firm-level
investment.
       The point estimates of the coefficients on instrumented uncertainty shocks with the full
set of controls are roughly of comparable magnitude to the univariate OLS point estimates
(e.g., columns 3 and 1). Our full set of lagged controls includes Tobin’s Q, log sales and stock-
returns to control for firm moment shocks, as well as book leverage, profitability (return on
assets) and tangibility to control for financial conditions. Our multivariate specifications also
include firm and time fixed effects and cluster standard errors at the 3-SIC industry (which
is the same level at which our instrumentation strategy estimates factor exposures). In all
instrumented cases, rises in uncertainty is a strong predictor of future reductions in capital
investment rates.
       In terms of magnitudes the results imply that a two-standard deviation increase in realized
volatility (see the descriptive statistics in Table A2) would reduce investment by between 4%
to 6% (using the results from our preferred multivariate specifications in column (3) and (6)).
  20
    We reestimate both specifications in columns (1) and (4) on a common sample of 17,391 observations in
table (A5) and find the realized and implied volatility coefficients are -0.033 and -0.079.



                                                   24
This is moderate in comparison to firm-level investment fluctuations which have a standard
deviation of 24.7%, but is large when considering that annual investment rates drop between
2% to 6% during recessions as show in Figure 1.


5.1.1   First stage results

The first stage instrumental investment results are shown in Table 4. Columns (1) and (2)
report the first stages for the univariate IV columns (2) and (4) from table 3. We see that
the F-statistics indicate a well identified first stage with respective values of 157.6 and 78.37
for the Cragg-Donald (CD) F-Statistics (robust standard-errors), and 18.58 and 14.96 for the
Kleibergen-Paap (KP) F statistic (SIC-3 digit clustering). We also find the Hansen over-
identifying test does not reject the validity of our instruments with p-values of 0.349 and
0.625. As another check of our identification strategy we would like to see that each of our
instruments is individually positively, and generally significantly correlated with uncertainty
shocks. Indeed, we see in columns (1) and (2) that all 10 instruments are positive and mostly
significant in the first stage.
   We repeat the above examination but adding our full set of controls, where columns (3)
and (4) in Table 4 present the first stage for the multivariate IV regressions of columns (3)
and (6) from table 3. Even when we add our full set of controls we see a well satisfied
relevance condition, with CD F-statistics of 171.1 and 58.59, and KP F-statistics of 17.57 and
11.14, respectively, and non-rejected Sargan-Hansen validity test p-values of 0.955 and 0.950.
Moreover, each instrument remains individually positively correlated with uncertainty shocks.


5.2     Intangible capital, employment, and cost of goods sold

Table 5 examines the predictive and causal implications of uncertainty shocks on the growth
of other real outcomes. In particular, Panel A examines investment in intangible capital (as
measured by expenditure on general and administration and R&D, which extends the approach
of Eisfeldt and Papanikolaou (2013)), Panel B examines employment, and Panel C examines


                                               25
the cost of goods sold. In each panel we present the same 6 specification results presented
for investment in Table 3. but to preserve space we drop the point coefficient estimates on
controls and keep only the estimates on lagged uncertainty shocks.
   The three panels show that realized and implied volatility shocks are negatively related to
future changes in intangible capital investment, employment, and cost of goods sold. As with
investment, these regressions show a strong first-stage with 3-SIC clustering KP F-statistics
in the range of 9.62 to 17.46 in all multivariate specifications that include a full set of controls,
columns (3) and (6). In our preferred specification of column (3), which instruments realized
lagged uncertainty shocks, both intangible capital investment and cost of good sold drop upon
higher realized uncertainty (significant at the 5 and 1 percent, respectively), while the response
of employment is negative but not statistically significant.
   Overall, the three panels confirm the robustness of the causal impact of uncertainty shocks
on real firm activity, even in the presence of extensive first-moment and financial condition
controls, plus an extensive instrumentation strategy for uncertainty shocks.


5.3    Financial variables

Table 6 examines how firm uncertainty shocks affect future changes in financial variables.
In particular, Panel A examines total debt, Panel B dividend payout, and Panel C cash
holdings. Panel A indicates that increases in uncertainty reduce the willingness of firm’s to
increases their overall debt. The correlations are strong and significant in both the OLS and
instrumental variable regressions. Panel B indicates that firm’s take a more cautious financial
approach toward corporate payout. Consistent with a precautionary savings motive, rises in
firm uncertainty causes a large reduction in cash dividend payout. Similarly, Panel C further
evidences a precautionary savings channel as cash holdings increase upon large uncertainty
shocks. In particular, firms accumulate cash reserves and short-term liquid instruments
following uncertainty rises.
   For the preferred specifications in columns (3) and (6) all three panel show highly significant


                                                 26
point estimates (at the 5% and 1%), strong first stage F-statistics (all KP F-statistics above
11.1), and non-rejections on the Sargan-Hansen over-identifying test. This highlights that our
instrumental strategy based on exchange rate and factor price volatility works well not only
for real outcomes but also for financial.


5.4       Instrument and credit supply robustness

In Appendix Table A3 we investigate the main multivariate investment results dropping each
instrument one-by-one in columns (2) to (9) to show our results are not being driven by
any particular instrument (noting in column (10) we drop the oil and treasury instruments
together to allow us to extend our sample size to 42,388)21 . As we see across the columns the
first stage results for investment are impressively robust - the tougher KP F-test test is in
the range of 12.09 to 19.84 in all specifications (the CD F–test is always above 99), and the
Hansen over-identifying test does not reject in any specification with p-values of 0.9 or above.
Moreover, all real and financial variables examined in baseline column (1) are robust. Taken
together, the results across all columns indicate that our identification results are not driven
by one particular instrument, but instead are driven by the combined identification of energy,
exchange rate, policy, and treasury uncertainty driving firm-level uncertainty fluctuations and
firm decisions. This suggests that our identification strategy will likely be broadly useful for
a wide-range of models of the causal impact of uncertainty on firm behavior.
       In Appendix Table A4 we investigate the robustness of the results to both adjusting
volatility shocks by firm leverage and including controls for financial constraints. In columns
(1) and (1A) we regress all main real and financial outcomes on lagged leverage-adjusted
realized and implied volatility shocks, respectively. Here we adjust uncertainty effects by
                                                                            E
                                                                          i,t
multiplying either volatility by firm’s book leverage, i.e., σ i,t · Ei,t +D  i,t
                                                                                  where E is book equity
(CEQ in Compustat) and D is total debt. The results are robust to these levered-volatility
measures. Moreover, one concern could be that uncertainty reduces financial supply - for
  21
    Oil and 10-year treasury daily implied volatility data starts in March 2003, whereas implied volatility data
on the Euro-USD bilateral exchange rate starts in 1999 and policy in 1985.


                                                      27
example, banks are unwilling to lend in periods of high uncertainty - which causes the results
we observe. To try to address this we include a variety of different controls for firms financial
conditions and show our baseline results are robust to this. In particular for both the realized
and implied volatility specifications we include controls for firm: CAPM-beta (defined as the
covariance of the firms daily returns with the market returns in the past year, scaled by the
variance of the market) in columns 2 and 2A, a broad set of firm financial constraint controls
in columns 3 and 3A - which include the lags for the Whited and Wu (2006) index, size and age
(SA) index of Hadlock and Pierce (2010), the Kaplan and Zingales (1997) index, reciprocal of
total assets, reciprocal of employees, and reciprocal of age -where age is the number of years
since firm incorporation-, the firms long-term credit rating from S&P in columns 4 and 4A
(which consist of a full set of dummies based on every possible credit rating category given
to firms by S&P on long-term debt, where the omitted dummy is for no credit ratings), and
all of the previous measures combined in columns 5 and 5A. In summary, as we can see from
Table A4 including these financial supply variables does not notably change our results. So
while these are not perfect controls for financial conditions, the robustness of our results to
their inclusion helps address concerns that financial supply conditions are the main driver of
our results.
   In Appendix Table A5 we re-examine our main investment Table 3 but holding the sample
of firm-time observations to be the same across specifications (1) to (6). In particular, our
sample is constrained by the availability of OptionMetrics data on firm-level implied volatility,
which gives a total of 17,391 observations across all columns. Compared to the main Table 3
the point estimates on the coefficients are largely comparable in both magnitude and statistical
significance. Therefore, differences in point estimates across specifications (2SLS vs OLS,
univariate vs multivariate, and realized vs implied volatility shocks) are primarily due to the
underlying specifications themselves and not due to differences in sample size.
   Finally, in Appendix Table A6 we further present dividend payout results when defined as
                                   P ayouti,t
a ratio of lagged total assets (    ATi,t−1
                                              ).   The causal effects of uncertainty shocks are robust to



                                                        28
using this alternative definition of dividend payout, which complements the dividend growth
results presented in Panel B of Table 6.


5.5      The finance uncertainty multiplier

Finally, Table 7 shows the results from running a series of finance-uncertainty interactions
on the data during the core Jan. 2008-Dec. 2009 period of the financial crisis. By running
double and triple interaction of uncertainty with financing frictions we attempt to tease out the
finance-uncertainty multiplier effects examined in the model of section 2. In particular, Table
7 examines the impact of realized volatility shocks on investment for financially constrained
and unconstrained firms during financial crisis and non-crisis years. We do this by running
the following specification and subsets of it:


                               Ii,t /Ki,t−1 = β 0 + β 1 ∆σ i,t−1 + β 2 Dcrisis year,t

        +β 3 Dcrisis year,t · ∆σ i,t−1 + β 4 Df in.constrained,i,t−1 + β 5 Df in.constrained,i,t−1 · ∆σ i,t−1

      +β 6 Dcrisis year,t · Df in.constrained,i,t−1 + β 7 Dcrisis year,t · Df in.constrained,i,t−1 · ∆σ i,t−1   (16)


where ∆σ i,t−1 is firm i0 s growth of realized annual vol from year t − 2 to t − 1, Dcrisis year,t is
a dummy that takes value of 1 for all firm fiscal-year observations of investment rate ending
in calendar years 2008 and 2009, i.e., core years of the financial crisis which comprise the
core months of the great recession in which firms would have observed at least 6 months
of heightened financial frictions in their annual accounting reports, zero otherwise, and
Df in.constrained,i,t−1 is a dummy that takes value of 1 for firms classified as financially constrained
(e.g., according to Whited-Wu index) in year t−1, zero otherwise. The coefficient β 7 indicates
whether the effect of uncertainty on investment is different for financially constrained firms
during crisis years relative to unconstrained firms.22
  22
     There is a large literature on measuring firm-level financial constraints. Any proxies are usually subject
to critiques on whether they truly capture constraints or just noise. We employ a total of 6 different proxies
to take rough cuts to our Compustat data. We thank Toni Whited for suggestions on this front, e.g., adding
the SA index.


                                                          29
    Column (1) presents our baseline 2SLS multivariate specification with full set of controls
presented in Table 3 column (3). Column (2) interacts past uncertainty shocks with the
contemporaneous crisis dummy, Dcrisis year,t . The regression indicates that the effects of
uncertainty shocks on investment are much larger in the period of high financing frictions
in the core crisis years of the great recession, as seen in the highly significant interaction
term Dcrisis year,t · ∆σ i,t−1 . This is consistent with the main thesis in this paper that financial
constraints substantially amplify the impact of uncertainty shocks.
    To disentangle and further understand these financing frictions vs uncertainty effects,
columns (3) to (8) run the full difference-in-difference-in-difference specification in 16 , where
we employ a total of 6 proxies for financing frictions to classify firms into financially constrained
and unconstrained groups. For example, in column (4) using each firm’s financial constraint
Whited-Wu index at every fiscal year t−1 we classify firms into constrained and unconstrained
groups using the 40 and 60 percentile cutoffs obtained from the cross-sectional fiscal-year
distribution of the given index. We consider a firm constrained if its t − 1 index value is equal
to or greater than the 60 percentile and unconstrained if equal to or less than the 40 percentile.
We exclude firm-time observations in the middle 50+/-10 percentiles to increase precision in
the classification of firms.23 We do this in all but the S&P credit-rating financial constraint
measure, column (3). Here we follow Duchin, Ozbas, and Sensoy (2010) and consider a firm
constrained if it has positive debt and no bond rating and unconstrained otherwise (which
includes firms with zero debt and no debt rating).24
    In sum the 6 measures of financial constraints are constructed using S&P ratings column
(3), Whited-Wu index column (4), reciprocal of employees column (5), reciprocal of total
assets column (6), reciprocal of age column (7) in which age is defined as the number of
years since firm incorporation, and the SA index based on size and age of Hadlock and Pierce
   23
      Our inferences are similar if we expand or reduce the window of observations dropped in the middle: 50+/-
15 and/or 50+/-5 percentiles, i.e., comparing top vs bottom 30% and/or 45% of firms. Moreover, results are
similar if we classify firms as ex-ante financially constrained or unconstrained using two-year past indexes of
financial constraints.
   24
      For ratings data we use Compustat-Capital IQ’s ratings data from WRDS, where ratings dummies are
based on variable SPLTICRM (S&P Domestic Long-Term Issuer Credit Rating).



                                                      30
(2010) column (8). In all specifications we include both firm and calendar-year fixed effects,
and cluster standard errors at the 3 digit SIC industry. All specifications include full set of
controls of baseline specification column (1).
   Using the Whited-Wu index column (4) to classify firms, the results indicate that
investment rates drop upon larger uncertainty shocks (negative and significant β 1 coefficient
on uncertainty shock ∆σ i,t−1 , at the 5%), the drop is more pronounced during the core crisis
years of 2008 and 2009 (negative and significant β 3 coefficient on the double interaction term
Dcrisis year,t · ∆σ i,t−1 , at the 1%), and the negative real effect on investment is amplified for ex-
ante financially constrained firms during the core crisis years (as determined by the negative
and significant β 7 coefficient on the triple interaction term Dcrisis year,t · Df in.constrained,i,t−1 ·
∆σ i,t−1 , at the 5%).
   Using other measures of financial constraints in columns (3) to (8) give similar inferences:
uncertainty matters (causally), it matters even more during periods of financial constraints,
and it matters most for the most ex-ante constrained firms. Hence, overall Table 7 provides
important empirical evidence in support of the testable predictions of the model of section 2
for an interactive effect of financial constraints and uncertainty in deterring firm investment
activities during the 2008-2009 period of the financial crisis.
   To show this graphically in the raw data Figure 7 plots investment rates for financially
constrained and unconstrained firms from 2003 to 2013. We normalize the investment rates
of both groups of firms to their respective values of investment rates in 2006. Financial
constraints are defined as a firm having short or long-term debt but no public bond rating
(see, e.g., Faulkender and Petersen (2006) and Duchin, Ozbas, and Sensoy (2010)). Volatility is
the annual realized stock return volatility of all firms in the sample. It is clear that constrained
and unconstrained firms’ investment rates track each other closely until the Great Recession,
at which point the constrained firms’ investment drop substantially more than unconstrained
firms. As uncertainty recedes post 2012 the gaps start to recede again as the investment rates
begin to converge. There are of course many ways to explain this difference (e.g. small vs



                                                   31
large firms), but it is at least consistent with the model of uncertainty shocks mattering more
for more financially constrained firms.
    As a robustness Appendix Table A7 repeats the examination done in Table 7, but using
option-implied firm-level uncertainty shocks instead of realized uncertainty shocks.        The
inferences on the economic and financial importance of uncertainty shocks are robust to these
forward-looking uncertainty data.



6     Conclusion

This paper studies the impact of uncertainty shocks on firms’ real and financial activity both
theoretically and empirically. We build a dynamic model which adds two key components:
first, real and financial frictions, and second, uncertainty and financial shocks. This delivers
three key insights. First, combining real and financial frictions roughly doubles the impact
of uncertainty shocks - this is the finance uncertainty multiplier. Second, combining an
uncertainty shock with a financial shock in this model increases the impact by about another
two thirds, since these shocks have an almost additive effect. Since uncertainty and financial
shocks are highly collinear (e.g. Stock and Watson 2012) this is important for modelling their
impacts. Finally, in this model uncertainty shocks not only reduce investment and hiring, but
also raise firms cash holding, while cutting equity payouts. Collectively, these predictions of a
large impact of uncertainty shocks on real and financial variables matches the evidence from
the recent financial crisis.
    We then use empirical data on U.S. listed firms to test the model using a novel
instrumentation strategy. Consistent with the testable implications, uncertainty shocks reduce
firm investment (tangible and intangible) and employment on the real side, and increase cash
holdings, while reducing payouts and debt on the financial side.
    In all, our theoretical and empirical analyses show that real and financial frictions are
quantitatively crucial to explain the full impact of uncertainty shocks on real and financial
activity.

                                               32
References
Abel, A., and J. Eberly (1996): “Optimal Investment With Costly Reversibility,” Review
  of Economic Studies, 63, 581–593.
Alessandri, P., and H. Mumtaz (2016): “Financial regimes and uncertainty shocks,”
  QMW mimeo.
Altinkilic, O., and R. S. Hansen (2000): “Are There Economies of Scale in Underwriting
  Fees? Evidence of Rising External Financing Costs,” Review of Financial Studies, 13, 191–
  218.
Arellano, C., Y. Bai, and P. J. Kehoe (2016): “Financial Frictions and Fluctuations
  in Volatility,” Working Paper.
Asquith, P., and D. Mullins (1986): “Equity issues and offering dilution,” Journal of
  Financial Economics, 15, 61–89.
Bachmann, R., and C. Bayer (2013): “Wait-and-See Business Cycles?,” Journal of
  Monetary Economics, 60(6), 704–719.
Bachmann, R., and G. Moscarini (2012): “Business Cycles and Endogenous
  Uncertainty,” Working Paper, University of Notre Dame and Yale University.
Baker, S., N. Bloom, and S. Davis (2016): “Measuring Economic Policy Uncertainty,”
  Forthcoming Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Bansal, R., and A. Yaron (2004): “Risks for the long run: A potential resolution of asset
  pricing puzzles.,” Journal of Finance, 59, 1481–1509.
Barro, R. (2006): “Rare disasters and asset markets in the twentieth century,” Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 121(3), 823–866.
Basu, S., and B. Bundick (2017): “Uncertainty Shocks in a Model of Effective Demand,”
  NBER Working Paper No. 18420.
Berger, D., I. Dew-Becker, and S. Giglio (2016): “Contractionary volatility or volatile
  contractions?,” Working paper, Northwestern University.
Bernanke, B., and M. Gertler (1989): “Agency costs, net worth, and business
  fluctuations,” American Economic Review, 79(1), 14–31.
Bernanke, B. S. (1983): “Irreversibility, Uncertainty, and Cyclical Investment,” Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 98(1), 85–106.
Bertola, G., and R. J. Caballero (1990): “Kinked Adjustment Costs and Aggregate
  Dynamics,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 5, 237–296.
Bigio, S. (2015): “Endogenous liquidity and the business cycle,” American Economic Review,
  105(6), 1883–1927.
Bloom, N. (2009): “The Impact of Uncertainty Shocks,” Econometrica, 77, 623–685.
Bloom, N., M. Floetotto, N. Jaimovich, I. Saporta-Eksten, and S. Terry
  (2016): “Really uncertain business cycles,” National Bureau of Economic Research, Stanford
  University.
Bolton, P., H. Chen, and N. Wang (2011): “A unified theory of Tobin’s q, corporate
  investment, financing, and risk management,” Journal of Finance, 66, 1545–1578.
Bolton, P., H. Chen, and N. Wang (2013): “Market timing, investmentand risk
  management,” Journal of Financial Economics, 109, 40–62.
Caballero, R., E. Engel, and J. Haltiwanger (1995): “Plant-level adjustment and
  aggregate investment dynamics,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2, 1–54.


                                            33
Carhart, M. (1997): “On Persistence in Mutual Fund Performance,” Journal of Finance,
  52,1, 57–82.
Carlstrom, C. T., and T. S. Fuerst (1997): “Agency costs, net worth, and business
  fluctuations: A computable general equilibrium analysis,” American Economic Review,
  87(5), 893–910.
Chen, G. (2016): “Corporate Savings, Financingand Investment with Aggregate Uncertainty
  Shocks,” Working Paper, Nanyang Technological University.
Chen, H., H. Wang, and H. Zhou (2014): “Stock Return Volatility and Capital Structure
  Decisions,” PBCSF-NIFR, Tsinghua University, 13,04.
Choe, H., R. Masulis, , and V. Nanda (1993): “Common Stock Offerings across the
  Business Cycle: Theory and Evidence,” Journal of Empirical Finance, 1, 3–31.
Christiano, L. J., R. Motto, and M. Rostagno (2014): “Risk Shocks,” American
  Economic Review, 104, 27–65.
Cooley, T. F., and V. Quadrini (2001): “Financial markets and firm dynamics,”
  American Economic Review, 91, 1286–1310.
Cooper, R., and J. Haltiwanger (2006): “On the nature of capital adjustment costs,”
  Review of Economic Studies, 73, 611–633.
Davis, S. J., and J. Haltiwanger (1992): “Gross Job Creation, Gross Job Destruction,
  and Employment Reallocation,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, MIT Press, 107,3,
  819–863.
DeAngelo, H., L. DeAngelo, and T. M. Whited (2011): “Capital structure dynamics
  and transitory debt,” Journal of Financial Economics, 99, 235–261.
Dixit, A. K., and R. S. Pindyck (1994): Investment under Uncertainty. Princeton:
  Princeton University Press, Princeton, N.J.
Duchin, R., O. Ozbas, and B. Sensoy (2010): “Costly external finance, corporate
  investmentand the subprime mortgage credit crisis,” Journal of Financial Economics, 97,
  418–435.
Eisfeldt, A. (2004): “Endogenous liquidity in asset markets,” Journal of Finance, 59(1),
  1–30.
Eisfeldt, A., and T. Muir (2016): “Aggregate External Financing and Savings Waves,”
  Journal of Monetary Economics, 84, 116–133.
Erel, I., B. Julio, W. Kim, and M. Weisbach (2012): “Macroeconomic Conditions and
  Capital Raising,” Review of Financial Studies, 25, 341–376.
Falgelbaum, P., E. Schaal, and M. Taschereau-Dumouchel (2016): “Uncertainty
  Traps,” Forthcoming, Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Faulkender, M., and M. Petersen (2006): “Does the source of capital affect capital
  structure?,” Review of Financial Studies, 19, 45–79.
Fernandez-Villaverde, J., P. Guerron-Quintana, K. Kuester, and J. Rubio-
  Ramirez (2015): “Fiscal Volatility Shocks and Economic Activity,” American Economic
  Review, 105(11), 33523384.
Fernandez-Villaverde, J., P. G. Quintana, J. F. Rubio-Ramirez, and M. Uribe
  (2011): “Risk Matters: The Real Effects of Volatility Shocks,” American Economic Review,
  101,6, 2530–61.
Gilchrist, S., J. Sim, and E. Zakrajsek (2014): “Uncertainty, Financial Frictions and
  Investment Dynamics,” Boston University mimeo.


                                           34
Gomes, J. (2001): “Financing investment,” American Economic Review, 65(2), 467–494.
Gourio, F. (2012): “Disaster Risk and Business Cycles,” American Economic Review,
  102(6), 2734–2766.
Graham, J. (2000): “How big are the tax benefits of debt?,” Journal of Finance, 55(5),
  1901–1941.
Guiso, L., and G. Parigi (1999): “Investment and Demand Uncertainty,” Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, 114, 185–227.
Hadlock, C. J., and J. R. Pierce (2010): “New Evidence on Measuring Financial
  Constraints: Moving Beyond the KZ Index,” The Review of Financial Studies, 23(5), 1909–
  1940.
Handley, K., and N. Limao (2012): “Trade and Investment under Policy Uncertainty:
  Theory and Firm Evidence,” NBER Working Paper 17790.
Hennessy, C. A., A. Levy, and T. M. Whited (2007): “Testing Q theory with financing
  frictions,” Journal of Financial Economics, 83(3), 691–717.
Hennessy, C. A., and T. M. Whited (2005): “Debt Dynamics,” Journal of Finance, 60,
  1129–1165.
          (2007): “How costly is external financing? Evidence from a structural estimation,”
  Journal of Finance, 62, 1705–1745.
Ilut, C., and M. Schneider (2014): “Ambiguous Business Cycles,” American Economic
  Review, 104(8), 2368–99.
Jermann, U., and V. Quadrini (2012): “Macroeconomic Effects of Financial Shocks,”
  American Economic Review, 102(1), 238–71.
Kahle, K., and R. Stulz (2013): “Access to Capital, Investment, and the Financial Crisis,”
  Journal of Financial Economics, 110(2), 280–299.
Kaplan, S., and L. Zingales (1997): “Do investment cash-flow sensitivities provide useful
  measures of financing constraints?,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112, 169–215.
Khan, A., and J. Thomas (2008): “Idiosyncratic Shocks and the Role of Nonconvexities
  in Plant and Aggregate Investment Dynamics,” Econometrica, 76,2, 395–436.
Khan, A., and J. K. Thomas (2013): “Credit shocks and aggregate fluctuations in an
  economy with production heterogeneity,” The Review of Financial Studies, 121(6), 1055–
  1107.
King, R., and S. Rebelo (1999): Handbook of Macroeconomics. North-Holland,
  Amsterdam, Netherlands, Resuscitating real business cycles.
Krusell, P., and A. A. Smith (1998): “Income and Wealth Heterogeneity in the
  Macroeconomy,” Journal of Political Economy, 106(5), 867–896.
Kurlat, P. (2013): “Lemons markets and the transmission of aggregate shocks,” American
  Economic Review, 103(4), 1463–1489.
Leahy, J. V., and T. Whited (1996): “The Effect of Uncertainty on Investment: Some
  Stylized Facts,” Journal of Money, Creditand Banking, 28, 64–83.
Leary, M. T., and M. R. Roberts (2014): “Do Peer Firms Affect Corporate Financial
  Policy?,” Journal of Finance, 69(1), 139–178.
Lee, G., and R. W. Masulis (2009): “Seasoned equity offerings: Quality of accounting
  information and expected flotation costs,” Journal of Financial Economics, 92(3), 443–469.
Lhuissier, S., and F. Tripier (2016): “Do uncertainty shocks always matter for business
  cycles?,” CEPII working paper.


                                            35
Moyen, N. (2004): “Investment-cash flow sensitivities: Constrained versus unconstrained
  firms,” Journal of Finance, 59, 2061–2092.
Nieuwerburgh, S. V., and L. Veldkamp (2006): “Learning Asymmetries in Real
  Business Cycles,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 53, 753–772.
Orlik, A., and L. Veldkamp (2015): “Understanding Uncertainty Shocks and the Role of
  the Black Swan,” Working paper, NYU.
Pastor, L., and R. Stambaugh (2003): “Liquidity Risk and Expected Stock Returns,”
  Journal of Political Economy, 111, 642–685.
Pastor, L., and P. Veronesi (2012): “Uncertainty about Government Policy and Stock
  Prices,” Journal of Finance, 67, 1219–1264.
Rajan, R. G., and L. Zingales (1995): “What do we know about capital structure? Some
  evidence from international data,” Journal of Finance, 50, 1421–1460.
Ramey, V., and G. Ramey (1995): “Cross-country evidence on the link between volatility
  and growth,” American Economic Review, 85,5, 1138–51.
Rampini, A., and S. Viswanathan (2013): “Collateral and capital structure,” Journal of
  Financial Economics, 109, 466–492.
Riddick, L. A., and T. M. Whited (2009): “The corporate propensity to save,” Journal
  of Finance, 64, 1729–1766.
Rietz, T. (1988): “The equity premium: a solution,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 22(1),
  117131.
Romer, C. (1990): “The Great Crash and the Onset of the Great Depression,” Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 105(3), 597–624.
Segal, G., I. Shaliastovich, and A. Yaron (2015): “Good and Bad Uncertainty:
  Macroeconomic and Financial Market Implications,” Journal of Financial Economics, 117,
  369–397.
Stein, L., and E. Stone (2013): “The effect of uncertainty on investment, hiring and RD:
  causal evidence from equity options,” Arizona State University mimeo.
Stock, J., and M. Watson (2012): “Disentangling the channels of the 2007-09 recession,”
  Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1, 81–135.
Welch, I. (2004): “Capital Structure and Stock Returns,” Journal of Political Economy,
  112, 106–131.
Whited, T., and G. Wu (2006): “Financial constraints risk,” Review of Financial Studies,
  19, 531–559.




                                           36
                                                                  Table 1
                                                Parameter values under benchmark calibration
                           Description                          Notation    Value                                   Justification
      Technology
      Subjective discount factor                                       β    0.988    Long-run average of U.S. firm-level discount rate
      Return on saving                                                rn     0.01    80% of the risk-free rate (the cash to asset ratio for cash holding firms)
      Share on capital                                                 α     0.33    Capital share in output is one-third, labor share is two-thirds
      Markup                                                            ε       4    33% markup. With constant returns to scale yields a + b = 0.75
      Wage                                                             w̄       1    Wage rate normalized to 1
      Rate of depreciation for capital                                  δ    0.03    Capital depreciation rate assumed 3% per quarter
      Fixed cost of investment                                        ck     0.01    1% of quarterly revenue (Also tried 2% & 4%)
      Fixed operating cost                                            F       0.2    Firms’ average SG&A to sales ratio

      Uncertainty shock (2 state Markov)




37
      Conditional volatility of productivity                         σL      0.051   Baseline uncertainty (Bloom et al 2016)
      Conditional volatility in high uncertainty state               σH      0.209   Uncertainty shocks 4.1*baseline uncertainty (Bloom et al 2016)
      Transition probability low to high uncertainty               π σL,H   2.60%    Uncertainty shocks expected every 9.6 years (Bloom et al 2016)
      Transition probability remaining in high uncertainty         π σH,H     94%    Quarterly probability of remaining in high uncertainty (Bloom et al 2016)
      Persistence of logged idiosyncratic productivity                 ρz     0.95   Quarterly persistence of idiosyncratic productivity (Khan & Thomas 2008)

      Stochastic financing cost (2 state Markov)
      Low external financing cost state                              ηL      0.005   Low cost .5% of output (Altinkilic and Hansen 2000)
      High external financing cost state                             ηH       0.05   High cost 5% of output (Altinkilic & Hansen 2000). Robust 2.5%,10%
      Transition probability low to high financing cost state      π ηL,H   2.60%    Same as uncertainty shock (Also tried 5%)
      Transition prob. remaining in high financing cost state      π ηH,H     94%    Same as uncertainty shock (Also tried 50%)
      Impact of uncertainty on financial cost                           λ     0.04   Correlation between the Baa-Aaa spread and VIX


     This table presents the predetermined and the calibrated parameter values of the benchmark model.
                                       Table 2
          Coefficient on changes in volatility for real and financial variables

                                                               Real              Financial

                                                         I/K       ∆Emp          ∆Cash Div/K
            A: Data
            ∆Volatility                                  -0.089    -0.074        0.227      -0.019
            B: Real frictions
            ∆Volatility                                  -0.042    -0.014        na         -0.007
            C: Financial frictions
            ∆Volatility                                  -0.021    -0.004        1.032      -0.036
            D: Real+financial frictions
            ∆Volatility                                  -0.080    -0.028        0.487      -0.012
            E: No frictions
            ∆Volatility                                  0.003     0.006         na         -0.021

Row (A) Data reports the results for investment rate, employment growth, cash growth, and equity payout
to assets ratio from columns (2) of tables (3), (5), (6), (A6) respectively. Rows (B) to (E) reports the model
counterparts from regressions using simulation data on volatility (σ i,t ) growth. The reported statistics in the
model are from simulated data with 3000 firms and 200 quarterly observations. I/K is the investment rate,
∆Emp is the employment growth, ∆Cash is the cash growth rate, and Div/K the dividend scaled by capital
in the model and cash dividend plus repurchase scaled by total assets in the data. For comparability all the
regressions (in the data and model) include firm and time fixed effects and all are significant at the 1% level
with firm-clustered standard errors. The only difference is employment is annual in the real data (since no
quarterly real employment data is available).




                                                       38
                                                 Table 3
                                             Investment rate
                             (1)       (2)                 (3)          (4)       (5)       (6)
 Investment ratei,t          OLS       IV                  IV           OLS       IV        IV
                             Realized Realized             Realized     Implied   Implied   Implied
 ∆Volatilityi,t−1            -0.032*** -0.089***           -0.030***    -0.090*** -0.225*** -0.078**
                             (-20.075) (-3.923)            (-2.948)     (-10.449) (-4.235)  (-2.454)
 Book Leveragei,t−1                                        -0.050***                        -0.037***
                                                           (-8.173)                         (-5.583)
 Stock Returni,t−1                                         0.008***                         0.005*
                                                           (2.953)                          (1.808)
 Log Salesi,t−1                                            -0.023***                        -0.022***
                                                           (-7.330)                         (-5.290)
 Return on Assetsi,t−1                                     0.142***                         0.132***
                                                           (5.558)                          (3.910)
 Tangibilityi,t−1                                          -0.115***                        -0.123***
                                                           (-5.801)                         (-3.355)
 Tobin’s Qi,t−1                                            0.049***                         0.054***
                                                           (9.892)                          (8.341)
 1st moment 10IVi,t−1        No            No              Yes          No        No        Yes
 Firm, time FE               Yes           Yes             Yes          Yes       Yes       Yes
 SE cluster(3SIC)            Yes           Yes             Yes          Yes       Yes       Yes

 Observations                124,206       28,419          28,132       26,030        17,572        17,391
 F 1st st. Cragg-D                         157.6           171.1                      78.37         58.59
 F 1st st. Kleib.-P                        18.58           17.57                      14.96         11.14
 p-val Sargan–H J                          0.349           0.955                      0.625         0.950

Table presents OLS and 2SLS annual regression results of firm-level investment rate on 1-year lagged changes
in firm-level volatility and lagged level of firm-level controls. Investment rate at fiscal year t is defined as
It /Kt−1 (capx/lagged net property plant & equipment from Compustat). Sample period is from 1963 to
2016. Specifications 1,2,4, and 5 are univariate, while 3 and 6 multivariate. Only 1 and 4 are OLS while all
others 2SLS. The latter instrument lagged changes in firm-level volatility with industry-level (3SIC) exposure
to 10 aggregate lagged uncertainty shocks. These include the lagged exposure to annual changes in expected
volatility of energy, currencies, and 10-year treasuries (as proxied by at-the-money forward-looking implied
volatilities of oil, 7 widely traded currencies, and TYVIX) and economic policy uncertainty from Baker, Bloom,
and Davis (2016). Annual realized volatility is the 12-month standard deviation of daily stock returns from
CRSP. Implied volatility is the annual average of daily (365-day) implied volatility of at-the-money-forward
call options from OptionMetrics. Regressors lagged by 1-year. Both firm and calendar-year fixed effects are
included. Standard errors are clustered at the 3-digit SIC industry. To tease out the impact of 2nd moment
uncertainty shocks we also include as controls the lagged exposure to changes in the return on each of the 10
aggregate instruments (i.e., 1st moment shocks). Data availability on implied volatility of treasuries and oil
restrict the start of the 2SLS sample to fiscal year 2006. Statistical significance: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.1, † p<0.15. t-statistics are in parentheses. See section 4 for data details.


                                                      39
                                            Table 4
                            Investment rate - 2SLS 1st stage results

       Specification:                         Univariate                             Multivariate
       Set-up: ∆Volatilityi,t−1         Realized     Implied                    Realized     Implied
       ∆Vol Exposure Cadi,t−1           3.643***     1.442***                   3.353***     1.234***
                                        (4.64)       (3.66)                     (4.54)       (3.35)
       ∆Vol Exposure Euroi,t−1          1.338***     0.643***                   1.211***     0.479***
                                        (4.34)       (3.57)                     (4.13)       (2.80)
       ∆Vol Exposure Jpyi,t−1           2.117***     0.244                      2.096***     0.298
                                        (3.53)       (0.55)                     (3.55)       (0.68)
       ∆Vol Exposure Audi,t−1           5.142***     1.769***                   5.395***     1.763***
                                        (7.44)       (5.64)                     (8.90)       (5.72)
       ∆Vol Exposure Seki,t−1           4.236***     1.277***                   4.914***     1.575***
                                        (7.56)       (3.57)                     (7.73)       (4.10)
       ∆Vol Exposure Chfi,t−1           2.046***     1.300***                   2.319***     1.360***
                                        (5.75)       (6.10)                     (5.90)       (5.44)
       ∆Vol Exposure Gbpi,t−1           2.971***     1.841***                   2.697***     1.655***
                                        (5.05)       (4.24)                     (5.05)       (4.51)
       ∆Vol Exposure Policyi,t−1        588.990*** 239.159*                     616.792*** 195.837*
                                        (3.02)       (1.94)                     (3.32)       (1.72)
       ∆Vol Expos.Treasuryi,t−1 ‡       3.116***     1.100***                   2.969***     0.811***
                                        (8.43)       (4.45)                     (8.31)       (4.10)
       ∆Vol Exposure Oili,t−1           3.132***     1.938***                   4.549***     1.796***
                                        (9.79)       (10.33)                    (5.90)       (6.06)
       Observations                     28,419       17,572                     28,132       17,391
       F-test 1st stage Cragg-Donald    157.6        78.37                      171.1        58.59
       F-test 1st stage Kleibergen-Paap 18.58        14.96                      17.57        11.14
       p-value Hansen-Sargan J          0.349        0.625                      0.955        0.950

Table presents the 2SLS first stage regression results of firm-level investment rate on 1-year lagged changes in
firm-level volatility and lagged level of firm-level controls. Columns 1 and 2 are the first stage results for the
univariate specifications (2) and (5) in Table 3, while columns 3 and 4 are the multivariate first stage results
of specifications (3) and (6). We instrument lagged changes in firm-level volatility with industry-level (3SIC)
exposure to 10 aggregate lagged uncertainty shocks. These include the lagged exposure to annual changes in
expected volatility of energy, currencies, and 10-year treasuries (as proxied by at-the-money forward-looking
implied volatilities of oil, 7 widely traded currencies, and TYVIX) and economic policy uncertainty from
Baker, Bloom, and Davis (2016). Annual realized volatility is the 12-month standard deviation of daily stock
returns from CRSP. Implied volatility is the annual average of daily (365-day) implied volatility of at-the-
money-forward call options from OptionMetrics. Regressors lagged by 1-year. Both firm and calendar-year
fixed effects are included. Standard errors are clustered at the 3-digit SIC industry. To tease out the impact
of 2nd moment uncertainty shocks we also include as controls the lagged exposure to changes in the return
on each of the 10 aggregate instruments (i.e., 1st moment shocks). Data availability on implied volatility of
treasuries and oil restrict the start of the 2SLS sample to fiscal year 2006. ‡ :The coefficients on treasuries are
scaled upward by a factor of 1000 for presentational purposes. Statistical significance: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05,
* p<0.1, † p<0.15. t-statistics are in parentheses. See section 4 for data details.
                                                        40
                                               Table 5
                                       Additional real quantities

                     (1)       (2)                       (3)           (4)            (5)           (6)
                     OLS       IV                        IV            OLS            IV            IV
                     Realized Realized                   Realized      Implied        Implied       Implied
  A: ∆Intangible Capital Investmenti,t
  ∆Volatilityi,t−1   -0.054*** -0.097***                 -0.036**      -0.137***      -0.182*** -0.044
                     (-11.075) (-3.868)                  (-1.976)      (-9.136)       (-2.556)  (-0.771)
  Observations       66,058    17,044                    16,914        16,181         10,933    10,841
  F 1st st. Cragg-D            106.6                     106.9                        39.95     35.72
  F 1st st. Kleib.-P           14.60                     15.50                        8.18      9.62
  p-val Sargan–H J             0.236                     0.295                        0.175     0.188
  B: ∆Employmenti,t
  ∆Volatilityi,t−1   -0.037*** -0.074***                 -0.011        -0.115*** -0.245***          -0.042
                     (-12.166) (-2.684)                  (-0.359)      (-10.744) (-3.353)           (-0.474)
  Observations       124,299   28,418                    28,120        26,093    17,567             17,380
  F 1st st. Cragg-D            157.8                     171.2                   78.52              58.57
  F 1st st. Kleib.-P           18.42                     17.46                   15.06              11.31
  p-val Sargan–H J             0.113                     0.506                   0.215              0.471
  C: ∆Cost of Goods Soldi,t
  ∆Volatilityi,t−1   -0.054*** -0.267**                  -0.147*** -0.206***          -0.823**      -0.361***
                     (-10.114) (-2.278)                  (-3.708)  (-6.009)           (-2.532)      (-3.158)
  Observations       125,526   28,471                    28,173    26,153             17,596        17,408
  F 1st st. Cragg-D            158.4                     171.8                        78.54         58.56
  F 1st st. Kleib.-P           18.43                     17.48                        14.96         11.16
  p-val Sargan–H J             0.143                     0.0296                       0.193         0.0345

This table reports regression results of annual changes in intangible capital investment (research and
development+selling, general and administrative expense from Compustat) (Panel A), changes in employment
(Panel B), and changes in cost of goods sold (Panel C), where growth rates defined as (xt − xt−1 )/(0.5 ∗ xt +
0.5 ∗ xt−1 ). Specifications 1 through 6 follow the setup, timing, and set of controls included in the investment
rate regression in Table 3. To preserve space we do not report the coefficients and t-statistics on controls.
The sample period is annual from 1963 to 2016. Specifications 1,2,4, and 5 are univariate, while 3 and
6 multivariate. Only 1 and 4 are OLS while all others 2SLS. We instrument lagged changes in firm-level
volatility with industry-level (3SIC) exposure to 10 aggregate lagged uncertainty shocks. These include the
lagged exposure to annual changes in expected volatility of energy, currencies, and 10-year treasuries (as
proxied by at-the-money forward-looking implied volatilities of oil, 7 widely traded currencies, and TYVIX)
and economic policy uncertainty from Baker, Bloom, and Davis (2016). Annual realized volatility is the 12-
month standard deviation of daily stock returns from CRSP. Implied volatility is the annual average of daily
(365-day) implied volatility of at-the-money-forward call options from OptionMetrics. Regressors lagged by
1-year. Both firm and calendar-year fixed effects are included. Standard errors are clustered at the 3-digit SIC
industry. To tease out the impact of 2nd moment uncertainty shocks we also include as controls the lagged
exposure to changes in the return on each of the 10 aggregate instruments (i.e., 1st moment shocks). Data
availability on implied volatility of treasuries and oil restrict the start of the 2SLS sample to fiscal year 2006.
Statistical significance: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1, † p<0.15. t-statistics are in parentheses. See section
4 for data details.
                                                        41
                                               Table 6
                                          Financial outcomes
                           (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)
                           OLS           IV            IV            OLS           IV            IV
                           Realized      Realized      Realized      Implied       Implied       Implied
  A: ∆Total Debti,t
  ∆Volatilityi,t−1   -0.079***           -0.275***     -0.168**      -0.202*** -0.776***         -0.616***
                     (-9.669)            (-3.609)      (-2.490)      (-6.794)  (-5.216)          (-3.764)
  Observations       124,631             28,298        28,116        25,978    17,473            17,369
  F 1st st. Cragg-D                      157.1         171.5                   77.26             58.32
  F 1st st. Kleib.-P                     18.29         17.41                   14.97             11.18
  p-val Sargan–H J                       0.131         0.342                   0.829             0.865
  B: ∆Payouti,t
  ∆Volatilityi,t−1   -0.164***           -0.554***     -0.310*** -0.523*** -1.461*** -0.846***
                     (-13.965)           (-4.882)      (-2.656)  (-8.806)  (-4.771)  (-2.656)
  Observations       125,538             28,471        28,173    26,153    17,596    17,408
  F 1st st. Cragg-D                      158.4         171.8               78.54     58.56
  F 1st st. Kleib.-P                     18.43         17.48               14.96     11.16
  p-val Sargan–H J                       0.394         0.635               0.990     0.990
  C: ∆Cash holdingi,t
  ∆Volatilityi,t−1   0.030***            0.227***      0.166**       0.117***      0.699***      0.570***
                     (3.488)             (3.289)       (2.504)       (3.571)       (4.165)       (2.756)
  Observations       125,511             28,468        28,170        26,150        17,593        17,405
  F 1st st. Cragg-D                      158.4         171.7                       78.49         58.53
  F 1st st. Kleib.-P                     18.44         17.49                       14.96         11.17
  p-val Sargan–H J                       0.545         0.458                       0.380         0.345

This table reports regression results of annual changes in total debt (Panel A), changes in firm payout (cash
dividend + share repurchase) (Panel B), and changes in cash holdings (cash and short-term investments)
(Panel C), where growth rates are defined as (xt − xt−1 )/(0.5 ∗ xt + 0.5 ∗ xt−1 ). Specifications 1 through 6
follow the setup, timing, and set of controls included in the investment rate regression in Table 3. To preserve
space we do not report the coefficients and t-statistics on controls. The sample period is annual from 1963
to 2016. Specifications 1,2,4, and 5 are univariate, while 3 and 6 multivariate. Only 1 and 4 are OLS while
all others 2SLS. We instrument lagged changes in firm-level volatility with industry-level (3SIC) exposure to
10 aggregate lagged uncertainty shocks. These include the lagged exposure to annual changes in expected
volatility of energy, currencies, and 10-year treasuries (as proxied by at-the-money forward-looking implied
volatilities of oil, 7 widely traded currencies, and TYVIX) and economic policy uncertainty from Baker, Bloom,
and Davis (2016). Annual realized volatility is the 12-month standard deviation of daily stock returns from
CRSP. Implied volatility is the annual average of daily (365-day) implied volatility of at-the-money-forward
call options from OptionMetrics. Regressors lagged by 1-year. Both firm and calendar-year fixed effects are
included. Standard errors are clustered at the 3-digit SIC industry. To tease out the impact of 2nd moment
uncertainty shocks we also include as controls the lagged exposure to changes in the return on each of the 10
aggregate instruments (i.e., 1st moment shocks). Data availability on implied volatility of treasuries and oil
restrict the start of the 2SLS sample to fiscal year 2006. Statistical significance: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.1, † p<0.15. t-statistics are in parentheses. See section 4 for data details.



                                                      42
                                                          Table 7
     Impact of realized volatility on investment for financially constrained and unconstrained firms during financial
                                                crisis and non-crisis years
      Crisis period: Jan-01-2008 to Dec-31-2009                                                 2SLS with full set of controls (1-8)
      Investment Ratet                                         (1)         (2)         (3)            (4)             (5)            (6)        (7)        (8)

      Financial Constraint Measure                                                     S&P Ratings     Whited-Wu      Employees     Assets      Age        Size&Age
      ∆Volatilityi,t−1 (Realized)                              -0.030***   -0.013      -0.010          -0.025**       -0.025**      -0.022**    -0.021**   -0.017*
      Dcrisis,t                                                                 -             -              -             -             -          -           -
      Dcrisis,t · ∆Volatilityi,t−1                                         -0.091***   -0.074***       -0.068***      -0.064***     -0.104***   -0.060**   -0.091***
      Df in constrained,i,t−1                                                          -0.005*         0.009          0.011         -0.002          -      -0.027
      Df in constrained,i,t−1 · ∆Volatilityi,t−1                                       -0.008          0.018          0.021†        0.009       0.002      0.016
      Dcrisis,t · Df in constrained,i,t−1                                              0.003           -0.010†        -0.012*       -0.015**    -0.000     -0.011**
      Dcrisis,t · Df in constrained,i,t−1 · ∆Volatilityi,t−1                           -0.028          -0.052**       -0.055***     -0.043*     -0.013     -0.047**

      Observations                                             28,132      28,132      28,132          21,132         21,138        21,132      22,131     21,153
      F-test 1st stage Cragg-D                                 171.1       88.48       43.34           29.46          37.26         24.05       36.52      28.86




43
      F-test 1st stage Kleib.-P.                               17.57       6.25        4.16            4.26           9.55          5.34        3.35       5.63
      p-val Sargan–Hansen J                                    0.955       0.789       0.531           0.369          0.844         0.721       0.945      0.495


     Table presents the impact of exogenous firm-level realized volatility on investment rates of financially constrained and unconstrained firms during
     financial crisis and non-crisis years. All regressions are 2SLS of investment rate - observed at fiscal year t and defined as It /Kt−1 (capx/lagged net
     property plant & equipment from Compustat)- on 1-year lagged changes in firm-level realized volatility and a full set of lagged firm-level controls.
     All specifications follow the setup, timing, and controls included in specification (3) in Table 3. Column 1 restates the benchmark regression (3) in
     Table 3. Column 2 further adds the interaction of lagged change in realized volatility with a financial-crisis dummy variable that takes value 1 for
     all firm-fiscal-year observations of investment rate ending in between Jan. 1 2008 and Dec. 31 2009, zero otherwise. This period comprises the great
     recession. Columns 3 to 8 run further interact lagged changes in volatility with standard measures of financial constraints and the crisis dummy. In
     particular, using each firm’s financial constraint index at every fiscal year t − 1 we classify firms into constrained and unconstrained groups using the
     40 and 60 percentile cutoffs obtained from the cross-sectional fiscal-year distribution of the underlying financial constraint index. We consider a firm
     constrained if its t − 1 index value is equal to or greater than the 60 percentile and unconstrained if equal to or less than the 40 percentile. We exclude
     firm-time observations in the middle 50+/-10 percentiles to increase precision in the classification of firms. We do this in all but the S&P credit-rating
     financial constraint measure. Here we follow Duchin, Ozbas, and Sensoy (2010) and consider a firm constrained if it has positive debt and no bond rating
     and unconstrained otherwise (which includes firms with zero debt and no debt rating). The other 5 measures of financial constraints are constructed
     using the Whited-Wu index, reciprocal of employees, reciprocal of total assets, reciprocal of age, and the SA index based on size and age of Hadlock
     and Pierce (2010). Both firm and calendar-year fixed effects are included. Standard errors are clustered at the 3 digit SIC industry. Data availability
     on implied volatility of treasuries and oil restrict the start of the 2SLS sample to fiscal year 2006. Statistical significance: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
     p<0.1, † p<0.15. t-statistics in parentheses. See sections 4 for data details.
     Figure 1: Uncertainty, real outcomes and financial flows




44
     Notes: Investment rate from investment and capital data from BEA NIPS tables. Employment seasonally adjusted total private employment, BLS ID
     CES0500000025. Short-term debt, long-term debt, and cash from the NIPA Integrated Macroeconomic Accounts Table S.5.q nonfinancial corporate business,
     deflated by the CPI (NIPA table 1.1.4, line 1). Short-term debt sum of open market paper (line 123) and short-term loans (line 127). Long-term debt sum of
     bonds (line 125) and mortgages (line 130). Cash sum of currency and transferable deposits (line 97) and time and savings deposits (line 98). Aggregate real
     dividend from Shiller's webpage http://www.econ.yale.edu/~shiller/data.htm. Growth rates of variables moving average with a window of 4 quarters ahead.
     Figure 2: Investment and Payout Policy Functions
     Figure 2A: Real fixed costs only                        Figure 2B: Benchmark: real and financial fixed costs




     Investment
                                                            Investment




45
     Figure 2C: Benchmark: real and financial fixed costs

                                                                         Notes: Figures 2A and 2B plot the optimal
                                                                         investment policies associated with low and high
                                                                         uncertainty shock states of the model with real
                                                                         investment costs only (top left) and the
                                                                         benchmark model (top right), respectively. In both
                                                                         figures, we fix the idiosyncratic productivity and
                                                                         cash at their median grid points and the financial
                                                                         shock at the low state. Figure 2C plots the payout




     Payout
                                                                         of the benchmark model (bottom left) with low and
                                                                         high uncertainty by fixing the idiosyncratic
                                                                         productivity and cash at their median grid points
                                                                         and the financial shock at its low states.
     Figure 3: The Impact of a pure Uncertainty Shock




46
     Notes: We plot the percent deviations of average output, labor, capital, cash, dividend and aggregate TFP from their values
     in quarter 0 of three model specifications: i) the model with real cost only (black x-mark); ii) the model with financial cost only
     (blue circle), and iii) the benchmark with both real and financial costs (red triangle). All plots are based on simulations of
     30,000 firms of 1000-quarter length. We impose an uncertainty shock in the quarter labelled 1, allowing normal evolution of
     the economy afterwards.
     Figure 4: The Impact of a pure Financial Shock




47
      Notes: We plot the percent deviations of average output, labor, capital, cash, dividend and aggregate TFP from their values
      in quarter 0 of three model specifications: i) the model with real cost only (black x-mark); ii) the model with financial cost only
      (blue circle), and iii) the benchmark with both real and financial costs (red triangle). All plots are based on simulations of
      30,000 firms of 1000-quarter length. We impose a financial shock in the quarter labelled 1, allowing normal evolution of the
      economy afterwards.
     Figure 5: The Impact of Uncertainty and Financial Shocks




48
       Notes: We plot the percent deviations of average output, labor, capital, cash, dividend and aggregate TFP from their values in
       quarter 0 of the benchmark model with both real and financial costs. All plots are based on simulations of 30,000 firms of
       1000-quarter length. We impose an uncertainty shock (black x-mark), a financial shock (blue circle) and a combined
       uncertainty and financial shocks (red triangle) in the quarter labelled 1, allowing normal evolution of the economy afterwards.
     Figure 6: Robustness check of the Impact of Uncertainty and Financial
     Shockss




49
     Notes: We plot the percent deviations of average output from their values in quarter 0 of the benchmark model with both real and
     financial costs (red-triangle), the model with the high financing-cost-state-to-low-cost-state ratio at 5 (blue-square), the model with a
     different transition matrix of financial shocks (black-circle), the pseudo-GE model (magenta-plus), the model with fixed production
     cost at 10% (blue-dashed-cross), the model with investment adjustment cost at 2% (yellow-star) and the model with the capital
     share at 1 (black-dashed-triangle). All plots are based on simulations of 30,000 firms of 1000-quarter length. We impose a combined
     uncertainty and financial shocks in the quarter labelled 1, allowing normal evolution of the economy afterwards.
     Figure 7: Investment by more and less financially constrained firms




                                                                                               Less constrained




50
                                                                                               More constrained
                                                                                                                                      Stock market volatility




     Investment rate (normed to 2006Q1=0)
     Notes: Plots the investment rate for financially more-constrained firms (red line, diamond markers) and less-constrained firms (blue
     line, circle markers) against the left axis. Financial constraints defined as a firm having short or long term debt but no bond rating
     (see Duchin, Ozbas and Sensoy, JFE 2010 and Faulkender and Petersen, RFS 2006). Stock-market volatility (green line, no-
     markers) plots the average volatility of all firms in the sample by year, right axis.
               Appendix For Online Publication
A      Numerical algorithm
We use the value function iteration procedure to solve the firm’s maximization problem
numerically. We specify the two grids of 82 points for capital and 312 points for cash,
respectively, with upper bounds k̄ and n̄ that are large enough to be non-binding. The
grid for capital is constructed recursively given the pre-specified lower and upper bounds k
                                                                                                  ¯
and k̄, following ki = ki−1 /(1 − δ), where i = 1,...,s is the index of grids points. The grid
for cash is constructed recursively using a similar approach, following ni = ni−1 /(1 + rn ),
where i = 1,...,s is the index of grids points given pre-specified lower and upper bounds n
                                                                                                  ¯
and n̄. The advantage of this construction approach is that it does not require off-grid points
interpolation. For robustness check, we also construct a different grid of 60 points for cash,
with upper bound n̄ that is large enough to be non-binding. The grid for cash is constructed
recursively, that is, ni = ni−1 + cn1 exp(cn2 (i − 2)), where i = 1,...,s is the index of grids
points and cn1 and cn2 are two constants chosen to provide the desired number of grid points
and two upper bound n̄, given pre-specified lower bounds n. The advantage of this recursive
                                                               ¯
construction is that more grid points are assigned around n, where the value function has most
                                                             ¯
of its curvature. Linear interpolation is used to obtain optimal investment and cash holding
that do not lie directly on the grid points. We find two construction approaches produce
similar quantitative results.
    We discretize the firm-specific productivity with two-state Markov process of time-varying
conditional volatility into a 5 (productivity level) by 2 grid. In all cases, the results are robust
to finer grids for the level of productivity process as well. Once the discrete state space is
available, the conditional expectation can be carried out simply as a matrix multiplication.
Finally, we use a simple discrete global search routine in maximizing the firm’s problem.


B      Data
Data used in the empirical analysis is described in detail in this section. Sources include
Compustat, CRSP, OptionMetrics, Bloomberg, CBOE, St. Louis Fed, and Baker, Bloom,
and Davis (2016). Table A2 presents descriptive statistics of main variables used in the firm-
level panel regressions. Our annual sample period begins in 1963 and ends in 2016.25

B.1     Company financial reports and realized stock return volatility
We draw financial information for US publicly held companies from Compustat. Sample
is annual from 1963 to December 2016. We use Compustat fiscal-year annual company data
from balance sheet, income statement, and cash flow statement. Financial, utilities, and public
sector firms are excluded from the sample. In particular, we exclude firms with historical SIC
codes in the range of 6000 to 6999, 4900 to 4999, and equal to or greater than 9000.26 When
  25
   OLS and 2SLS regressions are run in STATA v.15 using the package REGHDFE.
  26
   In general we do not use the current or “header” SIC code of a company (which is time invariant
and only representative of the company’s industry at the time of Compustat data download), but rather

                                                  I
Compustat reports more than one annual data for the same-company in a given fiscal year (e.g.,
when a company changes its fiscal-year end month) we drop the first chronologically dated
observations and keep only the last data for that fiscal year, ensuring only one data point
per firm-fiscal year. We drop any firm-year observations having zero or negative employment,
total assets, and/or sales.
    Our main empirical tests involve either variables in ratios, levels, and/or in changes from
one fiscal year to the next. To ensure that the latter changes are indeed annual, we require
a 12 month distance between fiscal-year end dates of accounting reports. Moreover, when
measuring changes from one year to the next we define the growth rate as in Davis and
Haltiwanger (1992), where for any variable xt the growth rate is ∆xt = (xt − xt−1 )/( 12 xt +
1
  x ), which for positive values of xt and xt−1 yields growth rates bounded between -2 and
2 t−1
2. Moreover, whenever both xt and xt−1 are zero we set the corresponding growth rate equal
to zero (which avoids losing information to undefined values and because in fact the growth
rate is zero in this case).
    Our set of dependent variables starts with capital formation. We measure firm investment
                                                          CAP X
rate (implicitly the change in gross capital stock) as Ki,t−1i,t where K is net property plant
and equipment, and CAP X is capital expenditures. We bound investment rate above at 0.5
and below at -0.10. For all other variables, we winsorize the levels, ratios, and growths every
fiscal semester at the 1 and 99 percentiles. Aside from investment, we also explore additional
real outcomes which include employment, EM P in Compustat , Intangible Capital, defined
as SG&A + R&D (sales, general and administration plus research and development), and
cost of goods sold, COGS. Our set of financial outcomes include corporate payout defined
as P ayout = DV + P RST KC , where DV is cash dividends and P RST KC is purchase of
common and preferred stock from Compustat. Cash holdings is the level of cash and short-
term investments, CHE. Total debt is T otal Debt = DLC + DLT T , where DLC and DLT T
are short-term and long-term debt from Compustat, respectively.
    Our main set of firm-level controls includes the following variables (in levels). Stock Return
is a firm’s compounded fiscal-year return, using CRSP daily returns (including dividends
and adjusted for delisting, RET ) within the corresponding 12-month fiscal-year period.
T angibilityt = P P EGT /AT, where P P EGT is gross property, plant, and equipment and
AT is total assets. Book leverage = (DLC + DLT T )/(DLC + DLT T + CEQ) , where
CEQ is Compustat common book equity. Tobin’s Q is computed as in Duchin, Ozbas, and
Sensoy (2010), Qi,t = (market value of assets) /(0.9 ∗ book assets + 0.1 ∗ market value of
assets), where market value of assets is ( AT + M E + CEQ − T XDB ), M E is CRSP market
value of equity (i.e. stock price times shares outstanding), book assets is AT, and T XDB is
deferred taxes. We handle outliers in Tobin’s Q by bounding Q above at 10. Return on assets,
ROAt = EBIT /AT , where EBIT is earnings before interest and tax. We further control for
firm size, defined as log SALE .
    As for our main variable of interest firm-level uncertainty shocks, ∆σ i,t , we measure
uncertainty in two ways, realized and option-implied uncertainty. Realized uncertainty is
classify companies each year based on their historical industry SICH codes (i.e., standard industrial
classification -historical, from Compustat), or when missing in a given year we replace it with the closest
backward-looking non-missing historical code. We backfill any remaining codes using the first non-missing
SICH code in the time-series. When none of the above are available we employ the firm’s current (header)
SIC code for all years.


                                                    II
the annual volatility of the firm’s realized CRSP stock return. Specifically, we estimate it
as the 12-month fiscal-year standard deviation of daily CRSP returns. We annualize this
standard deviation by multiplying by the square root of 252 (average trading days in a year).
This makes the standard deviation comparable to the annual volatility implied by call options,
which we describe in the next subsection. We drop observations of firms with less than 200
daily CRSP returns in a given fiscal year. Our sample uses securities appearing on CRSP for
firms listed in major US stock exchanges (EXCHCD codes 1,2, and 3 for NYSE, AMEX and
the Nasdaq Stock Market (SM)) and equity shares listed as ordinary common shares (SHRCD
10 or 11).

B.2       Implied volatility
Although our main measure of firm-level uncertainty is realized annual stock return volatility,
we further proxy for uncertainty by using OptionMetrics’ 365-day implied volatility of at-the-
money-forward call options.
    OptionMetrics provides daily implied volatility from January 1996 onward for securities
with exchange-traded equity options. Each security has a corresponding series of call and
put options which differ in their expiration dates and strike prices. For each of these options,
OptionMetrics imputes an implied volatility for each trading day using the average of the
end-of-day best bid and offer price quotes. To be consistent with the annual Compustat data
used throughout, our main tests focus only on 365-day implied volatility. We further restrict
our analysis to call options. Note that a call option and a put option on a given underlying
asset with the same strike price and expiration date have the same implied volatilities; the
difference in their prices comes from the fact that interest rates and dividends affect the value
of call and put options in opposite directions. Therefore, our principal proxy for uncertainty
is 365-day implied volatility of at-the-money-forward call options.

B.3       Currency exchange rates and implied volatility
We use bilateral exchange rate data from the Federal Reserve Board. Although there is a large
number of bilateral currencies available, we restrict our attention to the exchange rates between
the U.S. dollar and the 7 “major” currencies used by the Board in constructing the nominal and
real trade-weighted U.S. dollar Index of Major Currencies27 .These include the Euro, Canadian
dollar, Japanese Yen, British Pound, Swiss Franc, Australian Dollar, and Swedish Krona.
Each one of these trades widely in currency markets outside their respective home areas, and
(along with the U.S. dollar) are referred to by the Board staff as major currencies. These
daily currency spot prices are used in the daily regression described in equation 14 .
    In addition to the daily currency prices, our instrumental variables approach further
requires measures of forward-looking implied volatility for each of the 7 currencies. For these
we use daily data on three-month implied exchange rate volatilities for each bilateral rate,
from Bloomberg. Specifically, we extract these data using the VOLC function available at
Bloomberg terminals.
 27
      See: http://www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/bulletin/2005/winter05_index.pdf .




                                               III
B.4      Energy prices and implied volatility
We employ shocks to oil price as a general proxy for energy prices. We collect oil price and
implied volatility data from Bloomberg. In particular, Bloomberg provides price and 30-
day implied volatility data for one-month crude oil futures. Specifically, we use data on the
New York Mercantile Exchange Division’s light, sweet crude oil futures contract (Bloomberg
CL1). This contract is the world’s most liquid, largest-volume futures contract on a physical
commodity. The contract size is 1,000 U.S. barrels and delivery occurs in Cushing, Oklahoma.
Our data on oil futures implied volatility starts in 1Q 2003.
   As with exchange rates above, we construct our annual industry-by-year instrument for oil
by averaging the daily implied volatility data for oil over the corresponding 252-day backward-
looking window for each fiscal-year month-end date of a company.

B.5      Timing alignment of firm-level volatility and instruments
Most of our empirical analysis examines the effect of 1-year lagged changes in annual firm-level
uncertainty ∆σ i,t−1 on the changes in both real and financial outcomes ∆yi,t . In defining the
change in any variable xt , growth is ∆xt = (xt − xt−1 )/( 21 xt + 12 xt−1 ) . This applies to our
outcomes ∆yi,t , lagged instruments for energy prices, exchange rates, treasuries, and policy
uncertainty,| β c,weighted
                   j       | ·∆σ ct−1 , and also our main uncertainty measure of the lagged growth
in firm i0 s realized annual volatility, ∆σ i,t−1 . Given that our regressions are predictive from
year t − 1 to year t, our first-stage 2SLS regressions involve a regression of firms’ lagged
uncertainty shock ∆σ i,t−1 = (σ i,t−1 − σ i,t−2 )/( 21 σ i,t−1 + 12 σ i,t−2 ) on the 10 lagged composite
exposures to aggregate uncertainty shocks IVt−1      c
                                                        = | β c,weighted
                                                               j           | ·∆σ ct−1 where for instrument
c the growth in the lagged uncertainty shock is ∆σ ct−1 = (σ ct−1 − σ ct−2 )/( 21 σ ct−1 + 12 σ ct−2 ) , and
| β c,weighted
    j          | is the significance-weighted cross-industry exposure estimated 36 months prior
to the firm’s fiscal-year end month of the dependant variable, ∆yi,t .
     Taking into account that daily data on implied volatility of treasuries (TYVIX The
Cboe/CBOT ) starts in 1Q 2003, our main 2SLS regression sample containing the full set
of 10 instruments (oil, 7 exchange rates, 10-year treasuries, and policy) effectively starts for
any firm in fiscal year 2006. Our sample ends in December 2016.




                                                    IV
                                       Table A1
           Coefficient on changes in volatility for real and financial variables

                                                                     Real              Financial

                                                               I/K       ∆Emp          ∆Cash       Div/K
         A: Benchmark
         ∆Volatility                                           -0.080     -0.028         0.487      -0.012
         B: H/L = 5
         ∆Volatility                                           -0.090     -0.031         0.462      -0.007
         C: Different transition matrix of η t
         ∆Volatility                                           -0.086     -0.030         0.465      -0.009
         D: Pseudo-GE
         ∆Volatility                                           -0.053     -0.020         0.610      -0.020
         E: F = 0.10
         ∆Volatility                                           -0.071     -0.025         0.820      -0.018
         F:ck = 0.02
         ∆Volatility                                           -0.093     -0.031         0.169      -0.004
         G:α = 1
         ∆Volatility                                           -0.086         na        -0.082      -0.002

This table reports the model regression results of real and financial variables on volatility growth. The reported
statistics in the model are from simulated data with 3000 firms and 200 quarterly observations. We report
the cross-simulation averaged annual moments. I/K is the investment rate, ∆Emp is the employment growth,
∆Cash is the cash growth rate, and Div/K is the ratio of dividend to capital in the model and cash dividend
plus repurchase to total assets in the data. Panel A is the benchmark calibration. Panels B lowers the high
financing-cost-state-to-low-cost-state ratio (η H /η L ) to 5 while keeping the low financial cost state η L = 0.005.
Panel C sets the transition probabilities of financial shocks of π σL,H = 0.05 and π σH,H = 0.5. Panel D is the
pseudo-GE model with interest rates, prices and wages as functions of uncertainty shock. Panel E is the model
with smaller fixed production cost F = 0.10. Panel F is the model with bigger investment adjustment cost
ck = 0.02. Panel G is the model with the share of capital α = 1. All the regressions include firm and time
fixed effects and all results for the model are significant at the 1% level with firm-clustered standard errors.




                                                         V
                                             Table A2
                                        Descriptive statistics

 Variables in 2SLS               Obs.        Mean     S. Dev     P1         P10       P50      P90      P99
 Dependent
 Investment Rate                 125,596     0.248    0.152      0.012      0.067     0.215    0.500    0.500
 ∆Employment                     125,690     0.026    0.231      -0.765     -0.192    0.021    0.258    0.744
 ∆Intangible Cap. Invest.        66,977      0.077    0.198      -0.535     -0.137    0.077    0.292    0.642
 ∆Cost of Goods Sold             126,913     0.080    0.283      -0.929     -0.177    0.080    0.342    1.024
 ∆Debt Total                     126,022     0.046    0.669      -2.000     -0.514    0.000    0.738    2.000
 ∆Payout                         126,925     0.066    0.919      -2.000     -1.185    0.000    1.482    2.000
 ∆Cash Holdings                  126,899     0.043    0.702      -1.727     -0.839    0.043    0.934    1.797
 Independent
 ∆Realized Volatility            126,925     -0.001 0.303        -0.673     -0.376    -0.012 0.386 0.780
 ∆Implied Volatility             26,759      -0.015 0.200        -0.435     -0.259    -0.026 0.247 0.513
 Book Leverage                   125,460     0.322 0.279         0.000      0.000     0.291 0.672 1.287
 Stock Return                    126,925     0.176 0.674         -0.765     -0.458    0.066 0.847 2.781
 Log Sales                       126,680     5.092 2.140         -0.246     2.452     5.043 7.887 9.979
 Return on Assets                126,914     0.049 0.181         -0.784     -0.108    0.082 0.194 0.326
 Tangibility                     126,545     0.550 0.363         0.037      0.140     0.479 1.057 1.657
 Tobin’s Q                       125,795     1.482 0.833         0.569      0.791     1.215 2.539 4.690
 Instruments
 ∆Vol Exposure Cad               44,220      3e-04 0.006         -0.015 -0.001 0.000           0.002    0.020
 ∆Vol Exposure Euro              43,773      -2e-04 0.011        -0.030 -0.004 0.000           0.001    0.047
 ∆Vol Exposure Jpy               50,607      1e-04 0.005         -0.011 -0.001 0.000           0.000    0.015
 ∆Vol Exposure Aud               50,607      3e-05 0.006         -0.018 -0.003 0.000           0.003    0.022
 ∆Vol Exposure Sek               44,220      2e-04 0.007         -0.021 -0.004 0.000           0.002    0.032
 ∆Vol Exposure Chf               50,607      1e-04 0.009         -0.021 -0.003 0.000           0.001    0.032
 ∆Vol Exposure Gbp               50,607      1e-04 0.005         -0.014 -0.001 0.000           0.000    0.018
 ∆Vol Exposure Oil               29,016      6e-05 0.011         -0.040 -0.001 0.000           0.001    0.029
 ∆Vol Exposure Policy            50,607      3e-07 2e-05         -8e-05 0.000 0.000            0.000    8e-05
 ∆Vol Expos.Treasury             29,195      -0.637 8.503        -32.100 -4.564 0.000          2.286    26.640

This table presents summary statistics of all main variables used in the empirical panel regression analysis.
Sample period is annual from 1963 to 2016. Notation ∆x stands for growth rate of variable x, defined as
(xt − xt−1 )/(0.5 ∗ xt + 0.5 ∗ xt−1 ), standard deviation is S. Dev., while. P1, P10, P50, P90 and P99 stand
for the 1, 10, 50, 90 and 99 percentiles, respectively. Data sources include CRSP, Compustat, OptionMetrics,
Bloomberg, CBOE, St. Louis Fed, and Baker, Bloom, and Davis (2016). See sections 4 and 5 for the details
on the construction of variables.




                                                     VI
                                                                      Table A3
                                                      2SLS Sensitivity to individual instruments
                                   (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)         (5)          (6)          (7)         (8)          (9)         (10)
       IV Dropped                  None         Cad         Euro         Jpy         Aud          Sek          Chf         Gbp          Policy      Oil+Treasuries

       Real Variables
       Investment Ratei,t          -0.030***    -0.032***   -0.029***    -0.030***   -0.034***    -0.035***    -0.030***   -0.030***    -0.031***   -0.036**
       ∆Intang. Cap. Invest.i,t    -0.036**     -0.035*     -0.034*      -0.038**    -0.040**     -0.030†      -0.042**    -0.040**     -0.033*     -0.035†
       ∆Employmenti,t              -0.011       -0.009      -0.008       -0.011      -0.010       -0.037       -0.017      -0.010       -0.009      0.016

       Financial Variables
       ∆Debt Totali,t              -0.168**     -0.154**    -0.156**     -0.167**    -0.200***    -0.203***    -0.163**    -0.168**     -0.170**    -0.218**
       ∆Payouti,t                  -0.310***    -0.331***   -0.291***    -0.306***   -0.379***    -0.286**     -0.274**    -0.303**     -0.302**    -0.487***
       ∆Cash Holdingsi,t           0.166**      0.153**     0.164**      0.159**     0.202***     0.175**      0.124*      0.157**      0.161**     0.265**

       1st moment 10IVi,t−1        Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes
       Firm, time FE               Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes




VII
       SE cluster (3SIC)           Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes

       Investment Rate Stats
       Observations                28,132       28,132      28,132       28,132      28,132       28,132       28,132      28,132       28,132      42,388
       F 1st stage Cragg-D         171.1        178.7       182.8        187.5       161.6        150.8        173         182.4        184.9       99.17
       F 1st stage Kleib.-P.       17.57        19.84       19.35        18.34       14.09        17.88        18.40       16.97        18.31       12.09
       p-val Sargan–Hans J         0.955        0.946       0.939        0.921       0.961        0.950        0.921       0.938        0.920       0.992


      This table presents 2SLS multivariate regression results for all our main real and financial outcome variables (with full set of controls) when we drop
      individual instruments one at a time from our benchmark set of 10 instrumental variables (IVs). In the last column (10) we drop both oil and treasury
      IVs as these constrain the start of the sample to fiscal year 2006, whereas keeping only currencies and policy IVs allow an additional 4 years of panel
      data -with first fiscal year of dependent variable starting in 2002. Sample period ends in December 2016. The coefficient and statistics reported in
      (1) are from the benchmark 2SLS multivariate regression on lagged firm-level realized volatility shocks presented in column (3) across Tables 3, 5, and
      6. The statistics under ”Investment Rate Stats” correspond to the 1st stage results of the multivariate 2SLS regression of investment rate on lagged
      change in realized volatility and main set of lagged level controls. 1st Stage statistics for other real and financial estimations are largely comparable to
      their benchmark specifications with the full set of instruments. Firm and calendar-year fixed effects included. Standard errors clustered at the 3 digit
      SIC industry. To tease out the impact of 2nd moment uncertainty shocks we also include as controls the lagged exposure to the return on each of the
      10 aggregate instruments (i.e., 1st moment shocks). Data availability on implied volatility of treasuries and oil restrict the start of the 2SLS sample to
      fiscal year 2006. Statistical significance: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1, † p<0.15. t-statistics are in parentheses. See section 4 for data details.
                                                                             Table A4
                                                                        2SLS Robustness tests
                                               (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)         (1A)         (2A)         (3A)         (4A)         (5A)
        Volatility Instrumented                Realized     Realized     Realized     Realized     Realized    Implied      Implied      Implied      Implied      Implied

        Real Variables
        Investment Ratei,t                     -0.033***    -0.030***    -0.030***    -0.031***    -0.030***   -0.082*      -0.077**     -0.083**     -0.081**     -0.083**
        ∆Intangible Cap. Invest.i,t            -0.042**     -0.034*      -0.032*      -0.033*      -0.029†     -0.079       -0.036       -0.044       -0.036       -0.026
        ∆Employmenti,t                         -0.005       -0.010       -0.012       -0.011       -0.011      0.045        -0.039       -0.046       -0.045       -0.041

        Financial Variables
        ∆Debt Totali,t                         -0.184**     -0.167**     -0.170**     -0.169**     -0.168***   -0.843***    -0.602***    -0.623***    -0.620***    -0.612***
        ∆Payouti,t                             -0.358**     -0.295**     -0.333***    -0.313***    -0.320***   -1.419**     -0.798**     -0.927***    -0.847***    -0.877***
        ∆Cash Holdingsi,t                      0.183**      0.160**      0.154**      0.164**      0.151**     0.818**      0.567***     0.582***     0.569***     0.579***

        Leverage-adjusted ∆Volatilityi,t−1     Yes                                                             Yes
        Main firm-level controlsi,t−1          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
        Covariance w/ marketi,t−1                           Yes                                    Yes                      Yes                                    Yes




VIII
        Financial constraint indexesi,t−1                                Yes                       Yes                                   Yes                       Yes
        S&P credit ratingsi,t−1                                                       Yes          Yes                                                Yes          Yes
        1st moment controls 10 IVi,t−1         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
        Firm, time FE                          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
        SE clustering (3SIC industry)          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
        Investment Rate Stats
        Observations                           28,078       28,132       28,058       28,132       28,058      17,358       17,391       17,345       17,391       17,345
        F 1st stage Cragg-Donald Wald          96.72        182.6        170.3        171          181.8       12.52        64.9         58.17        59.06        65.05
        F 1st stage Kleibergen-Paap Wald       14.30        19.39        17.50        17.61        19.32       4.89         13.04        11.38        11.28        13.31
        p-val Sargan–Hansen J Chi-sq           0.891        0.955        0.928        0.950        0.922       0.846        0.949        0.938        0.950        0.934


       This table presents 2SLS robustness results for all our real and financial outcome variables examined in main Tables 3, 5, and 6. All specifications include
                                                                                                                                                              Ei,t
       full set of controls. In columns (1) and (1A) we investigate whether the results are robust to adjusting volatility by firm leverage, i.e., σ i,t · Ei,t +D i,t
       where E is book equity and D is total debt. Additional controls include: covariance w/ market, which adds firm lagged CAPM beta, financial constraint
       indexes, which add a set of 6 lagged firm-level controls for firm financial constraints. These include the lagged Whited-Wu index, lagged SA index of
       Hadlock and Pierce (2010), the Kaplan-Zingales index, reciprocal of total assets, reciprocal of employees, and reciprocal of age. The S&P credit ratings
       column further adds a full set of dummies based on every possible credit rating category given by S&P on long-term debt. Omitted dummy is for no
       credit ratings. Firm and calendar-year fixed effects are included. Standard errors clustered at the 3-digit SIC industry. Statistical significance: ***
       p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1, † p<0.15. t-statistics are in parentheses. See section 4 for data details.
                                        Table A5
                  Investment rate, using same panel across specifications

                              (1)       (2)                 (3)          (4)       (5)                (6)
 Investment ratei,t           OLS       IV                  IV           OLS       IV                 IV
                              Realized Realized             Realized     Implied   Implied            Implied
 ∆Volatilityi,t−1             -0.033*** -0.086***           -0.029**     -0.079*** -0.225***          -0.078**
                              (-4.642)  (-3.527)            (-2.470)     (-7.447)  (-4.184)           (-2.454)
 Book Leveragei,t−1                                         -0.040***                                 -0.037***
                                                            (-6.203)                                  (-5.583)
 Stock Returni,t−1                                          0.006**                                   0.005*
                                                            (2.194)                                   (1.808)
 Log Salesi,t−1                                             -0.023***                                 -0.022***
                                                            (-5.419)                                  (-5.290)
 Return on Assetsi,t−1                                      0.138***                                  0.132***
                                                            (4.087)                                   (3.910)
 Tangibilityi,t−1                                           -0.126***                                 -0.123***
                                                            (-3.491)                                  (-3.355)
 Tobin’s Qi,t−1                                             0.055***                                  0.054***
                                                            (8.089)                                   (8.341)
 1st moment 10IVi,t−1         No            No              Yes          No            No             Yes
 Firm, time FE                Yes           Yes             Yes          Yes           Yes            Yes
 SE cluster(3SIC)             Yes           Yes             Yes          Yes           Yes            Yes

 Observations                 17,391        17,391          17,391       17,391        17,391         17,391
 F 1st st. Cragg-D                          131.5           140.1                      77.94          58.59
 F 1st st. Kleib.-P                         15.40           15.29                      14.99          11.14
 p-val Sargan–H J                           0.590           0.918                      0.659          0.950

This table presents all investment rate regression results shown in main Table 3 but holding the sample
of firm-time observations fixed across specifications. The sample is restricted to firms that have both non-
missing lagged realized and implied volatilities every fiscal year. Investment rate at fiscal year t is defined as
It /Kt−1 (capx/lagged net property plant & equipment from Compustat). Sample period is from 1963 to 2016.
Specifications 1 and 4 are OLS while all others 2SLS. We instrument lagged changes in firm-level volatility
with industry-level (3SIC) exposure to 10 aggregate lagged uncertainty shocks. These include the lagged
exposure to annual changes in expected volatility of energy, currencies, and 10-year treasuries and economic
policy uncertainty from Baker, Bloom, and Davis (2016). Annual realized volatility is the 12-month standard
deviation of daily stock returns from CRSP. Implied volatility is the annual average of daily (365-day) implied
volatility of at-the-money-forward call options from OptionMetrics. Regressors lagged by 1-year. Both firm
and calendar-year fixed effects are included. Standard errors are clustered at the 3-digit SIC industry. To
tease out the impact of 2nd moment uncertainty shocks we also include as controls the lagged exposure to
changes in the return on each of the 10 aggregate instruments (i.e., 1st moment shocks). Data availability
on implied volatility of treasuries and oil restrict the start of the 2SLS sample to fiscal year 2006. Statistical
significance: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1, † p<0.15. t-statistics are in parentheses. See section 4 for data.


                                                       IX
                                         Table A6
                  Uncertainty effects on corporate dividend payout ratios

                              (1)       (2)                (3)           (4)       (5)       (6)
 Payout ratioi,t              OLS       IV                 IV            OLS       IV        IV
                              Realized Realized            Realized      Implied   Implied   Implied
 ∆Volatilityi,t−1             -0.004*** -0.019***          -0.009*       -0.016*** -0.059*** -0.037**
                              (-10.734) (-3.893)           (-1.658)      (-6.650)  (-4.237)  (-2.072)
 Book Leveragei,t−1                                        -0.029***                         -0.036***
                                                           (-4.028)                          (-3.226)
 Stock Returni,t−1                                         -0.003***                         -0.005***
                                                           (-5.102)                          (-3.966)
 Log Salesi,t−1                                            0.002                             0.004
                                                           (0.876)                           (0.850)
 Return on Assetsi,t−1                                     0.034***                          0.036***
                                                           (4.585)                           (3.019)
 Tangibilityi,t−1                                          -0.006                            0.002
                                                           (-1.186)                          (0.261)
 Tobin’s Qi,t−1                                            0.014***                          0.018***
                                                           (5.593)                           (4.268)
 1st moment 10IVi,t−1         No            No             Yes           No        No        Yes
 Firm, time FE                Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes       Yes       Yes
 SE cluster(3SIC)             Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes       Yes       Yes

 Observations                 125,532       28,471         28,173        26,153        17,596         17,408
 F 1st st. Cragg-D                          158.4          171.8                       78.54          58.56
 F 1st st. Kleib.-P                         18.43          17.48                       14.96          11.16
 p-val Sargan–H J                           0.542          0.326                       0.338          0.262

Table presents OLS and 2SLS annual regression results of firm corporate dividend payout ratios on 1-year
lagged changes in firm-level volatility and lagged level of firm-level controls. Dividend payout ratio at fiscal
                       P ayout
year t is defined as ATi,t−1i,t , where P ayout = DV + P RST KC, DV is cash dividends and P RST KC is
purchase of common and preferred stock, and AT is total assets from Compustat. Sample period is from 1963
to 2016. Specifications 1 and 4 are OLS while all others 2SLS. We instrument lagged changes in firm-level
volatility with industry-level (3SIC) exposure to 10 aggregate lagged uncertainty shocks. These include the
lagged exposure to annual changes in expected volatility of energy, currencies, and 10-year treasuries and
economic policy uncertainty from Baker, Bloom, and Davis (2016). Annual realized volatility is the 12-month
standard deviation of daily stock returns from CRSP. Implied volatility is the annual average of daily (365-day)
implied volatility of at-the-money-forward call options from OptionMetrics. Regressors lagged by 1-year. Both
firm and calendar-year fixed effects are included. Standard errors are clustered at the 3-digit SIC industry.
To tease out the impact of 2nd moment uncertainty shocks we also include as controls the lagged exposure
to changes in the return on each of the 10 aggregate instruments (i.e., 1st moment shocks). Data availability
on implied volatility of treasuries and oil restrict the start of the 2SLS sample to fiscal year 2006. Statistical
significance: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1, † p<0.15. t-statistics are in parentheses. See section 4 for data.


                                                       X
                                                        Table A7
     Impact of implied volatility on investment for financially constrained and unconstrained firms during financial
                                               crisis and non-crisis years
        Crisis period: Jan-01-2008 to Dec-31-2009                                              2SLS with full set of controls (1-8)
        Investment Ratet                                         (1)        (2)       (3)           (4)              (5)           (6)       (7)       (8)

        Financial Constraint Measure                                                  S&P Ratings    Whited-Wu       Employees    Assets     Age       Size&Age
        ∆Volatilityi,t−1 (Implied)                               -0.078**   -0.048†   -0.043†        -0.060**        -0.071**     -0.053**   -0.060*   -0.055**
        Dcrisis,t                                                               -            -             -              -           -          -          -
        Dcrisis,t · ∆Volatilityi,t−1                                        -0.093*   -0.084*        -0.027          -0.075       -0.075     -0.057    -0.077
        Df in constrained,i,t−1                                                       -0.005         0.004           0.039†       0.018          -     -0.124**
        Df in constrained,i,t−1 · ∆Volatilityi,t−1                                    -0.021         0.110***        0.068        0.057*     0.014     0.060**
        Dcrisis,t · Df in constrained,i,t−1                                           0.003          0.003           -0.010       -0.010     0.001     -0.012†
        Dcrisis,t · Df in constrained,i,t−1 · ∆Volatilityi,t−1                        -0.014         -0.170***       -0.151***    -0.083*    -0.025    -0.104**

        Observations                                             17,391     17,391    17,391         12,977          13,261       12,942     13,849    12,832
        F-test 1st stage Cragg-D                                 58.59      32.99     16.84          12.60           14.56        14.32      12.86     12.94




XI
        F-test 1st stage Kleib.-P.                               11.14      10.31     7.10           8.54            7.82         7.91       5.57      7.82
        p-val Sargan–Hansen J                                    0.950      0.994     0.985          0.621           0.713        0.637      0.754     0.219


     Table presents the impact of exogenous firm-level implied volatility on investment rates of financially constrained and unconstrained firms during
     financial crisis and non-crisis years. All regressions are 2SLS of investment rate - observed at fiscal year t and defined as It /Kt−1 (capx/lagged net
     property plant & equipment from Compustat)- on 1-year lagged changes in firm-level implied volatility and a full set of lagged firm-level controls.
     All specifications follow the setup, timing, and controls included in specification (6) in Table 3. Column 1 restates the benchmark regression (6) in
     Table 3. Column 2 further adds the interaction of lagged change in realized volatility with a financial-crisis dummy variable that takes value 1 for
     all firm-fiscal-year observations of investment rate ending in between Jan. 1 2008 and Dec. 31 2009, zero otherwise. This period comprises the great
     recession. Columns 3 to 8 run further interact lagged changes in volatility with standard measures of financial constraints and the crisis dummy. In
     particular, using each firm’s financial constraint index at every fiscal year t − 1 we classify firms into constrained and unconstrained groups using the
     40 and 60 percentile cutoffs obtained from the cross-sectional fiscal-year distribution of the underlying financial constraint index. We consider a firm
     constrained if its t − 1 index value is equal to or greater than the 60 percentile and unconstrained if equal to or less than the 40 percentile. We exclude
     firm-time observations in the middle 50+/-10 percentiles to increase precision in the classification of firms. We do this in all but the S&P credit-rating
     financial constraint measure. Here we follow Duchin, Ozbas, and Sensoy (2010) and consider a firm constrained if it has positive debt and no bond rating
     and unconstrained otherwise (which includes firms with zero debt and no debt rating). The other 5 measures of financial constraints are constructed
     using the Whited-Wu index, reciprocal of employees, reciprocal of total assets, reciprocal of age, and the SA index based on size and age of Hadlock
     and Pierce (2010). Both firm and calendar-year fixed effects are included. Standard errors are clustered at the 3 digit SIC industry. Data availability
     on implied volatility of treasuries and oil restrict the start of the 2SLS sample to fiscal year 2006. Statistical significance: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
     p<0.1, † p<0.15. t-statistics in parentheses. See sections 4 for data details.
