                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    IS YOUR LAWYER A LEMON? INCENTIVES AND SELECTION IN THE PUBLIC
                    PROVISION OF CRIMINAL DEFENSE

                                       Amanda Agan
                                      Matthew Freedman
                                        Emily Owens

                                     Working Paper 24579
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w24579


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    May 2018




We are grateful for helpful comments from Lisa Barrow, Damon Clark, Sara Heller, John
Matsusaka, Michael Mueller-Smith, David Neumark, Emily Nix, Anne Piehl, Todd Sorensen,
Mark Stehr, Betsey Stevenson, Megan Stevenson, and Matthew Weinberg as well as numerous
conference and seminar participants. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Amanda Agan, Matthew Freedman, and Emily Owens. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Is Your Lawyer a Lemon? Incentives and Selection in the Public Provision of Criminal Defense
Amanda Agan, Matthew Freedman, and Emily Owens
NBER Working Paper No. 24579
May 2018
JEL No. H44,H76,J15,J38,K14

                                          ABSTRACT

Governments in the U.S. must offer free legal services to low-income people accused of crimes.
These services are frequently provided by assigned counsel, who handle cases for indigent
defendants on a contract basis. Court-assigned attorneys generally garner worse case outcomes
than privately retained attorneys. Using detailed court records from one large jurisdiction in
Texas, we find that the disparities in outcomes are primarily attributable to case characteristics
and within-attorney differences across cases in which they are assigned versus retained. The
selection of low-quality lawyers into assigned counsel and endogenous matching in the private
market contribute less to the disparities.

Amanda Agan                                     Emily Owens
Department of Economics                         University of California - Irvine
Rutgers University                              Department of Criminology, Law and Society
75 Hamilton Street                              2311 Social Ecology II
New Brunswick, NJ 08901                         Irvine, CA 92697
and NBER                                        egowens@uci.edu
aagan@economics.rutgers.edu

Matthew Freedman
University of California, Irvine
Department of Economics
3151 Social Science Plaza
Irvine, CA 92697
matthew.freedman@uci.edu
1. Introduction
    Governments in the U.S. are constitutionally required to provide legal counsel, free of charge,
to low-income (i.e., indigent) people accused of crimes. In 2004, nearly 70% of felony defendants
in large urban jurisdictions were represented by publicly provided legal counsel rather than defense
attorneys they retained on their own. To provide indigent defense services, some jurisdictions use
public defenders, who are government employees. Many jurisdictions also rely on private
attorneys who elect to serve in an assigned counsel system, in which attorneys generally do not
get to choose their clients and face a different incentive structure than in the private market. Past
research has shown that defendants represented by assigned counsel are more likely to be convicted
and often receive harsher punishments than those represented by either retained counsel or public
defenders (Iyengar 2007, Cohen 2014). These disparities in outcomes in the criminal justice system
could have far-reaching impacts on recidivism, educational attainment, labor market outcomes,
economic mobility, and the well-being of defendants as well as their families and communities
(e.g., Pager 2003, Hjalmarsson 2008, Geller et al. 2011, Raphael 2011, Lovenheim and Owens
2013, Aizer and Doyle 2015, Agan and Starr 2018). Inadequate indigent defense is also a
potentially important contributor to the persistent racial gap in criminal justice outcomes, as non-
white males represent a disproportionate share of people in poverty and in prison.1
    In this paper, we take advantage of comprehensive data on criminal court cases and attorneys
to investigate the mechanisms behind the less favorable case outcomes typically observed among
defendants with assigned as opposed to privately retained counsel. Our empirical setting is Bexar
County, Texas, home of the racially and ethnically diverse city of San Antonio. Bexar County
District Courts have historically used an assigned counsel system in which a third party, with no
specific information about the case or lawyer, assigns private attorneys to indigent clients from a
pool of lawyers who have registered with the county (formally, via a rotating “wheel”). Unlike in
their private practices, attorneys assigned to indigent defendants cannot turn clients’ cases down,
and indigent defendants cannot select among attorneys. Assigned attorneys are also not paid
market rates; rather, they are compensated based on a court-determined fee schedule. These



1
 In 2013, 36% of inmates in state or federal prisons were black and 22% were Hispanic, larger than their respective
shares of the total population (17% and 13%) (Carson 2014). By comparison, 33% of the incarcerated population and
62% of the total population were white. In large urban jurisdictions in the late 1990s and early 2000s, 65% of black
and Hispanic defendants had publicly provided legal defense, compared to 56% of white defendants.

                                                         1
features of the assigned counsel system may affect the composition and incentives of participating
lawyers.
   We begin by confirming existing research findings in our data. Defendants in Bexar County
with assigned counsel are more likely to be found guilty and to be incarcerated, and receive longer
sentences and larger fines on average. The differences are statistically significant and economically
meaningful; for example, a defendant is 50% more likely to be convicted with assigned relative to
retained counsel, and conditional on conviction can expect a sentence that is 11% longer.
   There are four reasons why criminal case outcomes might be worse for cases handled by
assigned as opposed to retained counsel: (1) Case characteristics: Indigent clients may be harder
to defend than non-indigent clients for a variety of reasons, some of which may be unobservable
to researchers. (2) Adverse selection: Attorneys who register to serve as assigned counsel may be
worse than attorneys who do not. (3) Matching: The mechanism used to assign clients to attorneys
in indigent cases may not work as well as the endogenous process in the private market for retained
counsel. (4) Moral hazard: Attorneys may exert less effort in cases in which their clients are
assigned, relative to cases in which their clients pay them directly.
   Previous studies have typically attributed much, if not all, of the disparities in case outcomes
for indigent clients to differences in case characteristics and adverse selection in the assigned
counsel pool (Iyengar 2007, Roach 2010). Less attention has been paid to the possible matching
and moral hazard explanations for the disparities, in part due to data limitations. Our unique
administrative court records not only contain rich information about clients and their cases, but
also permit us to track individual attorneys across cases and over time. Therefore, we can not only
condition on detailed case characteristics, but can also include lawyer-by-year fixed effects, which
allow us to examine whether the same attorney in the same year obtains different outcomes in
cases in which he or she is assigned as opposed to retained on average. We can thus more precisely
quantify the roles of case characteristics and adverse selection among attorneys in the assigned
counsel pool in determining case outcomes. We find that differences in observable case
characteristics (including client, offense, and court characteristics) can explain between one-third
and one-half the disparities in outcomes among cases handled by assigned and retained attorneys;
in a series of robustness tests, we show that any unobservable case characteristics likely play only
a small role in determining outcomes. Meanwhile, adverse selection explains at most one-third of
the disparities in outcomes observed among clients of assigned as opposed to retained lawyers.

                                                  2
   Given that large gaps remain in many outcomes even with a rich set of case and attorney
controls, we next consider the potential role of client-attorney matching in explaining the relatively
worse outcomes observed among indigent defendants. Indigent clients and assigned counsel do
not have the ability to choose one another the way non-indigent clients and retained counsel do,
but rather are matched by a county employee based largely on when the client was booked and the
last time the attorney had an assigned case. We evaluate the extent to which clients who are
assigned to attorneys that look like better “matches” can mitigate the assigned counsel penalty. We
focus on several observable dimensions along which defendants have a revealed preference in the
private market for attorneys: race, gender, distance from residence, and experience. While there
are notable differences in the types of attorneys that different clients choose on the private market,
we find little evidence that being assigned a lawyer who looks like a better match reduces the
assigned counsel penalty.
   Finally, we explore the possible role of moral hazard in giving rise to the assigned counsel
penalty. Of course, attorney effort in a given case is unobservable. However, quickly resolving
cases is particularly incentivized by the assigned counsel fee schedule. We therefore examine the
length of court cases, from initial complaint to final adjudication, as a plausible proxy for attorney
effort. We find that attorneys resolve their assigned cases 13% faster than their retained cases,
consistent with reduced effort. To gain further insight into the potential role of moral hazard, we
examine how outcomes changed after the county altered its compensation structure to allow for
fixed, non-negotiable compensation for more types of cases. While the evidence is merely
suggestive, the county’s move away from forcing attorneys who did not enter guilty pleas to be
compensated based on hours worked (which had to be documented and approved by a judge) is
associated with slightly improved outcomes for clients, which we interpret as further evidence that
lawyer effort is sensitive to expected compensation. Consistent with this interpretation, a 2010
survey of Bexar County lawyers conducted by the Texas Task Force on Indigent Defense reveals
that by a variety of measures, attorneys tend to exert less effort for clients whose cases they were
assigned as compared to clients who retained them. The self-reported typical number of hearings,
motions filed, and hours spent on cases on which lawyers are assigned are consistently lower than
on cases on which lawyers are retained.
   The results of this paper shed new light on the mechanisms behind well-established disparities
in outcomes for defendants with assigned as opposed to retained counsel, and in particular go some

                                                  3
way toward dispelling the idea that such disparities are driven predominately by bad attorneys
electing disproportionately into assigned counsel roles. Instead, they suggest that institutional
factors that affect attorneys’ incentives to provide effective counsel may be key in understanding
these disparities. We consider some potential long-run social costs of deficiencies in the assigned
counsel system and the policy implications of our findings in the concluding remarks.

2. Background
2.1. Indigent Defense in the United States and the Bexar County Context
    In the U.S., there are two ways courts provide legal counsel for indigent defendants: through
public defenders or assigned counsel. Public defenders are government employees who
exclusively represent indigent clients. Assigned counsel are independent private attorneys who
volunteer into a potential selection pool, subject to minimum qualification criteria, and who handle
cases on a contract basis. Roughly 79% of jurisdictions have a public defender’s office, which are
generally supported by an assigned counsel system that handles overflow cases or cases where the
public defender’s office has a conflict of interest (DeFrances and Litras 2000). In jurisdictions
without a public defender, assigned counsel is solely responsible for indigent defense. Bexar
County District Courts use an assigned counsel system almost exclusively.2
    Attorneys may choose to work as assigned counsel for several reasons. Unlike in the private
market, attorneys working as assigned counsel do not have to incur the costs of advertising or
recruiting clients. In Bexar County, attorneys with at least one year of experience practicing
criminal law can request that they be added to the felony assigned counsel list in June and
December, and stay on the list as long as they (1) maintain a least ten hours of continuing legal
education credit each year and (2) do not turn down cases they are assigned.3 Another reason to
participate in assigned counsel is to gain experience handling criminal cases; this experience can
later be advertised to potential clients. Finally, at the conclusion of a case, an attorney representing


2
  During our sample period (2005-2013), the Bexar County Public Defender’s Office only handled cases in which the
defendant had severe mental health issues and appeals. The county had no public defender before 2005. In 2014, the
Public Defender’s Office began handling misdemeanor cases in one court.
3
  To qualify for the state jail felony list, an attorney must have at least one year of experience in criminal litigation as
well as experience as lead or co-counsel in at least three criminal jury trials. To qualify for the second and third degree
felony list, an attorney must have at least two years of experience in criminal litigation as well as experience as lead
or co-counsel in at least two felony jury trials. To qualify for the first degree or 3(g) felony list, an attorney must either
be board certified in criminal law or (1) have at least four years of experience in criminal litigation, (2) have experience
as a trial counsel in at least four felony jury trials in the last five years (and have served as lead counsel in at least two
of those trials), and (3) have completed 12 hours of CLE in criminal law or procedure in the last calendar year.

                                                              4
an indigent client is compensated by the court, which may make payment more certain than when
an attorney must collect money from an individual client.
    After defendants are booked, they have the opportunity to declare that they are indigent. As in
most jurisdictions, in Bexar County the court makes the final determination of indigence based on
whether a defendant’s net income (i.e., income less certain necessary expenses) is below a certain
amount per month.4 Attorneys in the county’s assigned counsel pool are then assigned eligible
felony clients in one of two ways, depending on the specific court. Either a Court Coordinator or
Pre-Trial Services Officer interviews the client and identifies the set of eligible lawyers, based on
the assigned counsel lists (“wheels”) maintained by the Criminal District Courts Administration
Office. The judge then assigns an eligible lawyer to the case, in some cases based on who is
physically present in the courtroom (District Courts 186, 226, and 379) and in other cases based
on whoever happens to be at the top of the wheel (District Courts 144, 175, 186, 187, 227, 290,
399, and 437). When a lawyer takes a case off the wheel, that lawyer is moved to the bottom of
the wheel. In both systems, attorneys must take on the clients assigned to them, and clients have
no say on the attorney to whom they are assigned. Lawyers who have been assigned to a case must
contact the defendant by the end of the first working day that they are assigned, and represent the
defendant until the conclusion of the case.5
    The compensation lawyers receive for serving as assigned counsel in Bexar County is a
function of the severity of the charge and the disposition of the case.6 Table 1 shows the assigned
counsel fee schedules that were in effect in Bexar County during our sample period (2005-2013).7
During the entire period, lawyers who resolved a case via a plea bargain or were assigned to a case
in which the District Attorney filed a motion to revoke a client’s probation (MTR) could choose
to be compensated with a flat fee. During the first half of our sample, in cases not resolved via a
plea bargain and that were not MTRs, lawyers were restricted to an hourly rate of $50-$150,


4
  The defendant’s necessary expenses include rent or mortgage, food/groceries, car payments, and utilities. These
expenses are subtracted from the defendant’s gross income, including spousal income if applicable. The threshold for
qualifying is adjusted annually pursuant to the Federal Poverty Guidelines; in 2015, it was $980.83 per month. Those
eligible for SNAP, Medicaid, TANF, SSI, or public housing are also automatically eligible to receive assigned counsel.
5
  There are only three ways an attorney can be excused from a case he or she is assigned: (1) he or she is actively
working on another assigned case, (2) he or she has a legal conflict with the case, or (3) he or she has registered
vacation with the court. “Vacation” is a specific term in this context; lawyers must register vacations in advance and
swear they are truly on vacation or attending to a family emergency rather than trying to manage their caseload.
6
  See Gross (2013) for a national survey of indigent defense compensation. Most jurisdictions have low hourly rates
combined with low maximum caps or have flat fees for assigned counsel.
7
  Beyond adjustments noted in Table 1, the rates have not been adjusted over time (e.g., for inflation).

                                                          5
depending on the severity of the case and how the time was spent.8 By comparison, on the private
market in 2015, the median criminal defense attorney in San Antonio charged $200 per hour (State
Bar of Texas 2016). In July 2009, flat fees became an option for lawyers who resolved cases via
dismissal, and the fee for representing clients facing MTRs increased. Finally, for cases resolved
after November 2015 (6% of our sample), attorneys could request a flat payment of $200 for any
other type of resolution. In practice, attorneys choose the flat fee in 75% of cases (Texas Task
Force on Indigent Defense 2010). Based on a 2010 survey of Bexar County attorneys (discussed
further in Section 5.3), this is because flat fee requests are not subject to review, whereas a judge
can adjust, or even refuse, the hours requested by a lawyer. Additionally, if an attorney can get a
case resolved quickly, the flat fee amounts will be higher than pay based on the hourly rate.
     Both the low hourly rates and flat fee options affect the incentives of assigned counsel. Under
the flat fee structure, attorneys have an explicit incentive to resolve a case via plea. Flat fees are
not uncommon in private criminal law, and retained attorneys typically set fees based on the
complexity of the case and the individual’s criminal history. According to one San Antonio firm,
someone with no prior criminal history charged with possession of less than one gram of marijuana
will pay a flat fee of $1000-$4000.9 Assuming an hourly wage of $200, a retained attorney would
expect to work 5-20 hours on such a case. If assigned, an attorney could receive a flat fee of $500
for a guilty plea, meaning that the typical attorney would spend no more than 2.5 hours on the case
in order to receive his or her market wage. Prior to 2009, if an assigned attorney did not enter a
guilty plea, his or her hourly wage would be $75, $125 less than the median hourly rate for criminal
defense attorneys.
2.2. Sources of Disparities in Assigned Counsel Case Outcomes
    A robust finding in the literature on indigent defense is that defendants with assigned counsel
fare worse than those with other forms of counsel (Iyengar 2007, Anderson and Heaton 2012,
Cohen 2014, Shem-Tov 2017). There are several potential reasons for this. First, publicly financed
counsel may handle different types of cases and clients. For example, defendants charged with
white-collar crimes are more likely to use private counsel, whereas those with a prior criminal

8
  Assigned counsel does have the option to petition judges for additional compensation if they spend their own
resources in order to, for example, conduct an investigation, but in practice this happens in less than 1% of cases.
Judges are not required to grant additional compensation, and the fear of being denied leads attorneys to forego making
requests (Texas Task Force on Indigent Defense 2010).
9
  Cook & Cook Law Firm, PLLC. https://lawyerdefend.me/average-cost-of-criminal-defense-lawyer-in-san-antonio-
texas/.

                                                          6
record are more likely to use public counsel (Harlow 2000). Further, clients who are technically
eligible for indigent defense may choose to borrow money to retain private counsel if they expect
that the return to doing so is high, potentially leading to selection along unobserved dimensions in
the characteristics of cases handled by assigned vs. retained counsel.
       A second potential source of disparities in case outcomes stems from possible adverse selection
in the assigned counsel pool. The regular, but typically low compensation may attract primarily
inexperienced or low-quality attorneys who are not capable of earning more as retained counsel.
In the past, researchers have generally interpreted the observed worse outcomes for defendants
randomly assigned to assigned counsel as opposed to public defenders in jurisdictions that
simultaneously use both as evidence that adverse selection is important (Iyengar 2007, Roach
2010).
       Another plausible reason that assigned counsel performs worse, at least relative to retained
counsel, is that any benefits associated with the ability of defendants to endogenously match with
lawyers are lost when attorneys are assigned by a third party. Mutual trust facilitates
communication between a lawyer and his or her client, which may help a lawyer uncover relevant
facts, witnesses, alibis, or extenuating circumstances regarding a case. It also could help ensure
the defendant behaves in a way that reduces the probability that he or she will be convicted or
incarcerated, such as showing up on time, dressing and behaving appropriately in court, and
refraining from suspicious activity while the case unfolds. To facilitate the matching process, most
law offices offer free initial consultations. Websites offering legal advice suggest that people meet
with at least two experienced attorneys before hiring one, that they should be looking for an
attorney that makes them “feel comfortable,” and that they should “trust [their] gut.”10 This may
also lead individuals accused of crimes to seek out attorneys who have similar backgrounds as
their own.
       A final reason that assigned counsel may perform worse than other forms of legal
representation is moral hazard. Given the low private returns to pursuing assigned counsel cases,
attorneys may exert less effort on them relative to cases on which they are retained. Because lawyer
effort is not easily observed or measured, there is little evidence on the quantitative importance of
this effect. However, Schwall (2016) exploits a change in payment scheme from hourly to flat fee
for indigent defense attorneys and finds evidence consistent with attorneys’ exerting less effort

10
     See, for example, http://www.wikihow.com/Select-a-Criminal-Defense-Attorney.

                                                        7
under the flat fee system. Legal scholars have also highlighted potential moral hazard problems
associated with remuneration by third parties (Carrington 1979, Toone 2014), and while they do
not entirely rule out adverse selection, interviews with defendants and other agents of the court
consistently suggest that privately retained attorneys tend to prepare more and pursue cases more
zealously than assigned counsel (Klein 1986, Anderson and Heaton 2012).

3. Data and Descriptive Statistics
3.1. Empirical Setting and Data Sources
   The setting for our study is Bexar County, Texas, which is the home of San Antonio. According
to Census data, Bexar County had a population of 1.7 million in 2010, making it the fourth most
populous county in Texas. Notably, Bexar County is ethnically and racially diverse; in 2010,
59.1% of the population of the county identified as Hispanic or Latino, 29.5% of the population
identified as white alone (not Hispanic or Latino), and 8.2% of the population identified as African
American.
   Our main source of data are comprehensive administrative records covering 64,209 felony
charges filed in Bexar County District Courts between 2005 and 2013. Bexar County began
releasing these data in 2011 as part of an initiative to make court records more accessible (Gonzalez
2011). The data include detailed information on each case, such as characteristics of the defendant,
the offense with which the defendant was charged, case outcomes, and sentencing outcomes. In
addition to the identities of the defendants, the records include the identities of defense attorneys,
which allow us to follow individual lawyers as they interact with the Bexar County courts over
time and across cases.
   We merged these administrative court records with several other datasets. First, we obtained
information from the State Bar of Texas on the characteristics of all attorneys licensed to practice
in Texas, including many characteristics to which clients might have a “gut” reaction. Specifically,
the Texas Bar maintains information on when the attorney was licensed in Texas, the law school
from which they graduated, the ethnicity and gender of the attorney, and the location of their office.
Both the case and bar data include the attorney’s bar number, allowing us to uniquely identify
attorneys in both datasets and merge the two together.
   The case data also include the home address of the defendant. Using this address, we determine
the census block group in which each defendant lives, and then incorporate block group
demographics from the Census Bureau’s 2009-2013 American Community Survey. This gives us

                                                  8
additional information about defendants’ backgrounds. For example, the case data do not include
defendants’ incomes, but defendants’ home addresses allow us to ascertain the poverty rates of
their neighborhoods, along with correlates of their likely costs of borrowing money. Information
on clients’ home addresses combined with State Bar records on attorneys’ office addresses also
allows us to calculate the distance between clients’ residences and their lawyers’ offices. Physical
proximity may affect the client’s (or the client’s family’s) ability to meet and communicate with
their attorney.
3.2. Descriptive Statistics
     Overall, assigned counsel represents 63% of felony cases that come before Bexar County
District Courts.11 Table 2 provides descriptive statistics on case and attorney characteristics as well
as case outcomes broken out for cases in which the lawyer was privately retained or assigned.
Panels A and B of the table make clear the potential role that client and case characteristics may
play in the relative performance of assigned counsel. Defendants represented by assigned counsel
are slightly more likely to be women, more likely to be black and less likely to be white, and reside
in more impoverished neighborhoods. They also tend to live in more unstable neighborhoods,
where instability is defined as the fraction of housing units in the defendant’s block group that are
vacant or whose current occupant moved in after 2009; as we discuss in Section 5.1.2, we use this
measure to proxy for the ease of borrowing funds to retain an attorney on the private market.
Additionally, defendants represented by assigned counsel are less likely to be released on bond at
some point during the adjudication process. They also have more serious criminal histories, as
measured by both previous felony charges filed against them as well as previous convictions.
However, the cases represented by assigned counsel are more likely to be state jail felonies, the
lowest level felony offenses that can be charged in Texas, as opposed to more serious first, second,
or third degree felonies.
     During the time period under consideration, 67% of attorneys in our sample serve as both
assigned and retained counsel in the same year. 12 This could potentially leave little scope for
adverse selection into the assigned counsel pool. However, as Panel C of Table 2 reveals, there are
systematic differences between attorneys who handle assigned and retained cases. Attorneys



11
  Two-thirds of felony defendants nationwide had publicly funded counsel in 1998 (Harlow 2000).
12
  Of respondents to the Texas Task Force on Indigent Defense’s survey of lawyers (discussed further in Section 5.3),
70% reported working on assigned cases.

                                                         9
working as assigned counsel are more likely to be women and tend to have offices further from
where their clients live. Attorneys handling assigned cases also tend to be less experienced, as
measured by both years since admission to the Texas Bar and previous number of cases tried.13
Differences in experience and other characteristics of attorneys on assigned and retained cases
could explain some of the assigned counsel penalty.14
     Panel D of Table 2 indicates that, consistent with the previous literature, felony cases with
assigned counsel tend to garner worse outcomes than cases with retained counsel on average. Cases
with assigned attorneys in Bexar County are 18.3 percentage points more likely to result in a
conviction on average. While only a slightly greater fraction of assigned counsel cases are resolved
via a guilty plea, assigned counsel cases are substantially more likely to end in a nolo contendere
or “no contest” plea, where the client admits that the state has sufficient evidence to convict but
neither admits nor denies guilt, and are less likely to end in dismissal.15 Clients represented by
assigned counsel also tend to receive longer sentences and larger fines.

4. Empirical Methodology
     We take advantage of the unique features of our data and setting to better measure and
understand disparities in case outcomes for clients with assigned as opposed to retained defense
attorneys. Our administrative data allow us to control for detailed case and attorney characteristics
to determine how much of the assigned counsel penalty these can explain. One key benefit of our
data is that, unlike in previous studies, we can observe the same attorney working as both assigned
counsel and retained counsel at the same point in his or her career. This allows us to control for
both observable and unobservable potential differences between attorneys, such as education,
charisma, or experience, which could also affect outcomes in criminal cases. If disparities in
outcomes between assigned and retained counsel cases arise purely as a result of adverse selection,
we should find similar outcomes, on average, in otherwise similar cases tried by the same attorney
in the same year. After conditioning on case and attorney characteristics and including attorney-

13
   We find little evidence that lawyers who attended highly ranked law schools are overrepresented in retained cases.
A plurality of attorneys working as retained and assigned counsel attended the local law school, St. Mary’s, which is
unranked in the U.S. News and World Report ranking of law schools.
14
   In Appendix Figure A1, we plot the average percentage of an attorney’s cases that are assigned by years since
Texas Bar admission. For less experienced attorneys, the vast majority of cases in a given year are assigned as
opposed to retained. The fraction assigned declines with attorney experience.
15
   Pleading nolo contendere rather than guilty can benefit a defendant in future legal actions. If a defendant is sued in
civil court, a previous guilty plea means the defendant is criminally liable for the incident as a matter of fact. This is
not the case if he or she pled nolo contendere. For the same reason, no contest pleas can be easier to appeal.

                                                           10
by-year fixed effects, any remaining penalty could be due to unobservable differences across cases
handled by assigned and retained counsel (an issue we address in Section 5.1.2), differences in
lawyer-client match quality across assigned and retained cases (explored in Section 5.2), or
differences in attorney effort across assigned and retained cases (examined in Section 5.3).
      The basic regression of interest for this analysis is as follows:
(1)                                                           X         A
where
                                  X           , ,       and A               ,    .
In equation (1),        is the outcome for defendant i (or for case i, as for our purposes each case is
associated with one defendant) with attorney k taking place in year t (where t is defined by the
complaint year of the case). In our main analysis, we focus on four outcomes: case dismissal,
deferred adjudication, conviction, and incarceration conditional on conviction. 16                              is a
dummy variable indicating whether attorney k was assigned (as opposed to retained) when
representing defendant i. X is a matrix of defendant/case characteristics, which includes the
following defendant characteristics in           : defendant gender, defendant race, defendant age at the
time of the offense, the poverty rate of the defendant’s block group, the fraction of housing units
in the defendant’s block group that are vacant or whose current occupant moved in after 2009,
whether or not the defendant was released during the adjudication process, the defendant’s
complaint history (i.e., the number of felony charges a defendant had accumulated at the time of
the relevant charge), and the defendant’s conviction history (i.e., the number of convictions a
defendant had accumulated at the time of the relevant charge). X also includes                      ,a   dummy for
the offense code associated with the defendant’s case,17 and                , a court docket dummy (which we
define as a unique combination of court and charge year; in Bexar County, each court has one
judge, and thus        controls for the judge the defendant faced). A                is a matrix of attorney and
attorney-client match characteristics. The vector               includes directly observable and measurable
attributes of attorney k and his or her match with defendant i, including the total number of felony
cases the attorney had represented in Bexar County (a measure of experience) as well as the
fraction of those cases in which he or she served as assigned counsel. Both these variables are


16
   In Appendix Tables A1-A5 and Appendix Figure A2, we present results for every adjudication and sentencing
outcome.
17
   There are 413 offense codes. Notably, the offense level dictates the list from which assigned attorneys are drawn.

                                                        11
measured at the date the case was filed. 18 The vector                      additionally includes the (logged)
distance in miles between the defendant’s home and his lawyer’s office as well as an indicator for
whether or not the attorney is the same race as the defendant. A                  also includes attorney-by-year
fixed effects         , which absorb roughly half the variation in assigned counsel. 19 We cluster
standard errors at both the defendant block group and the attorney levels.20
     In this specification,       is identified off variation within attorneys who work as both assigned
and retained counsel in the same year. Thus, a significant coefficient on                                   implies a
difference in outcomes for the same attorney when that attorney is assigned vs. retained in similar
cases handled at a similar point in the attorney’s career. Such a difference could arise from
unmeasured elements of the match between the client and attorney or from variation in attorney
effort, but cannot solely be attributable to fixed attorney characteristics and thus to adverse
selection.
     Identifying the source of a disparity by sequentially adding covariates can be problematic,
particularly when the covariates are correlated. Therefore, we quantify the importance of any given
factor in explaining the assigned counsel penalty using an order-invariant decomposition following
Gelbach (2016). We specifically identify the size of the omitted variable bias in the unconditional
estimate of the assigned counsel penalty, relative to the conditional estimate, that is attributable to
two sets of covariates: the collection of variables X , which we term case characteristics, and the
collection of variables A        , which we term attorney characteristics. The amount of bias due to the
omission         of      any       particular        set        of     covariates                is      equal       to
             ′                             ′         , where         is the estimated conditional correlations
between the control variables in          and the legal outcome from equation (1). Scaling the amount of
the penalty (and the estimated standard errors) attributed to each factor by the average
unconditional penalty allows us to compare the relative importance of each factor across outcomes.



18
   The number of cases previously handled likely best captures the amount of experience and skill an attorney brings
to a particular case. However, attorneys typically advertise their years of experience, so in our analysis of client-
attorney matching, we measure experience as years since Texas Bar admission.
19
   In other words, if we were to aggregate our sample to one observation per attorney per year, 49.4% of those
observations would have less than 100% and more than 0% of cases assigned.
20
   Clustering at the defendant home block group level consistently yields more conservative standard errors than
clustering at the defendant level. It is also conceptually in line with our instrumental variable strategy (discussed in
Section 5.1) that exploits block group-level income shocks as a source of exogenous variation in the likelihood that a
defendant uses assigned counsel.

                                                           12
In our results, we present the unconditional assigned counsel penalty, and then the percent of the
penalty explained by case characteristics and attorney characteristics based on the decomposition.
   One concern is that our controls and fixed effects do not fully capture features of cases that
could be relevant for legal outcomes, and that may also be correlated with whether a client retains
their own counsel or is assigned a lawyer by the court. For example, a defendant who qualifies for
assigned counsel might be less inclined to scrape together funds for retained counsel if he or she
knows that in his or her case, the return to hiring a lawyer is low. After presenting the basic
decomposition results, we discuss the implications of such selection on unobservables and consider
several extensions to our main model as well as alternative subsample analyses to ascertain its
empirical relevance. We then turn to our tests for the importance of match quality and moral hazard
in generating the assigned counsel penalty.

5. Results
   In Section 5.1, we explore how much of the assigned counsel penalty across different case
outcomes can be explained by case and attorney characteristics, estimating equation (1) and using
the decomposition methodology described above. The results speak to the extent to which adverse
selection of cases or attorneys into assigned counsel explains the observed gaps. We also perform
several robustness checks to better understand the potential importance of unobservable
differences between indigent and non-indigent clients. To the extent that disparities in outcomes
across cases with assigned and retained attorneys persist even after conditioning on case and
attorney controls, client-attorney match quality and lawyer effort could be important explanations.
In Section 5.2, we examine whether a policy that attempts to replicate the endogenous matching
process of defendants to attorneys on the private market could reduce the residual gaps. Finally, in
Section 5.3, we provide evidence on the importance of moral hazard in contributing to the
remaining disparities.
5.1. Case Characteristics and Adverse Selection
5.1.1 Baseline Results
   We begin by decomposing the source of the raw assigned counsel penalty for our main
outcomes of interest in Figure 1. For each outcome, the first bar in the figure shows the coefficient,
and associated 95% confidence interval, on the dummy for assigned counsel from a model with no
controls (i.e., the unconditional assigned counsel penalty). The final bar shows the estimated
assigned counsel penalty conditional on all other covariates (i.e., the residual assigned counsel

                                                 13
penalty). 21 The intervening bars show contributions of case characteristics X                         and attorney
characteristics A        to the assigned counsel penalty based on the decomposition.22
     Clients represented by assigned counsel are 13.5 percentage points (39% of the retained case
mean) less likely to have their cases dismissed than defendants with retained attorneys. Adding
case and attorney controls reduces this penalty by roughly half, leaving a significant 6.1 percentage
point assigned counsel penalty. Case characteristics account for 31% of the unconditional
disparity, while adverse selection on the part of attorneys accounts for 24%.
     In Texas, defendants with little or no previous contact with the justice system who are accused
of low-level offenses can qualify for deferred adjudication, meaning that if they remain crime-free
for a fixed period of time and comply with any other court orders, their case will be dismissed.
Clients represented by assigned counsel are 5.6 percentage points (18% of the retained case mean)
less likely to receive deferred adjudication, 3.2 percentage points of which cannot be explained by
case or attorney characteristics. Case characteristics explain 36% of the gap. Meanwhile, attorney
characteristics explain essentially none of the gap; that is, the disparity persists within attorneys
trying similar assigned and retained cases within the same year.
     Overall, when guilty pleas, no contest pleas, and actual convictions in court (a rare outcome)
are combined, clients represented by assigned counsel are 18.3 percentage points more likely to
be convicted than clients represented by retained counsel. Approximately 34% of the assigned
counsel penalty in conviction rates can be explained by differences in case characteristics, but even
after additionally controlling for differences across attorneys, 47% of the assigned counsel penalty
remains unexplained.23




21
   Unconditional and conditional estimates are also reported in Appendix Tables A1 and A2.
22
   In Appendix Table A3, we break the decomposition results down further by defendant characteristics, offense fixed
effects, court-by-year fixed effects, and attorney characteristics.
23
   Appendix Figure A2 breaks out guilty pleas and nolo contendere pleas. When lawyers work as assigned counsel,
their clients are 16.4 percentage points (73% of the retained case mean) more likely to enter nolo contendere pleas.
35% of this gap can be explained by case characteristics, and 26% can be characterized as being due to adverse
selection among attorneys. The estimated likelihood that an indigent client pleads guilty actually becomes more
precise as we compare increasingly similar cases, from a marginally statistically significant 1.9 percentage point
difference to a statistically significant 2.2 percentage point (16% of the retained case mean) difference. Decomposing
this change suggests that comparing similar clients eliminates this disparity, but the probability that a guilty plea is
entered is even more different across retained and assigned clients of the same attorney in the same year than it is for
clients on average. An example that would be consistent with this would be, for example, if more experienced attorneys
were more likely to negotiate guilty pleas for their retained clients than less experienced attorneys, and less
experienced attorneys took on, and quickly pled out, more assigned cases.

                                                          14
     Turning to a sentencing outcome, defendants with assigned counsel are 7.5 percentage points
more likely to be incarcerated conditional on conviction. This penalty falls to 2.3 percentage points
once we control for case and attorney characteristics. 24 Not surprisingly, differences in case
characteristics explain the majority (77%) of the gap in incarceration outcomes.25 Attorney quality,
again defined by the same attorney’s outcomes in similar retained cases in the same year, accounts
for none of the gap, leaving a residual penalty that corresponds to 31% of the raw difference in
case outcomes.
5.1.2. Robustness
     The previous results suggest that defendants with assigned counsel fare worse in their
adjudication and incarceration outcomes than those who hire their own attorneys, and that
controlling for case and attorney characteristics reduces but does not eliminate the disparity for
most outcomes. One concern is that certain unmeasured characteristics of cases that are correlated
with the likelihood that a client uses assigned or retained counsel could also independently affect
case outcomes. Specifically, if someone accused of a crime is aware of the penalty associated with
assigned counsel, they may exert more effort in acquiring the resources needed to hire a private
attorney from family or friends, even if they are eligible to a court appointed attorney. In this case,
some fraction of the assigned counsel penalty is due to this differential selection of the marginal
defendant.26
     As a first test of the potential importance of this unobserved selection, we appeal to a well-
established literature in sociology on the correlates of social capital and reciprocal exchange.
Sampson et al. (1999) showed that, even more so than measures of poverty or racial segregation,
measures of housing turnover are strongly correlated with the likelihood that neighbors provide
each other with financial assistance. Figure 2 illustrates conceptually how the selection problem
plays out in the context of neighborhoods that have lower or higher housing turnover; i.e., that are
more or less stable. In neighborhoods with low housing turnover, the social cost of raising money

24
   Appendix Figure A2 includes outcomes for incarceration not conditional on conviction; however, those results are
driven mainly by conviction. Appendix Figure A2 also includes decompositions for other sentencing outcomes,
including sentence length and fines.
25
   Recall that our case characteristics include court docket dummies, which account for judicial preferences.
26
   Suppose the only outcome a defendant cared about was conviction. The expected cost of using assigned counsel
can be expressed as r = E(Conviction | Retained, X ) – E(Conviction | Appointed, X), which is only different from
our estimated assigned counsel penalty to the extent that our control variables in equation (1) differ from the private
information, X, used by defendants to form their expectations. Rational defendants will hire an attorney as long as
the utility loss associated with paying their private fee, U(f) is less than the expected utility loss associated with the
increased probability of conviction U(r).

                                                           15
is lower, meaning that all defendants who anticipate the return to retained counsel to be rL or higher
choose to use the private market. In neighborhoods with high housing turnover, only defendants
who anticipate the return to retained counsel to be rH or higher are willing to turn to neighbors for
funds.
     If unobserved selection on the expected return to assigned counsel is driving our results, then
we would expect that in neighborhoods with low housing turnover, the observed assigned counsel
penalty will be pL; in these neighborhoods, increased rates of reciprocal exchange mean that the
cost of “scraping together” money is lower, implying that only people who perceive a very low
return to retained counsel (e.g., a low assigned counsel penalty) would not hire them. Alternately,
in neighborhoods with high housing turnover, we would expect larger penalties on average, pH, as
the marginal indigent person retaining counsel would expect the benefit to be higher.
     Following the sociology literature, we measure block group level instability as the fraction of
all housing units in the ACS (renter or owner occupied) that are vacant or whose current resident
moved in after 2009. For the regressions, we standardize this variable to be mean zero, with a
standard deviation of one. We show the results of a model in which the assigned counsel penalty
is allowed to vary with this measure in Panel B of Table 3. Our data provide some evidence
consistent with theory; in neighborhoods where residents have fewer informal networks on which
to rely, assigned counsel penalties are larger on average, particularly with respect to conviction.
However, the first-order effect of the assigned counsel penalty (not shown) is still statistically and
substantively significant, and is qualitatively identical to our first order effect that does not allow
for this heterogeneity (shown in Panel A of Table 3 for reference). This suggests that selection on
the client side can explain some, but not all, of the observed assigned counsel penalty.
     In a second test of the potential importance of endogenous case allocation between assigned
and retained lawyers, we consider an instrumental variable (IV) strategy in which we instrument
for whether a defendant uses assigned or retained counsel using Bartik-style shift-share measures
that arguably only affect case outcomes through their effects on the likelihood a defendant uses a
court-provided lawyer. Specifically, following Beaudry et al. (2012), we construct a two-part
instrument that predicts a client’s use of assigned counsel based on the timing of his or her arrest
and the industrial composition of his or her neighborhood.27 Here, we exploit the heterogeneous


27
  The Beaudry et al. (2012) version of the Bartik instrument consists of two instruments. The first instrument captures
variation in wages driven by changes in wages within an industry. The second instrument captures variation in wages

                                                         16
effects of the Great Recession across industries, combined with cross sectional and temporal
variation in the concentration of workers in different industries in Bexar County, to obtain
exogenous variation in the probability that a given defendant will be eligible for assigned counsel.
The excludability of the instrument relies on the assumption that changing economic
circumstances affect the relative performance of assigned and retained counsel only through the
fact that the marginal indigent defendant would not have qualified for assigned counsel in different
macroeconomic circumstances. The IV results appear in Panel C of Table 3. The first-stage is
reasonably strong (the F-statistic is 28), but the IV estimates tend to be much larger in absolute
value, and slightly less precise, than the baseline OLS estimates. Notably, however, the IV results
are the same sign as the OLS estimates. This leads us to conclude that focusing on variation in the
use of assigned counsel that is arguably exogenous to unobserved client characteristics does not
contradict our overall findings. This further helps to mitigate concerns about possible unobserved
selection in cases represented by retained vs. assigned attorneys; if anything, the assigned counsel
penalty increased, rather than decreased, when local economic conditions deteriorated.
    In the remaining panels of Table 3, we consider different subsamples of cases and clients in
which the scope for unobserved characteristics of cases to be important is substantially more
limited. First, in Panel D, we focus only on cases where the top charge is either a state jail or 3rd
degree felony. Since these minor crimes carry much shorter sentences, a marginally indigent client
may be less inclined to, for example, draw on an extended social network to raise funds in order
to retain an attorney. In this sample, we find that there is a slightly smaller reduction in the
probability of receiving deferred adjudication in assigned cases, but conditional on being


driven by the growth of high-wage vs low-wage industries. To construct the first instrument, we determined the share
of individuals in each block group in Bexar County who were working in each of 13 broad industries using the 2008-
2012 five-year ACS. We then used data from each of the one-year ACS IPUMS samples for Bexar County as a whole
between 2005 and 2013 to regress (log) household income on dummies for whether that individual worked in each of
the same 13 broad industries alluded to above. Household income is the closest measure to what would be considered
by the County Clerk’s Office to determine eligibility for assigned counsel. Using coefficients from these nine
regressions (one for each year between 2005 and 2013), we then predict household income for each individual
appearing in our court records, applying the arrest year-specific coefficients to the industry shares of the defendants’
home block groups. These predicted values are the first instrument. The second instrument is based on changes in the
industrial composition of jobs in a block group, and is constructed using annual block group-level data on industry
shares. Using 2001-2004 Census LODES data, we estimated the mean wage in the same 13 industries in Texas, and
then standardized this mean relative to the median wage. We then constructed an annual measure of predicted wage
changes in each block group in Bexar County for 2005-2015 as the sum of the percent of jobs in each industry in that
year multiplied by the statewide average relative 2001-2004 wage in that industry. Variation in how the recession that
occurred during our sample period affected employment and income of different industries provides time-varying and
cross-sectional variation in predicted income for individual defendants, which in turn affects the probability of being
eligible for assigned counsel in a manner independent of the outcomes of interest.

                                                          17
convicted, clients represented by assigned counsel are more likely to be incarcerated. Restricting
attention further in Panel E to examine only charges for possessing less than one gram of a
controlled substance (a common state jail felony), we find similar, if not larger, penalties.
    Next, in Panels F and G, we focus on clients living in lower income areas by excluding all
cases (retained and assigned) in which the client lives in a block group where the median household
income exceeds $44,000, the 75th percentile of block group median household income of clients
represented by assigned counsel. This helps to alleviate concerns that our current set of controls
do not adequately address the inframarginality problem associated with comparing indigent and
non-indigent clients. For all outcomes, our results are highly robust to this sample limitation as
well. Also in line with results for the full sample, we find that in more unstable neighborhoods
(where residents have fewer informal networks on which to rely), assigned counsel penalties tend
to be larger.28
    Finally, in Panel H, we restrict the sample to attorneys who were admitted to the Texas Bar
fewer than five years before charges were filed, limiting the potential for differential attrition from
the retained counsel market to affect our estimates. While our sample size is much smaller, the
point estimates remain qualitatively identical.
    The fact that we find little evidence that the assigned counsel penalty is substantially reduced
with these alternative specifications and samples, as well as in IV estimates identified off
fluctuations in individual income driven by macroeconomic conditions, substantially limits the
scope for unobserved client or case characteristics to be driving our estimates. Any such factor
leading to worse outcomes for indigent defendants must be equally important when clients
encounter higher and lower borrowing costs, when clients face minor and serious punishments,
when clients are lower and higher income, and when attorneys are more and less experienced. Our
results further suggest that any unobserved factor affecting outcomes must be particularly




28
   In Appendix Table A4, we also show that the results are robust to excluding cases with attorneys who work for
firms whose main office is located outside of San Antonio, which helps to address possible concerns that our results
are influenced by novice attorneys working in Bexar County to gain experience. We also show in Appendix Table A4
that the results are robust to excluding MTRs, where the severity of the original charge and the identity of the original
attorney handling the case are not always clear.

                                                          18
important when people accused of crimes are more likely to be indigent due to business cycle
fluctuations.29,30
5.2. Client-Attorney Match Quality
     The previous results indicate that a large fraction of the assigned counsel penalty remains
unexplained even after controlling for case characteristics as well as adverse selection of attorneys
into assigned counsel pool. The residual penalty could arise from the inability of indigent clients
to endogenously match with attorneys. In Table 4, we show that defendants who hire their own
counsel match with attorneys with different characteristics than those who are assigned attorneys
along several dimensions. Non-indigent defendants are 11 percentage points more likely to retain
counsel that is the same race as they are. Defendants also have a slight preference for male
attorneys; 82.8% of retained attorneys are male, compared to 79.5% of assigned attorneys. Relative
to when they are retained, when attorneys are assigned, their offices are located 7 miles further
from a defendant’s place of residence on average. Attorneys who are retained also tend to be more
experienced than those who are assigned; they have tried over 80% more felony cases in Bexar
County and have 3.7 additional years of experience (measured as years since Texas Bar admission)
on average. Clients retaining their own attorney also choose attorneys who are more specialized in
the type of crime of which they are accused31 In general, these preferences do not vary significantly
by defendant race. Clients of all races and ethnicities have a slight preference for male attorneys
(a preference that also does not vary by client gender), prefer closer attorneys, and prefer more
experienced attorneys. However, while black and Hispanic defendants are substantially more
likely to retain a lawyer of the same race or ethnicity than to be assigned one of the same race or
ethnicity, white defendants are somewhat less likely to retain a white lawyer than to be assigned a
white one.



29
   In results available on request, we include defendant fixed effects along with all other case and attorney controls.
Defendant fixed effects largely eliminate the assigned counsel penalty for adjudication outcomes, but there remain
statistically significant effects of assigned counsel on whether a defendant was incarcerated, the fine amount, and
sentence length. While this particular local average treatment effect may be of some interest, it is unlikely that it can
be interpreted as the impact of representation on case outcomes, as the reason that an individual has assigned counsel
in one case, but manages to hire his or her own attorney in another is almost certainly due to changes in the client’s
criminal history, social ties, or life circumstances that have direct effects on case outcomes.
30
   In results available on request, we find that assigned counsel performs particularly poorly relative to retained
counsel in the three courts that do not as strictly adhere to the attorney rotation wheel in selecting assigned counsel.
We also find little evidence that lawyers working in larger firms perform better or worse when handling cases as
assigned vs. retained counsel.
31
   Here, we group offenses into 18 different categories, such as arson, burglary, homicide, drug crime, etc.

                                                          19
     We now investigate whether the assigned counsel penalties vary across the dimensions along
which clients have a revealed preference in the retained attorney market that is not reflected in the
assigned counsel matching process: the attorney’s race, the attorney’s gender, how far the
attorney’s office is from a client’s residence, the attorney’s years of experience, and the attorney’s
experience with the specific offense (measured as the total number of cases handled in that offense
category).
     In Table 5, we examine how the assigned counsel penalty varies by the race of the client and
attorney. Again, we show results for four outcomes: dismissal, deferred adjudication, conviction,
and incarceration conditional on conviction.32 Since racial preferences appear to be race specific,
we estimate these models separately for black, Hispanic, and white defendants, and show both the
average difference for a racial match relative to an attorney of a different race as well as the average
differences for having an attorney of each of the two other races/ethnicities relative to a racial
match. All regressions have the full set of case characteristics X                   and attorney characteristics
A     .
     While black defendants are more than twice as likely to retain a black attorney as to be assigned
one, when indigent black defendants are assigned a black attorney, vs. a Hispanic or white attorney,
they are slightly (but not statistically significantly) less likely to be see their case dismissed (3.1
percentage points vs. 2.3 percentage points less likely). Similarly, relative to black defendants
assigned lawyers of different races or ethnicities, black defendants assigned black lawyers are
about 20% less likely to receive deferred adjudication. Conviction rates are also higher for black
defendants with attorneys of the same race, but again the difference relative to black defendants
assigned attorneys of different races or ethnicities is not statistically significant. Finally, with
respect to incarceration conditional on conviction, the assigned counsel penalty is about twice as
large when black attorneys as opposed to Hispanic or white attorneys represent black clients,
although the effects are imprecisely estimated. Taken together, these results suggest that
government attempts to connect black clients with black attorneys may do little to improve their
case outcomes, in contrast to results found in other social contexts, such as education and policing
(e.g., Dee 2004, McCrary 2007).33

32
  We show results for additional outcomes in Appendix Table A5.
33
  This finding is consistent with multiple plausible mechanisms. For example, it could be due to behavioral differences
on the part of black attorneys or to adverse treatment of black clients by white or Hispanic lawyers that is independent
of the client’s economic status. Our data do not allow us to distinguish between these mechanisms.

                                                          20
   Could black attorneys generally be worse when serving as assigned counsel? If this were true,
Hispanic and white defendants would also have particularly large assigned counsel penalties when
assigned black attorneys. This does not appear to be the case; if anything, Hispanic defendants are
less likely to be convicted, and receive shorter sentences conditional on conviction, when they are
assigned, as opposed to when they hire, black attorneys. Relative to black or white attorneys,
Hispanic attorneys appear to have larger gaps in conviction rates for their Hispanic and white
clients, but the estimated gaps are only marginally precisely estimated. We also fail to find
evidence that white defendants who are assigned black counsel do much worse than white
defendants who hire black counsel, although in contrast to the revealed preference that white
defendants have for Hispanic vs. white lawyers, we find that, with respect to conviction, the
assigned counsel penalty is smaller for white attorneys representing white clients. In sum, despite
an apparent preference for same-race, or non-white lawyers on the private market, we do not find
evidence that being assigned a lawyer from a client’s preferred racial or ethnic background results
in a meaningful reduction in the assigned counsel penalty.
   In Table 6, we estimate how the assigned counsel penalty varies with respect to the attorney’s
gender, the distance between an attorney’s office and defendant’s home, the attorney’s years of
experience, and the extent to which the attorney specializes in the particular charge. We find little
indication that having male, nearby, experienced, or specialized attorneys is related to lower
conviction rates or shorter sentences for assigned vs. retained work. Note that the “match” values
of distance and experience are not standardized, and yet the first-order effects of having assigned
counsel are statistically indistinguishable from, and, with the exception of sentence conditional on
conviction, substantively identical to, the baseline estimates.
   Overall, while there are notable differences in the types of attorneys with whom different
clients match on the private market and whom they are assigned by the court, we find little
evidence that being assigned a lawyer who looks like a better match reduces the assigned counsel
penalty substantially. Therefore, we conclude that changing the process by which the court assigns
attorneys to indigent clients is unlikely to improve outcomes for indigent defendants dramatically.
5.3. Moral Hazard (Attorney Effort)
   To the extent that there remains a significant assigned counsel penalty even after controlling
for case characteristics as well as adverse selection, and that this residual penalty is not obviously
attributable to the poorer matches that result when clients cannot choose their own attorneys, it

                                                 21
leaves moral hazard as a potentially important explanation. In this section, we present evidence
from our administrative data and from a survey of lawyers that indicates that differences in attorney
effort on assigned vs. retained cases is likely a key contributor to the observed disparities in case
outcomes.
5.3.1. Evidence from Court Records
     As previously discussed, the fee structure for assigned counsel creates incentives to obtain
pleas as quickly as possible. Under the flat fee arrangement, attorneys have no monetary incentive
to prolong a case or take it trial; in the hourly rate system, hourly rates are less than half of private
market rates and incentivize quick resolution to be able to take on additional cases. In this context,
a natural proxy for lawyer effort that we can calculate from the court records is case duration; i.e.,
the length of time that elapses between the complaint date, when charges were initially filed against
the defendant, and the date when the case ends, for which we use the earlier of the judgement date
and the adjudication date.34 Delaying cases can benefit defendants in a number of ways, including
making it more likely that the prosecutor offers a favorable deal, that evidence or witnesses are
lost, etc. (Feeley 1979). Attorneys zealously defending their clients may pursue a variety of
strategies to delay a case, for example by requesting continuances for consultation purposes or for
psychiatric evaluations, filing numerous motions, and using the discovery process to postpone
hearings. At the same time, however, individuals detained pre-trial may prefer to quickly plead
guilty or no contest in exchange for an earlier release (Gupta et al. 2016, Stevenson 2016, Dobbie
et al. 2018).
     On average, cases represented by assigned counsel are 65% shorter than when counsel is
retained. In Panel A of Table 7, we show results from regressions for the natural log of case length
in days on the full set of case and attorney characteristics. The results suggest that on average
attorneys resolve assigned cases 12.5% faster than similar retained cases (e-0.134–1 = -0.125). In
Gelbach decomposition results not shown, we find that 51% of the assigned counsel penalty for
case length can be attributed to characteristics of the case (which includes clients’ bail status).
Roughly 28% of the difference in case length can be attributed to characteristics of the attorney.
     Given the important role of pre-trial detention in the potential benefit to the client of quick
resolution, we divide our sample by whether the client had a bail bond posted. Conditional on all


34
  Dismissed cases have an adjudication date, but no judgement date. Cases that receive deferred adjudication have a
judgement date with a later adjudication date.

                                                        22
other features of the case and attorney, both detained and released clients’ cases resolve faster
when represented by assigned counsel. However, cases are particularly short among indigent
clients who are detained at any point prior to adjudication. While detained clients might prefer a
quick resolution, the fact that we also observe shorter case lengths for released clients when their
lawyer is assigned suggests that attorneys invest less time and effort on these cases. Given the fee
structure for assigned counsel incentivizes quick pleas, rather than lengthy investigations, extended
negotiations, and trials, moral hazard on the part of attorneys is a potentially compelling
explanation for the results.
   In Panels B and C of Table 7, we explore whether clients who are “matched” with attorneys
who share characteristics that appear to be valuable on the private market have shorter or longer
cases. There is little evidence that the assigned counsel penalty is larger for clients matched with
attorneys of the same race or ethnicity. However, being assigned a lawyer whose office is further
from one’s home (something not desirable on the retained market) or being assigned a more
experienced lawyer (something that is) is associated with slightly longer cases.
   The expansion of the flat fee option in Bexar County during our sample period allows us to
further explore how the compensation structure affects attorney behavior. For the first half of our
sample, lawyers could only increase their effective hourly wage by convincing their client to plead
guilty or no contest quickly. After 2009, having a case dismissed became relatively more attractive,
as lawyers could earn at least the fixed fee on those as well. To assess the impacts of this change,
in Figure 3 we present the results of extensions of equation (1) in which we allow the assigned
counsel penalty to vary with the year the case was filed. The black dots represent the estimated
assigned counsel penalties for dismissals, nolo contendere pleas, guilty pleas, and deferred
adjudications in each year, with 95% confidence intervals indicated. The black horizontal lines
show the average estimated penalties for cases filed in each payment regime (before and after June
2009), with 95% confidence intervals shaded.
   The probability that a case was dismissed or a no contest plea was entered appears stable across
regimes. However, relative to their retained clients, attorneys were less likely to enter guilty pleas,
and more likely to negotiate deferred adjudication, for their assigned clients after fixed fees were
possible for the latter. The effect for guilty pleas is particularly notable given these are entirely
within the defense’s control, and do not require any concession on the part of the prosecutor or



                                                  23
judge. We view these results as suggestive evidence that lawyers’ behavior is responsive to
changes in the compensation structure.
5.3.2. Evidence from Attorney Surveys
   Recent qualitative evidence from Bexar County further underscores how differences in effort
on cases in which attorneys are assigned as opposed to retained could contribute to disparities in
case outcomes. In April 2010, the Texas Task Force on Indigent Defense conducted a survey of
Bexar County lawyers, the responses to which they shared with us. While too small to draw strong
conclusions (a total of 93 attorneys responded to the survey), several patterns emerge. First, the
survey revealed substantial dissatisfaction among criminal defense attorneys with the
compensation structure for assigned counsel; 82% of lawyers surveyed had negative views about
the county’s fee structure. In response to a follow-up question about incentives created by the fee
structure, a majority said that the system did not provide an incentive to provide quality
representation. Moreover, a plurality noted in open-ended responses that the fee structure
encouraged pleas, and in particular pleas early in the process.
   Reported differences in the Task Force’s survey in the number of hearings, motions filed, and
time spent on cases provide additional evidence that attorney effort likely contributes to disparities
in case outcomes. The average number of hearings respondents said were typically required to
dispose an assigned felony case was 4.0, compared to 4.3 for a retained felony case (p-value for
the difference = 0.06); for those lawyers who reported an average number of hearings for both
types of cases, the figures were 3.9 and 4.2 (p-value = 0.03). Retained counsel also filed pre-trial
motions in felony cases substantially more often than assigned counsel (71.4% vs. 60.5% of cases;
p-value = 0.08); for those who reported average pre-trial motions for both types of cases, the
figures were similar (69.9% vs. 61.1% of cases; p-value = 0.004).
   Even more striking, though, was that survey respondents reported spending on average 16.8
hours on felony cases on which they were assigned counsel, about half the 33.5 hours they reported
spending on felony cases on which they were retained counsel (p-value = 0.01). Limiting attention
to lawyers who reported average hours spent on both assigned and retained felony cases, the gap
remains stark at 16.3 hours for assigned cases and 26.7 hours for retained cases (p-value = 0.03).
In percentage terms, the magnitude of this disparity echoes that we found for overall case length
between cases handled by assigned and retained counsel. These findings are also in line with those
of Anderson and Heaton (2012), whose interviews with various agents of the court in Philadelphia

                                                 24
suggested that certain institutional factors may serve to reduce the amount of time lawyers on
assigned counsel put into preparing cases.
   We cannot quantify the exact contribution of moral hazard to observed disparities in outcomes
between cases handled by assigned and retained counsel. However, the evidence presented in this
section, together with the previous results indicating that case characteristics as well as adverse
selection among attorneys can only account for a fraction of the differences, suggest that variation
across assigned and retained cases in lawyer effort plays a central role in generating the disparities.

6. Conclusion
   In this paper, we exploit detailed administrative data from one large county in Texas that allow
us to track cases through the criminal justice system as well as follow lawyers as they handle
different cases in different roles. Our ability to observe the same lawyer handling similar cases
under different case allocation regimes allows us to differentiate between four possible
mechanisms driving the disparity in outcomes for indigent clients: differing case characteristics,
adverse selection of low quality attorneys into assigned counsel, lower quality matches between
attorneys and defendants, and reduced effort on the part of lawyers.
   We find that, while important in understanding the disparities, case characteristics are not
solely responsible for the worse case outcomes generally observed among indigent relative to non-
indigent defendants. Meanwhile, adverse selection among lawyers electing to serve as assigned
counsel can explain at most one-third of the disparities in outcomes among clients of assigned as
opposed to retained lawyers. We also find little evidence that court-determined matches between
clients and attorneys that happen to replicate more closely private market matches deliver better
case outcomes.
   To the extent that case characteristics, adverse selection, and match quality together can only
explain a fraction of the disparities in outcomes between cases tried by assigned and retained
counsel, our results point to a central role for moral hazard in generating these disparities. Our
finding that lawyers working in assigned cases resolve these cases faster is consistent with this
interpretation. Further, survey evidence highlights striking gaps in the average number of hearings,
motions filed, and hours spent on cases handled by assigned relative retained counsel.
   Our results provide a window into the sources of disparities in outcomes for defendants with
assigned as opposed to retained counsel. These disparities are important to understand not just
because of their immediate impacts on indigent individuals, but also because differences in

                                                  25
treatment by the criminal justice system may have long-run impacts as well. One potential long-
run social cost of the disparate treatment is higher rates of future crime among low-income
individuals (Aizer and Doyle 2015). To shed some light on this, we consider the relationship
between attorney-specific assigned counsel penalties and future recidivism of those attorney’s
clients. We first generate attorney-specific assigned counsel penalties from estimating conviction
using equation (1), but including interactions between the assigned counsel dummy and attorney
fixed effects. We then regress the probability that a defendant has felony charges filed against him
or her again in the next three years on our full set of case characteristics. Because those incarcerated
cannot recidivate (at least temporarily), we exclude defendants who were imprisoned from this
sample. In Figure 4, we plot attorney-specific assigned counsel penalties against the average
difference in the residualized recidivism rates for their retained and assigned clients. We find a
positive and statistically significant relationship between them, suggesting that indigent clients
represented by attorneys with greater assigned counsel penalties are more likely to recidivate in
the future.35
     Our results have important implications for policymakers seeking ways to provide a fair and
accessible system of legal representation for those charged with crimes. Relative to programs
aimed at mitigating adverse selection in the assigned counsel pool, such as pro-bono style
requirements that all attorneys represent a certain number of indigent clients each year, improving
the incentives for individual attorneys to mount robust defenses in assigned counsel cases is likely
to be a more effective strategy for improving the quality of indigent defense. To the extent that
inadequate indigent defense is an important contributor to the persistent racial gap in criminal
justice outcomes, improving incentives for attorneys who defend indigent clients represents an
important step in ensuring equal access to justice for all Americans.




35
  Including all defendants, even those incarcerated, the relationship remains positive and statistically significant, but
as expected, smaller in magnitude (beta = 0.048, se = 0.029).

                                                          26
References
Agan, A. and S. Starr (2018), “Ban the Box, Criminal Records, and Racial Discrimination: A Field
   Experiment,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 133(1): 191-235.
Aizer, A. and J. Doyle (2015), “Juvenile Incarceration, Human Capital, and Future Crime: Evidence
   from Randomly-Assigned Judges,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 130(2): 759-803.
Anderson, J. and P. Heaton (2012), “How Much Difference Does the Lawyer Make? The Effect of
   Defense Counsel on Murder Case Outcomes,” Yale Law Journal 122: 154-217.
Beaudry, P., D. Green, and B. Sand. (2012). “Does Industrial Composition Matter for Wages? A Test
   of Search and Bargaining Theory.” Econometrica 80(3): 1063-1104.
Carrington, P. (1979), “The Right to Zealous Counsel,” Duke Law Journal 1979: 1291-1308.
Carson, E. (2014) “Prisoners in 2013,” U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, NCJ
   247282.
Cohen, T. (2014), “Who is Better at Defending Criminals? Does Type of Defense Attorney Matter in
   Terms of Producing Favorable Case Outcomes,” Criminal Justice Policy Review 25(1): 29-58.
Dee, T. (2004), “Teachers, Race, and Student Achievement in a Randomized Experiment,” Review of
   Economics and Statistics 86(1): 195-210.
DeFrances, C. and M. Litras (2000), “Indigent Defense Service in Large Counties, 1999,” U.S.
   Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, NCJ 184932.
Dobbie, W., J. Goldin, and C. Yang (2018), “The Effects of Pre-Trial Detention on Conviction,
   Future Crime, and Employment: Evidence from Randomly Assigned Judges,” American
   Economic Review 108(2): 201-240.
Feeley, M. (1979), The Process Is Punishment: Handling Cases in a Lower Criminal Court, New
   York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Gelbach, J. (2016), “When Do Covariates Matter? And Which Ones, and How Much?” Journal of
   Labor Economics, 34(2): 509-543.
Geller, A., I. Garfinkel, and B. Western (2011), “Paternal Incarceration and Support for Children,”
   Demography 48(1): 25-47.
Gonzalez, J. (2011), “Bexar County Criminal Cases Since ’74 Now Online,” San Antonio Express-
   News, December 30.
Gross, J. (2013), “Gideon at 50: A Three-Part Examination of Indigent Defense in America.”
   National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers.
Gupta, A., C. Hansman, and E. Frenchman (2016), “The Heavy Cost of High Bail: Evidence from
   Judge Randomization,” Journal of Legal Studies 45(2): 471-505.
Harlow, C. W. (2000), “Defense Counsel in Criminal Cases,” U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of
   Justice Statistics, NCJ 179023.
Hjalmarsson, R. (2008), “Criminal Justice Involvement and High School Completion,” Journal of
   Urban Economics 63(2): 613-630.


                                                27
Iyengar, R. (2007), “An Analysis of the Performance of Federal Indigent Counsel,” NBER Working
    Paper 13187.
Klein, R. (1986), “The Emperor Gideon Has No Clothes: The Empty Promise of the Constitutional
    Right to Effective Assistance of Counsel,” Hastings Constitutional Law Quarterly 13(4): 625-
    693.
Lovenheim, M. and E. Owens (2014), “Does Federal Financial Aid Affect College Enrollment?
    Evidence from Drug Offenders and the Higher Education Act of 1998,” Journal of Urban
    Economics 81: 1-13.
McCrary, J. (2007), “The Effect of Court-Ordered Hiring Quotas on the Composition and Quality of
    Police,” American Economic Review 97(1): 318-353.
Pager, D. (2003), “The Mark of a Criminal Record,” American Journal of Sociology 108(5): 937-
    975.
Raphael, S. (2011), “Improving Employment Prospects for Former Prison Inmates: Challenges and
    Policy,” in P. Cook, J. Ludwig, J., and J. McCrary (eds.) Controlling Crime: Strategies and
    Tradeoffs, Chicago, IL: U. of Chicago Press.
Roach, M. (2010), “Explaining the Outcome Gap between Different Types of Indigent Defense
    Counsel: Adverse Selection and Moral Hazard,” SSRN Working Paper 1839651.
Schwall, Benjamin. 2016. “Getting What You Paid For: How Payment Methods Affect Attorneys’
    Behaviors.” Clemson University Working Paper.
Shem-Tov, Y. (2017), “Make or Buy? The Provision of Indigent Defense Services in the U.S.,”
    SSRN Working Paper 2816622.
State Bar of Texas (2016), “2016 Hourly Fact Sheet,” Dept. of Research & Analysis.
Stevenson, M. (2016), “Distortion of Justice: How the Inability to Pay Bail Affects Case Outcomes,”
    University of Pennsylvania Working Paper.
Texas Task Force on Indigent Defense (2010), “Review of Bexar County’s Indigent Defense
    Systems,” Texas Indigent Defense Commission.
Toone, R. (2014), “The Absence of Agency in Indigent Defense,” American Criminal Law Review
    52: 25-72.




                                                28
                                                               Figure 1. Assigned Counsel Penalty Decompositions

                                                               Case Dismissed                                                                                               Def. Adjudication
                   0.00




                                                                                                                                     0.02      0.00
                                                                            -0.03 (24%)
                                                                                                                                                                                          -0.00 (8%)
                                                           -0.04 (31%)
     Assigned Counsel Penalty




                                                                                                                      Assigned Counsel Penalty
                       -0.05




                                                                                                                                    -0.02
                                                                                              -0.06 (45%)                                                                -0.02 (36%)


                                                                                                                                                                                                             -0.03 (57%)




                                                                                                                           -0.04
      -0.10




                                                                                                                                                         -0.06




                                                                                                                                     -0.06
                                           -0.13
                   -0.15




                                                                                                                                     -0.08
                                        Uncond. Penalty   Case Chars.    Attorney Chars.   Residual Penalty                                           Uncond. Penalty   Case Chars.    Attorney Chars.   Residual Penalty



                                                                    Convicted                                                                                            Incarceration | Convc.
                       0.20




                                                                                                                                 0.10
                                            0.18

                                                                                                                                                        0.07
                                 0.15




                                                                                                                                                                        0.06 (77%)
           Assigned Counsel Penalty




                                                                                                                   Assigned Counsel Penalty
                                                                                                                                     0.05


                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.02 (31%)
                     0.10




                                                                                               0.09 (47%)
                                                                                                                    0.00




                                                            0.06 (34%)                                                                                                                  -0.01 (-8%)
        0.05




                                                                             0.04 (20%)
                                                                                                                                 -0.05
                       0.00




                                        Uncond. Penalty   Case Chars.    Attorney Chars.   Residual Penalty                                           Uncond. Penalty   Case Chars.    Attorney Chars.   Residual Penalty


Notes: In each figure, the first bar is the unconditional coefficient on having an assigned (as opposed to retained) attorney for the
outcome listed at the top. The next two bars represent a Gelbach (2016) decomposition that shows the amount of the penalty that
can be explained by case characteristics and attorney characteristics, along with 95% confidence intervals of these estimates. The
final bar is the residual penalty after controlling for all case and attorney characteristics. Reported percentages are the
decomposition estimate divided by the unconditional coefficient.




                                                                                                              29
Figure 2. The Return to Private Counsel and Borrowing Costs




    Expected Cost, Return to Retained Counsel
                                                                                    Expected Benefit of
                                                                                    Retained Counsel



                                                rH                              High Turnover
                                                                                Neighborhood




                                                rL                              Low Turnover
                                                                                Neighborhood




                                                       pL                pH
                                                     Assigned Counsel Penalty




                                                             30
                                             Figure 3. Assigned Counsel Penalty Over Time
      .05                                Case Dismissed                                                                          Plead Nolo




                                                                                           .15
                                                                                           .1
      0




                                                                                           .05
      -.05




                                                                                           0
      -.1




                                                                                           -.05
      -.15




                                                                                           -.1
      -.2




             2005   2006   2007   2008     2009   2010    2011   2012   2013   2014               2005    2006   2007   2008     2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014




                                          Plead Guilty                                                                         Def. Adjudication
     .15




                                                                                            .1
     .1




                                                                                            .05
     .05




                                                                                            0
     0




                                                                                            -.05
     -.05




                                                                                            -.1




            2005    2006   2007   2008    2009    2010    2011   2012   2013   2014                2005   2006   2007   2008      2009   2010   2011   2012   2013   2014



Notes: The dotted line denotes when the compensation regime changed (see text for details). For each outcome, the black dots
represent the estimated assigned counsel penalty in each year, with 95% confidence intervals indicated. Black horizontal lines
show the average assigned counsel penalty for cases filed in each compensation regime, with 95% confidence intervals shaded.




                                                                                      31
            Figure 4. Attorney-Specific Assigned Counsel Penalties and Client Recidivism




                                           1        .5
                              Recidivism Difference
                                        0  -.5
                                           -1




                                                          -1                -.5           0          .5   1
                                                                                  Attorney Penalty
                                                         Beta=0.097, se=0.046

Notes: Estimates of attorney-specific assigned counsel penalties are plotted against the difference in the probability an attorney’s
indigent relative to non-indigent clients recidivate within 3 years. Excludes defendants who were imprisoned from the sample.




                                                                                    32
                      Table 1. Fee Schedule for Assigned Counsel in Bexar County
                                       State Jail,
                                                        2nd Degree       3rd Degree                 Capital
                                       3rd Degree
 Initial Jail Visit                       $100             $100             $100                     $100
 Flat Fees
                                                                                               1st Chair $3500
    Pleas                                 $400             $500             $750
                                                                                               2nd Chair $2500
    Post-Indictment
                                                                                               1st Chair $3500
       Dismissals (available              $400             $500             $750
                                                                                               2nd Chair $2500
       after July 2009 only)
    Pre-Indictment
                                                                                               1st Chair $1750
       Dismissals (available              $200             $250             $350
                                                                                               2nd Chair $1250
       after July 2009 only)
    Cases not disposed of
       by plea or dismissal
                                          $200             $200             $200                     $200
       (available after
       November 2015 only)
    Motion to Revoke
       Probation (2005-                   $175             $225             $300                      N/A
       July 2009)
    Motion to Revoke
       Probation (after July              $200             $250             $350                      N/A
       2009 only)
 Hourly Rates
   Court Appearance                       $75               $75              $75                       $75
                                                                                                  1st Chair $125
    Evidentiary Hearing                   $75               $85             $100
                                                                                                 2nd Chair $115
                                                                                           st
                                                                                          1 Chair Voir Dire $100
                                                                                          2nd Chair Voir Dire $90
    Trial                                 $75              $100             $125
                                                                                              1st Chair Trial $150
                                                                                             2nd Chair Trial $140
    Out of Court Time                     $50               $60              $75                       $80
Notes: Adapted from State of Texas and County of Bexar, “Joint Order Adopting Fee Schedule,” September 3, 2004, Document
58349; July 6, 2009, Document 62328; October 14, 2015, Document 67837.




                                                           33
                    Table 2. Case Characteristics and Outcomes for
                       Retained and Assigned Counsel Clients
                                     Retained (n=23,559)      Assigned (n=40,650)
                                      Mean      Std. Dev.      Mean       Std. Dev.
                                             A. Defendant Characteristics
Male                                 82.8%                    79.5%
Age at Offense                        31.0         10.8        31.4         10.6
White                                28.2%                    22.4%
Black                                12.3%                    19.3%
Hispanic                             59.5%                    58.3%
Previous Charges                       1.28        0.70         1.18        0.59
Previous Convictions                   0.64        1.37         1.05        1.74
Released on Bond                     87.1%                    55.2%
Block Group Poverty Rate             23.9%        16.4%       28.2%        17.1%
Block Group Turnover Rate            26.8%        14.1%       29.0%        14.3%
                                                B. Case Characteristics
State Jail Felony                     37.0%                    48.8%
2nd or 3rd Degree Felony              47.4%                    41.2%
1st Degree                            15.6%                    10.0%
Violent Crime                         20.3%                    20.8%
Property Crime                        14.2%                    23.4%
Drug Crime                            37.9%                    32.5%
                                              C. Attorney Characteristics
Male                                 91.5%        27.9%       77.7%        41.6%
Distance from Client (Miles)          10.06       51.09        17.28       103.24
Years of Experience                   19.02        9.79        15.28        9.62
Previous Cases                       611.10      631.74       332.48       426.59
Percent Assigned                     37.0%        25.6%       77.4%        20.8%
Race / Ethnic Match                  46.5%                    35.5%
                                                    D. Case Outcomes
Dismissed                            34.3%                    20.8%
Deferred Adjudication                30.8%                    25.2%
Charges Reduced                      11.2%                     9.2%
Convicted                            36.4%                    54.7%
  Guilty Plea                        13.6%                    15.5%
  Nolo Contendere                    22.6%                    39.0%
  Convicted at Trial                  0.2%                     0.2%
Incarcerated                         28.6%                    47.0%
Sentence (Days)                      550.16      1394.38      654.87      1572.74
Fine                                 $1041         $950       $1456        $1117
Notes: 64,209 observations.




                                         34
              Table 3. Assigned Counsel Penalties for Case Outcomes, Robustness Checks
                                 Dismissed            Def. Adj.          Convicted        Incarc. | Convic.
                                                 A. Baseline OLS Estimates (64,209 / 30,789)
Assigned Counsel                 -0.0610***         -0.0319***           0.0852***           0.0233***
                                  [0.0061]            [0.0059]            [0.0064]            [0.0056]
                                             B. Interactions with Social Capital (64,209 / 30,789)
Assigned Counsel ×                 -0.0042             -0.0007             0.0050              -0.0036
Borrowing Costs                   [0.0042]            [0.0036]            [0.0039]            [0.0045]
                                                        C. IV Estimates (63,063 / 30,132)
Assigned Counsel                    -0.386*            -0.381*            0.700***               0.347
                                    [0.153]            [0.149]             [0.174]             [0.229]
                                                      D. Minor Offenses (45,171 / 20,931)
Assigned Counsel                 -0.0722***          -0.0220**           0.0856***           0.0383***
                                  [0.0073]            [0.0075]            [0.0075]            [0.0075]
                                              E. Minor Drug Possession Offenses (12,844 / 8,635)
Assigned Counsel                 -0.0810***          -0.0546**           0.1180***             0.0319*
                                  [0.0175]            [0.0179]            [0.0161]            [0.0154]
                                                         F. Low-Income Block Groups
Assigned Counsel                 -0.0564***         -0.0333***           0.0852***            0.0173**
                                  [0.0075]            [0.0075]            [0.0075]            [0.0065]
                                      G. Low-Income BGs, Interactions w/ Social Capital (43,993 / 22,366)
Assigned Counsel ×                  -0.0062            -0.0033            0.0103+               0.0002
Borrowing Costs                    [0.0056]           [0.0046]            [0.0054]            [0.0054]
                                               H. ≤ Five Years of Experience (8,871 / 4,440)
Assigned Counsel                 -0.0722***           -0.0354+           0.0933***              0.0020
                                  [0.0162]            [0.0199]            [0.0206]            [0.0182]
Notes: All regressions include controls for case and attorney characteristics. Standard errors adjusted for heteroscedasticity
and clusters at the defendant home block group and attorney level. Significant at +10%, *5%, **1%, and ***0.1% levels.




                                                               35
                            Table 4. Attorney Characteristics by Representation Type and Defendant Race
                                                                                                   # of Cases
                                                                             Distance from                                                  % Previous
                                                                                                    Tried in
                                   Same Race as                                 Client’s                                 Years on            Cases in
                                                              Male                                 Bexar as of
                                      Client                                  Residence                                  Texas Bar         Same Offense
                                                                                                   Complaint
                                                                                (Miles)                                                      Category
                                                                                                      Date
 All Defendants
     Retained (n=23,559)                46.5%                82.8%                 10.1                 611                 19.0                18.5%
     Assigned (n=40,650)                35.5%                79.5%                 17.3                 332                 15.3                17.2%
 Black Defendant
      Retained (n=2,892)                18.8%                83.8%                 9.5                  678                 17.8                21.3%
      Assigned (n=7,841)                 8.7%                80.9%                 18.8                 345                 15.2                18.9%
 Hispanic Defendant
     Retained (n=14,017)                46.1%                86.1%                 9.6                  635                 19.3                18.5%
     Assigned (n=23,685)                32.9%                82.2%                 16.8                 329                 15.2                16.8%
 White Defendant
      Retained (n=6,650)                59.3%                75.4%                 11.3                 531                 18.9                17.3%
      Assigned (n=9,124)                65.4%                71.4%                 17.1                 329                 15.5                16.7%
Notes: All differences between characteristics of retained and assigned cases are significant at the 1% level. “% Previous Cases in Same Offense Category” is
the percent of all the attorney’s previous cases that were charged with the same offense (defined for 18 different categories such as arson, assault, burglary,
homicide, drug crime, etc.).




                                                                             36
                      Table 5. Race and Ethnicity Match Results, by Defendant Race
                                                                                                             Incarcerated |
                         Dismissed                    Def. Adj.                   Convicted
                                                                                                               Convicted
                                                                  A. Black Defendants
Assigned            -0.0233       -0.0317      -0.047**        -0.0576 0.065*** 0.0806** 0.0248         0.0544
                   [0.0193]      [0.0325]      [0.0158]       [0.0462] [0.0191] [0.0247] [0.0158] [0.0454]
Assigned ×          -0.0083                     -0.0103                     0.015             0.0296
Black Atty         [0.0373]                    [0.0473]                   [0.0315]           [0.0461]
Assigned ×                       -0.0735                       -0.0145              0.0966+            -0.0037
Hisp Atty                        [0.0505]                     [0.0598]              [0.0528]          [0.0522]
Assigned ×                         0.026                        0.0157              -0.0392             -0.033
White Atty                       [0.0384]                     [0.0477]              [0.0333]          [0.0468]
Obs.                10,733        10,733         10,733        10,733      10,733    10,733    5,312    5,312
                                                                 B. Hispanic Defendants
Assigned          -0.067*** -0.077*** -0.0266**              -0.039*** 0.086*** 0.111*** 0.0210** 0.0154
                   [0.0103] [0.0117] [0.0092]                 [0.0102] [0.0104] [0.0121] [0.0079] [0.0133]
Assigned ×                    0.0629                            0.0045              -0.0742            -0.0158
Black Atty                   [0.0477]                         [0.0500]              [0.0525]          [0.0324]
Assigned ×          -0.0096             -0.0124                           0.0251+             -0.0057
Hisp Atty          [0.0145]            [0.0130]                           [0.0150]           [0.0159]
Assigned ×                    0.0068                            0.0128               -0.0226            0.0067
White Atty                   [0.0146]                         [0.0130]              [0.0150]          [0.0161]
Obs.                37,702    37,702    37,702                 37,702      37,702    37,702   19,617    19,617
                                                                  C. White Defendants
Assigned          -0.091*** -0.045**             -0.034        -0.0232 0.11*** 0.060*** 0.0134 0.0515**
                   [0.0195] [0.0160]            [0.0220]      [0.0151] [0.0211] [0.0140] [0.0266] [0.0184]
Assigned ×                  -0.00646                           -0.0644                0.070            -0.104*
Black Atty                  [0.0519]                          [0.0557]              [0.0543]          [0.0484]
Assigned ×                  -0.0502*                           -0.0053              0.0497+            -0.0307
Hisp Atty                   [0.0255]                          [0.0276]              [0.0262]          [0.0348]
Assigned ×         0.0462+                       0.0108                  -0.0516*              0.038
White Atty         [0.0245]                     [0.0265]                  [0.0248]           [0.0330]
Obs.                15,774   15,774              15,774        15,774      15,774    15,774    5,860     5,860
Notes: All regressions include controls for case and attorney characteristics. Standard errors adjusted for heteroscedasticity and
clusters at the defendant home block group and attorney level. Significant at +10%, *5%, **1%, and ***0.1% levels.




                                                                37
                     Table 6. Defendant Preference Matches and Case Outcomes
                                                                                                         Incarcerated |
                                 Dismissed                Def. Adj.               Convicted
                                                                                                           Convicted
                                                            A. Male Attorney
                                -0.0646***           -0.0267*         0.0834***       0.0088
Assigned Counsel
                                 [0.0165]            [0.0129]          [0.0167]      [0.0152]
Assigned Counsel ×                0.0042              -0.0061            0.0021       0.0166
  Male                           [0.0175]            [0.0148]          [0.0187]      [0.0162]
                                          B. Distance from Defendant’s Home to Law Office
                                -0.0644***          -0.0307**         0.0872***      0.0183+
Assigned Counsel
                                 [0.0115]            [0.0094]          [0.0112]      [0.0100]
Assigned Counsel ×                0.0018              -0.0006           -0.0011       0.0028
  Ln(Distance)                   [0.0054]            [0.0045]          [0.0051]      [0.0052]
                                                 C. Years Since Texas Bar Admission
                                -0.0689***         -0.0436***          0.104***       0.0114
Assigned Counsel
                                 [0.0119]            [0.0128]          [0.0128]      [0.0129]
Assigned Counsel ×                0.0048               0.0072          -0.0117+       0.0071
  Experience                     [0.0061]            [0.0067]          [0.0070]      [0.0067]
                                                      D. Offense Specialization
Assigned Counsel                -0.0549***          -0.0187**         0.0690***     0.0297***
                                 [0.0072]            [0.0066]          [0.0077]      [0.0067]
Assigned Counsel ×                -0.0003           -0.0007**         0.0009***      -0.0004*
  Specialization                 [0.0003]            [0.0002]          [0.0002]      [0.0002]
Observations                       64,209              64,209            64,209       30,789
Notes: All regressions include controls for case and attorney characteristics. Main effects of interacted variables are also
included but not shown. Specialization is the percent of the attorney’s previous cases that were charged with the same
offense (defined for 18 different categories such as arson, assault, burglary, homicide, drug crime, etc.). Standard errors
adjusted for heteroscedasticity and clusters at the defendant home block group and the attorney levels. Significant at
+10%, *5%, **1%, and ***0.1% levels.




                                                             38
                Table 7. Assigned Counsel Penalty for Case Length
                                               A. Average Differences
                                                    Detained Pre-     Released Pre-
                                       All
                                                    Adjudication      Adjudication
                                  -0.134***           -0.239***        -0.139***
Assigned Counsel
                                    [0.017]            [0.033]           [0.013]
Observations                         52,488             18,902           33,586
                                            B. Racial and Ethnic Matches
                                     Black             Hispanic           White
                                  Defendants          Defendants       Defendants
                                    -0.084*           -0.119***         -0.130**
Assigned Counsel
                                    [0.039]            [0.027]           [0.039]
Assigned Counsel ×                   0.011              -0.040            0.009
 Same Race Attorney                 [0.104]            [0.044]           [0.046]
Observations                          8,847             30,720           12,921
                                             C. Other Match Dimensions
                                 Distance from
                                                   Years since Bar
                                 Home to Law                          Male Attorney
                                                      Admission
                                     Office
                                  -0.197***           -0.210***        -0.154***
Assigned Counsel
                                    [0.031]            [0.032]           [0.037]
Assigned Counsel ×                  0.035**            0.0452*            0.023
 Match Dimension                    [0.012]            [0.020]           [0.040]
Observations                         52,488             52,488           52,488
Notes: All regressions include controls for case and attorney characteristics. Sample excludes
motions to revoke probation (MTRs). Standard errors adjusted for heteroscedasticity and clusters at
the defendant home block group and the attorney levels. Significant at +10%, *5%, **1%, and
***0.1% levels.




                                                 39
Appendix


   Is Your Lawyer a Lemon? Incentives and Selection in the
            Public Provision of Criminal Defense
                                             Amanda Agan
                                            Matthew Freedman
                                              Emily Owens

                                              Appendix
                                        (For Online Publication)
A. Appendix Figures


                Figure A1. Average Percent of Cases Assigned by Attorney Experience




Notes: Sample includes 727 attorneys.




                                                   40
Appendix

                                     Figure A2. Assigned Counsel Penalty Decompositions for Additional Outcomes
                                                          Charge Reduced                                                                                                     Plead Nolo




                                                                                                                               0.20
                  0.04




                                                                                                                                                     0.16
                                                                        0.03 (-122%)
                            0.02




                                                                                                                                         0.15
     Assigned Counsel Penalty




                                                                                                                   Assigned Counsel Penalty
                  0.00




                                                                                          -0.00 (8%)




                                                                                                                             0.10
          -0.02




                                      -0.02

                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.06 (38%)
                                                                                                                                                                      0.06 (35%)




                                                                                                                0.05
 -0.04




                                                                                                                                                                                        0.04 (26%)
                                                      -0.04 (213%)
                  -0.06




                                                                                                                               0.00
                                   Uncond. Penalty   Case Chars.     Attorney Chars.   Residual Penalty                                          Uncond. Penalty    Case Chars.     Attorney Chars.    Residual Penalty



                                                             Plead Guilty                                                                                              Sentence Length
                  0.04




                                                                                                                        1.50
                                                                                           0.02 (116%)
                          0.02




                                      0.02
                                                                                                                                                   1.06
    Assigned Counsel Penalty




                                                                                                          Assigned Counsel Penalty
                                                                                                                            1.00
                                                       0.00 (23%)
              0.00




                                                                        -0.01 (-39%)
                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.53 (50%)
                                                                                                           0.50
 -0.02




                                                                                                                                                                    0.33 (31%)

                                                                                                                                                                                      0.20 (19%)
                  -0.04




                                                                                                                        0.00




                                   Uncond. Penalty   Case Chars.     Attorney Chars.   Residual Penalty                                         Uncond. Penalty    Case Chars.     Attorney Chars.    Residual Penalty



                                                     Sentence Length | Convc.                                                                                              Incarceration
                                                                                                                               0.20




                                                                                                                                                     0.18
                  0.20




                                                                                         0.13 (120%)
                                                                                                                                         0.15




                                     0.11
    Assigned Counsel Penalty




                                                                                                                   Assigned Counsel Penalty
                       0.10




                                                                                                                             0.10




                                                     0.00 (1%)
            0.00




                                                                      -0.02 (-21%)                                                                                                                         0.09 (47%)

                                                                                                                                                                      0.07 (37%)
 -0.10




                                                                                                                0.05




                                                                                                                                                                                        0.03 (16%)
                  -0.20




                                                                                                                               0.00




                                   Uncond. Penalty   Case Chars.     Attorney Chars.   Residual Penalty                                          Uncond. Penalty    Case Chars.     Attorney Chars.    Residual Penalty




                                                                                                          41
Appendix

  Figure A2 (continued). Assigned Counsel Penalty Decompositions for Additional Outcomes
                                                     Fine Amount                                                                                     Fine Amount | Convic.




                                                                                                                 0.30
                                1.02                                                                                                                                                   0.26 (102%)
                                                                                                                                    0.25
               1.00




                                                                                                                           0.20
  Assigned Counsel Penalty




                                                                                                     Assigned Counsel Penalty
                                                                                                               0.10
                                                                                   0.51 (50%)
         0.50




                                                                                                                                                                     0.03 (13%)




                                                                                                  0.00
                                                0.28 (27%)
                                                                0.23 (23%)
                                                                                                                                                    -0.04 (-16%)




                                                                                                                 -0.10
               0.00




                             Uncond. Penalty   Case Chars.   Attorney Chars.   Residual Penalty                                   Uncond. Penalty   Case Chars.    Attorney Chars.   Residual Penalty


Notes: In each figure, the first bar is the unconditional coefficient on having an assigned (as opposed to retained) attorney for the
outcome listed at the top. The next two bars represent a Gelbach (2016) decomposition that shows the amount of the penalty that
can be explained by case characteristics and attorney characteristics, along with 95% confidence intervals of these estimates. The
final bar is the residual penalty after controlling for all case and attorney characteristics we are able to control for. Reported
percentages are the decomposition estimate divided by the unconditional coefficient.




                                                                                                  42
    Appendix



    B. Appendix Tables


                                     Table A1. Unconditional and Residual Assigned Counsel Penalty for Case Outcomes
                                                                                    A. Adjudication Outcomes
                      Reduced Charge      Case Dismissed                   Deferred Adjudication        Plead Nolo                        Plead Guilty          Convicted
                     ret. mean = 0.112   ret. mean = 0.343                    ret. mean = 0.308     ret. mean = 0.226                  ret. mean = 0.136   ret. mean = 0.364
                       (1)        (2)      (1)        (2)                       (1)        (2)        (1)         (2)                    (1)        (2)      (1)        (2)
Assigned           -0.021*** -0.00172 -0.135*** -0.061***                  -0.056*** -0.032*** 0.164*** 0.0628***                     0.0189* 0.0220*** 0.183*** 0.0852***
Counsel            [0.00316] [0.00407] [0.00676] [0.00612]                 [0.00834] [0.00591] [0.00851] [0.00613]                   [0.00902] [0.00531] [0.00726] [0.00640]
Adjusted R2         0.00108      0.144   0.0221      0.141                   0.00367      0.35     0.0282       0.209                0.000644      0.157   0.0311      0.285
                                                                                     B. Punishment Outcomes
                                                                                                      Ln(Sentence) |
                                                    Incarcerated |                                                                                                       Ln(Fine) |
                        Incarcerated                                             Ln(Sentence)           Conviction                           Ln(Fine)
                                                      Conviction                                                                                                         Conviction
                     ret. mean = 0.286                                      ret. mean = 550 days    ret. mean = 1,512                  ret. mean = $ 1,041
                                                  ret. mean = 0.784                                                                                                 ret. mean = $ 1,455
                                                                                                           days
                       (1)       (2)       (1)       (2)                        (1)        (2)        (1)         (2)                    (1)      (2)      (1)      (2)
Assigned           0.184*** 0.0861*** 0.0749*** 0.0233***                  1.061*** 0.531***        0.108      0.129**                1.024*** 0.514*** 0.253*** 0.259***
Counsel            [0.00785] [0.00644] [0.00775] [0.00559]                  [0.0580] [0.0438] [0.0677] [0.0447]                       [0.0508] [0.0434] [0.0142] [0.0176]
Adjusted R2          0.0327    0.361    0.00828    0.699                      0.0232      0.379   0.000284       0.67                   0.024    0.184   0.0224    0.332
Notes: All regressions in Panel A include 64,209 observations. In Panel B, regressions conditional on conviction include 30,789 observations. Columns labeled (1) contain no controls, and
columns labeled (2) include controls for case and attorney characteristics. Standard errors adjusted for heteroscedasticity and clusters at the defendant home block group and attorney level.
Significant at +10%, *5%, **1%, and ***0.1% levels.




                                                                                             43
   Appendix

                                       Table A2. Full Results for Conditional Regressions in Columns (2) of Table A1
                     Reduced                                                      Plead                          Incarc. |          Ln(Sen.)|C             Ln(Fine) |
                               Dismissed Def. Adj.               Plead Nolo               Convicted Incarc.                Ln(Sen.)             Ln(Fine)
                      Charge                                                     Guilty                          Convic.               onvic.               Convic.
Assigned Counsel     -0.00172 -0.0610*** -0.0319***              0.0628***    0.0220*** 0.0852*** 0.0861*** 0.0233*** 0.531*** 0.129** 0.514*** 0.259***
                    [0.00407] [0.00612] [0.00591]                 [0.00613]    [0.00531] [0.00640] [0.00644] [0.00559] [0.0438] [0.0447] [0.0434] [0.0176]
Male Defendant      -0.00634* -0.0221*** -0.0877***              0.0740***    0.0325*** 0.106*** 0.102*** 0.0377*** 0.703*** 0.386*** 0.133*** 0.0298*
                    [0.00322] [0.00505] [0.00536]                 [0.00517]    [0.00439] [0.00473] [0.00456] [0.00542] [0.0309] [0.0414] [0.0357] [0.0139]
Age at Offense      0.0006*** -0.000476* -0.0009***              0.0008***    0.000412* 0.0013*** -0.00015 -0.001*** -0.0042*** -0.0107*** 0.0046*** 0.000303
                   [0.000135] [0.000187] [0.000184]              [0.000204]   [0.000173] [0.000206] [0.000185] [0.000166] [0.00123] [0.00128] [0.00138] [0.000481]
Previous           -0.0123*** 0.0161*** -0.0486***               0.0199***    0.0117*** 0.0317*** 0.0263*** 0.0106*** 0.208*** 0.146*** -0.141*** -0.00453
Complaints          [0.00119] [0.00214] [0.00203]                 [0.00256]    [0.00212] [0.00259] [0.00242] [0.00125] [0.0169] [0.0107] [0.0155] [0.00469]
Previous           0.0067*** -0.0167*** 0.0090***                  0.00392      0.00455 0.00865* 0.0141*** -0.00042 0.127*** 0.0439*** 0.135*** 0.00764
Convictions         [0.00152] [0.00283] [0.00235]                 [0.00324]    [0.00283] [0.00346] [0.00317] [0.00142] [0.0219] [0.0119] [0.0203] [0.00589]
Detained Pre-         0.00229 0.0992*** 0.123***                  -0.151***   -0.0683*** -0.219*** -0.223*** -0.0423*** -1.473*** -0.355*** -0.691*** -0.0512***
Adjudication        [0.00284] [0.00476] [0.00426]                 [0.00579]    [0.00475] [0.00507] [0.00499] [0.00285] [0.0325] [0.0230] [0.0343] [0.00905]
Home Poverty Rate -0.00216 -0.0231* -0.0306**                     0.0372**      0.00855 0.0454*** 0.0489*** -0.00045 0.274*** -0.0354              0.11      0.0321
                    [0.00802] [0.0104] [0.0115]                    [0.0129]     [0.0104] [0.0119] [0.0105] [0.00858] [0.0705] [0.0681] [0.0754] [0.0254]
Local Borrowing     0.0231** 0.00489       0.0243+                  -0.0055    -0.0220+ -0.0284* -0.0356** -0.0118         -0.277**    -0.129   0.00716     -0.0266
Costs               [0.00787] [0.0133] [0.0132]                    [0.0143]     [0.0117] [0.0134] [0.0128] [0.0107] [0.0885] [0.0877] [0.0916] [0.0294]
Distance from        -0.00103 0.0092*** 0.0091***                 -0.00741*   -0.0117*** -0.0188*** -0.0178*** -0.00529* -0.106*** -0.0311 -0.0633*** -0.00126
Home to Law Office [0.00217] [0.00277] [0.00248]                  [0.00318]    [0.00286] [0.00302] [0.00297] [0.00241] [0.0193] [0.0192] [0.0189] [0.00680]
Previous Cases       -3.7E-05 1.37E-05 3.54E-05                    3.26E-05     -0.00013 -9.3E-05 -0.00018 -0.00025** -0.00128+ -0.00179* -0.00074 -0.00082**
                    [0.00009] [0.000102] [0.000115]              [0.000129]    [0.00009] [0.000116] [0.000110] [0.00009] [0.000695] [0.000716] [0.000656] [0.000277]
Percent of Cases      -0.0264   0.00315    0.00866                  -0.0432      0.0506    0.00698    -0.0205    0.00948     -0.12    -0.0901     0.0241     -0.151
Assigned             [0.0592] [0.0662] [0.0696]                    [0.0767]     [0.0552] [0.0740] [0.0655] [0.0491]         [0.450]   [0.422]    [0.480]    [0.168]
Racial / Ethnic      -0.00376 0.00154 0.000757                     -0.0102*    0.00692+     -0.003   -0.00384 -0.00304      -0.016   0.00957     -0.0206    0.00294
Match               [0.00291] [0.00386] [0.00410]                 [0.00461]    [0.00411] [0.00448] [0.00409] [0.00377] [0.0279] [0.0274] [0.0279] [0.0101]
Average Retained   0.000253+ -0.0027*** 0.0012***                0.0007***    0.000897* 0.0016*** 0.0020*** 0.000179+ 0.0121*** 0.000064 0.0201*** -0.00012
Caseload           [0.000146] [0.000643] [0.000320]              [0.000208]   [0.000371] [0.000403] [0.000475] [0.000108] [0.00262] [0.000796] [0.00486] [0.000521]
Notes: All unconditional regressions include 64,209 observations. Regressions conditional on conviction include 30,789 observations. All models additionally include offense dummies,
court docket dummies, client race dummies, and attorney-by-year fixed effects. Standard errors adjusted for heteroscedasticity and clusters at the defendant home block group and attorney
level. Significant at +10%, *5%, **1%, and ***0.1% levels.




                                                                                           44
 Appendix

                                                            Table A3. Disaggregated Decomposition Results
                      Reduced                                      Plead                        Incarc. |           Ln(Sen.)|C           Ln(Fine) |
                                Dismissed Def. Adj. Plead Nolo           Convicted Incarc.                 Ln(Sen.)             Ln(Fine)
                       Charge                                     Guilty                        Convic.                onvic.             Convic.
Uncond. Penalty (β) -0.0206*** -0.135*** -0.0561*** 0.164*** 0.0189* 0.183*** 0.184*** 0.0749*** 1.061***              0.108   1.024*** 0.253***
                     [0.00316] [0.00676] [0.00834] [0.00851] [0.00902] [0.00726] [0.00785] [0.00775] [0.0580] [0.0677] [0.0508] [0.0142]
Amount of β Due to Differences in:
Offense FE          -0.0202*** -0.0064** 0.0134*** 0.0009 -0.0052*** -0.0045+        -0.0037 0.0374*** -0.1492*** -0.1388** 0.0424* -0.0596***
                      [0.0021] [0.0021] [0.0029] [0.0020] [0.0015] [0.0024] [0.0031] [0.0056] [0.0258] [0.0470] [0.0184] [0.0046]
Court FE             -0.0209*    -0.0043    0.026**   -0.0044 -0.0182*** -0.0224*    -0.018*     0.0036    -0.1284+ -0.0237      0.0287       0
                      [0.0105] [0.0124] [0.0096] [0.0101] [0.0053] [0.0104] [0.0089] [0.0107] [0.0712] [0.0812] [0.1045] [0.0260]
Male Defendant        0.0002+ 0.0007*** 0.0029*** -0.0024*** -0.0011*** -0.0035*** -0.0033*** -0.0018*** -0.0229*** -0.0181*** -0.0043** -0.0014+
                      [0.0001] [0.0002] [0.0006] [0.0005] [0.0002] [0.0006] [0.0006] [0.0004] [0.0042] [0.0033] [0.0014] [0.0008]
Age at Offense        0.0002* -0.0002+ -0.0003* 0.0003*          0.0002   0.0005*    -0.0001   -0.0005* -0.0016+ -0.006*        0.0018+    0.0002
                      [0.0001] [0.0001] [0.0002] [0.0002] [0.0001] [0.0002] [0.0001] [0.0002] [0.0008] [0.0025] [0.0009] [0.0003]
Race FE                -0.0002    0.0008 -0.0037*** 0.003*** -0.0002 0.0027*** 0.0024*** 0.0002             0.0104*   -0.0029   -0.0085*  -0.0001
                      [0.0003] [0.0006] [0.0007] [0.0006] [0.0005] [0.0007] [0.0006] [0.0003] [0.0044] [0.0026] [0.0041] [0.0009]
Previous            -0.0055*** 0.0072*** -0.0217*** 0.0089*** 0.0052*** 0.0142*** 0.0118*** 0.0033*** 0.0928*** 0.0453*** -0.0631*** -0.0014
Complaints            [0.0008] [0.0013] [0.0027] [0.0017] [0.0011] [0.0020] [0.0017] [0.0008] [0.0131] [0.0101] [0.0104] [0.0016]
Previous            0.0028*** -0.007*** 0.0037*** 0.0016         0.0019   0.0036* 0.0059*** -0.0001 0.0527*** 0.0156** 0.0562*** 0.0027
Convictions           [0.0007] [0.0013] [0.0010] [0.0014] [0.0012] [0.0015] [0.0015] [0.0005] [0.0105] [0.0049] [0.0100] [0.0023]
Detained Pre-          -0.0007 -0.0317*** -0.0394*** 0.0483*** 0.0218*** 0.0701*** 0.0714*** 0.016*** 0.4709*** 0.1343*** 0.2211*** 0.0194***
Adjudication          [0.0009] [0.0017] [0.0018] [0.0021] [0.0017] [0.0024] [0.0024] [0.0012] [0.0159] [0.0098] [0.0123] [0.0038]
Home Poverty Rate      -0.0001   -0.001*   -0.0013* 0.0016**     0.0004 0.0019*** 0.0021***         0     0.0117*** -0.0014      0.0047    0.0012
                      [0.0004] [0.0005] [0.0005] [0.0006] [0.0005] [0.0006] [0.0005] [0.0004] [0.0034] [0.0028] [0.0034] [0.0011]
Local Borrowing       0.0005*     0.0001    0.0005+   -0.0001   -0.0005+ -0.0006* -0.0008** -0.0003 -0.0061** -0.0031            0.0002   -0.0006
Costs                 [0.0002] [0.0003] [0.0003] [0.0003] [0.0003] [0.0003] [0.0003] [0.0003] [0.0020] [0.0024] [0.0021] [0.0008]
Distance from              0         0          0         0          0        0          0      -0.0001     0.0002    -0.0008    0.0001       0
Home to Law Office [0.0000] [0.0003] [0.0003] [0.0002] [0.0004] [0.0006] [0.0006] [0.0002] [0.0035] [0.0013] [0.0021] [0.0002]
Previous Cases          0.0103   -0.0038    -0.0099   -0.0091    0.0347    0.0258     0.0504    0.0823*      0.357    0.5838*    0.2069  0.2669**
                      [0.0250] [0.0296] [0.0334] [0.0379] [0.0305] [0.0337] [0.0367] [0.0370] [0.2348] [0.2788] [0.1925] [0.0969]
Percent of Cases       -0.0107    0.0013     0.0035   -0.0174     0.0204   0.0028    -0.0083     0.0039     -0.0484   -0.0374    0.0097   -0.0627
Assigned              [0.0249] [0.0278] [0.0292] [0.0322] [0.0232] [0.0310] [0.0275] [0.0220] [0.1888] [0.1890] [0.2014] [0.0753]
Racial / Ethnic         0.0004   -0.0002    -0.0001   0.0011+    -0.0008   0.0003     0.0004     0.0003      0.0018   -0.0011    0.0023   -0.0003
Match                 [0.0003] [0.0004] [0.0005] [0.0006] [0.0005] [0.0005] [0.0005] [0.0005] [0.0032] [0.0033] [0.0032] [0.0012]
Average Retained       -0.0011 0.0123*** -0.0052** -0.0033*** -0.004* -0.0074*** -0.0091*** -0.0009 -0.0545*** -0.0003 -0.0909*** 0.0006
Caseload              [0.0007] [0.0034] [0.0016] [0.0009] [0.0019] [0.0021] [0.0026] [0.0007] [0.0150] [0.0045] [0.0254] [0.0029]
Attorney x Year FE      0.0262   -0.0418     0.0074    0.0721    -0.0578   0.0141    -0.0033   -0.0916+     -0.0568   -0.5666    0.1025   -0.1707
                      [0.0402] [0.0425] [0.0458] [0.0531] [0.0410] [0.0462] [0.0456] [0.0479] [0.3050] [0.3887] [0.2896] [0.1277]
Notes: All unconditional regressions include 64,209 observations. Regressions conditional on conviction include 30,789 observations. All models additionally include offense dummies,
court docket dummies, client race dummies, and attorney-by-year fixed effects. Standard errors adjusted for heteroscedasticity and clusters at the defendant home block group and attorney
level. Significant at +10%, *5%, **1%, and ***0.1% levels.
                                                                                           45
Appendix

                          Table A4. Residual Assigned Counsel Penalty for Case Outcomes, Additional Robustness Checks
                 Reduced                                    Plead         Plead                       Incarc. |           Ln(Sen.)|          Ln(Fine) |
                         Dismissed Def. Adj.                                     Convicted Incarc.               Ln(Sen.)           Ln(Fine)
                 Charge                                     Nolo          Guilty                      Convic.             Convic.             Convic.
                                                                          A. Baseline OLS Estimates (64,209 / 30,789)
Assigned          -0.00172 -0.0610*** -0.0319*** 0.0628*** 0.0220*** 0.0852*** 0.0861*** 0.0233*** 0.531*** 0.129**                                        0.514***     0.259***
                 [0.00407] [0.00612] [0.00591] [0.00613] [0.00531] [0.00640] [0.00644] [0.00559] [0.0438]         [0.0447]                                 [0.0434]     [0.0176]
                                                                  B. Local Attorneys (62,210 / 29,785)
Assigned          -0.00187 -0.0599*** -0.0323*** 0.0621*** 0.0218*** 0.0843*** 0.0852*** 0.0224*** 0.528*** 0.128**                                        0.504***     0.259***
                 [0.00413] [0.00614] [0.00599] [0.00619] [0.00538] [0.00644] [0.00646] [0.00559] [0.0440]         [0.0447]                                 [0.0435]     [0.0176]
                                                    C. Excluding Motions to Revoke Probation (MTRs) (52,488 / 26,817)
Assigned         0.000221 -0.0616*** -0.0337*** 0.0731*** 0.0216*** 0.0951*** 0.102*** 0.0354*** 0.634*** 0.212***                                         0.583***     0.259***
                 [0.00443] [0.00693] [0.00648] [0.00716] [0.00581] [0.00724] [0.00766] [0.00582] [0.0519]         [0.0472]                                 [0.0537]     [0.0184]
Notes: Sample sizes indicated in parentheses (Full / Conditional on Conviction). All regressions include controls for case and attorney characteristics. Standard errors adjusted for
heteroscedasticity and clusters at the defendant home block group and attorney level. Significant at +10%, *5%, **1%, and ***0.1% levels.




                                                                                       46
Appendix

                                                    Table A5. Match Effects for Unreported Outcomes
                               Reduced                                                                                  Ln(Sen.)|                          Ln(Fine) |
                                Charge
                                                Plead Nolo       Plead Guilty         Incarc.         Ln(Sen.)                            Ln(Fine)
                                                                                                                        Convic.                             Convic.
    Average Assigned           -0.00172         0.0628***         0.0220***         0.0861***         0.531***           0.129**          0.514***          0.259***
    Counsel Penalty
                               [0.00407]         [0.00613]         [0.00531]        [0.00644]          [0.0438]          [0.0447]          [0.0434]         [0.0176]
    (Table 3, Panel A)
    Match Dimension:
    Male Attorney             -0.00063           -0.00332          0.00507           0.00729            0.076             0.146            -0.0764           -0.0591
                              [0.00988]          [0.0163]          [0.0115]          [0.0165]          [0.109]           [0.120]           [0.126]          [0.0420]
    Distance from             -0.00478            -0.0008         0.000227           -0.00247          -0.0102          0.00292            -0.0194          -0.00195
    Home to Law Office        [0.00321]         [0.00484]         [0.00533]         [0.00481]         [0.0325]          [0.0416]          [0.0390]          [0.0139]
    Years Since Bar            0.00351           -0.00927          -0.00342          -0.00792          -0.0341           0.0625            -0.0496          -0.0399*
    Admission                 [0.00419]         [0.00731]         [0.00564]         [0.00719]         [0.0459]          [0.0544]          [0.0419]          [0.0163]
    Racial / Ethnic             0.0248            0.0111          0.000875            0.0355           0.335+             0.275            0.0299             -0.012
    Black                      [0.0185]          [0.0265]          [0.0306]          [0.0288]          [0.177]           [0.272]           [0.273]          [0.0811]
    Racial / Ethnic           -0.00254             0.013            0.0129            0.0179            0.117           0.00178            0.0408            -0.0558
    Hispanic                   [0.0100]          [0.0165]          [0.0140]          [0.0157]          [0.107]           [0.120]           [0.101]          [0.0415]
    Racial / Ethnic           -0.00299            -0.0244           -0.0279           -0.0227          -0.0729            0.316             -0.273             0.124
    White                      [0.0177]          [0.0226]          [0.0186]          [0.0248]          [0.162]           [0.264]           [0.182]          [0.0833]
    Notes: All unconditional regressions include 64,209 observations. Regressions conditional on conviction include 30,789 observations. All models additionally
    include controls for case and attorney characteristics. See Table 5 for observation counts for racial matches. Standard errors adjusted for heteroscedasticity and
    clusters at the defendant home block group and attorney level. Significant at +10%, *5%, **1%, and ***0.1% levels.




                                                                                     47
