NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DOUGLASS C. NORTH:
TRANSACTION COSTS, PROPERTY RIGHTS, AND ECONOMIC OUTCOMES
Gary D. Libecap
Working Paper 24585
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24585

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2018

Thanks for very useful comments from Mary Shirley of the Coase Institute. The views expressed
herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Gary D. Libecap. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Douglass C. North: Transaction Costs, Property Rights, and Economic Outcomes
Gary D. Libecap
NBER Working Paper No. 24585
May 2018
JEL No. K11,K32,N4,N42,N5,N52,Q15,Q2,Q22,Q25,Q28,Q32,Q38
ABSTRACT
Douglass North asked why some societies historically and contemporarily have rising per-capita
incomes and individual welfare, whereas others do not? He argued that successful economies had
property rights that encouraged markets, trade, and investment in new production and
organizational methods. In other economies, transaction costs, especially those due to the
political process, blocked more efficient property rights. Property rights grant decision making
over valuable resources and are the basis for investment, and market exchange. They mold the
economy and the distribution of wealth and political power. Politicians and coalitions of
privileged elites with stakes in the status quo join to preserve it. Inefficiencies create their own
constituencies. There is no clear remedy for general citizens in North’s cases. Despite the power
of North’s argument, transaction costs are not clear in aggregate studies of economies. They are
more apparent in US common-pool resource problems with large, continuing losses in resource
rents. This evidence runs counter to the facile arguments in the welfare and environmental
economics literatures for addressing externalities that are reminiscent of the simplistic
recommendations in the growth and economic history literatures that North challenged. If the
observed costly political response to open access losses is characteristic of regulation in general,
then welfare losses permeate developed economies as well and are more pervasive than the
dramatic examples of development failure examined by North and others. Mitigation requires
competitive interest groups that benefit from more secure property rights and greater resource
rents to offset powerful elites that align with politicians and capture bureaucratic agencies to
achieve particularistic benefits that undermine general welfare.

Gary D. Libecap
Bren School of Environmental Science
and Management and Economics Department
University of California, Santa Barbara
Bren Hall 4412
Santa Barbara, CA 93106-5131
and NBER
glibecap@bren.ucsb.edu

Introduction.
Douglass North, his coauthors, and others provide general, cohesive arguments about
why economic growth and advances in welfare are so uneven historically and contemporarily,
with often enormous lost opportunities. The details, however, are missing about the transaction
costs that limit the definition, enforcement, and exchange of more effective property rights to
make such growth possible. What actually impedes adoption of institutions that support wealth
creation and advances in general welfare? What are the remedies?
Micro-level studies of persistent, economically-important losses with common-pool
resources provide insight. The problems of open-access have long been understood, as has their
solution—the definition of property rights. Yet, empirically-observed responses often are late,
incomplete, with unanticipated results. These findings are counter to facile recommendations for
the mitigation of externalities in the welfare economics literature (Pigou 1922, Meade 1973) or
often in environmental economics (see policy review in Goulder and Parry 2008 where transaction
costs and interest groups play little or no role). As Coase argued (1960, 15-16) the regulatory
solutions may be more costly than the problem. The literature is reminiscent of the simplistic
arguments in the growth and economic history literatures that North challenged.

Why are these externality losses not addressed privately as suggested by Ostrom (1990)?
As in North’s examples, there are heterogeneous interests with differential incentives to assign
property rights that limit rent dissipation and create value. Transaction costs constrain private
arrangements and mold the political response to private bargaining failure. Inefficiencies create
their own constituencies. Some interests have a stake in the status quo and agreement on
compensation to build consensus for change is not forthcoming. Powerful elites may align with
politicians and capture bureaucratic agencies to achieve particularistic benefits that undermine
general welfare.
Politicians and bureaucrats are not resource owners as private parties can be, and hence,
do not have the same motivation for maximizing resource net rents. Politicians, elected or not,
and bureaucrats depend on the support of critical constituencies. As a result, the political reaction
is to provide narrow benefits to influential interests, not necessarily to increase resource rents.
Politicians and bureaucrats may have no particular incentive to provide generalized benefits to
citizens as public goods, unless doing so coincides with gains to their constituents. If this is a
common phenomenon, the economy will underperform in a manner described broadly by North.
Moreover, it calls for a rethinking of the role of government in responding to externality losses.
Only if there are more general, organized interests who would profit from a more effective
property rights regime will competitive interest groups form and encourage a more complete
political response to the losses of the common pool.

1

This paper considers cases of competitive oil and gas extraction, excessive harvest of
fisheries, and the misallocation of fresh water and corresponding rapid draw down of
groundwater basins in the US. The country has a generally supportive legal and political
structure for property rights and markets to encourage more optimal resource use and economic
growth. Nevertheless, surprisingly large and on-going rent losses occur due to the failure to
adopt more effective property rights. In a large economy, such as that in the US, these costs are
spread broadly across the citizenry. With limited information and high organization costs, there
may be little political pressure for more welfare-enhancing policies, and costs per capita may be
small. In total, however, they add up and result in damaging underperformance of the economy.
In smaller, more resource-dependent economies the losses from the failure to adopt more
effective property rights are far more harmful. If the observed costly political response to open
access losses is characteristic of regulation in general, then welfare losses permeate developed
economies as well and are more pervasive than the dramatic examples of development failure
examined by North and others.
North on Transaction Costs and Impediments to Economic Growth and Welfare.
North defined institutions as “humanly devised constraints that structure political,
economic and social interactions” (1981, 36), that range from formal rules--constitutions, laws,
judicial rulings, property rights—to informal restraints and rewards--sanctions, customs,
traditions, codes of conduct. Unless impeded by transaction costs, which are the costs of
defining, enforcing, and trading property rights (Coase 1960, Allen 2011), those institutions that
are out of step with potential economic gains are adjusted through bargaining among relevant
agents. As North (1987, 422) described: “Modern economic growth results from the
development of institutions that permit an economy to realize the gains from specialization and
division of labor associated with the sophisticated technology that has developed in the Western
world in the last several centuries.”
Indeed, Davis and North (1971, 59) optimistically employed a transaction-cost free
contractual framework in describing the process of institutional change: “It is the possibility of
profits that cannot be captured within the existing arrangemental structure that leads to the
formation of new (or mutation of old) institutional arrangements.” In their framework,
bargaining does not break down and when politicians are involved, they respond to interest
groups that are motivated to maximize returns because they, and society, are better off by doing
so.
Why this would be the case, given empirical evidence to the contrary, remained
unresolved. Although North did not delve into the details of transaction costs, he later became
far more appreciative of how they could derail economic growth: “the absence of such
institutions [effective property rights] when compared to their presence in successful developing
countries provide essential clues for exploring production failures as a result of the high cost of
transacting” (North 1987, 427).

2

North was pessimistic about when the political process would actually respond in a
manner that was welfare enhancing: “In fact, one of the most evident lessons from history is that
political systems have an inherent tendency to produce inefficient property rights which result in
stagnation or decline” (1987, 422). These insights led him to conclude that “…economic history
is overwhelmingly a story of economies that failed to produce a set of economic rules of the
game (with enforcement) that induce sustained economic growth. The central issue of economic
history (and of economic development) is to account for the evolution of political and economic
institutions that create an economic environment that induces increased productivity” (North
1990, 2). But the details of transaction costs and conditions when bargaining conflicts over
property rights would be resolved successfully remained unaddressed.
General insights were provided by North and Thomas (1973). They broadly compare the
differential success of England and the Netherlands in economic growth in the 17th and 18th
centuries relative to wealthier and more populous France and Spain. North and Thomas argue
that the political position of the monarch and important constituents who would gain or be
harmed by changes in the status quo property rights regime were quite different across the four
countries. In England there were constraints on the arbitrary power of the crown, who faced
political pressure from those who would benefit from institutional change--new land owners,
commercial interests. As a result, new property rights, taxes, commercial law, and land and
capital markets were supported, allowing for more fluid resource movement and access to
expanded domestic and international markets. This process did not play out the same way in
France or Spain. There, absolutist monarchies faced few political restrictions or incentives to
change the status quo. They relied heavily on granting and taxing inefficient local monopoly
privileges, such as the Mesta (an association of powerful sheep ranchers) in Spain. Monopolies
not only provided revenue, but created a local, conservative elite that had a stake in supporting
the crown. Elites and the crown were fearful of responding to new innovation, since a more
open and entrepreneurial economy could undermine their economic, social, and political
positions.
North and Weingast (1989) provide more detail on the conditions in England that limited
the power of the crown to undermine economic growth. Following the Glorious Revolution of
1688, both the monarch and Parliament were constrained in their ability to arbitrarily confiscate
property rights. New legal restrictions provided for more credible commitments in financial
markets, for an independent judiciary that supported the sanctity of property rights and contracts,
for the creation of the Bank of England and the English stock market, and for central and equal
roles for Parliament and the crown in drafting laws. No similar institutional constraints were
placed on the power of the crown in Spain, thus making arbitrary seizure and redistribution of
property and abrogation of contracts more likely. Entrenched elites depended on the continued
support of the crown, and jointly, this coalition assembled to block change, and over time Spain
and Portugal, the two richest western European economies, became economic backwaters.
Almost 30 years after North and Weingast (1989), understanding the problem of coalition
formation and political support for new economic opportunities remains a central challenge.
3

Given often vast potential benefits, why is it not in the interest of politicians, bureaucrats, and
critical constituents to support change? Why is it that private agents cannot solve collectiveaction problems to either solve local inefficiencies or to mobilize effective lobby groups for
property rights that could deliver so much?
Why are North and South Korea, two basically similar societies in many ways so
incredibly different in per capita income, welfare, and individual opportunity? Why has
Venezuela’s fabulous oil wealth been squandered, making the country one of the poorest in
South America when it once had been one of the richest? Why did Zimbabwe drop from being a
major food producer and exporter to being a much poorer country and food importer? In
contrast, how long will the political structure in China support mostly informal or limited formal
property rights that underlie its dramatic economic growth over the past 20 years?
North, Wallis, and Weingast (2009), Acemoglu and Robinson (2012), Alston, Alston,
Mueller, and Nonnenmacher (2018, forthcoming) provide additional ways of thinking about
these problems. They explore how the political process raises the transaction costs of adopting
generally-beneficial institutional change to promote economic growth and wealth. In successful
cases, coalitions form among those who would benefit and lobby for change. In other cases,
incumbents associated with older economic practices and whose economic, social and political
positions could be undermined by change, form blocking coalitions. They align with politicians
who benefit from maintenance of the existing and more certain political and social order. Where
these coalitions persist, economies remain more closed as what North, Wallis, and Weingast call
natural states. Missing, however, is an understanding of when influential coalitions might form
to lead politicians and bureaucrats to provide pareto-improving collective goods, rather than
costly particularistic ones.
Transaction Costs and Modification of Property Rights
In a transaction cost-free world all available economic opportunities and associated rental
streams would be achieved. Potential rents from adopting new property rights structures and
organizational forms along with related innovative production and consumption technologies,
economies of scale, and changing input mixes would be realized as soon as their prospects
became known. Those tied to older property rights, technologies and production would adjust or
exchange rights costlessly to those tied to new practices. There would be no free riding. If parties
had heterogeneous prospects, new information would be made available for instant adjustment or
for full compensation to those disadvantaged. All would benefit. Where property rights required
new legal refinement, politicians and bureaucrats would be supportive. Measurement and
monitoring compliance with new rights structures would be complete (Barzel 1982). No
opportunity with positive net gains would be foregone. Economic welfare would be maximized.
Transaction costs, however, are positive because information about economic
opportunities is incomplete. Measurement and monitoring are imperfect. Parties are
heterogeneous in production cost and expectations and verifying differences credibly for uniform
4

positions in support of institutional change is difficult. Compensating payments to offset
differential assessments are not forthcoming. While private parties might be paid for
disproportionate costs they might bear in property rights change, politicians and bureaucrats
cannot be. They value political power and esteem, attributes not easily monetized or in some
cases, prohibited from being monetized. When transaction costs are positive then economic
outcomes stray importantly from their optimum.
To understand how positive transaction costs can impede needed definition, enforcement,
and exchange of property rights, it is useful to examine more micro-level, common-pool resource
problems. At this disaggregate level, it is possible to identify what impedes private agreement
and to see how such bargaining problems hinder effective interest group mobilization in the
political process for institutional change. Examination also reveals how politicians and
bureaucrats respond to narrow interests, rather than to coalitions that have an interest in
widespread welfare gains.
The lessons learned are generalizable for the broader economy and economic
performance. Many common-pool resource problems are surprisingly costly and persistent.
Addressing them involves private parties, politicians, and bureaucrats. There are private
negotiations and bargaining between politicians and political coalitions in the presence of often
formidable transaction costs. The outcomes determine what resource rents are saved and what
welfare gains are possible. The problems of resolving common-poor resource problems likely
are microcosms of the broader challenges of changing property rights to promote economic
growth.
Adjustments in Property Rights and Transaction Costs.
To understand how transaction costs can affect both private and political negotiations to
define, enforce, and exchange property rights to mitigate the losses of open access, it is helpful to
lay out the bargaining problem abstractly to identify key parameters.
A. The Bargaining Problem.
Rent dissipation from competitive extraction of a common-pool resource arise because
property rights to control access and use are not fully defined. The problem is outlined by
Gordon (1954) and Cheung (1970). Too many users exploit the resource too rapidly and are
locked into current production because there is no opportunity for trade. Additional labor,
capital, and technology are marshaled to win the race for rents, and in the limit, the full rental
value of the resource is dissipated. There are no residual net benefits to enhance social and
economic welfare. Open access fails to provide incentives for users to invest in or conserve the
resource and absent property rights, it cannot be traded for reallocation to higher-valued uses.
Addressing the problem is costly because excess labor and capital must be denied resource
access. Which parties have to go? If the parties are homogeneous in cost, values, and
expectations, the answer does not matter. Those that leave can be fully compensated so that all
5

parties share in the net gains. If the parties are heterogeneous, however, deciding who must be
denied and what their offsetting compensation must be becomes the bargaining problem. Hold
out is possible and those that believe they are made worse off will resist welfare-enhancing
solutions.
Implementing a remedial, new property rights regime requires both agreement on
property rights to the net gains as well as enforcement and reallocation via exchange. Because
negotiations are fraught with disagreement, they are costly, and whether they are worthwhile
depends upon the value of the resource. The difference between aggregate benefits and costs
determines the overall net gains or rents available from moderating the losses of the common
pool. These net gains define what the parties could achieve through the assignment or
refinement of property rights. At the same time, however, more valuable resources offer more
rents, attracting more claimants, and potentially raising bargaining costs over the distribution of
those rents.
B. The Nature of the Resource.
If the resource is small, boundable, low-valued, and homogeneous in quality, and the
impact of over exploitation is observable and not subject to dispute, then parties can agree upon a
property rights regime of some type that reduces the losses of open access. These characteristics
describe the small-scale common-pool resources often successfully managed locally (Ostrom,
1990). By contrast larger, less boundable and observable, more heterogeneous, and more
valuable resources are associated with more disputes over the net gains from a new property
rights regime and the division of the rents associated with it (Libecap 2014).
C. The Number and Nature of the Bargaining Parties.
More valuable resources attract more claimants, and the larger the number of parties that
must agree on property rights, the higher the transaction costs of agreement (Olson 1965). When
the parties are homogeneous in production cost and information, they will form similar
expectations of the net gains of new property rights. The distribution of associated rents can
occur though use of property rights that define uniform shares. The process is not controversial
because the parties are generally identical. These similarities generate trust and shared objectives
(Ostrom 1990; Cox, Arnold, Villamayor Tomás 2010).
Problems arise when these conditions do not describe users of the common-pool
resource, as often is the case. All parties must be made no worse off or they will oppose change.
Some who have adjusted well to open access will anticipate little gain from property rights
change, unless they receive offsetting compensation. Demonstrating and credibly verifying their
requirements for private agreement to the other negotiating parties is contentious when
information is asymmetrically held or incomplete. Parties may hold out to secure a greater share
if they believe that new information will be revealed to bolster their claims. In the meantime,
they continue to inflict losses on other parties.
6

As open-access exploitation continues and rents are dissipated, agreement on new
property rights becomes more likely. There are fewer parties because some have departed as
rents decline. Further, the remaining users become more similar in cost and expectations. Highcost parties have exited and more is revealed to all remaining users on the true resource state.
D. Politicians and Bureaucrats.
In the presence of private bargaining failure, advocates may turn to the political process.
They negotiate with politicians and bureaucrats to use the coercive power of the state to
implement their favored action that was not possible voluntarily. There is no guarantee, however,
that the political response will be one that maximizes rents or welfare. The reaction depends on
the nature of the interest groups that mobilize and their relative political influence (Peltzman
1976; Becker 1983). If groups that benefit from a more efficient property rights regime are
larger, wealthier, and better organized than those that resist it, then politicians have an incentive
to respond in a manner that coincides with greater rents and social welfare. If the groups that
mobilize most effectively have instead, a stake in the status quo, then politicians will provide
particularistic benefits that result in lost overall rents and reduced welfare. If advocates for new
property rights or opponents are similarly balanced as competitive interest groups, then
politicians and bureaucrats will use discretion in responding. More limited property rights
adjustments with some generalized benefits can take place. While second-best, the outcome
provides greater resource rents and welfare gains than when powerful elites who oppose such
actions dominate the political process.
Clearly defined property rights assign resource access and value, as well as wealth,
political influence and social standing. Politicians and bureaucrats have a stake in the outcome.
There is an inherent tension between private property rights and markets and political actors.
Property rights shift authority from politicians to individuals and hence, reduce political
authority over the resource and its uses. The market becomes more important than the state in
resource use and allocation. This weakens the ability of politicians and bureaucrats to reward
favored constituents.
If responding to critical constituent demands is costly to general welfare, politicians may
distort information, linking their particularistic actions to broadly-valued public goods and
downplaying costs (Buchanan and Tullock 1962; Johnson and Libecap 2001). In the political
arena no clear, tradable ownership typically is established when politicians and bureaucrats
reward favored constituencies. Doing so can weaken their discretion in responding to new
political demands and the clear assignment of property rights to key supporters becomes a
transparent signal to general citizens of the particularistic benefits they have provided,
information many politicians prefer to avoid providing. In the absence of clear, tradable property
rights, political adjustments in light of new interest group demands or economic conditions is
more contentious than market adjustments. It is not marginal as in a market, but lumpy, and
losing parties receive little or no compensation for lost regulatory-defined wealth, political
7

influence, and social standing. The process is inherently unstable, possibly leading to political
upheaval. The associated uncertainty dampens incentives for beneficial, long-term investment.
Private rights and markets, by contrast, are quite different. Rights owners are residual
claimants to new values and the gains from trade. They have incentive to search for and respond
to new market entrants and to participate willingly and smoothly to reallocation via market
transactions. Further, small adjustments can be made routinely, generating new rent flows and
more information.
North and others have targeted the political process as a major culprit in observed poor
economic performance across countries and time. But it is not just absolute rulers or limited
access orders that undercut economic growth and dissipate rents. In the cases at hand, there are
many ways in which the political process can undermine effective responses to the common pool
in the definition and assignment of property rights. The issue, then, is when will private parties
reach voluntary agreement to mitigate the loses of the common pool and limit political
intervention? When they do not, under what circumstances will the political response be one that
coincides with advances in economic welfare or hinders it? Table 1 summarizes key variables in
the bargaining process.
Table 1: Variables Affecting the Transaction Costs to Resolve Open-Access Losses.
Aggregate Benefits
Aggregate Costs
More valuable resources are more
Higher-valued resources attract more
vulnerable to new entry and competitive
claimants, raising transaction costs in
extraction and hence, offer greater benefits
resolving allocation disputes, in monitoring
from more precise property rights definition and enforcing compliance.
and enforcement (Demsetz, 1967).
Nature of the resource
Nature of the Resource
Spatially small, low-value, observable,
Spatially large, valuable, non-observable,
homogenous resources can be bounded and migratory resources are costly to measure,
measured to control extraction. The political bound, and agree upon allocation in the
process likely not needed. Low value and
definition of property rights. Absent private
few users makes the resource less attractive agreement, the political process becomes
to political intervention.
involved. Responses depend on characteristics
of the lobby groups and may not maximize
rents or advance broad economic welfare.
Nature of the Parties
Nature of the Parties
The smaller the number of parties, the more The larger the number, the more
homogeneous are their costs and values of
heterogeneous in cost and values of resource
resource use, expectations and preferences, use, expectations and preferences, the more
the more likely are agreements on property
likely there will be breakdowns in voluntary
rights definition and enforcement.
negotiations over property rights and resort to
the political process.
Politicians and Bureaucrats
Politicians and Bureaucrats
Politicians and bureaucrats are not direct
More precise property rights shift resource
residual rent claimants arising from more
use authority and net rents to individual
8

efficient property rights. They depend upon
favored constituents whose demands may
not coincide with broader welfare gains.
They seek discretion and information
control over the costs of their actions to
general citizens. There are limits as to how
they might be compensated for property
rights that generate greater rents.

owners. The market is more important than
the state. Politicians and bureaucrats may
constrain property rights so as to maintain
discretion to reward key constituents and keep
the political equilibria. Realized rent gains
depend upon the relative political influence of
beneficiaries of more effective property
rights.

Micro-Level Cases of Transaction Costs: Addressing the Losses of Open Access.
What do we learn from case studies about the transaction costs of defining, enforcing,
and trading property rights that are consistent maximizing the rental value of the key natural
resources? The cases are oil field unitization, wild ocean fisheries, fresh water allocation and
management in the US. All are small portions of overall US GDP (For example, fisheries
generated .01% of US GDP in 2015, as compared to 8%-20% in Iceland). Hence, their value can
be wasted in isolation without widespread losses to overall welfare. If, however, they are
indicative of broader problems in granting, enforcing and exchanging property rights in the
economy, then the general negative effects are more significant. These negatives affect
developed economies that often suffer from slow economic growth, limited opportunities for
segments of the labor market, and political discontent in declining sectors. If there were more
overall wealth generated in the economy, then perhaps these problems would be less damaging.
The sources of economic underperformance have not been examined systematically from a
transaction cost perspective, and they indicate that the issues of concern to North and others
regarding less-developed economies are more pervasive and costly for the world’s population.
Examination of the cases reveals the factors that are behind success or failure of
voluntary private bargaining and how those factors spill over to the political arena. Any political
response, whether the granting of more complete property rights or more commonly, regulation,
or less commonly, Pigouvian taxes assigns a claim to long-term benefits and costs. Parties with
a stake in the outcome organize to lobby politicians and government agencies for favorable rights
arrangements that may or may not maximize general rents. Politicians and their clients have an
incentive to couch the response in terms of provision of broad public goods, but general citizens
will have little cost-effective information to evaluate those claims. This indicates is why
competitive interest groups, rather than interest-group capture, are critical for information
generation for citizens (Johnson and Libecap 2001).
The evidence in these cases indicates that the political response to open-access losses
may be costlier than the problem as warned by Coase (1960, 15-16). As North observed
commented (1981, 20): “the existence of a state is essential for economic growth; the state,
however, is the source of man-made economic decline.”
Oil Field Unitization.
9

The Transaction Cost Lesson.
Oil and gas reservoirs in the U.S. are common-pool resources, subject to potential
competitive extraction under the rule of capture, unless property rights are defined to the
resource. Oil and natural gas are fugitive and in the US, accessible via leases to production firms
from surface property owners. When the ownership is fragmented, relative to the size of the
reservoir, producers access the same resource competitively, inflicting costs on one another and
dissipating overall rents. The problem has long been known, as have the solutions. One is
consolidation of leases through purchase because it reduces the number of competitors and
internalizes the costs of excessive extraction. The other is unitization contracts among all
producers that designate one producer to extract from the reservoir with assignment of shares in
unit net profits to other lease owners. Unitization also reduces the number of competitors and
internalizes costs and benefits among unit shareholders. Both solutions involve reallocation of
property rights and reduce the losses of open access. Even so, neither occurs early when most
rents could be saved.
Reservoirs are not uniform deposits, but vary in size and thickness, so that leases differ in
longevity and value. Other reservoirs have distinct pockets of natural gas and oil, and lease
owners must decide whether to use the gas as an input to drive out oil that may be owned by
others or extract it to be sold separately. Finally, on all reservoirs, some leases are well situated
to intercept subsurface hydrocarbon flows. These differences affect the incentives of lease
owners to agree at any point in time to new property rights. They will agree if the proposed
arrangement makes them at least as well off as they would be under open access. Negotiating
parties, however, generally do not settle on how to value the distinct characteristics of leases,
especially early in the productive life of the field. Lease owners with deep, long-lasting deposits;
those with natural gas; and those that are favorably located geologically to better drain their
neighbors seek to grandfather their advantages in share assignment. Private bargaining breaks
down, even in the face of observable field-wide losses. Over time, as reservoir production
declines, leases become more homogenous and lease owners exit so that sales or unit agreements
become more likely, but after vast rents have been lost.
Producers with large leases that internalize most of common-pool losses turn to the state
to regulate extraction. These are classic externalities described by Pigou (1920) and Meade
(1973), but the government response is not as hypothesized by those authors. Rather, politicians
react to the demands of numerous, politically-influential, high-cost producers, that frequently are
local, and not to the often smaller number of low-cost producers (even wealthier) with
headquarters in different political jurisdictions. The problem has been most egregious in Texas,
the largest oil and gas producing state and the one with the greatest distribution of high-cost,
small, local firms. Politicians and bureaucrats in Texas are not direct residual claimants to rents
saved or generated, but benefit from providing regulatory-defined particularistic property rights
to these well-organized interests (Volden and Wiseman 2007).

10

Open-Access Losses in Oil and Gas Production and Property Rights Solutions.
The problem of competitive extraction has been known since first discoveries in
Pennsylvania in 1859. Rents are lost due to too-rapid production, compared to what would
maximize rents, excessive capital investment in surface storage and wells and labor input, and
lower overall recovery as subsurface pressures are vented too rapidly, trapping oil beneath the
surface. In 1910, 10% of California’s production was lost annually from fires on surface storage
reservoirs—unnecessary if oil could be safely left below ground (Libecap and Smith, 2002,
S592). In 1914 the Director of the US Bureau of Mines asserted that 25% of the value of US
production ($214,000,000 in 1914), was lost due to the drilling of excessive wells. This translates
to losses of $1,344,000,000 in 2018 prices). The Federal Oil Conservation Board in 1926
concluded that oil recovery rates were 20-25% at current prices due to competitive extraction,
whereas recovery of 85-90% of initial oil was thought feasible with more restrained production
(Libecap and Wiggins 1984, 88). The Prudhoe Bay field in Alaska, discovered in 1966, went into
decline in 1988 due to the added costs of competitive extraction, not from declining endowments
(Libecap and Smith 1999, 543-545).
Private solutions have not been forthcoming preemptively. In 1947 energy economist Joe
Bain pointed out that of some over 3,000 active fields in the US, only 12 were fully unitized and
only 285 had partial unitization (Libecap and Wiggins 1984, 90; Libecap 2008, 380). 30 years
later as of 1975, Libecap and Wiggins (1985, 702) report that only 38 % of Oklahoma and 20 %
of Texas production came from fully-unitized fields. Based on examination of oil company
records, Wiggins and Libecap (1985) and Libecap and Wiggins (1985) report that lease owners
favorably-positioned above the thickest hydrocarbon deposits with the longest-lived and most
uncertain productive potentials, hold out for better shares and there is resistance from high-cost
producers to relaxed unanimity requirements for unit implementation to get around holdouts. The
time to reach agreement in 7 major Texas fields ranged from 4 to 9 years and final units were
incomplete, with one covering only 30% of the field area Wiggins and Libecap (1985, 384).
When firms seeking remedies appealed to the state to address the externalities, politicians and
regulatory agency officials responded with prorationing controls as a different type of property
right.
Prorationing caps annual state production and distributes it via a politically-devised
formula on a field-by-field basis, even though reservoirs differ dramatically in physical
characteristics, production cost, and potential. While high-cost fields could be closed down and
state production directed to low-cost reservoirs to maximize rents, this does not occur. Instead,
fields are assigned shares of the state allowance and those field shares are distributed among
leases based on political formulas. In the regulatory process, numerous, well-organized and
politically-influential small lease owners who benefitted from competitive production by
draining the resources of others, organized to mold prorationing rules. In Texas, they organized
as the Texas Independent Producers Association, and politicians and elected agency officials in
the Texas Railroad Commission, were responsive. In 1948, for example, there were more than
3,400 small independent producers in Texas who profited from dense well drilling and drainage
11

(Libecap and Wiggins 1985, 701-711). Small producers were awarded field production
allowances and prorationing rules that weighted well depth, encouraging the digging of deeper,
costlier wells. Further, the rules exempted high-cost stripper wells altogether from production
controls (Libecap and Smith 2002, S593-S594). Finally, unanimity rules for field-wide
unitization were retained (Libecap and Wiggins 1985, 693). In Oklahoma, where small
producers were less politically powerful, the unanimity requirement was relaxed to allow smaller
majorities to force unit agreements after lobbying from representatives of larger firms.
This costly political response not only preserved high-cost output, but lowered the overall
contribution of hydrocarbon resource production to economic and social welfare in the US.
Energy economist, Morris Adelman estimated that in the 1960s the added production costs of
such prorationing rules in the US were $2,000,000,000 (Libecap and Smith 2002, S595). To
scale, the present value of that annuity for 10 years at 5% in 2018 prices is $380,000,000,000.
These are regulation-based, economically-significant losses to society.
Wild Ocean Fisheries.
The Transaction Cost Lesson.
Fisheries have long been subject to competitive extraction under the rule of capture with
corresponding losses in wealth and contribution to social welfare. Worldwide, the World Bank
estimates that $80,000,000,000 is foregone annually due to extremely inefficient fishing
practices relative to more optimal harvests
(http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/feature/2017/02/14/global-fisheries-sunken-billions). This is
larger than the 2017 GDP of small, prosperous countries, such as Uruguay or Iceland and many
of the costs are inflicted on relatively poorer populations as global fish stocks decline (Myers and
Worm, 2003). With incomplete barriers to entry, more fishers and more and larger vessels
compete for the same stocks, driving down catch-per-unit of effort, increasing costs, and
lowering product quality. The problem potentially is solvable in many cases because the 1982
UN Convention on the Law of the Sea granted 200-mile exclusive economic zones (EEZs) to
coastal states and these areas are where many valuable fish migrate. Moreover, the costs of the
race to fish are no mystery. Among fishery economists, Gordon (1954) described the rent losses
from open access and Scott (1955) outlined the gains from sole ownership.
The response to over harvest, however, has not been the assignment of property rights,
but rather the adoption of effort controls, those that control inputs and not catch. These include
generalized seasons for fishing, vessel, and equipment controls. With diverse interests, ranging
from inshore and offshore fishers, large and small boat owners, fishers from different locales,
sports and commercial fishers, processors, equipment sellers, labor groups, and regulatory
officials, there can be agreement only on standardized rules and not on the more difficult task of
assigning and monitoring individual property rights (Libecap 2008, 387-392). Regulation,
however, has been costly and not halted the fall in fish stocks or declining catch-per-unit of
effort. The value of fisheries has continued to decline.
12

Because sole ownership to fishing regions was not adopted anywhere, Christy (1973,
388) devised an alternative of capping annual catch (TAC) and distributing shares in the cap as
individual transferable quotas (ITQs) or individual vessel quotas (IVQs). These are use rights to
harvest and not property rights to the stock. Nevertheless, they fundamentally change incentives
as compared to the race to fish under the rule of capture. Shares only have value if the stock is
vibrant and their value depends upon product quality, production cost, and tradability.
Accordingly, fishers have incentive to change production practices and timing to raise product
values and to lower costs.
Even so, no share systems were adopted until 1984 in Iceland and 1986 in New Zealand
and 1990 in the US. The Magnuson-Stevens Act in 1996 placed a 4-year moratorium on adding
new ITQ systems in the US. Where ITQs have been implemented in the US, there are strict
limits on tradability, often allowing exchanges only to smaller vessel owners and limiting the
amount of quota held by any fisher to a small portion of the total annual allowable, .5% in some
cases (Libecap 2008, 392). Although ITQs are labeled transferable quotas, they are not very
transferable, undermining the objective of reducing the number of excessive vessels in a fishery
and of achieving cost-effective economies of scale. High costs and large numbers of small
vessels generally are locked in. Further, in the US, ITQs and other catch shares are explicitly not
property rights, but use rights revocable at any time without compensation.
In contrast, in New Zealand, ITQs are a perpetual property right useable for collateral
(Grainger and Costello, 2014). In New Zealand fisheries account for a larger share of GDP than
in the US and are the country’s 5th largest export, so that the overall wealth losses from waste are
more apparent to the general population. Moreover, the Maori, following earlier treaties.
ultimately received property rights to 10% of established ITQ fisheries and 20% of newlydiscovered ones through legislation enacted between 1989 and 1996. The Maori became the
largest single shareholders in the highly-commercialized fisheries, setting precedents for
property rights security for non-Maori ITQ holders as well. In contrast in the US, native fishing
rights and practices generally were swept aside early in the 20th century so that there was no
similar constituency in the US and small-scale fishers have opposed the granting of definite
property rights that could encourage consolidation (and lower costs and possibly higher-valued
product). Additionally, neither regulators, nor fishery biologists have supported the assignment
of property rights and effective delegation of fishery management to fishers themselves.
In the US small, high-cost fishers, local community representatives, and regulatory
agency officials have resisted the assignment of more complete fishery property rights.
Bureaucrats have not trusted private property rights or the likelihood that fishers would adhere to
total annual catches. Neither bureaucrats nor fishers have the same stock assessments, with the
former believing stocks are in direr straights, whereas the latter believe stocks are more plentiful.
Politicians have preferred to maintain a strong regulatory presence not only for biological
reasons, but also to be responsive to the many constituencies that have some stake in the fishery
and the ecosystem and whose representatives could influence agency funding. Their regulatory
13

mandate is to manage fisheries and they are reluctant to transfer much authority to private
fishers, whose livelihoods depend upon it. Regulators do not directly bear the costs of their
actions and can focus on ecological and equity concerns. There is no inherent reason for them to
balance costs and benefits.
Heterogeneity hinders the ability of fishers to agree privately on methods of controlling
entry or harvest as hypothesized by Ostrom (1990) and their ability to form effective lobby
groups. Fishers differ in productive ability and harvest success based on skill. Many adapt well
to open access through specialized knowledge of fish migration patterns, how to set nets, and
timing of fish movements for greater fishing success. Their differential success allows them to
acquire larger and better equipped vessels. Successful commercial vessels often are from major
fishing centers where marketing of fish products and fleet supports are available. In contrast,
smaller, high-cost fleets tend to be linked with more remote, smaller communities. ITQs based
on documented historical catch are attractive to better fishers, who support ITQs and other catch
shares based on grandfathering, which is by far the most common allocation mechanism
(Lynham 2014; Anderson, Arnason, and Libecap, 2011). Smaller, high-cost fishers resist such
ITQs, unless they are modified significantly through the political and regulatory process. ITQs
tend to be implemented only when fish stocks are near collapse when fisher differences and
numbers have diminished.
Open-Access Losses in Fisheries and Property Rights Solutions.
Johnson and Libecap (1982) outline the impact of heterogeneity based on fishing skill on
bargaining for controls on access and harvest within a fishery. In their examination of the Gulf
of Mexico shrimp fishery, they find that differences among in-shore and off-shore fishers and
among those from across states impede private actions and formation of lobby groups for
property rights definition to reduce externalities. When shrimp fishers formed local fisherman
unions in coastal bays with rules to control total harvests, limit entry by nonmembers, and
channel catch toward higher-valued larger shrimp in the 1950s, excluded fishers appealed to the
FTC and Justice Department to dismantle the unions as violations of antitrust laws. Local union
efforts in Monterrey Bay on the Pacific Coast were similarly challenged and rejected. The result
was open access by law, resolvable only by regulation (Johnson and Libecap 1982, 1007-8).
Deacon, Parker and Costello’s (2013) study of the formation and collapse of the Chignik
salmon fishery cooperative in Alaska also reveals transaction costs due to skill-based
heterogeneity among fishers. The cooperative, which operated between 2002 and 2004, was
comprised primarily of less-skilled fishers, who cooperated in channeling salmon toward nets
and in deciding jointly when to retire excess vessels. All cooperative fishers shared in group net
returns uniformly and rents in the fishery rose by 33%. Better fishers, however, did not join,
preferring to stick to their own practices and maintaining their greater harvests and returns. State
regulators administering the cooperative, however, gradually reduced the share of the total
allowable harvest available to the independents in order to force them into the cooperative. The
number of cooperative members rose from 77 to 87 (of a total of 100 fishers) by 2004, but the 13
14

that remained outside successfully sued in court in 2005 to dismantle the cooperative that was
denying them the right to fish. The study again reveals differential skills, rents, and incentives
among fishers and shows why there was no clear political constituency for effective property
rights.
The failure of common effort-regulation in fisheries and the benefits of more complete
private property rights to replace it is underscored by Grafton, Squires, and Fox (2000) who
study the British Columbia halibut fishery. Limited entry restrictions were put into place by
regulators in 1980 with more vessels allowed to enter than were in the fishery at the time in order
to reduce fisher opposition. Outside fishers (nonvoters) were denied access. The number of
vessels rose by 31% to the regulatory limit in 9 years and the stock fell as fishing effort rose.
Regulators gradually reduced the fishing season from 65 days to 6 days by 1990, and a
tournament fishery emerged with intense congestion as part of the race to fish. All fish had to
caught during that period, and hence, only low-valued frozen halibut were available for
consumers. In light of this failure, total allowable catch and individual catch shares (IVQs) were
introduced in 1991 and consolidation of shares or quotas resulted in removal of some vessels. By
1993 the stock had recovered and the fishing season was expanded to 245 days (Grafton,
Squires, and Fox 2000, 685). More valuable fresh halibut became available for consumers
because fishers could harvest as much as market conditions demanded for much of the year
within the total allowable harvest. The authors do not describe the political process that allowed
for this far-better assignment of property rights, but it may be consistent with the general
phenomena that more effective arrangements are not adopted until late in resource use.
Costello, Gaines and Lynham (2008) reveal that the benefits of more secure property
rights generalize across fisheries. They examined 11,135 fisheries between 1950 and 2003
worldwide, where 121 had total allowable catches and catch shares. They simulated the results
of the share-based fisheries and applied them to the other fisheries and found that more complete
property rights halted or reversed declines in fish stocks.
These gains depend upon the strength of the property right, but property rights are weak
in the US. Grainger and Costello (2014) examine the dividend-price ratio (lease price/sales
price) for ITQ shares in the US, Canada, and New Zealand. As described above, in New Zealand
shares are a firm property right, but not so in Canada or the US. In the US fisheries are viewed
by law as a common resource held in trust for all citizens. This common property notion means
that restrictions on entry and harvest to increase rents must come from the political process. To
facilitate regulatory intervention and discretion to reward key constituents, including biologists,
the Magnuson Stevens Act emphasizes that any catch shares “shall be considered a permit” that
“may be revoked, limited, or modified at any time” (Grainger and Costello, 2014, 229). Using
data on lease and sales prices from 1986-2008, they show that the US lease/price ratio is about
double that in New Zealand (Grainger and Costello 2014, 230-233). Based on their analysis, the
market assigns a 50% probability of erosion in asset values due to political/regulatory revocation
of the property right. This added political risk undermines share values in a magnitude similar to

15

changes in the rate of interest or discount. This is a substantial and significant economic effect of
weak property rights on wealth and long-term incentives.
The objectives of politicians and regulators are to maintain control of the fishery to
provide particularistic benefits to favored constituents. This undermines the ability of property
rights and markets to encourage investment, conservation, and exchange so as to protect and
generate rents. But neither politicians, nor regulators are motivated to enhance global efficiency,
except under unusual circumstances. Their interests are served by responding to more narrow
interests. For these reasons, fisheries continue to perform comparatively poorly relative to what
they might, given the potential natural endowments of fish stocks that exist, vast experience and
knowledge that has been generated among fishers, and investment in new marketing and
products.
Fresh Water in the Western US.
The Transaction Cost Lesson.
Fresh water as groundwater is a common-pool resource almost everywhere in the world.
Surface water is a common-property resource in most places because the state owns and allocates
the water via the political and bureaucratic process. Only in Chile, Australia, the western US and
Canada are there private property rights to water that can be used and traded among private
owners (Grafton, Libecap, McGlennon, Landry, and O’Brien 2011). In the western US the
system is based on prior appropriation, a first-possession water right that is separable from the
land (Leonard and Libecap 2018). There are many advantages to these property rights, and a key
one is that their existence allows for institutional comparison and innovation that does not exist
elsewhere where state ownership is enshrined and guarded carefully by politicians and
bureaucrats.
Nevertheless, the record of state regulation is not one that inspires confidence or that
maximizes resource values. As with fisheries, politicians constrain water use through effort
controls (none of which were effective in fisheries). They mandate uniform use reductions
during drought, even though values of water use vary dramatically. They do not rely upon urban
water pricing to regulate demand, and as available water supplies fall during drought, cutbacks
are across-the-board. Despite being portrayed as equitable; these actions are not. The rich not
only consume more, but are better able to adjust to short falls than are the poor. But asserted
equity has a strong political appeal. Further, politicians and bureaucrats allocate water to favored
constituencies, but absent the value information that would be generated by market trades, there
is no way for citizens to assess the costs and benefits of those distributions. Water supply and
regulatory agencies rely upon value information provided by organized interests, which is
unlikely to reflect broad-based demands. For all of these reasons, the problem of lost rents and
welfare is increasing as water values rise with population growth, urbanization, higher per-capita
incomes, new environmental and recreational uses, along with growing traditional applications in
agriculture and industry.
16

The western US could be different because of its well-established water rights regime,
but thus far it is failing to take advantage of this opportunity. In this semi-arid region, most
water rights were granted by 1920 with streams being fully appropriated. Much of the water went
to agricultural production, which was water intensive and offered one of the highest valued uses.
Even today 60-80% of water use is in agriculture (Brewer, Glennon, Ker, and Libecap 2008).
On the margin, however, values in agriculture often are much lower than urban or other uses.
For example, in Nevada’s Reno/Truckee Basin, the median price of 1,025 agriculture-to-urban
water rights sales between 2002 and 2009 (in 2008 prices) was $17,685/acre-foot (an acre-foot =
325,851 gallons, about enough to meet the needs of four people for a year), whereas for 13
agriculture-to-agriculture water rights sales over the same period, the median price was
$1,500/acre-foot, a difference in value of over 12 times (Libecap, 2011). Irrigators as major
rights owners typically are active traders because they can earn more from some water sales than
from growing crops. Water-supply organizations, such as the Metropolitan Water District of
Southern California, are major buyers. Nevertheless, water trading is limited.
Only some 2-4% of annual consumption of water is traded in any western state (Libecap
2017). California is well positioned for water markets because there are private water rights in
agriculture in the relatively wet north and willing demanders in the drier more populous south.
Further, there is an elaborate infrastructure for moving water. Nevertheless, although the recent
5-year California drought ought to have resulted in an uptick in market activity, it did not
happen. It remained flat with lost opportunities to improve value and welfare (Jezdimirovic and
Hanak 2016).
A major reason for limited market trading during drought is a costly, slow, and resistant
regulatory process. All trades that involve changes in location (especially out-of-basin), nature
and timing of use, require regulatory review to insure that other water users are not harmed by
the sale. There is little evidence to support that this is a major concern, however, and much
opposition to proposed sales appears to come from organized interests that seek water allocation
based on the political process and not on market trades that they would have to pay for.
Politicians and regulators do not rely on a market system that weakens their regulatory discretion
and that limits their ability to respond to the demands of organized lobby groups.
Moreover, private water rights often are not well defined. Historically, water was
plentiful and there was little return to more precise measurement and monitoring. That is no
longer the case. A complicating factor is that private water rights are use rights, held so long as
they are consistent with political and bureaucratic interpretations of the public interest. Unlike
fishery use rights, historically water rights would be compensable if there were state adjustments
in property rights. A 1982 Supreme Court ruling in California based on the public trust doctrine,
however, suggested that compensation might not be required (National
Audubon Society v Superior Court (Supreme Court of California, 1983, 33 Cal.3d 419, Libecap
2007). The Public Trust ruling has added uncertainty to private rights. As a result, irrigators are
concerned that selling some water could put their imprecisely-defined rights in jeopardy.
Most of California’s drought response has been via government directives. In a series of
Executive Orders by the Governor and regulatory actions by the state regulatory agency called
17

for mandatory reductions of 25% in water consumption in urban areas (Libecap 2017).
Additionally, 100 of California’s senior agricultural water rights holders had their water uses
restricted and 200 large irrigators agreed to 25% reductions in water access in order to avoid
stricter state controls. Further, under the California and Federal Endangered Species Act (ESA),
water flows across the Sacramento Delta have been periodically halted in order to protect
endangered fish that might be harmed by the pumps used to move the water. Despite evidence of
major costs in lost employment and production in the San Joaquin Valley to the south, no costbenefit analysis is required for agencies under the ESA. Finally, state regulators are considering
minimum streamflow regulations at the behest of various environmental groups to address
declining stream levels during drought. Such mandates, however, do not consider costs and
disproportionately impair senior water rights holders, who otherwise are the most active in water
markets. Mandates do not require compensation and those interest groups who demand them
achieve their desired objectives while costs are spread broadly.
Moreover, beyond a few exceptions, such as in Tucson and Santa Fe, no urban water
supply organization aggressively uses prices to moderate demand in the western US, again
relying upon regulatory restrictions and calls upon neighbors to monitor one another’s use.
Politicians and bureaucrats prefer supply augmentation efforts that do not require major
behavioral changes among constituents and the costs are spread across all rate payers. San Diego
has a new water desalinization plant, where the produced water costs twice what the city pays for
alternative sources (Libecap 2017). Water pricing can have genuine benefits. Tucson, Arizona,
a desert city, uses steep-tier water pricing, whereas Phoenix and adjacent cities use low flat rate,
cost-of-service pricing. Per-capita consumption in Tucson is about 25% less than in Phoenix
(Libecap 2017) based on voluntary price responses. Flat rates are politically popular because
they appear to be equitable and are framed by politicians in that way. But they are not equitable
in the face of income elasticity of demand estimates and they do not effectively encourage water
use change unless the entire rate is shifted significantly.
Existing private water rights and markets are not the politically-favored responses to
growing surface water scarcity. There are no suggestive measures of the total economic costs of
using regulation rather than property rights and markets in fresh water allocation and
conservation. Although the aggregate losses in rents are likely substantial, they are spread across
political jurisdictions. Regulatory mandates and reallocations (such as ones for the environment)
are presented in the public interest and the per-capita costs are low. As water becomes
increasingly scarce with drought and possibly, climate change, the costs of political management
and distribution may become more apparent, particularly if agricultural production and
employment plummet and urban dwellers face on-going short-falls and rationing with no remedy
when prices are fixed. At least with markets consumers and producers have the option of paying
more for high-valued water uses. Basic human consumption demands can be met with low
prices because it is a small portion of overall water demand.
When surface water cannot be accessed, users turn to groundwater, which is a commonpool resource. Both agriculture and urban users are impacted. But as with oil fields, important
18

heterogeneities affect incentives to agree upon a more precise definition of water rights.
Additionally, mistrust of politicians and regulatory agency officials limits resort by users to the
state to address the hold out problem and related externalities.
Open-Access Losses in Groundwater and Property Rights Solutions
There are 445 groundwater basins in California that supply from 40-60% of annual water
use. In 309 basins, there are no constraints on pumping. 105 basins have weak management
plans that prescribe well spacing, but no controls on total extraction. 20 of these basins are
severely over-drafted and have been for some time. Surface levels have dropped over 100 feet in
some cases, damaging roads, structures, and fields. Pumping costs are driven up, and thin parts
of the aquifer have dried up. Seawater intrusion has occurred in aquifers adjacent to the coast. In
contrast, users in 31 basins have defined groundwater property rights, the most complete solution
to competitive withdrawal.
What explains this variation? In the 309 basins with no property rights, there are few
wells and water values are low. Ayres, Edwards, and Libecap (2018) analyze why there is such
variation in property rights regimes, particularly in the basins where overdraft has inflicted major
costs. As with oil and gas reservoirs, groundwater basins are not uniform in the impact of over
draft. Parts of large basins have more recharge from precipitation. Other parts have more
permeable geology encouraging subsurface flows, while others have denser formations that hold
water more in place and reduce cross-well drainage. The number of pumpers and well density
differs. Users are heterogeneous, in part because of their location above the basin. Additionally,
irrigators generally have lower water values and rely on intermittent rapid pumping during
drought to maintain crops and orchards. Urban water supply organizations have higher water
values, view aquifers as critical storage, and have lower overall pumping rates.
In their analysis of the 445 California basins, Ayres, Edwards, and Libecap (2018) find
that user and resource differences significantly affect whether or not pumpers will agree to assign
more definite water rights. Benefits rise as the resource becomes more common and as
groundwater values increase. Transaction costs rise with basin size and the number and
heterogeneity of users. Users on basins with the lowest recharge rates, most urban population
growth, highest well densities, , and most permeable subsurface geology have the greatest gains
from controlling excessive extraction, and are more likely to agree to the definition, monitoring,
and exchange of groundwater rights. Where the numbers of pumpers are large and both irrigators
and urban water supply organizations draw from the same basin, agreement on water rights
becomes less probable. Even so, on critically over-drafted basins where property rights would be
the most effective response to open-access losses, they often are not adopted due to disagreement
on the allocation of groundwater rights. Further, even more lenient management plans that define
well spacing rules, but no rights or limits on pumping rates are not adopted for entire basins.
Most are fragmented with multiple management areas above a single aquifer, reducing the basinwide benefit of pumping controls. This observation is similar to subunits above oil and gas
reservoirs.

19

These findings reveal the role of transaction costs in impeding collective action among
parties to agree to the definition of property rights to avoid rent losses. The California legislature
and regulatory agencies are mandating new, standardized regulatory controls to limit over draft if
private parties cannot agree. Across the state, groundwater basins are not uniform in value nor in
the costs of overdraft. Further, the characteristics of the basins and of the users vary.
Accordingly, one-size-fits-all mandates will not meet a cost-benefit test, and they will face
resistance from many pumpers and monitoring and compliance costs may rise. The restrictions
will assign regulatory-based property rights in a manner similar to prorationing in oil and gas.
They are not apt to coincide with a more optimal definition of rights that maximizes rents.
Where there is a greater consensus among pumpers for controls, as is the case where one type of
user (agriculture or urban) dominates, recharge is lower, and permeability of the subsurface
greater, pumpers could turn to the state to reduce unanimity requirements for agreement on
property rights as has been done in Oklahoma and other states to reduce holdouts in unitization
negotiations. Given the distrust of politicians and regulators by water rights holders as well as
differential agreement among the parties on the rights to be assigned, they have not adopted this
strategy that might otherwise promote agreement.
Conclusion
Douglass North and others have challenged economic historians, as well as development
and growth economists to place greater attention to the underlying institutional setting, especially
property rights, in an economy if economies of scale, human and physical capital investment,
and flexible responses to price changes are to be achieved. North criticized more simplistic
recommendations for growth based on capital flows and large-scale infrastructure investments as
being incomplete and ineffective. In this endeavor, he has been successful in changing thinking
on the underlying bases for growth, at least based on the outflow of scholarly articles, research
reports, and white papers where institutions play a leading role.
Despite this achievement and dramatic improvements in many developing economies,
spectacular outliers remain. North castigated the political process for raising the transaction
costs of defining property rights that could support economic growth and general welfare. He
pointed to the actions of politicians as a major reason why countries failed to exhibit long-term
economic expansion in history and contemporarily.
Unfortunately, but naturally, the analysis remains incomplete. First, the transaction costs
underlying economic differences across countries are not articulated in enough detail in his and
other studies to identify feasible remedies. Nor are transaction costs defined sufficiently so that
empirical hypothesis tests might be generated for econometric as well as qualitative analyses.
Such tests would allow for identification of the relative contribution of politically-based
transaction costs compared to other variables in explaining variation in economic growth over
time. Second, by focusing on economic development North and others have overlooked the
effect of high transaction costs and weak property rights in developed economies where the
opportunity costs may be far greater. Relative to developing economies, property rights are
much more completely defined and secure. At the same time, however, there appear to be
important retrenchments as the government role in the economy has expanded, and the welfare
20

effects have not been thought through by economists, who call for political intervention when
market failure is observed without weighing relative costs and benefits.
Consider externalities. The standard remedies to market failure remain generally quite
similar to those described in the classic welfare economics literature—taxes or quantity
restrictions. Comparisons of the costs of market failure versus the costs of political intervention
to correct it are not conducted. Regulation is assumed to be the welfare-improving in a way
similar to the facile recommendations in the growth literature North criticized. Yet the costs of
political responses to externalities presented here suggest that such assumptions are not
warranted. Indeed, if the political response to externalities is indicative of broad government
actions driven by narrow interest-group demands, then the costs may be more damaging across
all economies than the development cases of concern to North. The results are economic underperformance, lost economic welfare, and reduced range of citizen opportunities.

21

References
Acemoglu, D. and Robinson, J. (2012). Why Nations Fail. New York: Crown.
Allen, D.W. (2011). The Institutional Revolution: Measurement and the Economic Emergence of
the Modern World. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Alston, E., Alston L.J., Mueller, B., and Nonnenmacher, T. (2018, forthcoming). Institutional
and Organizational Analysis: Concepts and Applications. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Anderson, T.L., Arnason, R. and Libecap, G.D. (2011). Efficiency Advantages of
Grandfathering in Rights-Based Fisheries Management. Annual Review of Resource
Economics. 3: 159-179.
Ayres, A.B, Edwards, E.C., and Libecap, G.D. (2018). How Transaction Costs Obstruct
Collective Action: The Case of California’s Groundwater. Revision at Journal of
Environmental Economics and Management.
Barzel, Y. (1982). Measurement Costs and the Organization of Markets. Journal of Law and
Economics 25 (1): 27-48.
Becker, G. S. (1983). A Theory of Competition Among Pressure Groups for Political Influence.
Quarterly Journal of Economics 98(3): 371–400.
Brewer, J., Glennon, R., Ker, A., and Libecap, G.D. (2008). 2006 Presidential Address Water
Markets in the West: Prices, Trading, and Contractual Forms. Economic Inquiry 46 (2):
91–112.
Buchanan, J. M. and Tullock, G. (1962). The Calculus of Consent. Ann Arbor: University of
Michigan Press.
Cheung, S. N.S. (1970). The Structure of a Contract and the Theory of a Non-exclusive
Resource. Journal of Law and Economics, 13 (1): 49-70.
Christy, F.T., Jr. (1973). Fisherman Quotas: A Tentative Suggestion for Domestic Management.
Occasional Paper No. 19 of the Law of the Sea Institute, University of Rhode Island.
Coase, R. (1960). The Problem of Social Cost. Journal of Law and Economics, 3: 1-44.
Costello, C., Gaines, S.D., and Lynham, J. (2008). Can Catch Shares Prevent Fisheries Collapse?
Science, 321:1678-1681.

22

Cox, M., Arnold, G. and Villamayor Tomás, S. (2010). A Review of Design Principles for
Community-Based Natural Resource Management. Ecology and Society 15(4): 38-52,
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol15/iss4/art38.
Davis, L.E. and North, D.C. (1971). Institutional Change and American Economic Growth. New
York: Cambridge University Press.
Deacon, R.T., Parker, D.P. and Costello, C. (2013). Reforming Fisheries: Lesson from a SelfSelected Cooperative. Journal of Law and Economics, 56(1): 83-125.
Demsetz, H. (1967). Towards a Theory of Property Rights. The American Economic Review,
57(2), 347-359.
Gordon, H. S. (1954). The Economic Theory of a Common-property Resource: The Fishery.
Journal of Political Economy, 62(2): 124-42.
Goulder, L.H. and Parry, I.W.H. (2008). Instrument Choice in Environmental Policy. Review of
Environmental Economics and Policy 2, (2): 152–174.
Grafton, R. Q., Squires, D. and Fox, K.J. (2000). Private Property and Economic Efficiency: A
Study of a Common-Pool Resource. Journal of Law and Economics 43 (2): 679–713.
Grafton, R. Q., Libecap, G.D., McGlennon, S., Landry, C., and O’Brien, B. (2011). An
Integrated Assessment of Water Markets: A Cross-Country Comparison. Review of
Environmental Economics and Policy, 1–22.
Grainger, C. and Costello, C. (2014). Capitalizing Property Rights Insecurity in Natural
Resource Assets. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 67(2): 224-40.
Jezdimirovic, J. and Hanak, E. (2016). State Water Market Needs Reform.
http://www.ppic.org/blog/state-water-market-needs-reform/.
Johnson, R.N. and Libecap, G.D., (1982). Contracting Problems and Regulation: The Case of the
Fishery. The American Economic Review, 72(5): 1005-1022.
Johnson, R.N. and Libecap, G.D. (2001). Information Distortion and Competitive remedies in
Government Transfer Programs: The Case of Ethanol. Economics of Governance 2(2):
101-34.
Leonard, B. and Libecap, G.D. (2018). Collective Action by Contract: Prior Appropriation and
the Development of Irrigation in the Western United States. NBER Working Paper,
W22185.
Libecap, G.D. (2007). Owens Valley Revisited: A Reassessment of the West’s First Great Water
Transfer. Palo Alto: Stanford University Press.

23

Libecap, G.D. (2008). Open-Access Losses and Delay in the Assignment of Property Rights.
Arizona Law Review. 50 (2): 379-408.
Libecap, G.D. (2011). Institutional Path Dependence in Climate Adaptation: Coman’s “Some
Unsettled Problems of Irrigation. American Economic Review 101 (1): 112-40.
Libecap, G.D. (2014). Addressing Global Environmental Externalities: Transaction Costs
Considerations. Journal of Economic Literature 52 (2): 424-79.
Libecap, G.D. (2017). Adaptation to Climate Change: The Role of Water Markets. Conference
on Adaptation to Climate Change, Hoover Institution, Stanford University, November 78.
Libecap, G.D. and Smith, J. (1999). The Self-Enforcing Provisions of Oil and Gas Unit
Operating Agreements: Theory and Evidence. The Journal of Law, Economics, and
Organization, 15(2): 526-48.
Libecap, G. D. and Smith, J. (2001). Regulatory Remedies to the Common Pool: The Limits to
Oil Field Unitization. The Energy Journal, 22(1): 1-26.
Libecap, G.D. and Smith, J.L. (2002). The Economic Evolution of Petroleum Property Rights in
the United States.” Journal of Legal Studies 31 (2, Pt. 2): S589-S608.
Libecap, G. D. and Wiggins, S.N. (1984). Contractual Responses to the Common Pool:
Prorationing of Crude Oil Production. The American Economic Review, 74(1): 87-98.
Libecap, G. D. and Wiggins, S.N. (1985). The Influence of Private Contractual Failure on
Regulation: The Case of Oil Field Unitization. Journal of Political Economy 93 (4): 690714.
Lynham, J. (2014). How Have Catch Shares Been Allocated? Marine Policy 44: 42–48
Meade, J. E. (1973). The Theory of Economic Externalities: The Control of Environmental
Pollution. Geneva: Institut Universitaire de Hautes Etudes Internationales.
Myers, R.A. and Worm, B. (2003). Rapid Worldwide Depletion of Predatory Fish Communities.
Nature. 423(15 May): 282-283.
North, D. C. (1981). Structure and Change in Economic History. New York: Norton.
North, D.C. (1987). Institutions, Transaction Costs, and Economic Growth. Economic Inquiry25:
419-428.

24

North, D.C. (1990). Institutions, Institutional Change and Economic Performance.
Cambridge University Press.
North, D. C. and Thomas, R.P. (1973). The Rise of the Western World: A New Economic
History. New York: Cambridge University Press.
North, D.C. and Weingast, B.R. (1989). Constitutions and Commitment: The Evolution of
Institutions Governing Public Choice in 17th Century England. Journal of Economic
History 49: 803-842.
North, D. C., Wallis, J.J. and Weingast, B.R. (2009). Violence and Social Orders: A
Conceptual Framework for Interpreting Recorded Human History. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Olson, M. (1965). The Logic of Collective Action. Public Goods and the Theory of Groups,
Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Ostrom, E. (1990). Governing the Commons: The Evolution of Institutions for Collective Action.
Cambridge University Press.
Peltzman, S. (1976). Toward a More General Theory of Regulation. Journal of Law &
Economics 19(2): 211–240.
Pigou, A. C. (1920). The Economics of Welfare. London: Macmillan.
Scott, A. (1955). The Fishery: The Objectives of Sole Ownership. Journal of Political Economy
63: 116-24.
UNCLOS. (1982). United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea. UN Document A/Conf.
62/122.
Volden, C. and Wiseman, A.E. (2007). Bargaining in Legislatures over Particularistic and
Collective Goods. American Political Science Review, 101 (1): 79-92.
Weitzman, M. (1974). Prices vs. Quantities. Review of Economic Studies. 41 (4) :477-491.
Wiggins, S.N. and Libecap, G.D. (1985). Oil Field Unitization: Contractual Failure in the
Presence of Imperfect Information. American Economic Review 75(3): 368-85.
Wiggins, S. N. and Libecap, G.D. (1987). Firm Heterogeneities and Cartelization Efforts in
Domestic Crude Oil. Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, 3(1): 1-25.

25

