NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

JOB VACANCIES, THE BEVERIDGE CURVE, AND SUPPLY SHOCKS:
THE FREQUENCY AND CONTENT OF HELP-WANTED ADS IN PRE- AND POST-MARIEL MIAMI
Jason Anastasopoulos
George J. Borjas
Gavin G. Cook
Michael Lachanski
Working Paper 24580
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24580

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2018, Revised August 2019

Previously circulated as "Job Vacancies and Immigration: Evidence from Pre- and Post-Mariel
Miami." We are grateful to Ron Bird, Hugh Cassidy, Kirk Doran, Bill English, Richard Freeman,
Kenneth Goldstein, Daniel Hamermesh, Gordon Hanson, Garett Jones, Daniel Leach, Joan Llull,
Joan Monras, Marian Moszoro, John Nye, Solomon Polachek, Valerie Ramey, Dani Rodrik,
Jeanne Shu, Jan Stuhler, Steve Trejo, and Jay Zagorsky for very helpful discussions and
comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Jason Anastasopoulos, George J. Borjas, Gavin G. Cook, and Michael Lachanski. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Job Vacancies, the Beveridge Curve, and Supply Shocks: The Frequency and Content of Help-Wanted
Ads in Pre- and Post-Mariel Miami
Jason Anastasopoulos, George J. Borjas, Gavin G. Cook, and Michael Lachanski
NBER Working Paper No. 24580
May 2018, Revised August 2019
JEL No. J6,J61,J63
ABSTRACT
Beginning in 1951, the Conference Board constructed a monthly job vacancy index by counting
the number of help-wanted ads published in local newspapers in 51 metropolitan areas. We use
the Help-Wanted Index (HWI) to document how immigration changes the number of job
vacancies in the affected labor markets. Our analysis revisits the Mariel episode. The data reveal
a marked drop in Miami’s HWI relative to many alternative control groups in the first 4 or 5
years after Mariel, followed by recovery afterwards. The Miami evidence is consistent with the
observed relation between immigration and the HWI across all metropolitan areas in the
1970-2000 period: these spatial correlations suggest that more immigration reduces the number of
job vacancies. We also explore some of the macro implications of the Mariel supply shock and
show that Miami’s Beveridge curve shifted inwards by the mid-1980s, suggesting a more
efficient labor market, in contrast to the outward nationwide shift coincident with the onset of the
1980-1982 recession. Finally, we examine the text of the help-wanted ads published in a number
of newspapers and document a statistically and economically significant post-Mariel decline in
the relative number of low-skill vacancies advertised in the Miami Herald.
Jason Anastasopoulos
Center for Information Technology Policy
309 Sherrerd Hall
Princeton University
ljanastas@princeton.edu

Gavin G. Cook
Department of Sociology
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
gcook@princeton.edu

George J. Borjas
Harvard Kennedy School
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
gborjas@harvard.edu

Michael Lachanski
Woodrow Wilson School
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
mlachans@princeton.edu

3
Job Vacancies, the Beveridge Curve, and Supply Shocks:
The Frequency and Content of Help-Wanted Ads in Pre- and Post-Mariel Miami
Jason Anastasopoulos, George J. Borjas, Gavin G. Cook, and Michael Lachanski*
I. Introduction
How do labor supply shocks affect labor market outcomes? This is perhaps the central
question in the economics of immigration, in terms of both its economic content and political
implications. Most important questions in labor economics relate to how labor markets adjust to
supply and demand shocks. An immigration-induced increase in labor supply lets us observe
how firms and workers react and adjust to the changed environment. Similarly, the debate over
immigration policy often revolves around how immigration changes the size of the economic pie
available to the receiving country, and, particularly, with how that pie is split.
The centrality of the question inspired a voluminous amount of empirical research over
the past four decades (Blau and Mackie, 2016). In the U.S. context, this literature typically uses
microdata, such as the decennial censuses or the Current Population Surveys (CPS), to document
how wages change in those markets targeted by immigrants. Sometimes the markets are defined
by geographic boundaries; sometimes the markets are defined by skill group (Borjas, 2003). But
the basic strategy is the same. Immigrants tend to target some markets more than others. We then
measure the impact of immigration by contrasting the evolution of wages in the markets hit by
immigration with the evolution in the markets that immigrants shunned.
Due to a host of technical issues (e.g., immigrants do not target markets randomly; firms
and workers diffuse the impact of local supply shocks by moving elsewhere; the available data
often yields small samples for many cities and skill groups), the existing literature amply
demonstrates the difficulty of measuring the impact of immigration on wages. Even more
problematic, it turns out that the evidence often depends on researcher choices about how to
frame the empirical analysis.

* Anastasopoulos: School of Public and International Affairs, University of Georgia; Borjas: Harvard

Kennedy School; Cook: Department of Sociology, Princeton University; Lachanski: Woodrow Wilson School,
Princeton University. An initial draft of this paper (Anastasopoulos et al, 2018) circulated under the title “Job
Vacancies and Immigration: Evidence from Pre- and Post-Mariel Miami.” The Peterson Foundation provided
financial assistance that allowed us to examine the textual content of help-wanted ads. We are grateful to
Jonathan Arnold and Christian Kincaid for superb research assistance.

4
The recent debate over the wage impact of the Mariel boatlift provides a classic example
of how those choices influence the answer. Card (1990) reported that the wage of the average
worker in Miami was barely affected by the 8 percent increase in supply that Mariel represented.
Borjas (2017) showed that if one focused on the low-skill worker most likely to be affected by
Mariel (as represented by the average prime-age, non-Hispanic man who is a high school
dropout), the evidence suggested that the wage fell by at least 15 percent. And Peri and Yasenov
(2019) reported that the wage remained unchanged if one used an alternative definition for a
low-skill worker (i.e., the average non-Cuban man or woman who is 19 to 65 years old and has
not graduated from high school).
We contribute to the literature by reporting findings from a “new” data set, a data set that
economists have used often since the 1960s, but that has not been exploited in the immigration
context. Beginning in 1951, the Conference Board constructed an index of job vacancies in local
labor markets by counting the number of help-wanted classified ads in newspapers in 51
metropolitan areas. Although the rise of online advertising obviously reduced the usefulness of
this index beginning sometime around 2000, the Conference Board’s Help-Wanted Index (HWI)
provides a historical series of the ebbs and flows of labor demand in local labor markets for the
last half of the 20th century.
The HWI has been used to study such diverse and important phenomena as the trend of
wages and productivity in the stagnant 1970s (Medoff, 1983); the sectoral shifts explanation of
structural unemployment (Abraham and Katz, 1986); the relation between job vacancies and the
unemployment rate (Cohen and Solow, 1967; Burch and Fabricant, 1968; and Abraham, 1987);
the role of job search in a real business cycle framework (Andolfatto, 1996), and the cyclicality
of job vacancies (Shimer, 2005). An important theme runs through these studies: The HWI
provides valuable information about labor demand and is highly correlated with various
measures of labor market conditions.
The analysis of the HWI has one very valuable feature in the immigration context. It
greatly reduces the number of degrees of freedom available to a researcher interested in
estimating the labor market impact of immigration. The index was created concurrently with the
supply shocks by independent organizations for a purpose totally unrelated to the immigration
question that is at the core of this paper. The historical trends in the HWI in the cities that
received many or few immigrants are set in stone.

5
We use the HWI to document how immigration affects the number of job vacancies in
local labor markets.1 Our analysis begins by revisiting the Mariel episode. The data clearly show
a marked decrease in Miami’s HWI relative to various control groups in the first 4 or 5 years
after Mariel, followed by a full recovery afterwards. We also look beyond Miami and estimate
the generic spatial correlations that dominate the literature, correlating changes in the HWI with
immigration across the 51 metropolitan areas for which the index is available. These spatial
correlations also indicate that immigration is typically associated with reduced employer effort to
find workers by placing help-wanted ads in the local newspaper.
The job vacancy data lets us explore some of the macroeconomic implications of the
Mariel supply shock, which coincided with the onset of the 1980-1982 recession. The Beveridge
curve, the downward-sloping locus relating job vacancies and unemployment, was shifting out in
comparable cities during the recession. In Miami, however, after a short-lived outward shift in
the months after the Mariel supply shock, the curve shifted inwards substantially. The inward
shift might have been caused by the changed demographics of the Miami labor market, with the
search behavior of the Mariel refugees differing from that of native workers (e.g., the refugees
may have had lower reservation wages, quickly filling up vacancies). By the late 1980s,
however, the relative position of Miami’s Beveridge curve had moved back to where it was prior
to the supply shock.
We conclude our study by examining how the Mariel supply shock changed the textual
content of help-wanted ads. We examine the text of a large sample of help-wanted ads published
in the Miami Herald and in other newspapers between 1978 and 1984. This type of analysis
helps identify the types of jobs that “vanished” from the Miami labor market in the early 1980s.
It turns out that the drop in the number of job vacancies in Miami was particularly severe in the
low-skill labor market. The fraction of vacancies for blue collar positions fell precipitously, and
surviving vacancies were for jobs that tended to hire much more educated workers. In short, lowskill labor markets do seem to respond to low-skill supply shocks.
1 As far as we know, our study is the first to investigate the quantitative relationship between

immigration and job vacancies in the U.S. labor market. Withers and Pope (1985) find no statistically
significant relationship between immigration and the Australian job-finding rate (see also Warren, 1982),
while Pholphirul (2012) reports that immigration reduces short-term job vacancies in Thai manufacturing.
Job vacancies are often present as a latent variable in both theoretical (Ortega, 2000) and empirical analyses
(Davila and Saenz, 1990) of immigration’s impact on labor market outcomes. Chassamboulli and Peri (2015)
use the national HWI to calculate a long-run job-finding rate, which they then fix to calibrate a labor market
matching model for evaluating various immigration policies.

6

II. The Conference Board Help-Wanted Index
Unlike many OECD countries, the United States did not maintain any continuous official
statistics on job openings until 2000, when the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) introduced the
Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey (JOLTS). Prior to 2000, researchers interested in
understanding the trends and determinants of job openings or vacancies relied primarily on the
Conference Board Help-Wanted Index (HWI).
Beginning in 1951, the Conference Board contacted 51 newspapers (see Appendix A),
each corresponding to a metropolitan area, and asked each newspaper for the number of
classified ads published in the previous month. The Conference Board adjusted the count for
seasonal trends and day-of-the-week frequency to create a monthly index for each metropolitan
area. The metropolitan area indices were then aggregated to create an index for each geographic
region, and for the nation as a whole.2
Figure 1 illustrates the very strong correlation between the national HWI and the
unemployment rate, showing an inverse relation between the two variables throughout much of
the period.3 However, Autor (2001, p. 27) noted that the HWI was “flat throughout the 1990s
economic boom” and cited the migration of “vacancy listings… from newspapers to the Internet”
as a possible explanation.4 In response to the declining relevance of newspaper help-wanted
sections, the Conference Board ceased the public release of the HWI in July 2008 and stopped
internal data collection in October 2010.
Despite the obvious link between the HWI and the unemployment rate, there are several
biases in the index that influence the interpretation of observed trends. The first arises from the
fact that the number of job vacancies per ad is procyclical. During booms, a single ad might
advertise explicitly for two or more job openings. But the algorithm used by the Conference

2 Apart from the removal of the Newark Evening News (and the Newark metropolitan area) in 1971, and a

swap of the Dallas Times Herald News for the Dallas Morning News in the early 1990s, the newspapers and cities
surveyed did not change after 1970. Zagorsky (1998) combined previous surveys of help-wanted classifieds by the
Metropolitan Life Insurance Company with the HWI to create a help-wanted index that dates back to 1923.
3 Friedman (1985, p. 63) examines trends in the HWI for the Phoenix labor market and concludes

that the HWI is “a viable indicator of future employment activity in the Phoenix area, just as it is nationally.”
4 Kroft and Pope (2014) show that the growth of local online ads in Craigslist caused a reduction in a

city’s HWI.

7
Board to construct the HWI counts this as only one advertised job (Preston, 1977). Figure 2a
illustrates the bias through an ad published in the Miami Herald on March 2, 1975. This single
posting advertised “several openings” for test technicians.
A related problem arises with ads placed by private employment agencies, which often
contained several job postings (as in Figure 2b). Some newspapers placed all agency advertising
in a section specifically demarcated for labor market intermediaries (and this section may not
have been included in the Conference Board counts), while other newspapers made no
distinction between agency advertising and ads placed by individuals or firms (Walsh, Johnson,
and Sugarman, 1975). Further, when reporting private employment agency ads to the Conference
Board, some newspapers counted a posting by a private employment agency as a single helpwanted ad, but other newspapers did not (Abraham, 1987).5
Further, the HWI only counts ads placed in the official help-wanted section of the
newspaper. As Figure 2c shows, again drawn from the March 2, 1975 issue of the Miami Herald,
many high-skill jobs, especially those in finance, insurance and real estate (FIRE), were not
advertised in the help-wanted section at all. They instead appeared in dedicated FIRE sections,
juxtaposed with ads extolling “excellent land opportunities” or a “3,895 acre operating ranch,”
and those sections were not included in the computation of the index.
Finally, there are differences in the market power of the newspapers surveyed by the
Conference Board. In some cities, as in Miami (where the sampled paper was the Miami Herald),
the paper used to construct the index was the key source of job classifieds in the area. In other
locations, as in Minneapolis (where the sampled newspaper was the Minneapolis Star Tribune),
there were other newspapers (the St. Paul Dispatch-Pioneer) that also contained many job
classifieds (Courtney, 1991).
These methodological issues imply that intercity differences in the level of the HWI do
not provide a good metric for making comparisons in local labor market conditions.6 The
Conference Board index depended partly on how many job openings were posted in a specific ad

5 Cohen and Solow (1967, p. 108) noted these methodological issues, writing that “we know nothing, for

example, about the number of jobs offered per advertisement.” They also make the point, which we return to below,
that “the index can not be decomposed by occupation,” making it difficult to determine if the index is a better metric
of labor market conditions for some skill groups than for others.
6 As an example of the cross-section variation in the HWI, the 5th percentile value of the index in 1980

is 40.2 and the 95th percentile value was more than four times larger, or 166.9.

8
and how that ad was counted, on where the ad was physically placed in the newspaper, and on
the market power of the sampled newspaper.
We address this problem by rescaling the HWI so that the level of the index in each city
equals 1 at some point in the pre-treatment period. This rescaling is inconsequential, except when
illustrating the trends graphically. Our estimate of the impact of a supply shock on job vacancies
uses a difference-in-differences estimator, so that the level of the index washes out in the
calculation.7
The HWI data has been used by many widely-cited studies. Abraham (1987) provides the
most comprehensive discussion of the benefits and problems with the HWI and shows that the
index (or some normalization of it) is correlated with the true number of job vacancies. For
example, she compares the HWI with administrative data from Minnesota (one of only two states
that collected information on the number of job openings at the time) and concludes: “the
Minnesota data… suggest that the normalized help-wanted index is a reasonably good vacancy
proxy” (Abraham, 1987, p. 213).
Although the explosion of online job postings reduced the relevance of newspaper-based
indices, the HWI remains useful for historical research. For the time period in our analysis, the
HWI is the gold standard for job vacancy data. We obtained the entire HWI time series for the 51
metropolitan areas directly from the Conference Board. Our analysis exploits the historical data
in a novel context. How does the tightness or slackness of a local labor market respond to
immigration-induced supply shocks?

III. Job Vacancies and Mariel
Figure 3 shows the number of Cuban immigrants arriving in the United States each year
between 1955 and 2010. Most of them settled in the Miami metropolitan area.8 The Miami labor
market was hit by several sudden and short-lived supply shocks during this period. The first was
in the early 1960s, beginning soon after the Castro takeover and ending abruptly in 1962 with the
7 Medoff (1983) makes a similar point, arguing that although the absolute level of the index in any

given region depends on the sample of newspapers surveyed by the Conference Board, cross-region
differences in the percent change in the index can capture differences in the rate of growth of job vacancies.
8 The 1970 census indicates that 49.2 percent of the Cuban immigrants from the 1960-1964 cohort

lived in Miami; the 1990 census indicates that 63.5 percent of the 1980-1981 cohort lived in Miami; and the
2000 Census indicates that 63.7 percent of the 1994-1995 cohort lived in Miami.

9
Cuban missile crisis. The second is the very noticeable spike in 1980 associated with the Mariel
boatlift. And the third was in 1994-1995 when a new boatlift of Cuban refugees was rerouted to
Guantanamo Bay by the Clinton administration.9 This detour did not last long, however, and
most of the refugees ended up reaching the United States in 1995. The figure also shows that a
sizable number of Cubans entered between 1966 and 1970, as part of the “Freedom Flights” that
were designed to reunite families separated by the halt in 1962, but this migration was less
sudden, not entirely unexpected, and did not end abruptly in a year or two.
This section documents the response of job vacancies in the Miami labor market to the
Mariel supply shock, which is, by far, the “cleanest” of the shocks illustrated in Figure 3. It was
unexpected, large, and it was preceded and followed by a long period of little Cuban migration.10
The historical details of the Mariel episode are well known. On April 20, 1980, Fidel
Castro declared that Cuban nationals wishing to move to the United States could leave freely
from the port of Mariel. About 125,000 Cubans left before an agreement between the Carter
administration and the Castro regime closed the escape valve in October 1980. Borjas (2017,
Table 1) documents that the Mariel supply shock, which increased the size of the workforce in
Miami by 8.4 percent, was composed of relatively low-skill workers: Nearly 60 percent of the
adult refugees lacked a high school diploma and only 7.4 percent had a college degree. As a
result, the supply shock disproportionately increased the size of the low-skill workforce. The
number of workers in Miami without a high school diploma increased by 18.4 percent, but the
number of college graduates rose by only 3.4 percent.
The labor market impact of the Mariel boatlift was first studied in Card’s (1990) classic
paper. Card’s analysis of the Miami labor market, when compared to conditions in other labor
markets that served as a control group, indicated that nothing much happened to Miami despite
the large number of refugees. The average wage did not fall, and the unemployment rate
remained unchanged relative to what was happening in the cities that formed the control group.

9 Writing before the 2000 census data became available and documented the delayed arrival of the

immigrants, Angrist and Krueger (1999, p. 1328) branded this supply shock as “The Mariel Boatlift That Did
Not Happen.”
10 Appendix B analyzes the relation between Miami’s HWI and the other supply shocks. The short-

run response in the Miami labor market, relative to comparable cities, was similar across the various
shocks—a decline in the index of job vacancies within two or three years.

10
The debate over the labor market impact of the Marielitos intensified in the past few
years as a result of the Borjas (2017) reappraisal, which used data from both the March CPS and
the CPS Outgoing Rotation Group (ORG) to specifically examine the wage trends of workers
who lacked a high school diploma. It turns out that the wage of this low skill group in Miami fell
substantially relative to control cities. A flurry of subsequent papers argues that the evidence is
sensitive to the definition of the “low-skill” workforce, to changes in the racial composition of
the sample, and to the inevitable sampling error resulting from the small number of workers that
the CPS surveyed in the Miami metropolitan area.11 Our analysis of the behavior of the HWI
around the time of Mariel is impervious to these potential problems.
As noted earlier, part of the cross-city variation in the level of the HWI arises because of
the idiosyncratic way in which classified ads were counted by different newspapers. We address
this issue by rescaling the HWI so that the level of the index in each city equals 1 in the 19771979 period. Figure 4 begins the empirical analysis by illustrating the 1975-1989 trend in the
HWI in Miami, in the South Atlantic region, and in the entire nation. We choose the 1975-1989
period because Cuban immigration to the United States was relatively low and stable in the pretreatment period (hovering around 6 thousand annually between 1975 and 1978), and it was
again relatively low and stable in the post-Mariel period between 1981 and 1989 (hovering
around 10 thousand).12
The trends in the raw HWI data are visually striking. Because Mariel coincided with the
onset of a recession, the number of job vacancies declined everywhere between 1980 and 1982.
The index for Miami, however, declined much more, reaching a nadir at the end of 1982 before
beginning a recovery through the 1980s. By 1989, the value of the HWI for Miami was again
similar to the national index (although it was still lower than the index for the South Atlantic
region).13
11 The flurry of papers includes Borjas (2019), Borjas and Monras (2017), Peri and Yasenov (2019),

and Clemens and Hunt (2019).

12 We also conducted much of the analysis using a longer pre-treatment period (going back to 1970),

and the measured impact of the Mariel supply shock is very similar to what is reported below. The 1975-1989
period may be preferable because the Miami labor market in the early 1970s may still be recovering from the
aftermath of the 1966-1970 Freedom Flights.
13 The relative trend in Miami’s HWI resembles the wage trend for high school dropouts reported in

Borjas (2017, Figure 2). This similarity similarity between the trends in Miami’s low-skill wage and the HWI
suggests that the HWI, which presumably measures “average” labor market conditions, may be doing a
particularly good job at capturing changing opportunities for low-skill workers. We return to this point below.

11
Of course, Miami’s distinctive trend should be contrasted with what happened in
“comparable” cities rather than regional or national aggregates.14 To illustrate the uniqueness of
the Miami experience, we use several alternative controls. We start with the set of metropolitan
areas selected by Card (1990) as a control group for the Miami of the early 1980s. This original
control group was composed of Atlanta, Los Angeles, Houston, and Tampa-St. Petersburg.
Unfortunately, the HWI was never calculated for the Tampa-St. Petersburg metropolitan area, so
our “Card control” only has the other three cities. Figure 5 shows the trend in the HWI index for
Miami and for the cities in the Card control group.15 It is evident that Miami’s HWI declined
dramatically after Mariel relative to what was observed in the Card control.
We next use the control group of the four metropolitan areas that had similar growth rates
for low-skill employment in the pre-Mariel period (as reported in Borjas, 2017). These four cities
were Gary, Houston, Indianapolis, and Los Angeles. Figure 5 also shows that the post-1980
Miami experience was unusual when compared to this “low-skill control.”
Finally, we use the synthetic control method (Abadie, Diamond, and Hainmueller, 2010).
The method essentially searches across all 50 potential control cities and derives a weight that
combines cities to create a new synthetic city. This synthetic city is the one that best resembled
the pre-Mariel Miami labor market along some set of pre-specified conditions.
We calculate the synthetic control by using a large number of control variables, all
calculated from the 1970 and 1980 IPUMS census files. The control variables are: the education
distribution of workers in the city in 1980 and the percent change in the number of workers in
each education group between 1970 and 1980; the industrial distribution of workers in the city in
1980 and the percent growth in the number of workers employed in each of the industries
between 1970 and 1980; the fraction of immigrants in the workforce in 1980 and the percent
growth in the number of immigrants between 1970 and 1980; the fraction of workers who are
male, the percent growth in the number of male workers between 1970 and 1980, and the percent
growth in the number of female workers; the fraction of workers who are black (in 1980); and

14 We use the three-digit metarea variable (which defines a metropolitan statistical area) in the

IPUMS files of the decennial censuses to gather information about the cities for which the HWI is available.
The only exception is for Gary, Indiana (which is officially defined as a “metropolitan division”), where we use
the four-digit IPUMS code.
15 The average index for the control group is a weighted average of the index across the cities, where

the weight is the city’s employment in 1980.

12
the fraction who are Hispanic.16 Figure 5 also illustrates the trend in the HWI for the synthetic
control, and it again shows the uniqueness of Miami’s post-Mariel experience.
To calculate the impact of the supply shock on the HWI, we estimate a generic
difference-in-differences regression model where the unit of analysis is a city-year-month cell:
log Hrtm = qr + qtm + b(Miami ´ Post-Mariel) + e,

(1)

where Hrtm is the HWI in city r, year t, and month m; qr is a vector of city fixed effects; qtm is a
vector of interacted year-month fixed effects (i.e., a fixed effect for every year-month pairing);
“Miami” is a dummy variable identifying the Miami-Hialeah metropolitan area; and “PostMariel” indicates if cell (r, t, m) was observed after June 1980. The regression uses monthly data
from January 1975 through December 1989. Note that the inclusion of the qtm fixed effects net
out the impact of any transitory shock that affected all local labor markets equally (including
cyclical fluctuations).
The cities r included in the regression are Miami and the cities in a specific control
group. For example, if the Miami experience is being compared to that of cities in the low-skill
control group, there would be five cities in the data, and each of these cities would be observed
180 times between 1975 and 1989, for a total of 900 observations. The regression comparing
Miami to the synthetic control is similar in spirit, but there are only two “cities” in this
regression: Miami and the synthetic city, for a total of 360 observations. Because the impact of
Mariel might vary over time, the post-Mariel variable in equation (1) is a vector of fixed effects
indicating whether the observation refers to the intervals June 1980-1982, 1983-1984, 19851986, or 1987-1989.
The top panel of Table 1 reports the estimated coefficients in the vector b (and robust
standard errors) for various specifications of the regression model. If we use the Card control
group, the relative HWI in Miami declined by about 20 percent in 1981-1982 and by over 40
percent in 1983-1984. The regression in the second column uses the low-skill control group and
also shows sizable declines (of about 20 percent) by the mid-1980s. The third column estimates a
regression that pools the data across all 51 cities in our sample and it again shows sizable
16 The cities in the synthetic control are Charlotte (with a weight of 0.014), Jacksonville (0.023), Los

Angeles (0.338), Memphis (0.141), New Orleans (0.053), and San Antonio (0.432).

13
declines in the vacancy index by the mid-1980s. Finally, the fourth column compares Miami to
the synthetic control and shows a decline of over 20 percent by 1981-1982 and of over 40
percent by 1985.17 Regardless of the control group, all regressions indicate a full recovery in
Miami’s HWI by the late 1980s (in fact, Miami’s HWI is sometimes higher by the end of the
decade).
Some of the studies that examine trends in the HWI “normalize” the index by dividing it
by the size of the workforce (Abraham and Katz, 1986). Define the normalized index for the
"#$% = 𝐻#$% /𝐸#$% , where Ertm gives non-agricultural employment in
city-year-month cell as 𝐻
city r, year t, month m.18 Panel B of Table 1 reports the regressions that use the normalized index
as the dependent variable. The data again document the very different experience of post-Mariel
Miami relative to the control cities. If we use the synthetic control baseline, the normalized index
declined by about 40 percent by the mid-1980s, and fully recovered by the late 1980s. Because
of the similarity in results using the two alternative measures of the HWI, the remainder of the
paper uses the simpler, raw measure of the HWI constructed by the Conference Board.
The obvious interpretation of the evidence is that a large supply shock composed of
newly arrived immigrants makes it easier for firms to fill existing vacancies, leaving few
available jobs for the pre-existing workforce. One alternative explanation is that because of the
large and sudden increase in the size of the Cuban community, Miami’s employers began to shift
their advertising to Spanish-language outlets. In fact, in 1977 the Miami Herald began to publish
El Nuevo Herald, a sister newspaper in Spanish. The Conference Board did not enumerate helpwanted ads in El Nuevo Herald, perhaps mechanically leading to a decline in the HWI in postMariel Miami.

17 The regression estimated using the synthetic control differs in a slight (and numerically trivial)

way from the other regressions. As noted above, we rescaled the HWI index so that the index for each city
equals 1 in the 1976-1978 period. This rescaling is irrelevant in the regressions that use the Card control
group, the low-skill control group, or the entire set of 51 metropolitan areas, as the regressions include city
fixed effects. The synthetic control regression aggregates the control cities with positive weights into a
synthetic city and does not include individual fixed effects for each of those cities. The coefficients in the
vector b are almost identical if we skip the step of rescaling the index to equal 1 in the pre-Mariel period.
18 The BLS employment data at the city-year-month level is available in a file maintained by the

ICPSR, “Employment, Employment, Hours, and Earnings in States and Areas of the United States, 1940-1991”
(ICPSR 9928).

14
To determine the validity of the substitution hypothesis, we counted the total number of
ads published by El Nuevo Herald in each December between 1978 and 1984.19 Figure 6
illustrates the trend in Miami’s HWI and in the number of ads published in El Nuevo Herald. The
HWI dropped by 62.7 percent (from 126 to 47) between December 1979 and December 1982.
The number of ads published in El Nuevo Herald dropped by 70.1 percent in the same period
(from a monthly total of 2,510 to 750 ads). The data indicate, therefore, that the number of job
vacancies advertised directly to Miami’s Spanish-speaking community fell by more than the
number of vacancies in the aggregate Miami labor market. The difference suggests that the
Mariel refugees were perhaps more easily substitutable with the pre-existing Cuban workers than
with native workers.20
As noted earlier, the Mariel boatlift coincided with the onset of the 1980-1982 recession.
The HWI has an obvious cyclical trend, and the regression analysis in equation (1) nets out
cyclical shocks that affected all localities equally when estimating the impact of the Mariel
supply shock. However, the short-term cyclical fluctuations may vary across metropolitan areas
(perhaps because of immigration-induced supply shocks). It is easy to illustrate what happens if
we net out city-specific transitory fluctuations from the vacancy index by applying the HodrickPrescott (HP) filter to our data.
In a panel data context, this widely used filter decomposes the HWI time series for each
metropolitan area into a long-run trend and a short-term cyclical component. Note that because
the HP filter is applied individually to the time series in each metropolitan area, it ignores the
possibility that the intensity of the cyclical fluctuations in a particular city (e.g., Miami) might
themselves have been affected by supply shocks. Netting out city-specific transitory fluctuations,

19 Specifically, we accessed issues of El Nuevo Herald archived at the Library of Congress in microfilm
and manually counted the number of ads that appeared between December 1 and December 30 of each year
between 1978 and 1984. As with the calculation of the HWI, a help-wanted ad in El Nuevo Herald that
advertised several job openings is counted as a single vacancy.
20 One hypothesis that is consistent with the decline in both El Nuevo Herald and the HWI is that the

supply shock led firms to utilize pre-existing Cuban or Spanish-speaking social networks to fill jobs instead of
the help-wanted section of newspapers. Pholphirul (2012) provides suggestive evidence that firms which
have used immigrants to fill job openings in the past are more likely to do so in the future. This argument
would not explain why the HWI recovered unless immigrant social networks break down quickly.
Unfortunately, our data does not allow us to distinguish between these explanations. Note that from the
perspective of an unemployed non-Hispanic worker, the reduction in the number of posted job ads has the
same implications regardless of whether it arises from faster vacancy filling or from the substitution from
published job advertisements to unobservable social networks.

15
therefore, might remove some of the effect of supply shocks on the locality and produces a
lower-bound estimate of the impact of a supply shock. If the long-run trend implied by the HP
filter is shifted by supply shocks, there would be strong evidence for the hypothesis that such
shocks have a sizable and more persistent effect on local labor market conditions.
Figure 7 shows the behavior of the adjusted index in Miami and the synthetic control.21
The exercise obviously removes a lot of the cyclical variation in the HWI for the synthetic
control. It is also obvious, however, that the post-1980 Miami experience was very different
from what was observed elsewhere. The long-run trend in Miami’s HWI was obviously
dislodged after Mariel. As the regression reported in the last column of Table 1 indicates, the
permanent level of the HWI in Miami declined by about 30 percent relative to the synthetic
control by the mid-1980s.

IV. Robustness Checks
This section presents a number of extensions to help determine if our empirical finding of
a negative association between supply shocks and job vacancies is robust.
A. Randomizing the Control Group
The inference that supply shocks reduce the number of job vacancies may hinge crucially
on the counterfactual. One way of determining how much the choice of a control group matters
is to bypass the decision of picking control variables to create a synthetic city control, and
instead estimate the wage impact for every potential control group. We illustrate this approach by
estimating the short-run effect of the Mariel supply shock relative to each of the 230,300 fourcity control groups that can be constructed from the Conference Board data.
In particular, we use the data from the 1979-1984 period, set the treatment date as of June
1980, and estimate the generic difference-in-differences regression model in equation (1) for
each of the 230,300 control groups. The relevant coefficient is the interaction of an indicator
variable identifying the Miami metropolitan area and whether the observation refers to a post21 The long-term trend for the synthetic control in Figure 7 is calculated using a two-step approach.

We first remove the impact of the short-run cyclical fluctuation from the HWI time series. We then use the
adjusted HWI data to find the synthetic control and generate the trends summarized in the figure. The
synthetic control method, therefore, compares Miami with cities that had similar permanent trends prior to
the supply shock.

16
Mariel period (i.e., between June 1980 and December 1984). Figure 8 shows the density function
for all the 230,300 estimated short-run effects (i.e., the distribution of the coefficient b in the
regression model).
The mean impact is -0.232, with a standard deviation of 0.106. Only 1.7 percent of the
coefficients were zero or positive. The figure also shows the location of the impact implied by
the comparable synthetic control regression. Evidently, the synthetic control is “picking” a shortrun impact that is large relative to the potential mean.
B. Beyond Miami
Up to this point, our analysis has focused on documenting the response of job vacancies
in Miami to the Mariel supply shock. Immigration also affected many other cities in recent
decades, with the annual number of immigrants entering the United States increasing from about
250,000 in the 1950s to over 1 million legal and undocumented immigrants by 2000. It is well
known that immigrants cluster in a relatively small number of metropolitan areas, although no
other city experienced the sudden and large supply shock that hit Miami in 1980.
A large literature exploits the geographic distribution of immigrants to estimate the labor
market impact of immigration. This literature essentially correlates some economic outcome in
the city—typically the average wage of some group of workers—with the number of immigrants
settling in that city. Although the studies often report a weak spatial correlation (suggesting that
native outcomes may not be strongly affected by immigration), the correlation is contaminated
by the endogenous settlement of immigrants in high-wage cities. This sorting makes it difficult
to detect the potential adverse effect of supply shocks on the wage of competing workers.
Moreover, the widely used shift-share instrument (which is essentially a nonlinear transformation
of lagged immigration in the locality) may not truly solve the endogeneity problem and may
understate the adverse wage impact of supply shocks (Jaeger, Ruist, and Stuhler, 2018).
Given the dominance of this methodological approach (and the rarity of experimental
Mariel-like supply shocks), it is of interest to estimate the analogous spatial correlation between
the HWI and immigration. Ideally, we would have monthly or yearly data on the number of
immigrants arriving in each of the cities surveyed by the Conference Board over a multi-decade
period. Unfortunately, the CPS did not collect immigration data until 1994. Moreover, the
reliability of the HWI index deteriorated in the late 1990s with the explosion of on-line job

17
postings. The CPS data, therefore, would only let us analyze a very short time series, making it
unlikely that a credible spatial correlation could be estimated.22
We instead use the decennial censuses to calculate the immigration-induced supply shock
in each of the 51 cities. We then correlate these supply shocks with the decadal change in the
city’s HWI. The regression model is given by:

log

𝐻#,𝐼𝑚𝑚𝑖𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑜 𝑐𝑖𝑡𝑦 𝑟
= 𝜃- + γ
+ η,
𝐻#,-./
𝐵𝑎𝑠𝑒𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑒 𝑛𝑢𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑟 𝑜𝑓 𝑛𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒𝑠 𝑖𝑛 𝑐𝑖𝑡𝑦 𝑟

(2)

where Hr,t gives the HWI for city r in census year t (t = 1970,…,2000). The HWI index for
census year t is defined as the average HWI observed in the three-year interval around t. For
example, the average HWI for Rochester in census year 1980 is the average HWI reported
monthly for Rochester between 1979 and 1981. The two variables used to measure the supply
shock (the number of immigrants, and the number of natives) give population counts for persons
aged 18-64 in a particular city. There seems to be some confusion as to how the ratio defining
the supply shock in equation (2) should be defined (Borjas, 2014; Borjas and Monras, 2017; and
Card and Peri, 2016). We will use alternative definitions of the supply shock to demonstrate the
robustness of our estimated spatial correlation.
Note that the same endogeneity problem that plagues estimates of the spatial correlation
between wages and immigration plagues the regression in equation (2). Immigrants are more
likely to settle in cities where there are jobs to be had and employers are actively searching for
workers. This endogeneity builds in a positive correlation between the change in the HWI and
the number of immigrants settling in that city during the decade.
Table 2 reports estimates of the coefficient g using a number of alternative specifications.
Consider initially the regression reported in the first row. The supply shock is defined as the ratio
of the number of immigrants who moved to the city between census year t-1 and t, or M(t, t-1),

22 The monthly data from the Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey (JOLTS) since 2000 could, in

principle, be used to estimate the spatial correlations in the post-2000 period. Unfortunately, the data are not
publicly available at the metropolitan area level. In fact, the JOLTS vacancy rate series are only publicly
released for four broad census regions (the Northeast, the South, the Midwest, and the West), greatly
reducing the possibility that the data can be used to estimate credible spatial correlations.

18
to the number of natives residing in the city at time t-1, or N(t-1).23 This specification ignores
the fact that there may have been a supply response as natives either moved in or out of
immigrant-receiving cities. The estimated spatial correlation is negative and significant,
suggesting that a 10 percent increase in supply reduces the HWI by about 10 percent.
We address the endogeneity issue by using the “shift-share” instrument that is commonly
employed in the literature. In rough terms, the instrument uses the geographic settlement of
earlier immigrant waves belonging to particular national origin groups to allocate new
immigration across the cities. The validity of the instrument obviously hinges on whether the
local economic conditions that attracted immigrants to a particular place persist for some time
after arrival. We use the instrument for the total immigrant share for each city calculated by
Jaeger, Ruist, and Stuhler (2018).24 The IV estimate of the impact is also negative and
L MNO P

significant, and larger in absolute value than the OLS estimate. The estimated elasticity K L MNO Q R
is about -1.8.
The other rows of Table 2 use alternative definitions of the supply shock. In row 2, the
supply shock is the ratio M(t, t-1)/N(t). It differs from the definition in the first row because it
does not lag the native baseline (thereby allowing for a potential native supply response). Finally,
𝑀

𝑀

the supply shock in the last row is defined as the difference S 𝑁 𝑐,𝜏 − 𝑁 𝑐,𝜏−1 Y.25 Regardless of how
𝑐,𝜏

𝑐,𝜏−1

we define the supply shock, Table 2 documents a negative correlation between the change in the
HWI and aggregate immigration, with an elasticity of about -2. The spatial correlation approach,
therefore, confirms the basic lesson of the Mariel episode: the number of job vacancies falls after
an immigration-induced supply shock.
C. The HWI and Low-Skill Labor Markets

23 The number of immigrants who migrated to the United States in the interval (t-1, t) and settled in

city r is obtained from the decennial census in year t.

24 We are very grateful to David Jaeger, Joakim Ruist, and Jan Stuhler for generously sharing their

data. We use the variant of their instrument that uses the settlement of immigrants as of 1960 to predict the
geographic sorting of new arrivals in subsequent census years.
25 If there were only two cross-sections, the regression relating the first-difference in the HWI and
the first-difference in the ratio M/N is numerically equivalent to a panel regression where the level of the HWI
in city r and census year t is regressed on sets of city and year fixed effects and on the ratio M/N.

19
The HWI presumably provides information about aggregate conditions in the local labor
market. The Mariel supply shock was composed of relatively low-skill workers. The sensitivity
of the HWI to this shock suggests that perhaps the index is doing a particularly good job at
capturing labor market trends at the lower end of the skill distribution. As noted earlier, this
tendency may be a mechanical consequence of where classified ads appeared in the newspapers
sampled by the Conference Board, and how those ads were counted.
We use annual data from the CPS to document that changes in the HWI are, in fact, most
strongly correlated with wage and employment trends for the least-educated workers. Consider
the following regression model:
yrst = qr + qs + qt + b0 log Hrt + b1 (log Hrt × qs) + e,

(3)

where yrst is a labor market outcome for city r, education group s, and calendar year t; qr is a
vector of city fixed effects; qs is a vector of education fixed effects; qt is a vector of calendar
year fixed effects; and Hrt is the HWI index for city r in year t. By including the city fixed
effects, the coefficient vector (b0, b1) is essentially estimating the correlation between a withincity change in the HWI and the corresponding change in labor market outcome y, and how that
correlation varies across education groups.
We classify workers into four education groups: high school dropouts (who have less
than 12 years of education), high school graduates (exactly 12 years), some college (13-15
years), and college graduates (at least 16 years). We examine two labor market outcomes: wages
and employment. The average wage or employment propensity for cell (r, s, t) is calculated from
residuals to individual-level regressions estimated in the CPS data. We use a simple first-stage
model to calculate the age- and gender-adjusted outcome in cell (r, s, t). Specifically, we
estimate the following individual-level regression separately in each CPS cross-section:
yirst = at + Xi gt + e,

(4)

20
where yirst is the outcome for worker i in city r with education s at time t; and Xi is a vector of
fixed effects giving the person’s age and gender.26 We estimate the regressions using both the
March CPS (for survey years 1973-2000), and the ORG (for years 1979-1999).27 The dependent
variable in the wage regressions is either the log weekly wage (in the March CPS) or the log
hourly wage rate (in the ORG). The employment regressions use a linear probability model
where the dependent variable equals one if the person worked at some point in the previous
calendar year (in the March CPS) or during the reference week (in the ORG). The average
residual from the regression for cell (r, s, t) gives the age- and gender-adjusted mean outcome in
the cell.28
Table 3 reports the estimated vector b for alternative specifications of the regression
model. Consider initially the regression coefficients in the first row of the top panel of the table,
which measure the correlation between the HWI and wage trends in the March CPS. The
interactions of the HWI with the education fixed effects indicate that the wage of less-educated
workers is more strongly correlated with the HWI than the wage of workers with more
education. In fact, the correlation declines monotonically with education. A 10 percent increase
in the index is associated with a 1.3 percent increase in the wage of high-school dropouts, a 0.7
percent increase in the wage of high school graduates, a 0.4 percent increase in the wage of
workers with some college, and no change in the wage of college graduates. The table reports a
similar pattern in the wage regression coefficients using the ORG.
The second row of each panel shows the correlation between employment trends and the
HWI. The March CPS shows that the HWI and employment propensities are most strongly
correlated for the least-educated workers. A 10 percent increase in the index is associated with a
1.1 percentage point increase in the employment probability of high school dropouts (relative to
college graduates), a 0.7 percentage point increase in the probability for high school graduates,
26 The employment regressions use the sample of persons aged 18-64, while the wage regressions

use the sample of workers aged 25-59 to minimize the sensitivity of the measured wage to school enrollment
or early retirement. The age fixed effects indicate if the person is aged 24 or less, 25-29, 30-34, 35-39, 40-44,
45-49, 50-54, 55-59, or 60-64.
27 The 1973 March CPS is the first that identifies a relatively large number of metropolitan areas,

including Miami.

28 The calculation of the average residual wage in the cell weighs each individual observation by the

product of the person’s earnings weight times the number of weeks worked in the year (in the March CPS) or
the usual number of hours worked weekly (in the ORG).

21
and a 0.5 percentage point increase in the probability for workers with some college. The ORG
also shows a similar monotonic decline, although the drop is not as steep.
We can combine estimates of the correlation between the low-skill wage and the HWI
with estimates of the link between supply shocks and the HWI to back out a (very) rough
estimate of the implied wage elasticity—the short-run wage drop resulting from a supply shock.
Our discussion of the Mariel episode indicated that an increase in the size of the low-skill
workforce of about 18 percent reduced Miami’s HWI by about 40 percent, so the elasticity
relating the job vacancy index to an increase in supply Kor

L MNO P
L MNO Q

that the elasticity relating the low-skill wage to the HWI Kor

R is about -2. Table 3 indicates

L MNO \
L MNO P

R is +0.125. The implied

wage elasticity is given by the product of these two numbers, or -0.25.
This estimate sits comfortably in the ballpark of what is usually reported in the literature
(Blau and Mackie, 2016, Chapter 5), where the spatial correlations are often less than -0.2, while
the national-level correlations tend to be larger (between -0.3 and -0.6). The -0.25 estimate is
also remarkably close to the short-run elasticity implied by the simplest theoretical model that
uses an aggregate (and linear homogeneous) Cobb-Douglas production function to examine the
impact of immigration in a competitive market. The wage elasticity implied by that model is the
negative of capital’s share of income, which typically hovers around 0.3.

V. The Beveridge Curve and Supply Shocks
The BLS began to report the monthly unemployment rate for the metropolitan areas used
in our analysis in 1976.29 These data allow us to examine how the Mariel supply shock affected
what is known as the “job-finding rate” in the macro literature as well as document how
exogenous supply shocks shift the Beveridge curve.
Building on implications from search theory (Pissarides, 1985; and Mortensen and
Pissarides, 1994), the canonical model of the Beveridge curve is closely linked to the matching
29 The pre-1990 unemployment rate data are available in the monthly Employment and Earnings

series published by the BLS. The 1976-1989 unemployment series is not complete for 29 of the 51 cities
sampled by the Conference Board. Our analysis of the job-finding rate and the Beveridge curve uses data for
48 metropolitan areas. We excluded cities where the unemployment rate is missing for more than 2
consecutive months and linearly interpolated the missing unemployment rates.

22
function M(U, V) that gives the number of new hires, M, as a function of the number of
unemployed workers, U, and the number of job vacancies, V. If the matching function has
constant returns to scale, the job-finding rate (i.e., the probability M/U that an unemployed
worker finds a job) can be written as a function of the ratio V/U. The job-finding rate is
frequently interpreted as a measure of labor market tightness or slackness. We proxy the jobfinding rate by the ratio of the HWI to the unemployment rate at the city-year-month level.
The top panel of Figure 9 illustrates the trend in the job-finding rate in Miami and in the
synthetic control for the 1976-1989 period.30 The figure shows a rapid decline in Miami’s jobfinding rate soon after Mariel, suggesting a weaker labor market, with a full recovery by the late
1980s. The bottom panel of the figure uses the HP filter to estimate the long-run trend in our
proxy of the job-finding rate after removing the transitory (and city-specific) fluctuations. It is
again evident that unemployed workers found it much harder to find jobs in post-Mariel Miami.
Table 4 reports the difference-in-differences regressions measuring the impact of the
supply shock on the job-finding rate. Regardless of the specification, the regressions indicate that
Miami’s job-finding rate dropped by 40 to 50 percent relative to the synthetic control by the mid1980s (before recovering by the end of the decade).
As noted above, the matching function (with constant returns) is a key building block in
the canonical derivation of the Beveridge curve, the downward-sloping steady-state relationship
between job vacancies and unemployment (Elsby, Michaels, and Ratner, 2015). This model
trivially implies that as long as a supply shock is composed of persons who enter the labor
market as unemployed workers, the vacancy-unemployment locus should immediately shift
outwards (Blanchard and Diamond, 1989, p. 17). Vacancies are fixed in the short run, but the
number of unemployed workers rose. Over time, firms expand in response to the supply shock
and the number of vacancies increase. The Beveridge curve would then tend to shift back to its
original position. In short, the simplest model of the Beveridge curve would predict an
immediate outward shift in the vacancy-unemployment locus in post-Mariel Miami, followed by
a gradual movement back to its original position.

30 The job-finding rate for each city is rescaled to equal 1 in the 1977-1979 period. The control cities

(weights) forming the synthetic control are Jacksonville (0.106), Los Angeles (0.348), Memphis (0.101), New
Orleans (0.056), Providence (0.014), and San Antonio (0.376).

23
The top panel of Figure 10 illustrates the data scatter that forms the national Beveridge
curve (using the national HWI and the national unemployment rate) in the two 5-year periods
before and after Mariel. The national Beveridge curve shifted out after 1980, coincident with the
deep 1980-1982 recession. The middle panel shows the Beveridge curve for the synthetic
control, calculated by taking a weighted average of the unemployment and vacancy rates across
metropolitan areas (using the weights implied by the synthetic control analysis of the permanent
trend in the job-finding rate). As with the national data, the Beveridge curve for the synthetic
control also shifted out. Finally, the bottom panel shows the comparable data for Miami, which
generates exactly the opposite pattern, an inward shift in the Beveridge curve. The common
interpretation of such an inward shift is that the Mariel supply shock made Miami’s labor market
more efficient—there is less unemployment for a given number of vacancies.31
We can estimate the size of the shift in Miami’s Beveridge curve in the first half of the
1980s relative to either the national data or the synthetic control. The regressions that estimate
these shifts are:
National:

log Hrtm = qr + qtm – 0.082 urtm – 0.273 (Miami ´ Post-Mariel),
(0.013)
(0.028)

(5a)

Synthetic:

log Hrtm = qr + qtm – 0.117 urtm – 0.345 (Miami ´ Post-Mariel),
(0.014)
(0.029)

(5b)

where urtm gives the unemployment rate in cell (r, t, m); the “post-Mariel” period goes from June
1980 through December 1984; and both regressions have 216 observations. The Mariel supply
shock shifted down Miami’s Beveridge curve by about 30 percent relative to how the curve was
behaving in other cities at the time.
The inward shift in Miami’s Beveridge curve is still observed when Miami is compared
to all other cities in the HWI sample. In particular, we stacked the data across all metropolitan
areas over the 1976-1984 period (yielding 5,184 observations) and estimated the model:

31 Warren (1982) discusses the link between immigration and the Beveridge curve in the Australian

context. He finds little evidence that changes in Australian immigration policy shifted the Beveridge curve.

24
All cities:

log Hrtm = qr + qtm – 0.062 urtm – 0.179 (Miami ´ Post-Mariel).
(0.002)
(0.029)

(5c)

The pooled data again document an inward shift in Miami’s Beveridge curve of almost 20
percent relative to all other cities.
It turns out, however, that measuring “average” shifts across two 5-year periods hides
detectable short-term swings in the relative placement of Miami’s Beveridge curve. Following
Valletta (2005), we examine the post-Mariel changes in the relative position of that curve by
estimating a model where the interactions between Miami and the post-Mariel period are instead
done year by year. Table 5 reports the value and standard errors of the (annual) interaction
coefficients, while Figure 11 illustrates the year-to-year variation. Regardless of the
specification, the vacancy-unemployment locus in Miami seems to have shifted out immediately
after Mariel. If we use the national data, for example, the intercept of Miami’s curve shifted out
by about 0.12 log points (with a standard error of 0.029). This outward shift, however, did not
last long. By 1982, the relative intercept of Miami’s locus was strongly negative in all
specifications, reaching a nadir in 1985. Interestingly, all specifications show a “return to
normalcy” in Miami’s vacancy-unemployment locus by the end of the decade; the relative
Beveridge curve for Miami in 1989 was back at its starting pre-Mariel position.
The finding that a supply shock shifts the Beveridge curve inwards in the medium term is
corroborated by an analysis that goes beyond Miami and allows immigration to affect other cities
as well. In particular, we use decennial census data to estimate the vacancy-unemployment
relationship using a sample of all 51 metropolitan areas in the HWI survey over the entire 19702000 period. In particular, consider the regression model:
log Hrt = qr + qt + d urt + b prt,

(6)

where prt gives the foreign-born share of the population in city r and census year t. The
unemployment rate is calculated in each decennial Census and is defined by the fraction of labor
force participants in year t who are unemployed in the survey week. We estimated the regression
model in (6) using decadal census data (analogous to the spatial correlation models estimated in

25
the previous section), and the IV regression again uses the Jaeger, Stuhler, Ruist (2018) shiftshare instrument calculated from the 1960 Census. The estimated regression models are:32
OLS:

log Hrt = qr + qt – 0.178 urt – 0.007 prt,
(0.042)
(0.008)

(6a)

IV:

log Hrt = qr + qt – 0.147 urt – 0.036 prt.
(0.050)
(0.018)

(6b)

It is evident that immigration produces an inward shift in the Beveridge curve once we adjust for
the endogeneity of the geographic sorting of immigrants. If we take the IV coefficient at face
value, a supply shock that increases the number of workers by about 8 percent (i.e., roughly the
size of the Mariel shock) shifts the Beveridge curve inward by about 30 percent.
Although the Mariel evidence shows the immediate outward shift in the vacancyunemployment locus implied by the simplest search-theoretic approach to the Beveridge curve,
that model cannot account for its eventual inward shift. However, an intuitive extension of the
model can easily generate such a shift.33 The extension allows for the reality that the Mariel
supply shock changed the demographics of Miami’s workforce. As suggested by the framework
in Barnichon and Figura (2015), heterogeneity in search behavior between immigrants and
natives might shift the Beveridge curve because the matching function of the new arrivals differs
from that of pre-existing workers. Such a difference could arise, for example, if the immigrants
have a different reservation wage than natives.
To fix ideas, consider a special case of the Barnichon-Figura model. There are a total of I
sectors in a labor market, and the matching function in sector i is the (constant returns) CobbDouglas function:
𝑀] = 𝑉]/._ (𝑠] 𝑈] )_ ,

(7)

32 The unit of analysis is a city-year cell. The regressions have 198 observations and are weighted by

the size of the sample used to calculate the cell’s unemployment rate.

33 Shimer (2007) proposes an alternative micro foundation for the Beveridge curve, based on a

mismatch model where the firms with vacancies are located in different markets than the unemployed
workers looking for jobs. Appendix C shows that the mismatch model also predicts that a supply shock
produces an inward shift in the Beveridge curve.

26

where Mi gives the number of matches in sector i, Vi the number of vacancies, and Ui the number
of unemployed workers. In our context, it is useful to think of the labor market as a metropolitan
area, with sectors delineated along industrial or neighborhood boundaries.34 The variable si
measures the average search efficiency of the unemployed in sector i, which depends on the
demographic composition of the pool of unemployed workers in that sector. We scale si so that
matching efficiency equals 1 for the typical unemployed worker.
There are two types of unemployed workers, natives (j = 1) and immigrants (j = 2). To
easily derive the key insight, we make the simplifying assumption that each type of worker has
the same search efficiency sj regardless of which sector the worker searches in. Suppose further
that newly arrived immigrants have a relatively low reservation wage, implying that s2 > s1
because unemployed immigrants are more likely to accept job offers. The average search
efficiency in sector i is defined by:
𝑈]/
𝑈]b
𝑠] = S Y 𝑠/ + S Y 𝑠b ,
𝑈]
𝑈]

(8)

where Ui = Ui1 + Ui2. The total number of matches across sectors is 𝑀 = ∑] 𝑀] , and the
aggregate matching function is:
𝑀 = µ 𝑉 /._ 𝑈 _ ,

(9)

where V and U give the total number of vacancies and unemployed workers, respectively. To a
first-order approximation, the parameter µ, which measures the matching efficiency in the labor
market, can be written as:
µ = 1 + 𝜎 [𝜅/ (𝑠/ − 1) + 𝜅b (𝑠b − 1)],
34 Courtney (1991) and Valletta (2005) use the local labor market as the unit of analysis for

(10)

estimating Beveridge curve regressions, with the vacancy-unemployment relationship differing across
metropolitan areas or regions. Bonthuis, Jarvis, and Vanhala (2016) use a similar approach in their
examination of Beveridge curve shifts in the European Union. Finally, Anderson and Burgess (2000) estimate
the matching function using state-level data.

27

where 𝜅j = Uj/U, the fraction of unemployed workers in group j (Barnichon and Figura, 2015, pp.
228-229). Equation (10) implies that matching efficiency µ will be greater the larger the relative
number of immigrants and the more that the search efficiency of immigrants exceeds that of
natives.
An increase in µ in the matching function produces an inward shift in the Beveridge
curve for the particular labor market (Elsby, Michaels, and Ratner, 2015, pp. 580-582, 584). The
(assumed) search behavior of unemployed immigrants ensures a more rapid filling of vacancies
after the supply shock.35 Interestingly, the data indicate that the resulting “efficiency gain” in
Miami’s labor market vanished after a decade. The eventual return to the pre-Mariel equilibrium
might be reflecting the process of immigrant assimilation, with the search efficiency of
immigrants becoming more like that of natives over time.
In sum, Miami’s vacancy-unemployment locus shifted out immediately after Mariel,
consistent with the notion that the refugees initially entered the labor market as unemployed
workers. The curve then shifted in (relative to its original position) by the mid-1980s, indicating
that the large influx was composed of workers who were very efficient in their search behavior.
Finally, the curve ended up where it began by the late 1980s, suggesting that the refugees’
advantage in search efficiency disappeared over time.

VI. The Textual Content of Help-Wanted Ads
Although our analysis documents a short-term decline in the number of job vacancies in
post-Mariel Miami, the trends in the HWI do not provide direct insight into which types of job
vacancies are vanishing. Because of its skill composition, the Mariel supply shock should have
particularly affected the low-skill labor market. To determine whether these are indeed the
vacancies that were most affected by the increased supply, we need to examine the actual text of
the help-wanted ads. In the past, such an analysis would have required a great deal of effort to
35 Increasing returns to scale in the matching function may also explain why the Miami Beveridge
curve shifted inwards (but not the outward shift in 1980 nor its eventual return towards the pre-1980
position). Petrongolo and Pissarides (2001) report mixed evidence on estimates of the returns to scale in
matching functions.

28
read and categorize the advertisements. Modern machine learning and natural language
processing techniques, however, allow us to extract the relevant content of help-wanted
classifieds from the published text of a newspaper. As the pioneering work of Atalay,
Phongthiengtham, Sotelo, and Tannenbaum (2019; henceforth APST) shows, the analysis of the
textual content of help-wanted ads can provide insights into how labor markets evolve.
An important obstacle, however, constraints the scope of such a study: digitized files that
contain the text of help-wanted classifieds exist for only a small number of newspapers, and it is
an arduous and costly undertaking to expand this small set. For example, APST use only the ads
published in the Boston Globe, the New York Times, and the Wall Street Journal to document the
changing occupational structure of the labor market. A private company (ProQuest) archives the
digital version of these newspapers and makes the data accessible to university researchers.
Unfortunately, ProQuest does not include the Miami Herald in its archive. The private firm that
archives the Herald digitally (NewsBank) does not generally make their data accessible to
researchers at educational institutions at a non-prohibitive price.
We pursued an alternative approach to construct a large sample of help-wanted ads from
the Miami Herald. Specifically, we selected a random sample of issues published between 1978
and 1984 (essentially one issue from every month in that period).36 For each of these issues, we
(manually) produced digital images of the help-wanted pages from the microfilm archive
maintained at the Library of Congress. Using a crowd-sourced, natural language processing
pipeline37, each ad was transcribed into text and then compiled into a single database. This
approach created a random sample of 95,263 ads. Appendix D describes the process of creating
this sample of ads from the Miami Herald (as well as two other newspapers introduced below).
Appendix Figure D3 shows that the secular trend in the number of ads in our sample closely
tracks the annual trend in the Miami HWI over the period.
The next step involves classifying each ad in terms of the type of job being advertised.
This classification is relatively straightforward as the Department of Labor commissioned a
private firm to create an algorithm, the O*NET-SOC AutoCoder, that classifies job titles and
36 We first picked a random date 2 to 3 years after Mariel: December 20, 1982. Once that date was

determined, we worked backwards to find a similarly situated date before Mariel: December 18th, 1978.
From these dates, the pre-Mariel and post-Mariel samples were constructed by selecting issues published
every 29 days from the initial pre- and post-Mariel dates from January 1978 to December 1984.
37 The pipeline was developed using Python.

29
other job information into standard occupational codes. This algorithm “is the first affordable,
commercially available system developed specifically to assign SOC-O*NET occupational codes
to jobs, resumes and UI claims at an accuracy level that exceeds the level achieved by human
coders” (Wilson, 2019). Specifically, we “fed” the entire text of each of the help-wanted ads in
our sample to the algorithm (using code in the Python language), which returned the
corresponding SOC-2010 occupation code for that vacancy. The algorithm is very reliable when
conducting this type of matching; it “guarantee(s) 85% accuracy for codes assigned to job ads
(titles plus descriptions)” (Wilson, 2019).38
Once each help-wanted ad is assigned an occupation code, it is easy to create a number of
variables that describe the skill composition of that vacancy. To easily summarize the evidence,
we use four alternative characterizations of the occupation’s skill level: 1. Whether the vacancy
advertises a blue-collar (or service) job opening; 2. The mean educational attainment (in years)
of workers in the occupation; 3. The percent of workers in the occupation without a high school
diploma; and 4. The “occupational wage,” defined as the (adjusted) log hourly wage of workers
in the occupation.39 All of these variables were created using the sample of workers aged 25-64
in the 1980 Census.
The various panels of Figure 12 illustrate the 1978-1984 trends for each of these skill
measures. To minimize month-to-month sampling error, we aggregate the Miami Herald data to
the annual level. Consider initially the trend in the relative frequency of ads for blue-collar
vacancies. Prior to Mariel, about 38 percent of vacancies advertised in the Miami Herald were
for blue-collar positions. By 1982, only about 30 percent of the ads were for blue-collar jobs.
Similarly, the mean years of education of workers typically employed in the advertised job rose
from 12.2 years before Mariel to 12.5 years by 1982. Finally, the average occupational wage in
the advertised vacancy rose by 3 to 4 percentage points. Figure 12 leaves little doubt that the skill
composition of the help-wanted ads appearing in the Miami Herald changed in the post-Mariel
period, with a noticeable decline in the relative number of low-skill vacancies.
38 Using a standard concordance table, we converted the SOC-2010 code into the 1990 Census

occupation code (which is the code we use when merging all the data sets used in this section).

39 A blue-collar or service job is in the precision production, craft, and repair occupations (with a

code between 503 and 699), or the operators, fabricators, and laborers occupations (with a code between
703 and 889), or the service occupations (with a 1990 occupation code between 405 and 469). The
occupational wage is constructed by averaging (within each occupation) the residuals from a regression of a
worker’s log hourly wage on a vector of age fixed effects, and on indicators for race and gender.

30
Of course, the observed trends in Miami should be contrasted with trends in other cities
to determine whether the evolution of the occupational distribution of Miami’s job vacancies was
unique. As noted earlier, however, the construction of an appropriate control group is difficult
because the digital files of the ads published by many newspapers is not yet available (or is often
available only at a prohibitive cost).
APST generously gave us access to the samples of help-wanted ads they created for the
New York Times and the Boston Globe. In particular, they provided us with a data file that
reported the number of ads published in each occupation-year-month-day cell for each
newspaper.40 We then collected comparable data for two other newspapers from the set that
ProQuest made available to the Princeton University Library.41 These two other newspapers, the
Minneapolis Star-Tribune and the St. Louis Post-Dispatch, were chosen because they sometimes
appeared as “control cities” when we estimated synthetic control models of the 1975-1989 trend
in the HWI using the small subset of newspapers that we could potentially use in the analysis.
The ProQuest files for these newspapers include their entire published content. Using the
machine-learning methods developed by APST, we isolated the help-wanted ads in each issue
published between 1978 and 1984. This procedure created a sample of 253,833 ads for
Minneapolis and 148,520 ads for St. Louis. We then obtained the ad’s occupation code by
running each ad through the O*NET-SOC AutoCoder. In sum, the control group consists of
help-wanted classifieds published in the Boston Globe, the Minneapolis Star-Tribune, the New
York Times, and the St. Louis Post-Dispatch.
Figure 12 also shows the trend in the skill characteristics of ads published in the control
group. It is visually obvious that the Miami trend is noticeably different from the trend in the
control. At the same time that the fraction of blue-collar ads dropped rapidly in Miami between
40 The APST data consist of 1,211,616 ads in the New York Times, and 1,060,920 ads in the Boston
Globe. The Boston Globe data, however, do not contain any ads for calendar year 1984. APST also shared the
comparable data they created for the Wall Street Journal, but we do not use that newspaper in our analysis.
The ads published in the Wall Street Journal are typically targeted to a very different sector of the labor
market than the ads published in other newspapers.
41 Putting aside the Boston Globe and the New York Times, we purchased the entirety of ProQuest

newspaper holdings that satisfied the following restrictions: (a) the newspaper was in the HWI sample; (b)
the newspaper had already been digitized and Optical Character Recognition (OCR) software had been
applied so that we could, in theory, work directly with the text; and (c) the digital files existed for the years
1978 through 1984. The newspapers that satisfied these restrictions at the time were the Detroit Free Press,
the Louisville Courier-Journal, the Minneapolis Star-Tribune, the Philadelphia Inquirer, the Pittsburgh PostGazette, and the St. Louis Post-Dispatch.

31
1980 and 1982, the respective fraction rose in the control cities. Similarly, while the average
education or the occupational wage of job vacancies advertised in the Miami Herald was rising
after Mariel, the respective statistic in the control cities was stable.
Figure 13 shows a more detailed illustration of exactly what happened to the distribution
of the advertised wage offers in Miami and in the control cities before and after Mariel.
Specifically, it documents the change in the cumulative distribution of wage offers. It is evident
that the distribution of the occupational wage remained unchanged in the control newspapers. In
contrast, Miami’s cumulative distribution shifted downwards. In fact, the figure suggests that the
post-Mariel distribution stochastically dominates the pre-Mariel distribution. Moreover, the shift
was economically important. Before 1980, the top quartile of vacancies offered an occupational
wage of at least 0.21. By 1983-1984, 31.1 percent of the surviving vacancies offered an
occupational wage in that range.
Table 6 reports the relevant coefficients from the difference-in-differences regression
model in equation (1) that estimates the impact of the Mariel supply shock on the skill
composition of advertised vacancies. The unit of analysis in the regression is a newspaper-yearmonth cell, and the regression includes newspaper and year-month fixed effects. We estimated
both unweighted and weighted regressions (where the weight is the number of ads in the cell).
The table reports the interaction coefficients between the Miami indicator and the post-Mariel
time period.
Regardless of the specification, the regressions consistently show a significant postMariel effect in the skill composition of vacancies in Miami, with much of the effect
disappearing by 1984. The relative number of blue-collar vacancies in Miami declined by 6.5
percent by 1982; the fraction of workers in the (typical) advertised job who lacked a high school
diploma dropped by 3.0 percent; the educational attainment of the average occupation being
advertised increased by 0.2 years; and the occupational wage rose by 3 percent. In short, a
regression analysis that focuses on the textual content of advertised vacancies confirms a
substantial drop in the relative availability of low-skill jobs in post-Mariel Miami.42
42 The O*NET-SOC AutoCoder also reports a “match score,” which measures the reliability of the

occupation allocation. The data we obtained for New York and Boston, however, do not contain that score.
Nevertheless, we estimated regressions in the Miami Herald data using a simple difference specification of
equation (1) and weighed the observations by the average match score of the month-year cell. The results are
very similar to those that ignore the score altogether.

32
The analysis of the HWI reported in earlier sections and the complementary analysis of
the textual content of ads in this section document that both the number of vacancies and the
relative number of low-skill vacancies declined in post-Mariel Miami. We can combine these
two separate findings to get a sense of what happened to the actual number of low-skill
vacancies. Our simple back-of-the-envelope exercise takes the HWI as the “official” count of
help-wanted ads in Miami and in the control cities in each year between 1978 and 1984. We then
multiply the HWI in each of the cities times the fraction of ads advertising a blue-collar job and
rescale the product in each city to equal 1 in 1979.
Figure 14 illustrates the resulting trends. It is obvious that the number of low-skill
vacancies fell substantially in both Miami and the control group after 1980 because of the
recession. It is also evident, however, that the low-skill labor market in Miami was the hardest
hit, with the number of low-skill vacancies dropping by nearly 70 percent between 1979 and
1982 (as compared to a 50 percent drop in the control group). The end of the recession led to a
widespread recovery, but the recovery was not as strong in Miami. The number of low-skill
vacancies in that city still lagged behind by about 20 percent in 1984. In short, our statistical text
analysis strongly suggests that unemployed low-skill workers in Miami suffered not only from
the reduction in advertised job openings but additionally from shifts in the composition of
advertised job openings away from low-skill work.

VII. Summary
This paper addresses what is perhaps the central economic question in the immigration
debate: How do supply shocks affect the labor market in receiving countries? We contribute to
the literature by exploiting a data set that has a long history in economics but has not been
employed in the immigration context, the Conference Board Help-Wanted Index (HWI).
Beginning in 1951, the Conference Board constructed an index of job vacancies in local
labor markets by counting the number of help-wanted classified ads in newspapers in 51
metropolitan areas. It is well known that the HWI provides valuable information about trends in
local labor demand and is highly correlated with various measures of labor market conditions.
We use the HWI to document how immigration affects job vacancies in labor markets
affected by supply shocks. We exploit both natural experiments created by random and sudden

33
labor supply shocks in the city of Miami, as well as estimate spatial correlations that measure
how local trends in job vacancies are related to immigration-induced supply shifts. Our findings
include:
1. The labor market in Miami responded strongly to the Mariel boatlift in 1980. The
HWI dropped relative to the trend observed in many alternative control groups
between 1980 and 1986. Miami’s HWI recovered fully by 1990.
2. There is a negative cross-city correlation between the change in the HWI and the
number of immigrants entering the local labor market. The measured spatial
correlation is negative and significant despite the obvious endogeneity bias created by
the non-random settlement of immigrants in cities where there are job openings.
3. In the past few decades, immigrant flows to the United States have been
disproportionately low-skill. Although the HWI presumably measures “average”
local labor market conditions, the persistent negative correlation between
immigration and the HWI suggests that the index might be a particularly good
barometer for labor market conditions at the bottom end of the skill distribution.
Our analysis indeed indicates that the HWI seems to be more strongly correlated
with wage and employment trends for the least educated workers.
4. At the same time that the Beveridge curve was shifting out in other cities in
1982-1985, Miami’s Beveridge curve shifted in. The inward shift might have
been caused by the changed demographics of the Miami labor market, with the
Mariel refugees perhaps having lower reservation wages and more quickly filling
up vacancies. Miami’s Beveridge curve returned to its pre-Mariel (relative)
position by the late 1980s.
5. We examined the text of a large sample of help-wanted ads published in the
Miami Herald and other newspapers between 1978 and 1984. The textual
analysis documented that the drop in the number of job vacancies in Miami was
particularly severe for low-skill jobs.
In sum, our evidence consistently indicates that immigration-induced supply shocks are
typically followed by a short-run period of slackness in the local labor market (as measured by
the number of advertised job openings). The labor market, however, tends to recover after a few
years.

References
Abadie, Alberto, Alexis Diamond, and Jens Hainmueller. 2010. “Synthetic Control Methods for
Comparative Case Studies: Estimating the Effect of California’s Tobacco Control
Program," Journal of the American Statistical Association 105 (June 2010): 493-505.
Abraham, Katharine G. 1987. “Help-Wanted Advertising, Job Vacancies, and Unemployment,”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (1): 207-243.
Abraham, Katharine G. and Lawrence F. Katz. 1986. “Cyclical Unemployment: Sectoral Shifts
or Aggregate Disturbances?” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 94, No. 3, Part 1.
Anastasopoulos, Jason, George J. Borjas, Gavin G. Cook, and Michael Lachanski. 2018. “Job
Vacancies and Immigration: Evidence from Pre- and Post-Mariel Miami,” NBER
Working Paper No. 24580.
Anderson, Patricia M. and Simon M. Burgess. 2000. “Empirical Matching Functions: Estimation
and Interpretation Using State-Level Data,” Review of Economics and Statistics 82(1):
93-102.
Andolfatto, David. 1996. “Business Cycles and Labor-Market Search,” American Economic
Review, 86(1): 112-132.
Atalay, Enghin, Phai Phongthiengtham, Sebastian Sotelo, and Daniel Tannenbaum. 2019. “The
Evolution of Work in the United States,” American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics, forthcoming.
Autor, David H. 2001. “Wiring the Labor Market,” Journal of Economics Perspectives 15
(Winter 2001): 25-40.
Barnichon, Regis and Andrew Figura. 2015. “Labor Market Heterogeneity and the Aggregate
Matching Function,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 7(4): 222-249.
Belasen, Ariel R. and Solomon W. Polachek, 2009. “How Disasters Affect Local Labor Markets:
The Effects of Hurricanes in Florida,” Journal of Human Resources 44: 251-276.
Benoit, Kenneth, Kohei Watanabe, Haiyan Wang, Paul Nulty, Adam Obeng, Stefan Müller, and
Akitaka Matsuo. 2018. “quanteda: An R Package for the Quantitative Analysis of Textual
Data," Journal of Open Source Software 3 (30): 774.
Blau, Francine D. and Christopher Mackie, editors. 2016. The Economic and Fiscal
Consequences of Immigration. Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2016.
Blei, David M., Andrew Y. Ng, and Michael I. Jordan. 2003. "Latent Dirichlet
Allocation," Journal of Machine Learning Research 3, no. Jan (2003): 993-1022.

35
Bonthuis, Boele, Valerie Jarvis, and Juuso Vanhala. 2016. “Shifts in Euro Area Beveridge
Curves and Their Determinants,” IZA Journal of Labor Policy, 5.
Borjas, George J. 2003. “The Labor Demand Curve Is Downward Sloping: Reexamining the
Impact of Immigration on the Labor Market,’ Quarterly Journal of Economics 118
(November 2003): 1335-1374.
Borjas, George J. 2017. “The Wage Impact of the Marielitos: A Reappraisal,” Industrial and
Labor Relations Review, 70(5): 1077-1110.
Borjas, George J. 2019. “The Wage Impact of the Marielitos: The Role of Race,” Industrial and
Labor Relations Review, 72(4): 858-870.
Borjas, George J. and Joan Monras. 2017. “The Labor Market Consequences of Refugee Supply
Shocks,” Economic Policy 32: 361-413.
Burch, Susan W. and Ruth A. Fabricant. 1968. “A Further Comment on the Behavior of HelpWanted Advertising,” Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 50, No. 2.
Card, David. 1990. “The Impact of the Mariel Boatlift on the Miami Labor Market,” Industrial
and Labor Relations Review 43 (January 1990): 245-257.
Chassamboulli, Andri and Giovanni Peri. 2015. “The Labor Market Effects of Reducing
Undocumented Immigrants,” Review of Economic Dynamics 18: 792-821.
Clemens, Michael A., and Jennifer Hunt. 2019. “The Labor Market Effects of Refugee Waves:
Reconciling Conflicting Results,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 72: 818-857.
Cohen, Malcolm S. and Robert M. Solow. 1967. “The Behavior of Help-Wanted Advertising”,
Review of Economics and Statistics, 49(1).
Courtney, Hugh. 1991. “The Beveridge Curve and Okun's Law: A Re-Examination of
Fundamental Macroeconomic Relationships in the US,” Ph.D., dissertation, MIT.
Davila, Alberto and Rogelio Saenz. 1990. “The Effect of Maquiladora Employment on the
Monthly Flow of Mexican Undocumented Immigration to the U.S., 1978–1982,”
International Migration Review, 24 (February 1990): 96–107.
Elsby, Michael W., Ryan Michaels, and David Ratner. 2015. “The Beveridge Curve: A Survey,”
Journal of Economic Literature 53 (September 2015): 571-630.
Friedman, Susan Krug. 1982. “The Help-Wanted Advertising Index: A Leading Indicator of the
Local Economy,” Business Economics 17 (May 1982): 61-64.
Jaeger, David A., Joakim Ruist, and Jan Stuhler. 2018. “Shift-Share Instruments and the Impact
of Immigration,” NBER Working Paper No. 24285.

36

Kroft, Kory and Devin G. Pope, 2014. “Does Online Search Crowd Out Traditional Search and
Improve Matching Efficiency? Evidence from Craigslist,” Journal of Labor Economics
32: 259-314.
Lazear, Edward, Kathryn Shaw, and Christopher Stanton. 2018. “Who Gets Hired? The
Importance of Competition among Applicants,” Journal of Labor Economics 36(1): 133181.
Medoff, James L. 1983. “U.S. Labor Markets: Imbalance, Wage Growth, and Productivity in the
1970s,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, pp. 87-120.
Ortega, Javier. 2000. “Pareto-Improving Immigration in an Economy with Equilibrium
Unemployment,” Economic Journal 110 (January 2000): 92–112.
Peri, Giovanni and Vasil Yasenov. 2019. “The Labor Market Effects of a Refugee Wave:
Synthetic Control Method Meets the Mariel Boatlift,” Journal of Human Resources
54(2), pp. 267-309.
Petrongolo, Barbara and Christopher A. Pissarides. 2001. “Looking into the Black Box: A
Survey of the Matching Function,” Journal of Economic Literature 39(2): 390-431.
Pholphirul, Piriya. 2013. “Immigration, Job Vacancies, and Employment Dynamics: Evidence
from Thai Manufacturers,” Journal of Asian Economics 24 (February 2013): 1-16.
Pissarides, Christopher A. 1985. “Short-Run Equilibrium Dynamics of Unemployment,
Vacancies, and Real Wages,” American Economic Review 75: 676-690.
Preston, Noreen L. 1977. The Help-Wanted Index: Technical Description and Behavioral
Trends. Report no. 716. New York: Conference Board, 1977.
Shimer, Robert. 2005. “The Cyclical Behavior of Equilibrium Unemployment and Vacancies,”
American Economic Review 95 (March 2005): 25-49.
Shimer, Robert. 2007. “Mismatch,” American Economic Review 97: 1074-1101.
Valletta, Robert G. 2005. “Why Has the U.S. Beveridge Curve Shifted Back? New Evidence
Using Regional Data,” Working Paper #2005-25, Federal Reserve Bank of San
Francisco.
Walsh, John, Miriam Johnson, and Marged Sugarman. 1975. Help-Wanted: Case Studies of
Classified Ads. Salt Lake City: Olympus, 1975.
Warren, Donald. 1982. “Immigration and the Natural Rate of Unemployment in Australia,”
Journal of Macroeconomics 4 (Fall 1982): 449-457.

37
Wilson, Rob. 2019. “Frequently Asked Questions: What is the O*NET-SOC AutoCoder?” R.M.
Wilson Consulting, Inc. www.onetsocautocoder.com/plus/onetmatch?action=guide,
accessed on August 9, 2019.
Withers, Glenn and David Pope. 1985. “Immigration and Unemployment,” Economic Record 61
(June 1985): 554-564.
Zagorsky, Jay L. 1998. “Job Vacancies in the United States: 1923 to 1994,” Review of
Economics and Statistics, 80(2).

38
Figure 1. The national Help-Wanted Index (HWI) and the unemployment rate

Help-Wanted Index

Unemployment rate

39
Figure 2. Enumeration biases in the Help-Wanted Index
A. Ad with multiple job listings

C. Ads posted in the FIRE (Finance, Insurance, and
Real Estate) section

B. Employment agency ad

Notes: All ads appeared in the March 2, 1975 edition of the Miami Herald.

40
Figure 3. Cuban immigration to the United States, 1955-2010
120,000

Mariel

110,000
100,000

Number of immigrants

90,000
80,000
70,000
60,000
50,000

Freedom
Flights

The "Mariel Boatlift
That Never Happened"

The first
wave

40,000
30,000
20,000
10,000
0
1950

1960

1970

1980

Year of migration

Source: Adapted from Borjas (2017), p. 1080.

1990

2000

2010

Figure 4. The Help-Wanted Index in Miami, 1975-1989
0.6
South Atlantic
0.4

Log HWI

0.2
0
National
-0.2
-0.4
-0.6
Miami

-0.8
-1
1974

1976

1978

1980

1982

1984

1986

1988

1990

Year

Notes: The HWI for each city/region is rescaled to equal 1 in 1977-1979. The treatment line is drawn as of June
1980.

42
Figure 5. Job vacancies in Miami relative to control cities, 1975-1989
0.4
0.2
Synthetic control

Log HWI

0
-0.2
Low-skill
control

-0.4

Card control

-0.6
Miami

-0.8
-1
1974

1976

1978

1980

1982

1984

1986

1988

1990

Year

Notes: The HWI for each city is rescaled to equal 1 in 1977-1979. The treatment line is drawn as of June 1980.

43

Number of ads pubished (Dec. 1979 = 1)

Figure 6. Number of help-wanted ads published
in the Miami Herald and El Nuevo Herald, 1978-1984

1

0.8
HWI (Miami Herald)

El Nuevo Herald
0.6

0.4

0.2

0
1977

1978

1979

1980

1981

1982

1983

1984

1985

Year

Notes: The number of ads published in the Miami Herald is given by the HWI in Miami in December of each year.
We manually counted the number of ads published in El Nuevo Herald in each December between 1978 and 1984.
Each of the trends is rescaled to equal one as of December 1979.

44
Figure 7. Removing local transitory fluctuations from the HWI using the HP filter
0.4

0.2
Synthetic control
Log HWI

0

-0.2

-0.4
Miami
-0.6

-0.8
1974

1976

1978

1980

1982

1984

1986

1988

1990

Year

Notes: The HWI in in the figure is the long-term trend predicted by the HP filter with a smoothing parameter of
129,600, using all monthly observations between 1975 and 1989. The HWI for each city is rescaled to equal 1 in
1977-1979.

45

4

Figure 8. Frequency distribution of short-run impact of Mariel
(relative to all potential four-city control groups)

Synthetic control

0

1

Density
2

3

µ = -0.232
s = 0.106
Pr(³0) = 0.017

-.6

-.4

-.2
Short-run impact

0

.2

Notes: The sample period used in the analysis is 1979-1984 with a treatment date of June 1980. The figure shows
the density function for the relevant coefficient from the difference-in-differences (log) HWI regression that
compares Miami to all potential 230,300 four-city control groups. All regressions include city and year-month fixed
effects.

46
Figure 9. The job-finding rate in Miami relative to the synthetic control
A. Unadjusted data
1.8
1.6

Synthetic control

1.4

Job-finding rate

1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
Miami
0.2
0
1974

1976

1978

1980

1982

1984

1986

1988

1990

1988

1990

Year

B. Removing local transitory fluctuations using HP filter
1.8
1.6

Job-finding rate

1.4
Synthetic control
1.2
1
0.8
Miami

0.6
0.4
1974

1976

1978

1980

1982

1984

1986

Year

Notes: The job-finding rate is defined as the ratio of the HWI to the unemployment rate in the city-year-month cell.
The job-finding rate for each city is rescaled to equal 1 in 1977-1979. The treatment line is drawn as of June 1980.

47
Figure 10. The Beveridge Curve and Mariel, 1976-1984
A. The national labor market
5

4.8

4.6

log HWI

4.4

June 1980-1984

4.2

1976-May 1980

4

3.8

3.6
4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

Unemployment rate

B. The synthetic control
4.8
4.7
4.6
4.5

log HWI

4.4

June 1980-1984

4.3
1976-May 1980

4.2
4.1
4
3.9
3.8
4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Unemployment rate

C. Miami
5.2

5

4.8

log HWI

4.6

1976-May 1980

4.4

4.2

4
June 1980-1984
3.8

3.6
4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

Unemployment rate

Notes: The figures show the data scatter and the logarithmic trend lines relating the raw HWI and the unemployment
rate in a city-year-month cell in the pre-Mariel (January 1976-May 1980) and post-Mariel (June 1980-December
1984) periods. The Beveridge curve for the synthetic control in Panel B is constructed by taking a weighted average
of the vacancy and the unemployment rate across metropolitan areas for each year-month cell, weighted by the
synthetic control weights obtained in the analysis of the permanent trend in the job-finding rate (Table 4, column 2).

48
Figure 11. Year-by-year shift in relative intercept of Miami’s Beveridge curve
(Baseline is January 1976-May 1980)

Change in intercept of Miami's Beveridge curve

0.2
Relative to all
other cities
0
Relative to national
-0.2

-0.4
Relative to
synthetic cohort
-0.6

-0.8
1979

1980

1981

1982

1983

1984

1985

1986

1987

1988

1989

Year

Notes: The figure illustrates the value of the interaction coefficient in a Beveridge curve regression model between a
Miami indicator variable and a post-Mariel year (with the 1980 year being denoted by the June 1980-December
1980 period). The dependent variable is the log of the HWI index in an area. The regressions include the area’s
unemployment rate, area fixed effects, and year-month fixed effects.

49
Figure 12. Trends in the skill composition of advertised vacancies, 1978-1984
A. Percent blue collar

B. Percent high school dropout
25

Miami
35

Percent high school droopout
in advertised occupation

Percent of ads for blue-collar jobs

40

30

Control

25

20
1977

1978

1979

1980

1981

1982

1983

1984

1985

Miami
20

Control

15

10
1977

1978

1979

1980

1983

1984

1983

1984

1985

0.1

13.5
13.25
Mean log wage
in advertised occupation

Control
13
12.75
12.5

Control

0.05

0

-0.05

Miami

Miami

12.25
12
1977

1982

D. Log hourly wage

C. Educational attainment

Years ofeducation
in advertised occupation

1981
Year

Year

1978

1979

1980

1981
Year

1982

1983

1984

1985

-0.1
1977

1978

1979

1980

1981

1982

1985

Year

Notes: Panel A gives the fraction of ads advertising for a blue-collar position; panel B gives the fraction of workers
who are high school dropouts in the average advertised occupation; panel C gives the average years of education in
advertised occupations; and panel D gives the average (adjusted) mean log hourly wage in advertised occupations.
The size of the sample in the Miami Herald is 95,263 ads; the size of the sample in the control newspapers (the
Boston Globe, the Minneapolis Star-Tribune, the New York Times, and the St. Louis Post-Dispatch) is 2,674,889
ads.

50
Figure 13. Cumulative distributions of occupational wage offers in advertised vacancies
A. Miami Herald
1

Cumulative Probability

.8

.6

.4

.2

0
-1.5

-1

-.5
0
Adjusted log hourly wage
1978-May 1980

.5

1

1983-1984

B. Control newspapers
1

Cumulative Probability

.8

.6

.4

.2

0
-1.5

-1

-.5
0
Adjusted log hourly wage
1978-May 1980

.5

1

1983-1984

Notes: The figures show the cumulative distribution of the adjusted log hourly wage in the (average) advertised
occupation. The occupational wage is calculated from the 1980 census. The size of the sample in the Miami Herald
is 57,946 ads; the size of the sample in the control newspapers (the Boston Globe, the Minneapolis Star-Tribune, the
New York Times, and the St. Louis Post-Dispatch) is 1,634,227 ads.

Number of blue-collar vacamcies (1979 = 1)

Figure 14. Predicted number of blue-collar vacancies, 1978-1984

1

0.8
Control

0.6

0.4
Miami
0.2

0
1977

1978

1979

1980

1981

1982

1983

1984

1985

Year

Notes: The predicted number of blue-collar vacancies is given by the product of a city’s HWI times the fraction of
blue-collar ads calculated from the textual analysis of the city’s newspaper. The product is rescaled to take on a
value of 1 in 1979 in both Miami and in the control group. The size of the sample in the Miami Herald is 95,263
ads; the size of the sample in the control newspapers (the Boston Globe, the Minneapolis Star-Tribune, the New
York Times, and the St. Louis Post-Dispatch) is 2,674,889 ads.

52
Table 1. Difference-in-differences impact of Mariel supply shock
(Dependent variable = log HWI)
Synthetic control
Card
control

Low-skill
control

All
cities

Unadjusted

HP filter

-0.204
(0.041)
-0.482
(0.029)
-0.446
(0.042)
0.109
(0.033)

0.006
(0.045)
-0.186
(0.026)
-0.225
(0.025)
0.129
(0.032)

0.029
(0.037)
-0.296
(0.028)
-0.493
(0.019)
-0.041
(0.028)

-0.237
(0.036)
-0.436
(0.023)
-0.448
(0.029)
0.138
(0.029)

-0.172
(0.014)
-0.342
(0.007)
-0.308
(0.011)
-0.000
(0.021)

B. Log normalized HWI
June 1980-1982
-0.179
(0.034)
1983-1984
-0.449
(0.025)
1985-1986
-0.403
(0.036)
1987-1989
0.130
(0.028)

-0.059
(0.044)
-0.298
(0.023)
-0.358
(0.025)
-0.017
(0.034)

-0.039
(0.037)
-0.364
(0.026)
-0.544
(0.018)
-0.099
(0.027)

-0.257
(0.033)
-0.410
(0.020)
-0.395
(0.026)
0.138
(0.028)

-0.198
(0.014)
-0.372
(0.007)
-0.345
(0.010)
-0.049
(0.020)

Variable:
A. Log HWI
June 1980-1982
1983-1984
1985-1986
1987-1989

Notes: Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. The data consist of monthly observations for each city
between 1975 and 1989. All regressions include vectors of city and year-month fixed effects. The table reports the
interaction coefficients between a dummy variable indicating if the metropolitan area is Miami and the timing of the
post-Mariel period (the baseline period goes from January 1975 through May 1980). The normalized HWI is the
index divided by employment in the city-year-month cell. The regression that uses the Card control has 720
observations; the regression that uses the low-skill control has 900 observations; the regression that uses the all-city
sample has 9,180 observations; and the regressions that use the synthetic control have 360 observations.

53
Table 2. Supply shocks and the HWI, 1960-2000
(Dependent variable = Decadal change in city’s log HWI)
Measure of supply shock:
1. M(t, t-1)/N(t-1)

OLS
-1.027
(0.399)

IV
-1.809
(0.606)

2. M(t, t-1)/N(t)

-1.291
(0.402)

-1.707
(0.553)

3. M(t)/N(t) - M(t-1)/N(t-1)

-0.907
(0.464)

-2.108
(0.747)

Notes: Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. The variable M(t) and N(t) give the number of
immigrants and natives (in the relevant city-year cell) enumerated in census year t, and M(t -1, t) gives the number
of immigrants who arrived between the two census years. All regressions have 198 observations. The instrument is
the predicted size of the immigrant flow settling in a particular city based on the geographic settlement of earlier
waves of immigrants belonging to the same national origin group (as constructed by Jaeger, Ruist, and Stuhler,
2018). All regressions are weighted by the size of the city’s adult population at the time of the census.

54
Table 3. Correlation between labor market conditions and the HWI, by education group

Log HWI
March CPS (1972-1999)
1. Log weekly wage
2. Employment propensity
CPS-ORG (1979-1999)
1. Log hourly wage
2. Employment propensity

Log HWI interacted with:
High school
High school
Some
dropout
graduate
college

-0.009
(0.013)
0.002
(0.004)

0.125
(0.021)
0.043
(0.006)

0.069
(0.013)
0.034
(0.004)

0.038
(0.013)
0.023
(0.004)

-0.037
(0.012)
0.019
(0.004)

0.109
(0.021)
0.038
(0.006)

0.066
(0.012)
0.034
(0.005)

0.045
(0.012)
0.026
(0.004)

Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. The number of observations is 4,604 in the March CPS regressions
and 3,657 in the ORG regressions. Both the wage and employment variables are age- and gender-adjusted. The
employment variable in the March CPS gives the probability that the person worked at some point during the
calendar year prior to the survey, while the employment variable in the CPS-ORG gives the probability that the
person worked during the CPS reference week. All regressions are weighted by the number of observations used to
calculate the dependent variable.

55
Table 4. Difference-in-differences impact of Mariel supply shock on the job-finding rate
(relative to synthetic control)
Variable:
June 1980-1982
1983-1984
1985-1986
1987-1989

Unadjusted series
-0.190
(0.043)
-0.479
(0.043)
-0.462
(0.039)
0.121
(0.046)

HP filter
-0.151
(0.019)
-0.427
(0.016)
-0.491
(0.010)
-0.243
(0.018)

Notes: Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. The data consist of monthly observations for each city
between 1976 and 1989. The job-finding rate is the ratio of the HWI to the unemployment rate in each city-yearmonth cell. It is rescaled to equal 1 in each city in 1977-1979. All regressions include vectors of city and year-month
fixed effects. The table reports the interaction coefficients between a dummy variable indicating if the metropolitan
area is Miami and the timing of the post-Mariel period (the baseline period goes from January 1975 through May
1980). All regressions have 336 observations.

56
Table 5. Relative intercept of Miami’s Beveridge curve, 1980-1989
(Baseline = Jan. 1976-May 1980)
Year
June-December 1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989

National
0.117
(0.029)
-0.033
(0.039)
-0.270
(0.017)
-0.290
(0.017)
-0.501
(0.021)
-0.608
(0.016)
-0.499
(0.017)
-0.200
(0.058)
0.050
(0.015)
0.032
(0.019)

All cities
0.167
(0.035)
0.021
(0.038)
-0.214
(0.025)
-0.230
(0.020)
-0.433
(0.023)
-0.574
(0.019)
-0.498
(0.020)
-0.232
(0.058)
0.001
(0.017)
-0.004
(0.021)

Synthetic cohort
0.042
(0.027)
-0.178
(0.041)
-0.369
(0.023)
-0.438
(0.015)
-0.595
(0.016)
-0.685
(0.017)
-0.597
(0.024)
-0.300
(0.063)
-0.042
(0.018)
-0.069
(0.022)

Notes: Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. The data consist of monthly observations for each city
between 1976 and 1989. The dependent variable is the log HWI for the city-year-month cell. The regressors include
the cell’s unemployment rate, a vector of city fixed effects, and a vector of year-month fixed effects. The “national”
regression compares Miami to the national HWI and unemployment data; the “synthetic cohort” regression
compares Miami to the synthetic cohort implied by the analysis of the permanent trend in the job-finding rate; the
“all cities” regression pools the city-year-month cells across all 48 cities in the sample. The table reports the
interaction between a dummy variable indicating if the metropolitan area is Miami and the year in the post-Mariel
period. The regressions using the national or the synthetic cohort data have 336 observations; the regression using
the all-city sample has 8,064 observations.

57
Table 6. Difference-in-differences impact of Mariel supply shock
on skill composition of help-wanted ads, 1978-1984
Variable:
A. Unweighted
June 1980-1982
1983-1984

B. Weighted by number of ads in cell
June 1980-1982
1983-1984

Percent blue
collar

Percent
dropout

Years of
education

Mean log
wage

-6.705
(1.994)
0.507
(2.707)

-2.787
(0.952)
-0.761
(1.030)

0.231
(0.068)
0.069
(0.082)

0.029
(0.011)
0.013
(0.012)

-6.503
(1.895)
-2.971
(2.693)

-3.010
(0.817)
-2.059
(1.054)

0.251
(0.070)
0.141
(0.090)

0.032
(0.011)
0.021
(0.012)

Notes: Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. The data consist of monthly observations for each city
(i.e., newspaper) between 1978 and 1984. All regressions include vectors of city and year-month fixed effects. The
table reports the interaction coefficients between a dummy variable indicating if the metropolitan area is Miami and
the timing of the post-Mariel period (the baseline period goes from January 1978 through May 1980). The
regressions have 403 observations.

58
Appendix A. Newspapers sampled by the Conference Board
City
Paper Used for HWI Since at Least 1970
Albany
The Times Union
Allentown
Allentown Morning Call
Atlanta
Atlanta Constitution (became Atlanta Journal Constitution in 1982)
Baltimore
Baltimore Sun
Birmingham
Birmingham News
Boston
Boston Globe
Charlotte
Charlotte Observer
Chicago
Chicago Tribune
Cincinnati
Cincinnati Enquirer
Cleveland
Cleveland Plain Dealer
Columbus
Columbus Dispatch
Dallas
Dallas Times Herald until 1991, then Dallas Morning News
Dayton
Dayton Daily News
Denver
Denver Rocky Mountain News
Detroit
The Detroit News
Gary
Gary Post-Tribune
Hartford
Hartford Courant
Houston
Houston Chronicle
Indianapolis
Indianapolis Star
Jacksonville
Florida Times-Union
Kansas City
Kansas City Star
Knoxville
Knoxville News-Sentinel
Los Angeles
Los Angeles Times
Louisville
Louisville Courier-Journal
Memphis
Memphis Commercial Appeal
Miami
Miami Herald
Milwaukee
Milwaukee Sentinel
Minneapolis
Minneapolis Star Tribune
Nashville
Nashville Tennessean
New Orleans
The Times-Picayune
New York
New York Times
Newark
Newark Evening News
Oklahoma City The Daily Oklahoman*
Omaha
Omaha World-Herald
Philadelphia
Philadelphia Inquirer
Phoenix
Phoenix Arizona Republic
Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
Providence
Providence Journal
Richmond
Richmond Times-Dispatch
Rochester
Rochester Times-Union
Sacramento
Sacramento Bee
Salt Lake City
Salt Lake Tribune
San Antonio
San Antonio Express-News
San Bernardino San Bernardino Sun
San Diego
San Diego Union
San Francisco
San Francisco Examiner
Seattle
Seattle Post-Intelligencer
St. Louis
St. Louis Post-Dispatch
Syracuse
Syracuse Herald Journal
Toledo
Toledo Blade
Tulsa
Tulsa World
Washington D.C. Washington Post
*We have been unable to confirm that the surveyed paper in Oklahoma City was the Daily Oklahoman.

59
Appendix B: Job Vacancies and the Other Supply Shocks in Miami
1. The First Wave of Cuban Refugees
Fidel Castro toppled the U.S.-supported government of Fulgencio Batista on January 1,
1959. There was little migration of Cubans to the United States during the Batista years (see
Figure 3). The number of immigrants remained low in 1959, but began to increase rapidly soon
after that, as the totalitarian nature of the communist regime came to the surface. In 1960, nearly
40,000 Cubans migrated, and over 50,000 Cubans migrated in both 1961 and 1962.43
The first wave of Cuban refugees ended abruptly. Most of those refugees left Cuba on a
twice-daily commercial flight that Pan American Airways operated between Havana and Miami.
On October 16, 1962, President Kennedy was informed that the Soviet Union had placed
medium-range ballistic missiles in Cuba, setting in motion the Cuban Missile Crisis. Within a
week, the Pan American flights were discontinued, and the Cuban exodus ended.
The flow of refugees resumed in December 1965, after the establishment of the “Freedom
Flights” that reunited families separated by the migration hiatus that followed the Missile Crisis.
An average of 44,000 Cubans migrated to the United States each year between 1966 and 1969.
The flow dwindled down to a small number (about 15,000 a year) by the early 1970s.
The top panel of Table B1 uses the 1960 and 1970 decennial censuses to calculate some
basic facts about the size and skill composition of the first wave of Cuban immigrants that
arrived between 1960 and 1962. The influx of refugees increased the size of Miami’s workforce
by 16.6 percent—almost twice as large as the 8.4 percent increase resulting from the Mariel
boatlift. The supply shock was remarkably large at the upper end of the education distribution.
The first wave of Cuban refugees increased the number of college graduates in Miami’s
workforce by over 40 percent.
However, the typical immigrant in that early wave experienced a substantial amount of
“down-skilling,” with employers heavily discounting their credentials. The bottom two rows of
the panel show the extent to which the Miami labor market downgraded (at least initially) the
educational attainment of the immigrants. The average Cuban who did not have a college
diploma ended up working at a job where the average native was a high school dropout. And
even the average Cuban college graduate ended up at a job that employed natives who had just
one year more than a high school education. In an important sense, therefore, the initial supply
shock of Cuban refugees was also disproportionately low-skill.
The top panel of Figure B1 shows the raw trends in the HWI for the 1954-1974 period,
comparing Miami with both the South Atlantic region and the nation as a whole, while the
bottom panel compares Miami to the synthetic control. The synthetic control in the bottom panel
of the figure uses exactly the same specification employed in the Mariel analysis, except that all
the control variables are now calculated using the 1950 and 1960 IPUMS census files (the
treatment is timed as of January 1960).44 The figure shows that the HWI for Miami and the
43 As far as we know, we are the first to examine the labor market consequences of this supply shock,

most likely because the earliest public-use CPS microdata starts in 1962 and the Miami metropolitan area is
not identified until 1973.

44 The HWI data for some of the metropolitan areas did not begin to be collected until after 1954. We

use the subsample of the 44 metropolitan areas that have a complete time series for the period. The cities in
the synthetic control are Charlotte (0.31), Jacksonville (0.085), Memphis (0.064), San Bernardino (0.373),
Sacramento (0.023), and San Diego (0.144).

60
synthetic control had similar trends in the Batista years, but that the post-1960 Miami experience
is unusual. The index for Miami began to decline (relative to the synthetic control) soon after the
Cuban refugees began to arrive in 1960 and had begun to recover by the mid-1960s. The
recovery, however, did not take hold. As soon as the Freedom Flights started in 1966, the HWI
for Miami again began to diverge. The two indices reached parity again after the end of the
Freedom Flights in the early 1970s, but the recovery was short-lived. The deep 1973-1975
recession led to a severe (relative) decline in Miami’s HWI.
The first column of Table B2 estimates the regression model in equation (1) using data
from the 1954-1974 period. The coefficients indicate that Miami’s HWI declined relative to the
synthetic control between 1960 and 1963 and had recovered somewhat by the middle of the
1960s. There was continued recovery after the beginning of the Freedom Flights, but the gap had
again grown to about 25 percent by the time that program ended in 1970. The situation improved
in the early 1970s; by 1972-1974, the HWI in Miami was only 9.8 percent below that of the
synthetic control.
2. The “Mariel Boatlift That Did Not Happen”
There was another spike in Cuban immigration in 1995. The number of immigrants rose
from about 18,000 in 1993 to over 50,000 in 1995, before quickly falling to below 20,000 in
1996. This spike coincides with the period examined by Angrist and Krueger (1999, p. 1328):
In the summer of 1994, tens of thousands of Cubans boarded boats destined for
Miami in an attempt to emigrate to the United States in a second Mariel Boatlift
that promised to be almost as large as the first one…Wishing to avoid the political
fallout that accompanied the earlier boatlift, the Clinton Administration interceded
and ordered the Navy to divert the would-be immigrants to a base in Guantanamo
Bay. Only a small fraction of the Cuban émigrés ever reached the shores of
Miami. Hence, we call this event, "The Mariel Boatlift That Did Not Happen."
[emphasis added]
At the time that Angrist and Krueger wrote about this episode, they could not know what
the 2000 Census would eventually uncover: The Mariel boatlift that did not happen indeed
happened; it was just delayed by a year. The refugees diverted to Guantanamo made it to the
United States after President Clinton reversed course in May 1995 and permitted their entry.
We examine the labor market consequences of this supply shock by focusing on the
1990-1999 period. This supply shock differs in crucial ways from the other waves of Cuban
immigrants. First, although it involved a sizable number (with over 75,000 Cubans migrating in
1994-1995), Miami was a much larger city by the mid-1990s. As a result, the relative increase in
supply was much smaller—only about 3.9 percent (see the bottom panel of Table B1). Second,
the aftermath of the 1994-1995 supply shock was not followed by a hiatus in Cuban immigration.
The steady increase in Cuban immigration after the 1994-1995 shock may make it more difficult
to detect any recovery.
Figure B3 shows the raw trend in Miami’s HWI during the 1990s, contrasting it with the
trend in both the South Atlantic region and in the national index. A notable feature of the figure
is the huge upward spike in the Miami index in the last half of 1992. The value of the HWI for
Miami almost doubled between August and November. This spike coincides exactly with the
aftermath of Hurricane Andrew, a Category 5 hurricane that made landfall in Homestead,

61
Florida, on August 24, 1992. At the time, it was the strongest hurricane to ever make landfall in
the United States, causing $45 billion in damage (in 2018 dollars).
The behavior of Miami’s HWI in the aftermath of Andrew dramatically shows how a
local labor market changes after a major environmental disaster that requires a lot of rebuilding
(Belasen and Polachek, 2009). After the quick spike, the HWI began to decline slowly until late
1993. It then remained relatively stable through 1995, at which point the index began a steady
relative decline. Note that the raw data do not suggest any type of recovery in the Miami index in
the post-1995 period.
We applied the synthetic control method to examine the impact of the 1994-1995 supply
shock. We time the treatment as of August 1992, so that the method will create a synthetic city
that resembled Miami prior to both the hurricane and the supply shock. The set of controls is
exactly the same as that used earlier in our analysis of the other shocks, with the only change
being that we used the 1980 and 1990 IPUMS census files to construct the control variables.45
The bottom panel of Figure B3 shows the trend in Miami’s HWI relative to the synthetic
control. The comparison reveals the same insights as the raw data. There was a remarkable spike
due to Hurricane Andrew with the index becoming relatively stable throughout the 1994 calendar
year, but then the index began to decline with the arrival of the refugees from Guantanamo Bay.
Notably, Miami’s HWI continued to decline throughout the last half of the 1990s (coincident
with the steady increase in Cuban immigration).
The second column of Table B2 reports the coefficients from the difference-indifferences regression model.46 The specification of the model allows for the separate
identification of the impact of Hurricane Andrew. In particular, we use the interregnum between
Andrew and the supply shock (i.e., the period between January 1994 and June 1995) as the
baseline. As the first column of the table shows, Andrew increased the HWI by about 37 percent,
and the index fell (relative to the baseline) by 15 to 20 percent between 1995 and 1999. Notably,
there is no evidence that the Miami index recovered after the 1994-1995 supply shock. The
continued decline in Miami’s index after the supply shock can perhaps be attributed to the steady
increase in Cuban immigration after 1996.

45 The cities in the synthetic control are Los Angeles (0.448), New Orleans (0.116), New York (0.178),

Providence (0.022), and San Bernardino (0.237).

46 The relative decline of the post-1995 Miami HWI could have resulted from a faster rate of

adoption in online ads in Miami, with a corresponding decline in printed ads. Anastasopoulos et al (2018)
estimate a regression model that uses data on a metropolitan area’s intensity of computer use (available in
CPS supplemental surveys) to examine this hypothesis. The adjustment barely affects the coefficients
reported in Table B2.

62
Figure B1. The Help-Wanted Index in Miami, 1954-1974
A. Relative to regional-national aggregates
1.5

South
Atlantic

1

Log HWI

0.5

National

0

Miami
-0.5
1960-62 wave
-1
1954

1956

1958

1960

1962

1973-75
recession

Freedom Flights

1964

1966

1968

1970

1972

1974

1976

Year

B. Relative to the synthetic control
1.5

Synthetic
control
1

Log HWI

0.5

Miami

0

-0.5

-1
1954

1956

1958

1960

1962

1973-75
recession

Freedom Flights

1960-62 wave

1964

1966

1968

1970

1972

1974

1976

Year

Notes: The HWI for each city/region is rescaled to equal 1 in 1956-1958. The treatment line is drawn as of January
1960.

63
Figure B2. The Help-Wanted Index in Miami, 1990-1999
A. Relative to regional-national aggregates
0.6

0.4

Hurricane
Andrew

National

Log HWI

0.2
South Atlantic
0

-0.2

-0.4
Miami
-0.6
1990

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

Year

B. Relative to the synthetic control
0.6
Hurricane
Andrew
0.4

Log HWI

0.2

0

-0.2

-0.4

Miami

Synthetic control
-0.6
1990

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

Year

Notes: The HWI for each city/region is rescaled to equal 1 in January 1991-August 1992. The treatment line is
drawn as of June 1995.

64
Table B1. Characteristics of other supply shocks of Cuban immigrants

Episode:
A. First wave, 1960-62
No. of workers in Miami, 1960
No. of Cuban immigrants
Percent increase in supply
Education in occupation
employing:
Average native
Average Cuban immigrant
B. Guantanamo, 1994-1995
No. of workers in Miami, 1990
No. of Cuban immigrant
Percent increase in supply
Education in occupation
employing:
Average native
Average Cuban immigrant

High school
dropouts

High school
graduates

Some
college

College
graduates

All
workers

172.1
21.7
12.6

111.0
15.5
14.0

43.1
7.7
17.9

35.5
15.0
42.2

361.8
59.9
16.6

10.2
10.0

11.6
10.7

12.2
11.8

14.6
13.2

11.7
11.2

246.9
13.5
5.5

222.9
11.5
5.2

260.8
4.5
1.7

193.7
6.8
3.5

932.3
36.2
3.9

12.1
11.8

12.8
12.2

13.4
12.5

15.2
13.5

13.6
12.3

Notes: The pre-existing number of workers in Miami reported in Panel A is calculated from the 1960 census; the
number of Cuban immigrants (at least 18 years old as of 1962) comes from the 1970 census; and a small adjustment
is made because the 1970 census only identifies immigrants who arrived between 1960 and 1964. The pre-existing
number of workers in Miami reported in Panel B is obtained from the 1990 census; the number of Cuban immigrants
(at least 18 years old as of 1995) is obtained from the 2000 census.
.

65
Table B2. Difference-in-differences impact of the 1960-62 and 1994-1995 supply shocks
(relative to synthetic control)
A. 1960-1962 supply shock
Relative to 1954-1959
(1)
1960-1961
-0.210
(0.021)
1962-1963
-0.270
(0.014)
1964-1965
-0.218
(0.015)
1966-1969
-0.141
(0.015)
1970-1971
-0.250
(0.020)
1972-1974
-0.098
(0.023)

B. 1994-1995 supply shock
Relative to Jan. 1994-May 1995
(2)
January 1990-August 1992
-0.044
(0.039)
September 1992-December 1993
0.366
(0.046)
June 1995-December 1997
-0.141
(0.027)
January 1998-December 1999
-0.215
(0.030)
-------

---

Notes for Panel A: Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. The data consist of monthly observations for
Miami and the synthetic control between 1954 and 1974. All regressions include vectors of city and year-month
fixed effects. The table reports the interaction coefficients between a dummy variable indicating if the metropolitan
area is Miami and the timing of the post-shock period. The regression has 502 observations.
Notes for Panel B: Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. The data consist of monthly observations for
each city between 1990 and 1999. All regressions include vectors of city and year-month fixed effects. The table
reports the interaction coefficients between a dummy variable indicating if the metropolitan area is Miami and the
timing of the post-shock period. The regression has 240 observations.

66
Appendix C: Supply Shocks and the Beveridge Curve in the Shimer Mismatch Model
Shimer (2007) proposes an alternative micro foundation for a Beveridge curve:
Vacancies arise because of a “mismatch” between the cities where the unemployed are looking
for jobs and the cities where the jobs are located (rather than the search-theoretic framework
underlying the matching function). The mismatch hypothesis also predicts that a supply shock
produces an inward shift in the Beveridge curve.
We reinterpret the mismatch hypothesis in terms of a single local labor market that has
multiple skill-based sectors. The mismatch then arises because the talents that unemployed
workers are offering are not suitable for the vacancies that the city’s employers are advertising.47
Following Shimer, let L denote the number of workers per sector and N denote the number of
jobs per sector in the local labor market. Suppose further that the number of sectors is very large
and that the actual number of workers and jobs across sectors varies according to a Poisson
distribution. The fraction of sectors with exactly i workers and j jobs can be written as:
𝑒 .Q 𝐿]
𝜋(𝑖; 𝐿) =
,
𝑖!
𝜋(𝑗; 𝑁) =

𝑒 .u 𝑁 v
.
𝑗!

(𝐶1)
(𝐶2)

A sector where i > j has (i – j) unemployed workers; a sector where j > i has (j – i)
vacancies. Summing these differences across all sectors (and assuming independence between
the sectors where firms have vacancies and the sectors where workers are looking), the number
of unemployed workers per sector and the number of job vacancies per sector are:
]
𝑈(𝐿, 𝑁) = ∑z
]x/ ∑vxy (𝑖 − 𝑗) 𝜋 (𝑖; 𝐿 ) 𝜋(𝑗; 𝑁) ,

(𝐶3)

v
𝑉(𝐿, 𝑁) = ∑z
vx/ ∑]xy (𝑗 − 𝑖) 𝜋(𝑖; 𝐿) 𝜋(𝑗; 𝑁).

(𝐶4)

The aggregate unemployment rate u equals the ratio U/L, and the aggregate vacancy rate
v is V/N. To simplify, suppose that the number of workers per sector, L, is exogenous. In this
simplified version of Shimer’s mismatch model, productivity shocks manifest themselves
through variations in N, with a fixed level of L. The downward-sloping Beveridge curve is
derived by choosing a fixed value of L, varying N ∈ (0, ∞), and calculating the corresponding
values of u and v that trace out the curve. For example, a productivity shock that increases N,
holding L constant, raises the vacancy rate and lowers the unemployment rate (Shimer, 2007,
Proposition 3). We wish to examine how the resulting Beveridge curve shifts when L increases
exogenously due to a supply shock.
47 Our reinterpretation is influenced by research on the sectoral shifts hypothesis; see Lilien (1982)

and Abraham and Katz (1986). It is also related to the work of Lazear, Shaw, and Stanton (2018), who provide
a conceptual framework for the derivation of a cross-sectional Beveridge curve, where vacancies are
concentrated in occupations requiring high levels of skills while unemployment mainly targets low-skill
workers.

67
Consider the initial Beveridge curve B in Figure C1, where L = ℓ > 0, and an arbitrary
point p = (u∗, v∗) on that curve. A supply shock where L = ℓ + k (with k > 0), moves the labor
market to a point on a different Beveridge curve, say B¢.
We can derive the new Beveridge curve by varying N with L fixed at ℓ + k. Let n be the
value of N corresponding to the initial point (u∗, v∗) on curve B, and increase n by the same
ℓ•€
proportion as the increase in m, so 𝑁 = ℓ 𝑛. The new pair of values for L and N generates a
point on the new Beveridge curve B¢. Shimer (2007, footnote 7) shows that a proportional
increase in L and N decreases both u and v, so that B and B¢ cannot be the same downwardsloping curve.
Let p¢ = (u¢, v¢) be the point on B¢ resulting from the proportional increase in L and N,
with u¢ < u∗ and v¢ < v∗. We can derive another point p¢¢ = (u∗, v¢¢) on curve B¢ by decreasing N in
order to raise u until it equals the initial u∗ (with L fixed at ℓ + k). This decrease in N must reduce
v. Because v¢¢< v¢< v*, B¢ represents an inward shift of the Beveridge curve.48
Although the mismatch model predicts an inward shift in the Beveridge curve after a
supply shock, the model does not predict the curve’s eventual return to its original position. In
the mismatch model, a larger labor market simply provides more opportunities for successful
matches. Barring other changes that would affect the fundamentals (i.e., the number of workers
per market or the number of jobs per market), there would be no reason for Miami’s Beveridge
curve to return to its original (relative) position.

48 Put differently, an increase in M, holding the unemployment rate constant, reduces the vacancy

rate. We are grateful to Jonathan Arnold for his assistance in outlining the proof.

68
Figure C1. A supply shock and the Beveridge curve in the mismatch model

Vacancy rate

p

v*
v¢
v¢¢

p¢

p¢¢

B(ℓ)
B(ℓ + k)
u¢ u*

Unemployment rate

69
Appendix D. Construction of Samples of Help-Wanted Classifieds
A. The Miami Herald
As noted in the text, we selected a random sample of issues published between 1978 and
1984 (essentially one issue from every month). For each issue, we (manually) produced digital
images of the help-wanted pages primarily from the microfilm archive maintained at the Library
of Congress. In the rare cases where the help-wanted pages from the Library of Congress were
either not available or illegible for the selected dates, we used the Princeton University Library’s
Miami Herald archive. For all but one day in our original sampling plan, a human coder judged
this procedure sufficient to obtain the entire day’s help-wanted advertisements.49 These digital
images were then parsed into many smaller files and the task of transcribing each of these files
was crowdsourced to Amazon Mechanical Turk workers. For instance, if a PDF page of helpwanted ads contained 9 columns of ads, this single page might be broken down into a total of 3page chunks each containing 3 columns of ads, as in Figure D1 below.
Each of these page chunks was stored on Google Drive with the filename formatted in the
following manner: “YYYY-MM-DD-##.pdf”. Using the link sharing capabilities of Google
Drive, a single link was generated for each of the files to enable us to share the file with Amazon
Mechanical Turk workers as needed. After constructing links for every page chunk that we
created, a Human Intelligence Task or HIT, was created on Amazon’s Mechanical Turk for each
page chunk. As part of the HIT, Mechanical Turk workers were asked to transcribe each ad in a
format that would allow us to parse the ad using natural language processing (NLP) tools
available in the Python language. Figure D2 provides an example of an HIT posted to
Mechanical Turk requesting the transcription of a single page chunk of help-wanted ads.
After accepting the HIT and viewing the PDF file, each Mechanical Turk worker was
instructed to create a file in the “.txt” format which had the identical filename as the PDF. For
instance, if the PDF they happened to open was “1984-2-10-01.pdf”, then the worker would
create a file with the name “1984-2-10-01.txt” which would contain the transcribed ads in the
format we requested. When transcribing the ads, workers were asked to separate each ad by a
new line and to not include numbers, capitalization, line breaks, addresses, dates or days of the
week contained in the ads themselves. These additional instructions allowed us to more easily
extract and format the ad text using Python NLP tools. Finally, after transcribing the help-wanted
page chunk according to our instructions, the Mechanical Turk worker was instructed to upload
the transcriptions to a Dropbox folder that we had created for this purpose. This resulted in a
total of 651 text files containing transcriptions from each of the page chunks.
After obtaining these transcribed files, we passed them through a Python script that used
the filename and the textual information contained within each of the files to add each help49 For the one date in which neither the Library of Congress nor Princeton University Library had a

legible copy of the Miami Herald, we downloaded the prior day’s Miami Herald from the Princeton University
Library. For the dates in our sample in which the paper was available at both the Princeton University Library
and the Library of Congress, the Miami Herald was missing more often in the Princeton collection.
Additionally, the Princeton archive of the Miami Herald can only be read and downloaded one page at a time,
making it relatively time-consuming to sample the help-wanted ads, which typically spread over many pages
and tend to appear near the back of newspaper (and which must be manually clicked through to access).
Moreover, the Princeton archive does not have copies of the Miami Herald after 1982. Hence, we defaulted to
the Library of Congress archive whenever possible. We used the original print run edition of the Miami Herald
if it was available; otherwise we used the “Final” edition. This procedure allowed us to obtain complete helpwanted sections for all the dates specified in our original sampling plan.

70
wanted ad to a single row on a CSV sheet which contained information about the month, day,
year, text, and original filename of the transcribed ad. This database was subsequently processed
further using a combination of keyword searches and manual auditing to remove duplicates and
ads that were not help wanted classifieds. The resulting database from this process contains the
95,263 ads that were used in our analyses.
We compared the annual trend in the number of ads in our random sample from the
Miami Herald to the “population counts” reported in the HWI. To make this comparison,
however, we need to make two minor adjustments. First, three months from the 1978-1984
period do not appear in our data as the Mechanical Turk workers were unable to transcribe text
from the digital images of the Herald. We adjusted for the missing months by running a
regression of the number of ads in our sample on the HWI with vectors of year and month fixed
effects, and then using the prediction to “fill in” the three missing data points. Second, our
sampling scheme implies that a small number of months appear twice in the sample. We adjusted
for the “double counting” by using the average number of ads in the affected month to represent
the monthly count. As the top panel of Figure D3 shows, the (adjusted) annual number of ads in
our sample closely tracks the trend in the annual HWI. The correlation coefficient for the seven
data points is 0.88.
B. Control Newspapers
As noted in the text, we obtained a file from APST that reported the number of ads in
each newspaper-occupation-year-month-day cell for the New York Times and the Boston Globe.
The text of help-wanted ads for the other two newspapers in the control group, The Minneapolis
Star-Tribune (MST) and the St. Louis Post-Dispatch (SLPD), was acquired in a manner that was
nearly identical to the method used by APST and utilized much of the Python code they made
publicly available on their Github page: https://occupationdata.github.io/.
The digital versions of the SLPD and MST were acquired from ProQuest and were
delivered to us in Extensible Markup Language (XML) format. The original data consisted of
hundreds of thousands of individual XML files, each of which contained a full newspaper page.
The first step for processing these data involved isolating ProQuest newspaper pages
from between 1978-1984, the period covered by our analyses. This was conducted using a script
in the C# language and this process yielded 302,775 total MST newspaper pages and 272,817
SLPD newspaper pages, all in XML format. As part of the extraction process, the C# code
labeled each of these newspaper pages using date and page number metadata from within each
ProQuest XML file in the following format: “YYYY-MM-DD-###.xml” which represents year,
month, day and page number, respectively. This was done to enable us to easily identify and
keep track of each newspaper page in this large database. For instance, the file “1978-01-01001.xml” within a folder containing the MST pages is the first (front) page of the Minneapolis
Star-Tribune for the edition published on January 1, 1978.
The next stage involved identifying and isolating the newspaper pages that contained
help-wanted ads. This stage required four additional steps: (1) removal of XML markup for each
newspaper page; (2) conversion of the XML page to plain text; (3) unsupervised learning/topic
model estimation on cleaned plain text files and; (4) posterior estimation from the topic model to
identify pages with help-wanted ads. Removal of the XML markup for each newspaper page and
conversion to plain text was accomplished using modified Python code from APST (2019) who
had written a script to perform a similar task in their work. After conversion of the pages to plain
text, each of the newspaper pages was cleaned through stemming, tokenization into unigrams

71
and bigrams, and the removal of stop words using the quanteda package in R (Benoit et al,
2018). The resulting text was then converted into a high-dimensional document-feature matrix
that was used to estimate a series of topic models on the pages of each newspaper. Topic models
are an unsupervised machine learning technique that uses the words in documents to identify
clusters of similar documents (Blei, Ng, and Jordan, 2003).
Topics contained within a corpus are identified using the top 10-20 vocabulary words that
make up the topic. Labeling of documents with topics is conducted through posterior estimation,
where topics are assigned to each document according to the highest probability topic for that
document. After an examination of the output of the top terms from each of the topic models, we
found that a 10-topic model was able to most clearly distinguish between pages with help wanted
ads for each of the newspapers.
Table D1 provides the top 10 terms from the first 6 topics estimated on MST newspaper
pages in 1978. In this case, Topic 6 is clearly identifying pages with help-wanted ads. Because of
the large scale of the topic modeling analysis required, a ten-topic model was estimated for each
newspaper-year, so that a total of 14 ten-topic models were estimated, one for each newspaperyear combination.
Posterior estimation identified the pages in each newspaper-year which corresponded to
the highest posterior probability for the help-wanted ad topics. Those pages were then extracted
from the larger database. This process yielded a total of 12,078 pages from MST and 11,079
pages from SLPD identified as containing help-wanted ads. Finally, help-wanted ads from each
of these pages were extracted and added to a CSV sheet using code provided by APST. This
yielded a total of 253,890 MST and 148,535 SLPD ads which included ad titles, ad text, along
with the day month and year of the ad. As illustrated in Panel B of Figure D3, the trend in the
number of annual ads sampled in each of the control newspapers tracks the HWI for the
respective city. The tracking is quite good for some newspapers (e.g., the Boston Globe), and less
precise for others (e.g., the New York Times or the St. Louis Post-Dispatch). Each of the helpwanted ads in the MST and STPD samples was then fed to the O*NET-SOC AutoCoder to obtain
the occupation code of the advertised job.

72
Figure D1. Example outline of the process of transcribing
a single Miami Herald page of help-wanted ads

Chunk 1

Miami Herald
PDF page.

Chunk 1
Transcribed

Chunk 2

Chunk 2
Transcribed

Chunk 3

Chunk 3
Transcribed

Natural
Language
Processing

Help-wanted
ads appended
to CSV
database.

73
Figure D2. A sample Human Intelligence Task (HIT) posted to Amazon’s Mechanical Turk
requesting the transcription of Miami Herald ads

74
Figure D3. Trends in the local HWI and in the number of ads in sample

120

Number of annual ads
8000 10000 12000 14000 16000

A. Miami Herald

40

6000

60

80
HWI

100

R = 0.88

1978

1980

1982

1984

Year
Number of ads

HWI

B. Control group
2. Minneapolis Star-Tribune
R = 0.98

1980

1982

100

HWI

150

Number of annual ads
40000
60000
80000

1984

50

20000

60

70
HWI

80

R = 0.61

50

1978

200

100000

90

Number of annual ads
50000 55000 60000 65000 70000 75000

1. Boston Globe

1978

1980

year

1982

Number of ads

HWI

Number of ads

HWI

140

90

35000

4. St. Louis Post-Dispatch

250000

3. New York Times

R = 0.44

1980

1982

1984

year
Number of ads

Notes: See Appendix C for details.

80

100
HWI

120

Number of annual ads
20000
25000
30000

60

15000

65

100000

70

75

HWI

80

Number of annual ads
150000
200000

85

R =0.57

1978

1984

Year

1978

1980

1982

1984

Year
HWI

Number of ads

HWI

75
Table D1. First 6 topics from a 10-topic model
estimated using Minneapolis Star-Tribune pages, 1978
Topic 1
home
open
room
br
new
rm
realti
bath
lot
area

Topic 2
reg
sale
t
m
j
price
new
w
r
f

Topic 3
m
s
ii
t
v
n
j
l
r
i_i

Topic 4
br
s
avail
ft
apt
call
av
new
park
home

Topic 5
of_the
said
year
in_the
state
minneapoli
percent
minnesota
new
to_the

Note: Topic 6 is clearly the one that identifies pages containing help-wanted ads.

Topic 6
opportun
experi
person
call
work
employ
time
benefit
posit
open

