                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

  COGNITION AND SES RELATIONSHIPS AMONG THE MID-AGED AND ELDERLY:
                A COMPARISON OF CHINA AND INDONESIA

                                           John Strauss
                                         Firman Witoelar
                                          Qinqin Meng
                                           Xinxin Chen
                                           Yaohui Zhao
                                          Bondan Sikoki
                                          Yafeng Wang

                                       Working Paper 24583
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w24583

                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02134
                                     May 2018

The prior work of Dr. John McArdle is greatly appreciated. The development of the
revised adaptive number series test for use in Indonesia and other low income countries
originated from long discussions between Strauss, John McArdle, Robert Willis and Rebeca
Wong, with the support of the Division of Behavioral and Social Research, National Institute
on Aging. Richard Woodcock was also heavily consulted. Support from small grants from
the USC/UCLA Center on Biodemography and Population Health (from P30-AG017256)
and from the University of Michigan (from P01-AG026571) helped to fund the pretest field
work in Indonesia and Mexico for the adaptive number series test used in this paper. Grant
support from the National Institute on Aging, R01-AG026676, and the National Institute of
Child Health and Human Development, R01-HD050764 for IFLS and from the National
Institute on Aging, R01-AG037031, the National Natural Science Foundation of China,
71450001,71273237, 7130002, 71603013, and the China Medical Board, 16-249, for CHARLS
is greatly appreciated. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w24583.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by John Strauss, Firman Witoelar, Qinqin Meng, Xinxin Chen, Yaohui Zhao, Bondan
Sikoki, and Yafeng Wang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Cognition and SES Relationships Among the Mid-Aged and Elderly: A Comparison of China
and Indonesia
John Strauss, Firman Witoelar, Qinqin Meng, Xinxin Chen, Yaohui Zhao, Bondan Sikoki, and
Yafeng Wang
NBER Working Paper No. 24583
May 2018
JEL No. I15,O53

                                           ABSTRACT

In this paper, we use a measure of fluid intelligence, an adaptive number series test, to measure
that part of cognition for respondents in two developing countries: China and Indonesia, both with
very low educated elderly populations. This test was specially adapted by us and our collaborators
from measures used in the United States to better fit such populations. We also use a measure of
episodic memory and one measuring mental state intactness and examine their distributions and
then the socio-economic gradients associated with each, concentrating on gender differences and
how those change as SES and variables measuring community development are added.

We find large variation in our cognition measures in both countries, even among those 60 and over
with no schooling. We explore the bivariate socio-economic gradients for these measures,
separately for different age groups: 45-59 and 60 and above. We find strong gender, education
and rural-urban gradients. Of these, the education gradient is the strongest, followed by the rural-
urban gradient. China has a stronger rural-urban gradient than Indonesia, which is associated
with the hukou residential permit system in China.

We find a significant, negative multivariate differential for women, that is significantly larger in
China than Indonesia. The gender differential in both countries is smaller for the mid-aged,
45-59, for whom the gender schooling differentials are smaller. The gender differential
declines substantially, and the China-Indonesia differential disappears once we control
for SES characteristics. Adding community measures related to mean schooling and asset
levels does not affect the gender differential.

Schooling levels are monotonically and significantly related to higher levels of cognition for all
three of the variables we use. The magnitudes of the schooling coefficients are relatively large.
Higher log of household per capita expenditure (pce) is positively associated with cognition,
more so in China. Other SES characteristics such as height, are also positively related to the
cognition measures, again more strongly so in China. Rural respondents have substantially lower
levels of cognition measures, with a significantly stronger gradient in China. Mean community
level schooling and log pce are also positively related to cognition outcomes, especially for
elderly women.
John Strauss                          Yaohui Zhao
Department of Economics               CCER
University of Southern California     Peking University
318A Kaprielian Hall                  Beijing 100871, CHINA
Los Angeles, CA 90089                 yhzhao@nsd.pku.edu.cn
and NBER
jstrauss@usc.edu                      Bondan Sikoki
                                      Survey Meter
Firman Witoelar                       Yogyakarta INDONESIA
SurveyMETER                           bsikoki@gmail.com
Jakarta, Indonesia
fwitoelar@gmail.com                   Yafeng Wang
                                      Institute of Social Science Surveys
Qinqin Meng                           Peking University
Institute of Social Science Surveys   econyfwang@gmail.com
Peking University
meng_qinqin@qq.com

Xinxin Chen
Institute of Social Science Surveys
Peking University
xinxinchen@pku.edu.cn
Introduction

       In this paper, we use a measure of fluid intelligence, an adaptive block number series test, to

measure that part of cognition for respondents in low income, low educated populations. We use

population survey data from China and Indonesia, from the China Health and Retirement

Longitudinal Study (CHARLS) and the Indonesia Family Life Survey (IFLS). The number series test

was specially adapted by us and our collaborators from measures used by the Health and Retirement

Study (HRS) in the United States to better fit such low income populations. We also use a measure

of episodic memory and one measuring mental state intactness and examine their distributions and

the socio-economic gradients associated with each, concentrating on gender differences and how

these change as SES and variables measuring community development are added.

       We use the fifth wave of IFLS, fielded in 2014/15, and the third wave of CHARLS, fielded in

2015/16, so this analysis is cross-sectional. The reason is that the main cognition variables we want

to use are only available in wave 5 for IFLS and in wave 3 for CHARLS. IFLS covers all people

within a surveyed household, and our cognition measures (except one) were asked of all respondents

aged 15 and over. CHARLS is a nationally representative aging survey covering respondents aged

45 and over (and their spouses). In this paper we will make inter-country comparisons for

comparably aged respondents, 45 and older and 60 and over.

       Indonesia is a low-income country that has been growing economically at relatively high

rates since the mid-1960s. There exists substantial variation within Indonesia, which IFLS well

captures. China has grown from a low-income country to a middle-income country from 1980 until

2015. China’s older population, however, has very little education, similar to Indonesia’s elderly.

       In this paper, we first examine the properties of our cognition measures, focusing on whether

there exists variation by age and education groups and by education within age groups. We pay

special attention to the lowest education within the oldest age group to see if there is variation with

that group. This has been a concern of some social scientists in the past and some worry about the


                                                                                                          3
number series test in this regard. We find for both IFLS and CHARLS that there does exist plentiful

variation even among older people (aged 60 and above) with no schooling, specifically for the

number series, as well as for the other cognition measures we use. The three measures are positively

correlated, but not perfectly, so they are not measuring the exact same construct.

       We explore the socio-economic gradients for these measures, separately for two different age

groups: 45-59 and 60 and above. We find significant, negative differentials for women for all three

cognition measures in both countries, that are lower for the mid-aged group, 45-59. The differentials

are larger in China, significantly so, especially for the elderly age group. The gender differential

declines substantially once we control for SES characteristics in both countries, and the country

differential becomes insignificant. Adding community measures related to mean community

schooling and mean community household per capita expenditure (pce) levels does not affect these

gender differentials.

       Schooling levels are monotonically and significantly related to higher levels of cognition for

all three of the variables we use. The magnitudes of the schooling coefficients are relatively large in

both countries. Higher household pce is also positively associated with cognition, more so in China.

Other SES characteristics such as height, are also positively related to the cognition measures, again

more so in China. Cognition measures are substantially lower among rural respondents, more so in

China, the country differential being significant. Mean community levels schooling and household

pce are also positively related to cognition outcomes, especially for elderly women.



Literature Review

       Cognition psychologists separate cognition broadly into fluid and crystallized intelligence

(Horn and Cattell, 1966, 1967; McArdle et al., 2002). Crystalized intelligence has to do with

accumulated knowledge from school and from experiences. Fluid intelligence has to do with

abstract reasoning ability. Past research has shown that fluid intelligence tends to peak during


                                                                                                         4
adolescence or in young adulthood while crystallized intelligence in mid-age, around 50 (Horn and

Cattell, 1967; McArdle et al., 2002). There are different dimensions of fluid intelligence.

Quantitative reasoning is one, and has to do with reasoning with mathematical concepts. In this

paper, we use a modification of an adaptive block number series test used in the HRS, which shows a

series of numbers with one blank and asks a respondent to fill in the blank with no prompting of

possible correct answers. Smith, McArdle and Willis (2010) have found the number series to be

highly correlated with financial wealth in the HRS data.

       Other dimensions of cognition include measures of episodic memory or mental status

intactness. CHARLS and IFLS both use the HRS version of the CERAD immediate and delayed

word recall to measure episodic memory (Ofsteddal et al., 2005). Ten 10 nouns are slowly read to

the respondent who is then asked to recall as many as they can. After approximately 4 minutes of

other questions the respondent is asked again to recall the nouns, without reading out the words a

second time. Mental intactness is measured in HRS, CHARLS and IFLS using a series of questions

from the Telephone Interview of Cognition Status (TICS) (Brandt et al., 1988). This includes

recognition of date: month, day, year, season (CHARLS and IFLS allow using the lunar calendar and

IFLS the Islamic calendar, in addition to Gregorian calendar), day of the week, how the respondent

rates their own memory on an excellent, very good, good, fair, poor scale, and serial subtraction of

7s from 100 (up to five times). The respondent is also asked to redraw a picture of overlapping

pentagons.

       Lei et al. (2012, 2014) examine episodic memory and mental intactness using the China

Health and Retirement Longitudinal Study (CHARLS) and document a large gender difference, with

women having significantly lower scores. These gender differences are substantially larger for older

women, in part because older women have a substantial disadvantage in schooling completed

relative to older men. Among the youngest cohorts of women examined (who are mid-aged in




                                                                                                       5
CHARLS) no gender differences were found. Controlling for education and other socio-economic

(SES) covariates lowered but did not eliminate the gender differences.

       However, adding community characteristics related to the level of community development

did eliminate the gender difference for episodic memory, although not for mental intactness. Living

in a more economically developed community is associated with better cognition scores, particularly

for women.



Data

       The data for this paper come from the fifth wave of the Indonesia Family Life Survey (IFLS)

(see Strauss, Sikoki and Witoelar, 2016) and the third wave of the China Health and Retirement

Longitudinal Study (CHARLS) (CHARLS, 2017).

       The Indonesia Family Life Survey is a continuing longitudinal socioeconomic and health

survey. It is based on a sample of households representing about 83% of the Indonesian population

living in 13 of the nation’s 26 provinces in 1993. The survey collects data on individual respondents,

their families, their households, the communities in which they live, and the health and education

facilities they use. The first wave (IFLS1) was administered in 1993 to individuals living in 7,224

households. IFLS5 was fielded in late 2014 and early 2015 on the same set of IFLS households and

splitoffs: 16,204 households and 50,148 individuals were interviewed. IFLS has had cognition tests

for part of the sample since the third wave in 2000. In IFLS5 new tests were added, plus the age

range for old tests was expanded.

       The China Health and Retirement Longitudinal Study (CHARLS) is a nationally

representative survey of China. The CHARLS national baseline survey was conducted in 2011-12. It

includes one person per household aged 45 years of age or older and their spouse (no matter the

spouse’s age), totaling 17,708 individuals, living in 10,257 households in 450 villages/urban

communities (see Zhao et al., 2013). The sample includes 150 counties/districts in 28 of China’s 30


                                                                                                      6
provinces excluding Tibet. The sample is a stratified (by per capita GDP of urban districts and rural

counties), multi-stage (county/district-village/community-household) sample, using PPS. In light of

the outdated household listings at the village/community level due to population migration,

CHARLS designed a mapping/listing software (CHARLS-GIS) that makes use of Google-earth map

images to list all dwelling units in all residential buildings to create sampling frames. The third wave

of CHARLS was administered from mid-2015 to early 2016 and covered 12,450 households with

21,057 respondents. As for IFLS, and HRS, CHARLS surveys split-off households, which is why

the increase in sample size.

        The major new cognition test added in IFLS5 and the 3rd wave of CHARLS, and the main

subject of this paper, is an adaptive number series test, designed after the test used in the Health and

Retirement Study (HRS) (see Fisher et al., 2013). In IFLS this is given to all respondents aged 15

and higher; in CHARLS to all respondents. The number series test measures a specific form of fluid

intelligence related to quantitative reasoning. It has been found by Smith, McArdle and Willis

(2010) to be highly correlated with the financial wealth of HRS respondents. The test requires a

respondent to look at a series of numbers with one number missing and to fill in the missing number.

        The HRS number series is a 6 question block adaptive test (with 15 questions in total that

could be asked). All respondents are asked the same first three questions. Depending on how many

correct they answer they go to a second block of four possible, each having three additional

questions. The difficulty of the second block of questions is increasing with the number of correct

answers for the first block of three questions. Within each block the 3 questions have an increasing

level of difficulty.

        We worried that the level of difficulty of the HRS version might be too difficult for countries

with low levels of schooling and income. With the support of the Division of Behavioral and Social

Research of the National Institute on Aging, Strauss, John McArdle (co-PI for cognition of HRS),

Robert Willis (former PI of HRS) and Rebeca Wong (PI of the Mexican Health and Aging Study,


                                                                                                           7
MHAS) had a series of discussions that led to efforts to develop and field test a revised version of the

number series test. Under the leadership John McArdle and with the help of Dr. Richard Woodcock,

a revised version of the HRS test was developed, with some of the same questions as HRS, plus

some new questions of lesser difficulty. We pretested this new version extensively in both Indonesia

and Mexico and found that the new version was well-suited to low schooling environments. In

particular, even older respondents with no schooling could generally answer some of the questions

correctly, so we had power to discriminate their fluid intelligence (see Prindle and McArdle, 2013).

This is the version that is used in both IFLS and CHARLS.

       The number series answers are scored using a standardized score called a W-score. These are

comparable to the W-scores used in the Woodcock-Johnson III test battery (Jaffe, 2009). The W-

scale is a transformation of the difficulty parameters from a Rasche item response model. It is an

interval scale and the differences in scores is supposed to measure the same difference no matter

where on the scale, for example between 400 and 410 and 500 and 510. In the particular test used in

IFLS W-scores range from 299 to 635, with 17 different ordinal scores. The W-scores are

comparable across surveys, even though not all of the questions are the same. So for instance, W-

scores from IFLS can be compared to those of CHARLS, but also to those of HRS. This is because

IFLS and CHARLS use some of the same questions as in HRS.

       IFLS4 in 2007 introduced a measure of episodic memory as measured by immediate and

delayed word recall, which was repeated in IFLS5. The HRS version of the word recall is used.

CHARLS has used the same HRS version since wave 1. The respondent is told and shown 10

commonly used nouns, then asked to repeat as many as they can remember, both immediately and

after approximately 4 minutes of other questions. In this paper we use the mean number of words

recalled correctly on both immediate and delayed recall.

       Finally, we examine a measure of mental status called mental intactness. It is a combination

of nine different questions taken from the Telephone Interview of Cognitive Status (TICS): 3 having


                                                                                                       8
to do with date orientation, up to 5 having to do with the ability of the respondent to subtract 7 from

100 5 successive times, and 1 having to do with the respondent being able to draw a figure with 2

overlapping pentagons, while looking at a picture of the drawing done correctly. These questions

were partly introduced in IFLS4 and updated in IFLS5. They have been used in CHARLS since

wave 1. They are also used in HRS. In IFLS some of the mental intactness questions are only given

to respondents aged 50 and older, although in CHARLS all questions are given to everyone. The

CHARLS mental intactness and episodic memory questions have been used in a number of related

papers, including Lei et al. (2012, 2014).

       IFLS and CHARLS are very broad-based population panel surveys, containing information

on many dimensions of life. In this paper we look at SES measures and their correlations with these

cognition measures for different age groups. We focus on gender differences controlling for five

year age dummies, district (IFLS) or county (CHARLS) dummies and a dummy for rural area (IFLS

or rural hukou (CHARLS). We then examine how the gender differences are intermediated by levels

of schooling, a linear spline in log of household per capita expenditure (pce), height and marriage

status. For levels of schooling, we include dummy variables for some primary, complete primary,

complete junior high school, and complete senior high school or more, relative to the omitted

category, no schooling. We also add community fixed effects and explore what factors could be

responsible by including community mean levels of schooling levels and log pce and allow them to

interact with the female dummy, similar to the work of Lei et al. (2012; 2014) using CHARLS data.

For the SES regressions we use 2 broad age groups: 45-59 and 60+, for both IFLS and CHARLS.



Cognition test distributions and correlations

       Table 1a shows the pattern of answers to the number series questions by all respondents 45

and older in both IFLS and CHARLS. As shown in Table 1b, the 3 entry block questions were all

answered correctly by 17.5% of respondents 45 and older in China and 12.5% in Indonesia (a higher


                                                                                                          9
fraction correctly answered all 3 among respondents under 45 years in Indonesia). Comparable

fractions, 16.3% of respondents in China and 14.4% in Indonesia, did not answer any of the first

three questions correctly. In general, within each block the first question, which is the easiest, is

answered correctly by a higher percent than the second or third questions. It is not always the case

that questions in the easier blocks after the opening block that all respondents answer are more

frequently answered correctly than those in harder blocks, because of selection of the respondents

who are answering each block.

       Table 1b shows the distributions of W-scores for all age groups combined. We show for the

entry block and for each second block, the number of respondents and the percent that get each

number of correct answers, and the associated W-score. Some 12.9% in China and 8.5% in

Indonesia 45 and older got no correct answers out of 6 possible and only 1.1% and 0.6% in China

and Indonesia respectively got all 6 correct. Getting one correct in the opening block and one correct

in the (easiest) second block is the modal score, 16.7% Chinese and 21.4% Indonesians did that.

Getting two correct in the opening block and none in a harder second block has the next highest

frequency in China, 15.8%, while one correct in the opening block and none in the second is the next

highest in Indonesia, 18.3%. There is a good spread among the rest of the W-score categories.

       Figure 1 displays the histograms of W-scores by 2 age groups: 45-59 and 60+, and by

schooling level: no schooling, some primary, completed primary, completed junior high school and

completed senor high school or more. The CHARLS and IFLS scores are plotted over each other.

The W-score distribution shifts left for both distributions with older age and with less schooling.

The W-score distribution is slightly shifted left for the CHARLS compared to the IFLS sample, both

for age and schooling. Likewise the distribution shifts left for each education group for the elderly

(60 and over).

       Table 2 shows the distributions for all respondents aged 45 and older and for each schooling

level within this group. For the subset of the elderly with no schooling, the group we may be most


                                                                                                        10
worried about, 34.2% in China and 30.6% in Indonesia got nothing correct, which means that 65-

70% did get at least one correct answer; indeed one can observe there is a distribution of correct

answers among this group. Figure 1 shows the histogram for this group, which shows that there

exists variation in the W-scores.

       Figure 2 exhibits the histograms for the word recall, again by age group and education level.

The distributions are close between IFLS and CHARLS. They are somewhat right skewed for the

mid-aged and elderly groups, similar to W-scores. The distributions have a lot of spread in it, even

for elderly with no education, as shown in Table 3. By education, there is a strong skew for the

elderly with no schooling, but the distribution is much more centered for high schooling groups, even

among the elderly.

       A very similar set of patterns exists for mental intactness for those 50 and over and 60 and

over, as shown in Figure 3 and Table 4. The CHARLS distribution has somewhat more spread on

both ends than that for IFLS. For both countries, the distributions by age group are centered for

those with no schooling, but become left-skewed at higher levels of schooling. For mental intactness

in Indonesia, a very trivial percent, 2.6%, gets nothing correct among the over 50 and no schooling

group, while for China a much larger fraction, 16.9% got nothing correct.

       Table 5 shows the simple correlations in the raw data between the number series, word recall

and mental intactness for 45 and older and the two sub-age groups. The correlations between W-

score and word recall are very close for China and Indonesia, .43 and .41 respectively. Between W-

score and mental intactness (for 50 and over) the correlation is higher in China, .63, compared to .47

in Indonesia. There are small differences in the correlations across the 2 broad age groups, some of

which may be due to correlations with age (and schooling, which in turn is correlated with age). For

both countries, the correlations are slightly higher for the older age group.



Gender and SES gradients of cognition measures


                                                                                                      11
       We conduct this analysis in two parts. First we examine figures of cognition scores by age;

stratified by gender, by education level and by urban-rural status. We then report regressions,

focusing on the elderly, but run the same regressions for the 45-59 age group, which are reported in

the Appendix. Figures are not weighted, but all regressions are, with cross-section sample weights

that are corrected for non-response (see Zhao et al., 2013 and Strauss et al., 2016, for details on

construction of these weights).

       Figures 4-6 show the bivariate patterns of cognition by age for W-scores (Figure 4), word

recall (Figure 5) and mental intactness (Figure 6). Each figure has three panels, showing the

stratifications by gender, education level and rural-urban status. For the W-score, we can see in

Figure 4a, that men score higher than women, and the difference is larger for older respondents.

This is the pattern reported by Lei et al. (2012, 2014) for word recall and mental intactness, which

they demonstrate is due in part to a wider schooling gender gap for older Chinese. The same pattern

is displayed for word recall and mental intactness (remember that the scales differ for the three

cognition measures).

       For the W-score and to a lesser extent word recall, the scores tend to be higher for Chinese

than for Indonesians, both men and women, consistent with the density plots. That is reversed for

mental intactness for women, although not for men; the reasons for this are not clear.

       The bivariate education gradients are very large, larger than the bivariate gender gaps. These

seem to decline with younger age slightly for the W-scores, but not as much for word recall or

mental intactness. As is true for gender, by education level the W-scores are higher for Chinese than

for Indonesians, except at very old ages for women. This may result from differing mortality

selection patterns between China and Indonesia. For word recall we see a similar pattern except that

the differences within education groups are small compared to the W-scores. For mental intactness

Indonesian women have higher scores across all ages, given their education level, although the

reverse is true for men.


                                                                                                       12
       Chinese with agricultural hukou have lower cognition scores than those with non-agricultural

hukou for all 3 measures. The difference is large, larger than the gender gap, but not as large as the

education gap. For Indonesia, the rural-urban cognition gaps are considerably smaller than for

China. This is not so surprising because in China the hukou status is mandated and hard for

individuals to change, even when one migrates, whereas in Indonesia there do not exist residential

permit requirements. Also in Indonesia the difference between urban and rural is often very blurred.

       We now turn to the regression results. Table 6 presents descriptive statistics (weighted like

the regressions) by gender for the SES variables for elderly group for both CHARLS and IFLS.

Appendix Table 1 presents the same for the mid-aged group, 45-59.

       For the elderly group presented in Table 6, mean W-scores are higher for men in China than

in Indonesia (significant at the 1% level), and slightly higher for women (significant at 10%). Mean

word recall scores are roughly the same in both countries for both genders, while for mental

intactness, mean scores are slightly higher for men in China, but for women in Indonesia (both

differences significant at 1%). Among the mid-aged group, W-scores are also higher in CHARLS,

but the differences only significant for men.

       Within each broad age group, CHARLS has a slightly older population than IFLS. To

account for this and other age impacts in the regressions we control for 5-year age dummies. They

are jointly significantly different between CHARLS and IFLS.

       For the elderly, CHARLS has a larger fraction in the tails compared to IFLS, the education

dummies being jointly significantly different between the countries at 1%. IFLS has a higher

fraction of male respondents than CHARLS who have completed high school or more, 20% versus

10%, while for women the fractions are the same, 10%. However when we aggregate completing

junior high plus senior high school or more, the fractions are a little higher in CHARLS for both men

and women. The fraction of population with no schooling is a higher among the CHARLS elderly




                                                                                                       13
than in IFLS, especially for women.1 Some 54% of the elderly women in the CHARLS sample have

no schooling, compared to 35% in IFLS. For men with no schooling the corresponding fractions are

19% for CHARLS and 13% for IFLS. Notice that when we aggregate no schooling with some

primary (which means unfinished primary) the fractions are comparable for women across CHARLS

and IFLS, while for men they are much higher in IFLS (62% versus 67% for women in CHARLS

and IFLS respectively; 29% versus 46% for men).

            As shown in Appendix Table 1 for the mid-aged, 45-59, schooling differentials are

considerably narrower between CHARLS and IFLS samples, although they are still jointly

significantly different. While the fraction with no schooling remains larger for women in CHARLS,

28% compared to 14%, for men they are roughly the same, at 8% and 9%. Aggregating no schooling

with some primary, the fractions for men are larger in IFLS, as is true for the elderly. For women,

the aggregate with low education is still now considerably larger in IFLS. On the other tail,

aggregating junior high with senior high or more, the fractions for men are higher in CHARLS for

both men and women.

            As noted by Lei et al. (2012), the fraction of women with low education in CHARLS is much

smaller for the mid-aged compared to the elderly. If we take the ratio of women with no schooling

or some primary to those with junior high and above, for the elderly it is 62/11 and for the mid-aged

it is 35/43. For men in CHARLS the same ratio is 29/33 for the elderly and 13/66 for mid-aged men.

In IFLS the same ratios have a large turnaround, but smaller than for CHARLS, especially for

women: 67/15 to 46/29.

            Attained mean heights are larger in CHARLS for both men and women, by about 4.5cm, a

fairly large amount and statistically significant at 1%. In both samples heights are larger for the mid-

aged than the elderly, which had been shown with IFLS data by Strauss and Thomas (1995) among




1
    IFLS does not cover eastern Indonesia, which is the poorer part of the country. The sample weights help correct for this.

                                                                                                                          14
others, and is generally true over the twentieth century in developing countries, height has been

increasing by later birth cohort in most countries.

           Comparable fractions of elderly men are currently married between CHARLS and IFLS, but

a much larger fraction of CHARLS women are married, again the country differences being

significant, at 1%. This may reflect a higher older male mortality rate in Indonesia, and also lower

divorce rates in China.

           Finally, larger fractions of men and women have agricultural hukou in CHARLS than are

rural residents in IFLS. Part of that is because recent urban migrants in China often have agricultural

hukou. Since this comparison uses sampling weights, it should not reflect sampling factors, which

are more urban-centered in IFLS than CHARLS.

           Table 7 shows the coefficient on the female dummy variable in the base specification that

contains 5-year age dummies within each of the two broad age groups, dummies for district or

county of residence and a rural dummy.2 The coefficient for each of the 2 broad age groups is shown

for each of the 3 cognition measures. For mental intactness we only show it for the 60 and over age

group since in IFLS it is only available for the respondents 50 and over.

           The female coefficient is more negative for the elderly than the mid-aged in both China and

Indonesia; it is statistically significant at under 5% in all cases. Furthermore, the coefficient is more

negative, and significantly so at under 1%, in the CHARLS data for both W-scores and mental

intactness, but is approximately the same for word recall. For example, for the W-scores, the female

dummy coefficient for the 45-59 year group is -25.9 for IFLS and -33.7 for CHARLS. For the 60

and over group the coefficients are -36.7 for IFLS and -56.7 for CHARLS. Remember, these W-

scores are directly comparable across the two countries.

           For the other cognition measures, the gender differences by age groups also exist. For word

recall in IFLS, the female coefficient is -.15 for the mid-aged group and -.29 for the elderly, both


2
    For CHARLS this is a hukou variable, not actual place of residence.

                                                                                                       15
significant; while for CHARLS it is -.08 and -.27 respectively for the 45-59 and 60 plus age groups.

For mental intactness for the elderly, the difference between IFLS and CHARLS female

disadvantage is large, -.85 for IFLS and -1.95 for CHARLS.

       We now examine how the gender differential is affected as we add additional SES covariates,

discussed above. Tables 8 and 9 show results for number series, word recall and mental intactness

for the 60 and older groups in CHARLS and Tables 10 and 11 for IFLS. Appendix Tables 2 and 3

show the results for 45-59 year respondents in CHARLS and Appendix Table 4 for IFLS. In each

case we first add individual and household level SES covariates, then community variables with

interactions with the female dummy allowing for differential effects for women and men; and finally

community fixed effects.

       The gender differential on the W-score moves to under 1/5 its level in CHARLS and under

1/3 in IFLS once own education level dummies are added along with a linear spline in household

assets, linear height and a dummy for being married. It is still statistically significant at the 5% level.

The female differential between CHARLS and IFLS is no longer significant once SES covariates are

added. The female differentials in CHARLS and IFLS do not change further as we add community

fixed effects in column 4 or community mean schooling levels and asset variables, interacted with

the female dummy, in column 3.

       For word recall, we see that the gender dummy turns sign to positive for both CHARLS and

IFLS and is significant as SES variables are added (becoming positive is consistent with results for

CHARLS in Lei et al., 2014). For CHARLS the mental intactness coefficient drops to ¼ of its level

as SES covariates are added, while for IFLS it becomes slightly positive, but insignificant. For both

word recall and mental intactness in both CHARLS and IFLS, the female coefficient does not change

much when community variables or fixed effects are added.

       All three cognition measures are monotonically decreasing in 5-year age groups within the

broader age group categories and the age dummies are jointly significant at under 1% in both broad


                                                                                                        16
age groups. For both 45-59 and 60 and above age groups the age gradients for all three cognition

measures are smaller once own SES covariates are added, probably in part because older respondents

have lower schooling in both countries and low education is associated with lower cognition.

       Own schooling levels have positive, significant and monotonically increasing coefficients for

all three cognition measures. The coefficient magnitudes are large for the W-scores, especially for

the elderly. They are substantially larger in magnitude than the coefficients on the female and age

dummies in the same regressions. Being larger in magnitude for the older age group may reflect a

mortality selection effect that older respondents with higher levels of schooling are more positively

selected than for younger age groups.

       Log of household pce has positive, significant associations with the cognition measures, for

values below the sample median (the knot point used) for the CHARLS sample, but the coefficient

magnitudes are much smaller and are not significant for the IFLS sample. However, the differences

between CHARLS and IFLS for household pce coefficients are not statistically significant.

       Height is positively and significantly related to all the cognition measures in both CHARLS

and IFLS samples. The magnitude of the height coefficients for the W-scores are small in IFLS, and

larger, but not significantly so, in CHARLS. For word recall and mental intactness the coefficient

magnitudes are similar. In the CHARLS sample, a 10 cm increase in height, which is very large, is

associated with an 11.2 point increase in the W-score for the elderly, while in IFLS with only a 6.4

point increase. Height in this case is a reflection of childhood health, but its association with the W-

scores is less in magnitude than are schooling levels or age, and less too than being female (except

for an exceptionally large, 10 cm, increase in height).

       The marriage dummy has differing associations with different cognition tests for the elderly

in CHARLS and IFLS. In the CHARLS elderly sample, being married is generally associated with

better cognition, significant in most cases, but the coefficient magnitudes are small compared to the

other SES variables. In the IFLS elderly sample, for number series, being married is associated with


                                                                                                       17
a significantly lower W-score, though the magnitude is small. The difference in the marriage

coefficient is significant between CHARLS and IFLS. For word recall, there is a positive

relationship, significant at 5%, while for mental intactness no relationship exists. For the mid-aged

group, 45-59 in CHARLS, being married is positively and significantly associated only with word

recall, not with the W-score or mental intactness. In IFLS it is only weakly significant (at 10%) with

the number series.

       Overall, a positive association of marriage with cognition may represent a selection effect.

Those elderly who are married, conditional on age, may be healthier with healthier spouses, and have

better cognition. It may also reflect the “protective” influences of marriage, so often observed on

outcomes such as labor earnings. However, as seen, the association of marriage, conditional on other

SES covariates, with cognition is not systematic across the different cognition measures, nor across

the two country samples.

       Community influences

       The base specification contains district dummy variables, plus a dummy variable for living in

a rural area for IFLS and a dummy for having an agricultural hukou for CHARLS. The agricultural

hukou dummy is negative and significant in the CHARLS base specifications for all three cognition

variables, and the magnitudes are large, a little less than the female dummy coefficients for the W-

score and mental intactness, but more negative for word recall. The coefficient magnitudes drop

considerably when SES covariates are introduced, but are still significant. They drop a little more,

but still significant, when community covariates are introduced.

       In the IFLS sample, the rural dummy coefficients are small, 1/3 of the female dummy

coefficient for the W-score, but larger for word recall and mental intactness, roughly comparable in

size to the gender differential. The rural coefficients are substantially and significantly smaller for

IFLS than for CHARLS. When SES covariates are added the IFLS rural differential greatly shrinks

and becomes insignificant for W-score and word recall. The difference between IFLS and CHARLS


                                                                                                          18
coefficients are now not significant. For mental intactness it shrinks by 1/3 to ½ but is still

significant when SES variables are added and the differential between CHARLS and IFLS is still

significant at 5%. When community variables are added the rural dummy further shrinks and

becomes insignificant for mental intactness. The same pattern is observed for the mid-aged group,

except that in the CHARLS results, the rural hukou differentials are somewhat larger for the elderly

than the mid-aged.

       Following Lei et al. (2012, 2014) in the third columns we add community mean values for

the schooling level dummies and log household pce, taking a linear spline again for mean log pce.

We also include interactions of the community variables for females, allowing for differential effects

by gender. We still control for respondent level schooling level and log pce of the respondent

households, as well as for other individual characteristics. The community means are calculated

removing values for the reference respondent. The community means will reflect several factors

controlling for respondent covariates, including the relative position of the respondent within the

community. In the fifth and final column we present results with community fixed effects, that will

account for all observed and unobserved community influences. These results are similar to the

results when we add SES covariates. The community dummies are always jointly significant.

       The observed uninteracted community variables for IFLS are jointly significant at 5% or

better for all three cognition measures, for the elderly group, but not for CHARLS. In the case of

IFLS it is the community mean schooling level variables that are responsible for this. Increasing

levels of community schooling, conditional on own schooling, are associated with higher W-scores

and word recall correct answers. The size of the community mean schooling level coefficients are

smaller than the coefficients for respondent schooling levels.

       However, for CHARLS when we consider interactive community effects with the female

dummy plus the level coefficients, they are always jointly significant. The interaction coefficients

themselves are jointly significant for the W-score (at 10%) and mental intactness (at under 1%), but


                                                                                                       19
not for word recall. Higher mean community schooling and higher mean log pce have significantly

more positive associations for elderly women than men for W-scores and word recall, consistent with

what Lei et al. (2014) found for the mid-aged and elderly in China. However, the community

associations of mean schooling and mean pce for women are smaller than it is for respondent’s own

education and pce.

       For IFLS the coefficients on mean community education, and to a lesser extent mean

household pce, are higher for women for W-scores and mental intactness, but are lower for word

recall. The female interactions are jointly significant at 5% for all three cognition measures.

       It is not clear what the exact pathways behind these relationships may be; one possibility is

that higher community mean schooling may be correlated with better quality social networks within

which one has social interactions, which may be better for elderly women than men in Indonesia.

       These relationships are different for the mid-aged group. For IFLS, the community variables

are not jointly significant for any of the cognition measures. However, once we allow for differential

effects for women, the community coefficients plus the interactions are jointly significant at under

the 1% level, being higher for women for both mean community education and household pce. For

CHARLS it is again the interactions with female that make the community coefficients jointly

significant. Now the associations with community education and pce are smaller for women than for

men for the W-score, but the reverse for word recall, and mixed results for mental intactness. The

coefficients for mean community education and pce are smaller than those for the respondent’s own.



Conclusions

       This paper examines three different measures of cognition in China and Indonesia among

respondents aged 45 and older. We concentrate on a measure of fluid intelligence: an adaptive block

number series test, plus a measure of episodic memory and a measure of mental intactness. The

number series test is new for population surveys in developing countries, and has been specially


                                                                                                       20
modified from the version used in the Health and Retirement Study in the US to be better suited to

low income, low education environments.

       We first examine the properties of our cognition measures, focusing on whether there exists

variation, particularly among the lowest education and oldest age groups. This has been a concern of

some social scientists in the past and some worry about number series in this regard. We find there

does exist plentiful variation in both China and Indonesia even among older people (aged 60 and

above) with no schooling. The three measures are correlated, but not perfectly, so they are not

measuring the exact same dimension of cognition.

       We explore the socio-economic gradients for these measures, separately for middle-aged 45-

59 and elderly 60 and above. We focus in part on the gender differential, finding a significant,

negative differential for women. This differential is less for the mid-aged group, for whom the

schooling differentials are smaller, and considerably larger, statistically significantly so, in China. It

declines substantially once we control for SES characteristics, with the country differences no longer

being statistically significant. Adding community measures related to mean schooling and asset

levels does not much affect the gender differential.

       Schooling levels are monotonically and significantly related to higher levels of cognition for

all three of the variables we use, in both China and Indonesia. The magnitudes of the schooling

coefficients are relatively large. Higher household per capita expenditure is also positively

associated with cognition, more so in China. Height, too, is positively associated with better

cognition, although the magnitudes are not large in Indonesian, but larger in China.

       There are large rural deficits for the elderly in cognition, larger and significantly so in China,

which become smaller once socio-economic covariates are added, with the country differential no

longer being significant. Community mean schooling and mean log pce for the elderly are generally

positive and significantly related to the cognition measures we consider in Indonesia, especially for

community schooling. For China it is only for women that the community variables are jointly


                                                                                                        21
significant. The effects are often more positive for women, especially for elderly women. For mid-

aged respondents the community variables have a much more mixed set of results.

       We must stress that the data are cross-sectional because the number series measures are only

available in one wave for both CHARLS and IFLS. Hence we cannot say anything about dynamics

of fluid intelligence and its SES gradients. With future waves of CHARLS and IFLS we will be able

to examine changes.




                                                                                                 22
References

Brandt, Jason, Miriam Spencer and Marshal Folstein. (1988). The Telephone Interview for Cognitive
       Status. Neuropsychiatry, Neuopsychology, and Behavioral Neurology, 1:111-117.

CHARLS. (2017). Release note: Follow up 2015. China Center for Economic Research, Peking
    University, May 2017.

Fisher, Gwenith, John McArdle, Ryan McCammon, Amanda Sonnega and David Weir. (2013). New
        measures of fluid intelligence in the HRS: Quantitative reasoning, verbal reasoning, verbal
        fluency, HRS Documentation Report DR-027, Survey Research Center, University of
        Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI.

Horn, John and Raymond Cattell, (1966). Refinement and test of the theory of fluid and crystallized
       generalized intelligences, Journal of Educational Psychology, 57:253-270.

Horn, John and Raymond Cattell, (1967). Age differences in fluid and crystallized intelligence, Acta
       Psychologica, 26:107-129.

Lachman, Margie, Stefan Agrigoroaei, Patricia Tun and Suzanne Weaver, (2014). Monitoring
      cognitive functioning: Psychometric properties of the Brief Test of Adult Cognition by
      Telephone, Assessment, 21(4):404-417.

Lei, Xiaoyan, Yuqing Hu, John McArdle, James P. Smith and Yaohui Zhao, (2012). Gender
       difference in cognition among older adults in China, Journal of Human Resources,
       47(4):951-971.

Lei, Xiaoyan, James P. Smith, Xiaoting Sun and Yaohui Zhao, (2014). Gender differences in
       cognition in China and reasons for change over time: Evidence from CHARLS, Journal of
       the Economics of Ageing, 4:46-55.

McArdle, John, Emilio Ferrar-Caja, Fumiaki Hamagami and Richard Woodcock, (2002).
     Comparative longitudinal structural analyses of the growth and decline of multiple
     intellectual abilities over the life-span, Developmental Psychology, 38(1):115-142.

Ofstedal, Mary Beth, Gwenith Fisher, and A. Regula Herzog. (2005). “Documentation of cognitive
       functioning measures in the health and retirement study”, HRS/AHEAD Documentation
       Report DR- 006. Survey Research Center, University of Michigan.
       http://hrsonline.isr.umich.edu/sitedocs/userg/dr-006.pdf

Prindle, John and John McArdle. (2013). Number series abilities in the Mexico and Indonesia
       Sample, RAND Corporation, Santa Monica CA.

Smith, James P., John McArdle and Robert Willis, (2010). Financial decision making and cognition
       in a family context, Economic Journal, 120(549):F363-F380.

Strauss, John and Duncan Thomas, (1995). Human Resources: Empirical modeling of household and
       family decisions, in J.R. Behrman and T.N. Srinivasan (eds.), Handbook of Development
       Economics, Volume 3A, Amsterdam: North Holland Press.


                                                                                                  23
Strauss, John , Firman Witoelar and Bondan Sikoki. (2016) The fifth wave of the Indonesia Family
       Life Survey: Overview and field report, Volume 1, WR-1143/1-NIA/NICHD, RAND
       Corporation, Santa Monica CA.

Zhao, Yaohui, John Strauss, Gonghuan Yang, John Giles, Peifeng Hu, Yisong Hu, Xiaoyan Lei, Man
   Liu, Albert Park, James P. Smith and Yafeng Wang. (2013). China health and retirement
   longitudinal study—2011-2012 national baseline user’s guide. China Center for Economic
   Research, Peking University. April 2013.




                                                                                               24
          Figure 1. W-score by age group and by education




Age 45+                                              Age 60+




                                                               25
     Figure 2. Word recall by age group and by education




Age 45+                                               Age 60+




                                                                26
  Figure 3. Mental intactness, by age group and education




Age 50+                                              Age 60+




                                                               27
Figure 4a. W-score and age, by gender      Figure 4b. W-score and age. highly educated vs no-schooling




Figure 4c. W-score and age, by residence




                                                                                                         28
Figure 5a. Word recall and age, by gender      Figure 5b. Word recall and age. highly educated vs no-schooling




Figure 5c. Word recall and age, by residence




                                                                                                             29
Figure 6a. Mental intactness and age, by gender      Figure 6b. Mental intactness. highly educated vs no-schooling




Figure 6c. Mental intactness and age, by residence




                                                                                                                     30
                  Table 1a. Adaptive number series test: pattern of answers, age 45+

                                                      China                  Indonesia
                                       Most
                         Correct   frequent                                    #
Questions                answer      answer    # correct   % correct     correct   % correct
7, 8, ?, 10                   9          9       15,058       82.61       7,641          83.07
8, ? 12, 14                  10         10        8,341       45.76       2,710          29.46
18, 10, 6, ?, 3               4          4        4,968       27.25       2,466          26.81
n1                                               18,228                   9,198
1, 2, 3, ?                    4          4          557       18.79         487          36.89
6, 5, 4, ?                    3          3          222        7.49         203          15.38
12, ?, 16, 18                14         13           50        1.69          29            2.2
n2                                                2,964                   1,320
5, ?, 3, 2                    4          4        3,646       68.11       2,238          54.79
4, 7, 10, ?                  13         11          245        4.58         205           5.02
?, 4, 6, 8                    2          3          859       16.05         560          13.71
n3                                                5,353                   4,085
1, 3, 3, 5, 7, 7, ?           9          9        2,081       31.04         581          21.95
3, ? 8, 12, 17                5          5        2,269       33.84         839           31.7
17, ?, 12, 8                 15         15        1,750        26.1         450            17
n4                                                6,705                   2,647
10, ?, 3, 1                   6          6          978       30.66         382          33.33
18, 17, 15, ?, 8             12         12          884       27.71         291          25.39
3, 3, 4, 6, 6, 7, ?, ?        9          8        1,069       33.51         218          19.02
3, 3, 4, 6, 6, 7, ?, ?        9          9        1,350       42.32         394          34.38
n5                                                3,190                   1,146




                                                                                                 31
                          Table 1b. W-score distribution, age 45+


Entry block     China Indonesia     2nd block       China Indonesia
# of correct                      # of correct
   answers:        %         %       answers:           %           %   W-score
           0   16.3%     14.4%               0      12.9%        8.5%       299
                                             1       2.3%        3.9%       322
                                             2       0.9%        1.4%       360
                                             3       0.2%        0.1%       396
          1    29.4%     44.4%               0       8.5%       18.3%       431
                                             1      16.7%       21.4%       467
                                             2       3.1%        2.8%       494
                                             3       1.0%        0.1%       510
          2    36.8%     28.8%               0      15.8%       15.2%       516
                                             1      11.0%        8.0%       527
                                             2       7.6%        4.3%       535
                                             3       2.4%        1.3%       545
          3    17.5%     12.5%               0       5.8%        4.3%       567
                                             1       4.4%        4.5%       604
                                             2       4.0%        2.1%       614
                                             3       2.2%        1.0%       625
                                             4       1.1%        0.6%       635
               100.0%   100.0%                     100.0%      100.0%




                                                                                  32
                                             Table 2. W-score by education, age 45+


China
                                                                           Compl. Junior      Compl. Senior
             No schooling       Some Primary        Compl. Primary              High              High+                All
W-score     # resp.       %    # resp.       %      # resp.       %       # resp.        %   # resp.        %   # resp.         %
      299    1,795      34.2      208     14.9         232       5.1          90       2.0       24       1.0    2,349        12.9
      322      306       5.8       46      3.3          52       1.1          17       0.4        5       0.2      426         2.3
      360       79       1.5       21      1.5          41       0.9          12       0.3        2       0.1      155         0.9
      396       12       0.2        2      0.1           9       0.2           5       0.1        3       0.1       31         0.2
      431      844      16.1      166     11.9         360       7.8         135       3.0       40       1.6    1,545         8.5
      467      925      17.6      314     22.4         976      21.3         678      15.1      152       6.2    3,045        16.7
      494      121       2.3       59      4.2         177       3.9         162       3.6       52       2.1      571         3.1
      510       17       0.3       12      0.9          45       1.0          77       1.7       35       1.4      186         1.0
      516      669      12.7      245     17.5         922      20.1         747      16.7      292      11.9    2,875        15.8
      527      189       3.6      134      9.6         581      12.7         703      15.7      387      15.7    1,994        11.0
      535       77       1.5       58      4.1         333       7.3         552      12.3      361      14.7    1,381         7.6
      545       20       0.4       14      1.0         104       2.3         172       3.8      134       5.4      444         2.4
      567       90       1.7       63      4.5         301       6.6         362       8.1      238       9.7    1,054         5.8
      604       72       1.4       31      2.2         207       4.5         295       6.6      199       8.1      804         4.4
      614       27       0.5       15      1.1         159       3.5         267       6.0      254      10.3      722         4.0
      625        9       0.2       11      0.8          63       1.4         153       3.4      164       6.7      400         2.2
      635        3       0.1        2      0.1          27       0.6          54       1.2      121       4.9      207         1.1
Total        5,255     100.0    1,401    100.0       4,589     100.0       4,481     100.0    2,463     100.0   18,189       100.0




                                                                                                                             33
Indonesia
                                                                     Compl. Junior      Compl. Senior
             No schooling       Some Primary     Compl. Primary           High              High+                All
W-score     # resp.        %   # resp.       %   # resp.        %   # resp.        %   # resp.        %   # resp.          %
      299      421     30.57      275    10.37       61      2.86       16      1.75       11      0.52      784        8.52
      322      149     10.82      152     5.73       46      2.15       11       1.2        4      0.19      362        3.93
      360       38      2.76       59     2.22       47       2.2       11       1.2       10      0.47      165        1.79
      396        2      0.15        2     0.08        1      0.05        1      0.11        3      0.14        9         0.1
      431      376     27.31      718    27.06      403     18.87       90      9.84       96      4.53    1,683       18.29
      467      165     11.98      675    25.44      602     28.18      248      27.1      284     13.39    1,974       21.45
      494       25      1.82       65     2.45       70      3.28       30      3.28       69      3.25      259        2.81
      510        2      0.15       13     0.49       31      1.45       34      3.72       91      4.29      171        1.86
      516      126      9.15      441    16.62      413     19.34      155     16.94      268     12.64    1,403       15.25
      527       30      2.18       92     3.47      180      8.43      113     12.35      321     15.13      736           8
      535        5      0.36       33     1.24       75      3.51       63      6.89      219     10.33      395        4.29
      545        2      0.15        6     0.23       17       0.8        8      0.87       82      3.87      115        1.25
      567       14      1.02       44     1.66       73      3.42       47      5.14      217     10.23      395        4.29
      604       18      1.31       56     2.11       86      4.03       59      6.45      198      9.34      417        4.53
      614        3      0.22       16      0.6       25      1.17       17      1.86      129      6.08      190        2.06
      625        0         0        6     0.23        5      0.23        9      0.98       68      3.21       88        0.96
      635        1      0.07         -       0        1      0.05        3      0.33       51       2.4       56        0.61
Total        1,377      100     2,653      100    2,136      100       915       100    2,121       100    9,202        100




                                                                                                                       34
                                               Table 3. Word recall by education, age 45+


China
# words
                                                                               Compl. Junior    Compl. Senior
recalled       No schooling     Some Primary            Compl. Primary                                                  All
                                                                                  High             High+
(average)
              # resp.      %    # resp.      %          # resp.       %       # resp.      %    # resp.      %    # resp.         %
          0      881     17.8      143     10.7            217       4.8          74      1.7       16      0.7    1,331         7.6
        0.5      229      4.6       61      4.6             97       2.2          44      1.0       13      0.5      444         2.5
          1      453      9.1      101      7.6            215       4.8         116      2.6       28      1.2      913         5.2
        1.5      501     10.1      106      8.0            358       8.0         163      3.7       50      2.1    1,178         6.7
          2      526     10.6      138     10.4            368       8.2         215      4.9       99      4.1    1,346         7.6
        2.5      448      9.0      121      9.1            404       9.0         298      6.8      104      4.3    1,375         7.8
          3      528     10.7      142     10.7            470      10.5         431      9.8      178      7.3    1,749         9.9
        3.5      390      7.9      108      8.1            495      11.1         499     11.3      188      7.7    1,680         9.5
          4      376      7.6      145     10.9            567      12.7         622     14.1      305     12.5    2,015        11.4
        4.5      222      4.5       94      7.1            415       9.3         508     11.5      309     12.7    1,548         8.8
          5      194      3.9       74      5.6            340       7.6         516     11.7      311     12.8    1,435         8.1
        5.5       81      1.6       44      3.3            225       5.0         353      8.0      268     11.0      971         5.5
          6       62      1.3       31      2.3            141       3.2         261      5.9      210      8.6      705         4.0
        6.5       25      0.5       10      0.8             87       1.9         134      3.0      151      6.2      407         2.3
          7       16      0.3         6     0.5             46       1.0          88      2.0       88      3.6      244         1.4
        7.5         7     0.1         3     0.2             14       0.3          52      1.2       57      2.3      133         0.8
          8         9     0.2         3     0.2             10       0.2          28      0.6       29      1.2       79         0.5
        8.5         2     0.0         2     0.2               3      0.1            8     0.2       16      0.7       31         0.2
          9         1     0.0         -     0.0               3      0.1            4     0.1         8     0.3       16         0.1
        9.5         -     0.0         -     0.0               1      0.0            2     0.1         3     0.1         6        0.0
         10         6     0.1       10      1.0 0.08          3      0.1            -     0.0         3     0.1       13         0.1
Total          4,957    100.0    1,333    100.0          4,479     100.0       4,416    100.0    2,434    100.0   17,619       100.0


                                                                                                                              35
Indonesia
# words
                                                                    Compl. Junior     Compl. Senior
recalled      No schooling      Some Primary      Compl. Primary                                              All
                                                                       High              High+
(average)
              # resp.      %    # resp.      %    # resp.      %    # resp.      %    # resp.      %    # resp.           %
          0      245     17.8      150      5.7       42      2.0       10      1.1         7     0.3      454           4.9
        0.5       76      5.5       97      3.7       29      1.4         7     0.8         8     0.4      217           2.4
          1      164     11.9      211      8.0      102      4.8       23      2.5       30      1.4      530           5.8
        1.5      106      7.7      206      7.8      119      5.6       38      4.2       37      1.7      506           5.5
          2      164     11.9      288     10.9      198      9.3       46      5.0       60      2.8      756        8.2
        2.5      103      7.5      301     11.4      181      8.5       68      7.4       95      4.5      748        8.1
          3      143     10.4      323     12.2      259     12.1       89      9.7      155      7.3      969       10.5
        3.5       98      7.1      271     10.2      254     11.9      112     12.2      203      9.6      938       10.2
          4       97      7.0      246      9.3      262     12.3      116     12.7      233     11.0      954       10.4
        4.5       72      5.2      164      6.2      211      9.9      132     14.4      269     12.7      848        9.2
          5       55      4.0      153      5.8      185      8.7      102     11.2      292     13.8      787        8.6
        5.5       22      1.6      119      4.5      116      5.4       69      7.5      233     11.0      559        6.1
          6       14      1.0       66      2.5       80      3.8       53      5.8      200      9.4      413        4.5
        6.5        3      0.2       28      1.1       51      2.4       21      2.3      124      5.9      227        2.5
          7       10      0.7       15      0.6       23      1.1       12      1.3       77      3.6      137        1.5
        7.5        3      0.2        5      0.2       18      0.8       11      1.2       47      2.2       84        0.9
          8        1      0.1        5      0.2        3      0.1        3      0.3       31      1.5       43        0.5
        8.5        1      0.1        3      0.1        2      0.1        2      0.2       10      0.5       18        0.2
          9        -      0.0        1      0.0        1      0.1        -      0.0        7      0.3        9        0.1
        9.5        -      0.0        -      0.0        -      0.0        -      0.0        3      0.1        3        0.0
         10        -      0.0        1      0.0        -      0.0        1      0.1        -      0.0        2        0.0
Total          1,377    100.0    2,653    100.0    2,136    100.0      915    100.0    2,121    100.0    9,202      100.0




                                                                                                                    36
                                         Table 4. Mental intactness by education, age 50+



Mental                                                                         Compl. Junior         Compl. Senior
intact-        No schooling      Some Primary          Compl. Primary               High                 High+                All
ness (0-9)    # resp.       %   # resp.       %        # resp.       %        # resp.        %      # resp.        %   # resp.          %
     China
          0      751     16.9       42       3.8           39        1.1           14         0.4        4      0.2       850          7.8
          1      492     11.1       47       4.2           63        1.7           18         0.5        7      0.3       627          5.4
          2      534     12.0       54       4.8           77        2.1           26         0.8        4      0.2       695          6.0
          3      529     11.9       92       8.2          146        4.0           40         1.2       21      1.0       828          6.5
          4      455     10.2      103       9.2          224        6.1          115         3.5       27      1.3       924          6.9
          5      425      9.6      144      12.9          318        8.7          211         6.3       80      3.9     1,178          8.1
          6      396      8.9      139      12.4          463       12.6          329         9.9      134      6.5     1,461          9.5
          7      356      8.0      180      16.1          630       17.2          572        17.1      277     13.3     2,015         12.9
          8      335      7.5      170      15.2          859       23.4          898        26.9      568     27.4     2,830         17.8
          9      178      4.0      147      13.2          849       23.2        1,114        33.4      955     46.0     3,243         19.1
      Total    4,451    100.0    1,118     100.0        3,668      100.0        3,337       100.0    2,077    100.0    14,651        100.0
 Indonesia
          0       29      2.6       12       0.6            1        0.1           -          0.0        -      0.0        42          0.6
          1       75      6.6       36       1.7            8        0.5           -          0.0        -      0.0       119          1.8
          2      108      9.5       82       3.9           20        1.3           2          0.4        2      0.2       214          3.2
          3      160     14.1      181       8.6           38        2.4           9          1.6        8      0.7       396          6.0
          4      303     26.7      298      14.1          101        6.4          28          4.9       20      1.7       750         11.4
          5      161     14.2      347      16.4          164       10.3          53          9.2       49      4.2       774         11.7
          6      150     13.2      344      16.3          241       15.2          66         11.5       96      8.2       897         13.6
          7       89      7.8      355      16.8          312       19.6         111         19.3      168     14.3     1,035         15.7
          8       46      4.1      296      14.0          398       25.0         159         27.7      356     30.3     1,255         19.0
          9       16      1.4      166       7.8          308       19.4         146         25.4      478     40.6     1,114         16.9
      Total    1,137    100.0    2,117     100.0        1,591      100.0         574        100.0    1,177    100.0     6,596        100.0

                                                                                                                                37
                                      Table 5. Correlation matrices

China                                                      Indonesia
                                   Word      Mental                                  Word      Mental
Age    45+*         W-score        recall Intactness      Age 45+   *     W-score    recall Intactness
W-score              1.0000                               W-score          1.0000
Word recall          0.4331     1.0000                    Word recall      0.4142   1.0000
Mental               0.6146     0.4653       1.0000       Mental           0.4662   0.3988     1.0000
Intactness                                                Intactness
*
  pairwise correlations with mental intactness are for people 50 and above

                                   Word      Mental                                 Word      Mental
Age 45-59*           W-score       recall Intactness       Age 45-59*    W-score    recall Intactness
W-score               1.0000                               W-score        1.0000
Word recall           0.3596      1.0000                   Word recall    0.3909    1.0000
Mental                0.5481      0.4064       1.0000      Mental         0.4466    0.3533    1.0000
Intactness                                                 Intactness
*
    pairwise correlations with mental intactness are for people 50 -59

                                   Word      Mental                                  Word      Mental
Age 60+              W-score       recall Intactness       Age 60+       W-score     recall Intactness
W-score               1.0000                               W-score        1.0000
Word recall           0.4414      1.0000                   Word recall    0.3967    1.0000

Mental                 0.6291     0.4698       1.0000      Mental         0.4716    0.4276     1.0000
Intactness                                                 Intactness




                                                                                                  38
                                                           Table 6. Descriptive Statistics, 60+

                                                   Male                                                          Female
                                        China              Indonesia           Difference             China              Indonesia           Difference
                                     (n = 3,715)          (n = 1,399)          (signif.)           (n = 3,793)          (n = 1,489)          (signif.)
                                 Mean     Std. Dev.    Mean Std. Dev.                           Mean     Std. Dev. Mean       Std. Dev.
W-score                           493.6         84.72   463         83.36      ***               437.6       99.34    426.6        87.68      *
Word recall                         3.0          1.78    2.9         1.66                          2.7         1.86     2.6         1.78
Mental intactness                   6.8          2.35    6.3         2.11      ***                 4.9         3.04     5.5         2.33      ***
Age group:
60-64                                   0.37        0.48    0.48         0.50 ***                  0.40        0.49       0.45         0.50
65-69                                   0.28        0.45    0.23         0.42 **                   0.25        0.43       0.23         0.42 **
70-74                                   0.17        0.38    0.16         0.37                      0.18        0.38       0.20         0.40 **
75+                                     0.18        0.39    0.13         0.33 ***                  0.17        0.38       0.12         0.32
Own education:
No schooling                            0.19        0.39    0.13         0.33 ***                  0.54        0.50       0.35         0.48 ***
Some primary                             0.1        0.29    0.33         0.47 ***                  0.08        0.28       0.32         0.46 ***
Compl.primary                           0.36        0.48    0.28         0.45 ***                  0.21        0.41       0.20         0.40
Compl. junior high                      0.22        0.41    0.08         0.28 ***                    0.1       0.31       0.05         0.23 ***
Compl. senior high+                      0.1        0.35    0.20         0.39 ***                    0.1       0.23        0.1         0.28 ***
Height (cm)                            163.1        6.78 158.7           6.13 ***                 151.2        6.21     146.6          6.18 ***
Married = 1                             0.83        0.37    0.88         0.33 ***                  0.70        0.46       0.45         0.50 ***
Own pce
Spline pce 1                            8.48        0.95    13.3         0.41                      8.43        1.09       13.3         0.41
Spline pce 2                            0.27        0.47    0.20         0.43                      0.27        0.47       0.20         0.45
Rural=1                                  0.7        0.46    0.49          0.5 ***                  0.76        0.43       0.50         0.50 ***
Community education
No schooling                            0.15        0.36       0         0.04 ***                  0.15        0.36       0.01         0.11 ***
Some primary                            0.14        0.34    0.04         0.18 ***                  0.13        0.33       0.04         0.20 ***
Compl.primary                           0.44         0.5    0.48          0.5 ***                  0.44        0.50       0.46         0.50 ***
Compl. junior high                      0.23        0.42    0.27         0.44 ***                  0.22        0.41       0.27         0.45 ***
Compl. senior high+                     0.05        0.22    0.21         0.41 ***                  0.06        0.23       0.21         0.41 ***
Comm. Pce
Spline pce 1                            8.85         0.2    13.5         0.18                      8.84          0.2      13.4         0.18
Spline pce 2                            0.13        0.23     0.1         0.24                      0.13        0.23        0.1         0.22
Statistical significance of the differences between CHARLS and IFLS are denoted by *** (0.01%), **(0.05%), and * (0.10%). Differences in pce are not tested
since currencies differ.

                                                                                                                                                              39
               Table 7. Female coefficients

China
Dependent variable:             45-59           60+
W-score                       -33.74***       -56.70***
                               (2.048)         (2.108)
Word recall                    -0.08**        -0.27***
                               (0.039)         (0.037)
Mental intactness              -1.27***       -1.95***
                                (0.067)        (0.070)
Indonesia:
 Dependent variable:            45-59           60+
 W-score                      -25.85***       -36.65***
                                (1.729)         (3.050)
Word recall                    -0.15***        -0.29***
                                (0.039)         (0.059)
Mental intactness                 -           -0.85***
                                  -            (0.086)




                                                          40
                              Table 8. W-score and Word Recall, China, 60+


                                             W-score                                       Word Recall
VARIABLES                                        + female                                         + female
                                     + height +                                      + height +
                         Female                  interacted               Female                 interacted
                                     married                                          married
                         only                    w/ comm.     community    only                  w/ comm.     community
                                     +SES                                              +SES
                                                 var          FE                                     var         FE

Female =1                -56.70***   -11.70***    -193.4**    -14.05***   -0.27***   0.35***      -1.787       0.32***
                           (2.108)     (2.752)     (95.79)      (2.712)    (0.037)   (0.053)      (1.825)      (0.056)
Age group
65-69 years old = 1         -0.97       0.35         0.557       0.74     -0.33***   -0.28***    -0.277***     -0.27***
                           (2.648)     (2.373)      (2.368)     (2.314)    (0.050)    (0.048)     (0.0482)      (0.047)
70-74 years old = 1      -17.48***   -13.18***    -13.18***   -11.47***   -0.71***   -0.63***    -0.626***     -0.60***
                           (2.967)     (2.637)      (2.641)     (2.695)    (0.060)    (0.057)     (0.0570)      (0.055)
75+ years old = 1        -65.42***   -41.30***    -41.27***   -39.65***   -1.51***   -1.14***    -1.146***     -1.11***
                           (3.245)     (3.133)      (3.121)     (2.917)    (0.062)    (0.062)     (0.0619)      (0.061)
Own education
Some primary =1                      40.84***     39.28***    39.12***               0.49***     0.478***      0.46***
                                      (3.924)      (3.962)     (3.476)               (0.074)      (0.0737)     (0.072)
Compl. Primary = 1                   73.29***     71.34***    71.19***               0.87***     0.853***      0.85***
                                      (2.589)      (2.640)     (2.503)               (0.052)      (0.0527)     (0.052)
Compl. Junior High = 1               89.92***     87.93***    88.76***               1.32***     1.292***      1.30***
                                      (2.928)      (2.936)     (3.181)               (0.065)      (0.0659)     (0.065)
Compl. Senior High =1                108.06***    106.7***    106.59***              1.72***     1.675***      1.71***
                                      (3.609)      (3.597)     (4.256)               (0.093)      (0.0955)     (0.087)
Height (cm)                           1.16***     1.124***     1.12***               0.02***     0.0150***     0.01***
                                      (0.156)      (0.158)     (0.159)               (0.003)     (0.00300)     (0.003)
Married=1                               3.72       4.321*      4.74**                0.13***     0.137***      0.14***
                                      (2.334)      (2.338)     (2.322)               (0.047)      (0.0474)     (0.048)



                                                                                                                          41
Own pce
Spline pce 1                                        3.60***     3.460***   3.78***               0.07***   0.0688***   0.08***
                                                     (0.998)     (0.997)   (0.957)               (0.020)    (0.0203)   (0.020)
Spline pce 2                                         4.37**       2.792      3.33                  0.03    0.000340     -0.01
                                                     (2.107)     (2.178)   (2.187)               (0.046)    (0.0464)   (0.045)
Rural=1                                -44.40***   -16.61***   -12.47***             -0.76***   -0.32***   -0.240***
                                         (2.904)     (2.550)     (2.715)              (0.060)    (0.058)    (0.0603)
Comm. average educ
Some primary =1                                                 -11.25                                       0.103
                                                               (6.900)                                      (0.138)
Compl. Primary = 1                                               5.124                                       0.120
                                                               (4.963)                                      (0.114)
Compl. Junior High = 1                                         13.31**                                     -0.00394
                                                               (6.575)                                      (0.146)
Compl. Senior High =1                                            6.735                                      -0.112
                                                               (11.74)                                      (0.242)
Comm. average pce
Spline pce 1                                                    19.90*                                       0.228
                                                                (10.93)                                     (0.209)
Spline pce 2                                                     8.869                                       0.254
                                                                (10.60)                                     (0.205)
Female x comm. variables interaction
Female x Some Primary                                            6.502                                      0.0866
                                                                (5.244)                                     (0.101)
Female x Compl. Primary                                          3.980                                      0.0525
                                                                (4.652)                                    (0.0915)
Female X Comp. Junior High                                       2.964                                      0.220*
                                                                (5.853)                                     (0.123)
Female x Compl. Senior High                                      5.403                                       0.280
                                                                (9.847)                                     (0.214)
Female x ln spline pce 1                                         9.400                                      -0.131
                                                                (9.020)                                     (0.170)


                                                                                                                                 42
Female x ln spline pce 2                                      12.17                                    0.283*
                                                             (8.604)                                   (0.165)
Constant                             490.17***   194.69***    120.1    217.85***   3.40***    -0.85     0.366     -0.70
                                      (22.189)    (33.730)   (83.84)    (26.982)   (0.092)   (0.524)   (1.601)   (0.560)
Observations                           7,368       7,368      7,368      7,368      7,102     7,102     7,102     7,102
R-squared                              0.271       0.396      0.401      0.426      0.207     0.282     0.284     0.319
F-tests of joint significance
Age groups                            168.30      74.45      75.83      72.57      210.00    123.70    124.30    121.50
  p-value                             0.000       0.000      0.000      0.000      0.000     0.000     0.000     0.000
Own educ. vars                                    319.80     304.60     306.30               138.40    129.10    149.10
  p-value                                         0.000      0.000      0.000                0.000     0.000     0.000
Own pce vars                                                  8.82      11.41                           6.11      8.77
  p-value                                                    0.000      0.000                          0.002     0.000
Comm vars. (level): education and
pce                                                          1.21                                      2.23
  p-value                                                    0.299                                     0.039
Comm vars. (level): education only                           0.42                                      1.16
  p-value                                                    0.795                                     0.327
Comm vars. (level): pce only                                 1.96                                      1.53
  p-value                                                    0.142                                     0.217
Comm. vars (level), comm. vars x
female interactions (education and
pce
                                                             5.17                                      2.47
  p-value                                                    0.000                                     0.004
Comm. vars (level), comm. vars x
female interactions: education                               2.24                                      0.97
  p-value                                                    0.024                                     0.457
Comm. vars (level), comm. vars x
female interactions: pce                                     5.84                                      3.23
  p-value                                                    0.000                                     0.013
Interaction vars: comm. pce vars x
female, comm. educ vars x female                              5.07                                      1.05


                                                                                                                           43
  p-value                                                            0.000                                                   0.392
Interaction vars: comm. educ vars x
female                                                               3.33                                                    0.64
  p-value                                                            0.011                                                   0.638
Interaction vars: comm. pce vars x
female                                                               2.63                                                    1.99
  p-value                                                            0.073                                                   0.138
Comm. vars + comm. vars x
female interactions (educ and pce                                    9.22                                                    4.16
  p-value                                                            0.000                                                   0.000
Comm. vars + comm. vars x
female interactions (educ only)                                      3.96                                                    0.99
  p-value                                                            0.004                                                   0.411
Comm. vars + comm. vars x
female interactions (pce only)                                       5.67                                                     1.60
 p-value                                                               0.004                                                     0.203
Community dummy vars                                                                   1.71                                                     1.84
  p-value                                                                             0.000                                                    0.000
The dependent variables are W-score (columns 1-4) and Word Recall (columns 5-8) described in the text. Base specification in columns (1) and (5)
include female, age group, and rural dummy variables only. Columns (2) and (6) add height, marital status dummy variables, and SES. Columns (3) and
(7) add community level variables as well as interaction variables between community level variables and female dummy variables. Finally, columns
(4 and (8) use community FE in place of community variables. Omitted variables dummy variables for are male, some primary schooling, age 60-64
and urban. Standard errors are clustered at the community level, with statistical significance at p<0.01 (***), p<0.05(**), and p<0.1(*) reported.




                                                                                                                                                       44
                         Table 9. Mental Intactness, China, 60+



                                                        Mental Intactness

                                              + height+ married   + female interacted
                              Female only
                                                    +SES             w/ comm. var
VARIABLES                                                                               community FE

Female =1                       -1.95***          -0.50***             -5.020*            -0.56***
                                 (0.070)           (0.082)             (2.890)             (0.079)
Age group
65-69 years old = 1               -0.05             -0.04               -0.0282             -0.03
                                 (0.075)           (0.065)             (0.0648)            (0.067)
70-74 years old = 1             -0.52***          -0.40***            -0.403***           -0.39***
                                 (0.090)           (0.076)             (0.0753)            (0.079)
75+ years old = 1               -1.79***          -1.02***            -1.022***           -1.05***
                                 (0.095)           (0.089)             (0.0878)            (0.086)
Own education
Some primary =1                                   1.81***             1.751***            1.74***
                                                  (0.110)               (0.111)           (0.103)
Compl. Primary = 1                                2.67***             2.602***            2.63***
                                                  (0.082)              (0.0825)           (0.073)
Compl. Junior High = 1                            3.10***             3.028***            3.06***
                                                  (0.094)              (0.0960)           (0.092)
Compl. Senior High =1                             3.24***             3.203***            3.25***
                                                  (0.109)               (0.110)           (0.123)
Height (cm)                                       0.03***             0.0320***           0.03***
                                                  (0.004)             (0.00443)           (0.005)
Married=1                                         0.15**               0.172**            0.16**
                                                  (0.071)              (0.0710)           (0.068)
Own pce



                                                                                                       45
Spline pce 1                                       0.15***   0.149***    0.15***
                                                   (0.029)    (0.0290)   (0.028)
Spline pce 2                                        -0.02      -0.0538    -0.03
                                                   (0.057)    (0.0580)   (0.064)
Rural=1                                -1.31***   -0.52***   -0.401***
                                        (0.085)    (0.075)    (0.0794)
Comm. average educ
Some primary =1                                                -0.194
                                                              (0.205)
Compl. Primary = 1                                           0.356**
                                                              (0.160)
Compl. Junior High = 1                                       0.690***
                                                              (0.206)
Compl. Senior High =1                                        0.904***
                                                              (0.323)
Comm. average pce
Spline pce 1                                                   0.473
                                                              (0.330)
Spline pce 2                                                   0.115
                                                              (0.302)
Female x comm. variables interaction
Female x Some Primary                                           0.163
                                                              (0.157)
Female x Compl. Primary                                       0.0304
                                                              (0.135)
Female X Comp. Junior High                                      0.106
                                                              (0.179)
Female x Compl. Senior High                                    -0.263
                                                              (0.251)
Female x ln spline pce 1                                      0.0163
                                                              (0.236)
Female x ln spline pce 2                                        0.341


                                                                                   46
                                                                 (0.227)
Constant                                     7.21***   -1.90**    -1.828   -1.80**
                                             (0.334)   (0.802)   (2.136)   (0.792)
Observations                                  7,035     7,035      7,035    7,035
R-squared                                     0.296     0.456      0.461    0.482
F-tests of joint significance
Age groups                                   133.40    49.48     51.00     56.03
  p-value                                    0.000     0.000     0.000     0.000
Own educ. vars                                         335.90    312.40    432.30
  p-value                                              0.000     0.000     0.000
Own pce vars                                                     13.48     15.00
  p-value                                                        0.000     0.000
Comm vars. (level): education and pce
                                                                 1.10
  p-value                                                        0.363
Comm vars. (level): education only                               1.43
  p-value                                                        0.225
Comm vars. (level): pce only                                     1.21
  p-value                                                        0.300
Comm. vars (level), comm. vars x female
interactions (education and pce
                                                                 6.06
  p-value                                                        0.000
Comm. vars (level), comm. vars x female
interactions: education                                          4.47
  p-value                                                        0.000
Comm. vars (level), comm. vars x female
interactions: pce                                                2.56
  p-value                                                        0.038
Interaction vars: comm. pce vars x female,
comm. educ vars x female                                         8.79
 p-value                                                         0.000




                                                                                     47
Interaction vars: comm. educ vars x
female                                                                                           5.69
  p-value                                                                                        0.000
Interaction vars: comm. pce vars x female                                                        1.30
  p-value                                                                                        0.275
Comm. vars + comm. vars x female
interactions (educ and pce                                                                       8.90
  p-value                                                                                        0.000
Comm. vars + comm. vars x female
interactions (educ only)                                                                         7.18
  p-value                                                                                        0.000
Comm. vars + comm. vars x female
interactions (pce only)                                                                            2.31
  p-value                                                                                         0.100
Community dummy vars                                                                                                       1.85
  p-value                                                                                                                 0.000
The dependent variable is Mental Intactness (column 1) as described in the text. Base specification in column (1) includes female,
age group, and rural dummy variables only. Columns (2) add height, marital status dummy variables, and SES. Column (3) adds
community level variablesc as well as interaction variables between community level variables and female dummy variables. Finally,
column (4) uses community FE in place of community variables. Omitted variables dummy variables for are male, some primary
schooling, age 60-64 and urban. Standard errors are clustered at the community level, with statistical significance at p<0.01 (***),
p<0.05(**), and p<0.1(*) reported.




                                                                                                                                       48
                               Table 10. W-score and Word Recall, Indonesia, 60+


                                            W- score                                        Word Recall
                                                   + female                                         + female
                                     + height +                                       + height +
                          Female                  interacted               Female                  interacted
                                      married                                          married
                           only                   w/ comm.     community    only                   w/ comm.     community
                                        +SES                                             +SES
VARIABLES                                             var         FE                                   var         FE

Female =1                -36.65***    -9.86**      -205.36     -10.99**    -0.29***   0.31***        -5.13       0.31***
                           (3.050)    (4.537)     (251.584)     (4.570)     (0.059)   (0.087)       (4.550)      (0.093)
Age group
65-69 years old = 1      -10.03***    -6.64**      -6.83**        -4.92     -0.16**     -0.07         -0.08        -0.05
                           (3.637)     (3.212)      (3.238)      (3.824)    (0.082)    (0.080)       (0.080)      (0.078)
70-74 years old = 1      -24.44***   -14.11***    -14.63***     -10.68**   -0.51***   -0.26***      -0.26***     -0.24***
                           (4.144)     (4.138)      (4.157)      (4.218)    (0.080)    (0.079)       (0.079)      (0.086)
75+ years old = 1        -46.37***   -26.28***    -26.23***    -23.28***   -1.27***   -0.84***      -0.84***     -0.78***
                           (5.304)     (5.293)      (5.307)      (5.042)    (0.096)    (0.094)       (0.096)      (0.103)
Own education
Some primary =1                      42.79***     42.03***     40.66***               0.51***       0.50***      0.47***
                                      (4.748)      (4.757)      (4.475)               (0.088)       (0.089)      (0.091)
Compl. Primary = 1                   68.70***     67.13***     67.45***               1.03***       0.99***      1.00***
                                      (5.368)      (5.404)      (5.066)               (0.094)       (0.095)      (0.104)
Compl. Junior High = 1               81.14***     77.84***     81.53***               1.51***       1.47***      1.50***
                                      (6.913)      (6.997)      (7.453)               (0.130)       (0.133)      (0.152)
Compl. Senior High =1                122.91***    118.32***    116.53***              1.78***       1.71***      1.62***
                                      (6.243)      (6.544)      (6.743)               (0.126)       (0.135)      (0.138)
Height (cm)                           0.69***      0.72***      0.64**                0.02***       0.02***      0.02***
                                      (0.260)      (0.262)      (0.265)               (0.005)       (0.005)      (0.005)
Married=1                             -7.32**      -7.29**       -4.77                0.16**        0.16**       0.19**
                                      (3.547)      (3.580)      (3.725)               (0.066)       (0.067)      (0.076)
Own pce
Spline pce 1                           -0.89        -0.67         2.65                 0.20**       0.20**       0.21**
                                      (4.539)      (4.613)      (4.455)                (0.091)      (0.094)      (0.091)

                                                                                                                            49
Spline pce 2                                1.19        1.06       -1.01                 0.11       0.08       0.13
                                          (3.612)     (3.719)     (4.194)              (0.080)    (0.080)    (0.086)
Rural=1                       -13.90**     -3.10        0.83                  -0.28*    -0.08      -0.02
                               (6.112)    (4.785)     (4.912)                (0.146)   (0.128)    (0.134)
Comm. average educ
Some primary =1                                      -21.73**                                     0.65**
                                                      (8.695)                                     (0.254)
Compl. Primary = 1                                   -30.89**                                     1.10***
                                                     (14.226)                                     (0.282)
Compl. Junior High = 1                                 -18.39                                     1.11***
                                                     (14.999)                                     (0.294)
Compl. Senior High =1                                   -9.56                                     1.10***
                                                     (15.531)                                     (0.311)
Comm. average pce
Spline pce 1                                           -17.09                                      -0.41
                                                     (17.179)                                     (0.332)
Spline pce 2                                            2.75                                      0.55**
                                                      (9.502)                                     (0.222)
Female x comm. variables
interaction
Female x Some Primary                                63.33***                                       -0.23
                                                      (13.052)                                     (0.304)
Female x Compl. Primary                              74.32***                                     -0.93***
                                                      (11.579)                                     (0.175)
Female X Comp. Junior High                           69.32***                                     -0.83***
                                                      (12.054)                                     (0.187)
Female x Compl. Senior High                          69.39***                                     -0.56***
                                                      (12.726)                                     (0.209)
Female x ln spline pce 1                                9.20                                         0.47
                                                      (19.110)                                     (0.345)
Female x ln spline pce 2                                4.46                                        -0.36
                                                      (12.788)                                     (0.270)
Constant                      349.55***   181.10**    428.21*    278.75***   0.57***   -5.93***     -1.58    -3.59**
                               (6.844)    (70.647)   (234.542)    (70.455)   (0.154)    (1.422)    (4.398)   (1.440)

                                                                                                                       50
Observations                      2,886   2,886    2,886    2,886   2,886   2,886   2,886   2,886
R-squared                         0.24    0.367    0.37     0.46    0.219   0.313   0.318   0.426
F-tests of joint significance
Age groups                        28.21    9.11    9.20     7.50    64.02   28.83   28.32   20.73
  p-value                         0.000   0.000    0.000    0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000
Own educ. vars                            102.10   84.60    81.77           65.40   53.79   45.37
  p-value                                 0.000    0.000    0.000           0.000   0.000   0.000
Own pce vars                               0.06    0.04     0.18            4.86    3.87    5.72
  p-value                                 0.941    0.957    0.837           0.008   0.021   0.003
Comm vars. (level): education
and pce                                            3.865                            3.614
 p-value                                           0.00                             0.00
Comm vars. (level): education
only                                               4.199                            3.979
 p-value                                           0.00                             0.00
Comm vars. (level): pce only                       0.496                            3.267
 p-value                                           0.61                             0.04
Comm. vars (level), comm.
vars x female interactions
(education and pce)                                11.020                           7.792
  p-value                                           0.00                            0.00
Comm. vars (level), comm.
vars x female interactions:
education                                          7.723                            9.475
  p-value                                          0.00                             0.00
Comm. vars (level), comm.
vars x female interactions: pce                    0.370                            1.800
  p-value                                          0.83                             0.13
Interaction vars: comm. pce
vars x female, comm. educ vars
x female                                           11.010                           6.653
  p-value                                           0.00                            0.00
Interaction vars: comm. educ
vars x female                                      10.590                           9.131


                                                                                                    51
 p-value                                                           0.00                                                      0.00
Interaction vars: comm. asset
vars x female                                                     0.266                                                     1.303
  p-value                                                         0.77                                                      0.27
Comm. vars + comm. vars x
female interactions (educ and
pce                                                               3.358                                                     2.217
  p-value                                                         0.00                                                      0.04
Comm. vars + comm. vars x
female interactions (educ only)                                   4.291                                                     2.374
  p-value                                                         0.00                                                      0.05
Comm. vars + comm. vars x
female interactions (pce only)                                     0.205                                                         0.024
  p-value                                                           0.65                                                         0.88
Community dummy vars                                                                  1.20                                                     1.39
  p-value                                                                            0.002                                                     0.000
The dependent variables are W-score (columns 1-4) and words recalled(columns 5-8) described in the text. Base specification in columns (1) and (5)
include female, age group, and rural dummy variables only. Columns (2) and (6) add height, marital status dummy variables, and SES. Columns (3) and
(7) add community level variables and interaction variables between community level variables and female dummy variables. Finally, columns (4) and
(8) use community FE in place of community variables. Omitted variables dummy variables for are male, some primary schooling, age 60-64, and
urban. Standard errors are clustered at the community level, with statistical significance at p<0.01 (***), p<0.05(**), and p<0.1(*) reported.




                                                                                                                                                       52
                         Table 11. Mental Intactness, Indonesia, 60+

                                                           Mental intactness
                                                                      + female
                                                        + height +
                                              Female                 interacted
                                                         married
                                               only                  w/ comm.     community
                                                           +SES
VARIABLES                                                                var         FE

Female =1                                    -0.85***      0.18          4.40        0.15
                                              (0.086)    (0.115)       (6.932)     (0.115)
Age group
65-69 years old = 1                            -0.06       0.08           0.07        0.03
                                              (0.094)    (0.083)        (0.083)     (0.096)
70-74 years old = 1                          -0.56***    -0.20**        -0.21**     -0.22**
                                              (0.110)    (0.098)        (0.097)     (0.107)
75+ years old = 1                            -1.23***   -0.53***       -0.54***    -0.54***
                                              (0.152)    (0.143)        (0.145)     (0.128)
Own education
Some primary =1                                          1.29***       1.27***     1.21***
                                                         (0.125)       (0.126)     (0.114)
Compl. Primary = 1                                       2.31***       2.26***     2.27***
                                                         (0.136)       (0.140)     (0.128)
Compl. Junior High = 1                                   2.76***       2.70***     2.62***
                                                         (0.161)       (0.166)     (0.188)
Compl. Senior High =1                                    3.08***       3.04***     2.96***
                                                         (0.155)       (0.163)     (0.170)
Height (cm)                                              0.03***       0.03***     0.03***
                                                         (0.006)       (0.006)     (0.007)
Married=1                                                  0.03          0.03        0.02
                                                         (0.089)       (0.090)     (0.094)
Own pce
Spline pce 1                                               0.08          0.07        0.05
                                                         (0.107)       (0.110)     (0.112)

                                                                                              53
Spline pce 2                                        0.02      0.01       0.05
                                                  (0.083)   (0.085)    (0.106)
Rural=1                                -0.59***   -0.27**    -0.18
                                        (0.170)   (0.118)   (0.114)
Comm. average educ
Some primary =1                                             -1.18***
                                                             (0.276)
Compl. Primary = 1                                            -0.51
                                                             (0.350)
Compl. Junior High = 1                                        -0.31
                                                             (0.369)
Compl. Senior High =1                                         -0.47
                                                             (0.386)
Comm. average pce
Spline pce 1                                                  0.39
                                                            (0.415)
Spline pce 2                                                  0.04
                                                            (0.254)

Female x comm. variables interaction
Female x Some Primary                                         0.63
                                                            (0.454)
Female x Compl. Primary                                       0.32
                                                            (0.319)
Female X Comp. Junior High                                    0.55
                                                            (0.333)
Female x Compl. Senior High                                 0.84**
                                                            (0.345)
Female x ln spline asset 1                                   -0.35
                                                            (0.526)
Female x ln spline asset 2                                    0.13
                                                            (0.327)
Constant                               5.44***     -3.09*    -7.62      -1.21
                                       (0.188)    (1.776)   (5.661)    (1.774)

                                                                                 54
Observations                                 2,825   2,825    2,825    2,825
R-squared                                    0.287   0.437    0.442    0.509
F-tests of joint significance
Age groups                                   25.76    6.80     6.79     7.59
  p-value                                    0.000   0.000    0.000    0.000
Own educ. vars                                       126.80   107.60   105.40
  p-value                                            0.000    0.000    0.000
Own pce vars                                          0.41     0.28     0.32
  p-value                                            0.667    0.759    0.729

Comm vars. (level): education and pce                         3.432
 p-value                                                      0.00

Comm vars. (level): education only                            5.036
 p-value                                                      0.00
Comm vars. (level): pce only                                  0.553
 p-value                                                      0.58


Comm. vars (level), comm. vars x female
interactions (education and pce)                              7.075
  p-value                                                     0.00
Comm. vars (level), comm. vars x female
interactions: education                                       7.214
  p-value                                                     0.00
Comm. vars (level), comm. vars x female
interactions: pce                                             0.365
  p-value                                                     0.83

Interaction vars: comm. pce vars x female,
comm. educ vars x female                                      2.049
  p-value                                                     0.06

Interaction vars: comm. educ vars x female                    2.337
  p-value                                                     0.05

                                                                                55
Interaction vars: comm. asset vars x female                                        0.236
  p-value                                                                          0.79

Comm. vars + comm. vars x female
interactions (educ and pce                                                         2.863
  p-value                                                                          0.01
Comm. vars + comm. vars x female
interactions (educ only)                                                           3.655
  p-value                                                                          0.01
Comm. vars + comm. vars x female
interactions (pce only)                                                            0.006
  p-value                                                                          0.94
Community dummy vars                                                                               1.12
  p-value                                                                                         0.042
The dependent variables is mental intactness score (columns 1-4) described in the text. Base specification
in column (1) includez female, age group, and rural dummy variables only. Column (2) adds height,
marital status dummy variables, and SES. Column (3) adds community level variables and d interaction
variables between community level variables and female dummy variables. Finally, column (4) uses
community FE in place of community variables. Omitted variables dummy variables for are male, some
primary schooling, age 60-64, and urban. Standard errors are clustered at the community level, with
statistical significance at p<0.01 (***), p<0.05(**), and p<0.1(*) reported.




                                                                                                             56
                                                     Appendix Table 1. Descriptive statistics, 45-59

                                                      Male                                                               Female
                                       China                Indonesia           Difference                  China                Indonesia         Difference
                                     (n = 3,282)             (n = 2,925)       (signif.)                  (n = 3,940)            (n = 3,289)       (signif.)
                                Mean     Std. Dev.     Mean       Std. Dev.                          Mean     Std. Dev.     Mean     Std. Dev.
W-score                          525.5           69.06   495.4           74.75 ***                    495.6           84.34  470.7           79.99
Word recall                       3.86            1.68    3.80            1.74                          3.9            1.83   3.70            1.79
Mental intactness                  7.4            1.91                                                  6.3            2.58
Age group:
45-49                                  0.31          0.46      0.37           0.48 **                   0.31           0.46       0.42            0.49 *
50-54                                  0.36          0.48      0.35           0.48                      0.37           0.48       0.33            0.47 **
55-59                                  0.34          0.47      0.28           0.45 ***                  0.32           0.47       0.24            0.43 ***
Own education:
No schooling                           0.08          0.28      0.09           0.29 ***                  0.28           0.45       0.14            0.35 ***
Some primary                           0.05          0.21      0.24           0.43 ***                  0.07           0.25       0.32            0.47 ***
Compl.primary                          0.21          0.41      0.24           0.43 ***                  0.22           0.42       0.25            0.43
Compl. junior high                     0.41          0.49      0.12           0.33 ***                  0.28           0.45       0.10            0.30 ***
Compl. senior high+                    0.25          0.43        0.3          0.46 ***                  0.15           0.36       0.19            0.39 ***
Height (cm)                           165.9          6.23    161.20           5.94 ***                 154.9           5.89        150            5.49 ***
Married = 1                            0.91          0.28      0.94           0.24 ***                  0.86           0.34       0.79            0.41 ***
Own pce
Spline pce 1                           8.43          1.09     13.40           0.35                      8.67           0.59      13.40            0.36
Spline pce 2                           0.27          0.47      0.30           0.46                      0.34           0.50       0.30            0.48
Rural =1                               0.77          0.42      0.49           0.50 ***                  0.78           0.42       0.48            0.50 ***
Comm. Education
No schooling                                         0.33      0.00           0.05 ***                  0.12           0.33       0.01            0.07 ***
Some primary                           0.11          0.31      0.04           0.19 ***                  0.11           0.31       0.04            0.19 ***
Compl.primary                          0.46           0.5      0.40           0.49 ***                  0.47           0.50       0.41            0.49 ***
Compl. junior high                     0.27          0.44      0.32           0.47 ***                  0.25           0.43       0.31            0.46 ***
Compl. senior high+                    0.04          0.19      0.23           0.42 ***                  0.04           0.20       0.24            0.42 ***
Comm. Pce
Spline pce 1                           8.85           0.2     13.50           0.18                      8.86           0.19      13.50            0.18
Spline pce 2                           0.14          0.23      0.10           0.26                      0.14           0.23       0.10            0.27
Statistical significance of the differences between CHARLS and IFLS are denoted by *** (0.01%), **(0.05%), and * (0.10%). Differences in pce are not tested.

                                                                                                                                                               57
                         Appendix Table 2. W-score and Word Recall, China, 45-59


                                             W-score                                        Word Recall
                                                   + female                                        + female
                                      + height +                                      + height +
                           Female                 interacted               Female                 interacted
                                       married                                         married
                            only                  w/ comm.     community    only                  w/ comm.     community
                                        +SES                                            +SES
VARIABLES                                             var         FE                                  var         FE

Female =1                 -33.74***    -5.13**     -86.22       -5.62**    -0.08**    0.43***      -1.714       0.43***
                            (2.048)    (2.293)     (75.48)      (2.353)    (0.039)    (0.052)      (1.509)      (0.056)
Age group
50-54 years old = 1       -15.86***   -16.86***   -16.95***    -17.32***   -0.23***   -0.27***    -0.272***     -0.25***
                            (2.062)     (1.903)     (1.907)      (2.033)    (0.052)    (0.048)     (0.0477)      (0.048)
50-59 years old = 1       -40.90***   -29.39***   -29.69***    -30.18***   -0.69***   -0.52***    -0.511***     -0.51***
                            (2.127)     (2.081)     (2.073)      (2.174)    (0.054)    (0.053)     (0.0531)      (0.052)
Own education
Some primary =1                       39.44***    37.50***     40.19***               0.49***     0.461***      0.52***
                                       (4.664)     (4.628)      (3.847)               (0.095)      (0.0947)     (0.092)
Compl. Primary = 1                    62.33***    59.43***     61.87***               0.85***     0.816***      0.83***
                                       (2.912)     (2.925)      (2.585)               (0.062)      (0.0622)     (0.062)
Compl. Junior High = 1                79.19***    76.24***     78.70***               1.32***     1.285***      1.32***
                                       (2.888)     (2.906)      (2.554)               (0.059)      (0.0592)     (0.061)
Compl. Senior High =1                 99.58***    96.48***     99.68***               1.75***     1.691***      1.73***
                                       (3.321)     (3.318)      (3.113)               (0.068)      (0.0687)     (0.074)
Height (cm)                           0.67***     0.673***     0.68***                0.01***     0.0133***     0.01***
                                       (0.150)     (0.149)      (0.148)               (0.004)     (0.00361)     (0.004)
Married=1                               2.32        2.300        1.80                 0.13**       0.128**      0.15**
                                       (2.515)     (2.515)      (2.539)               (0.062)      (0.0620)     (0.060)
Own pce
Spline pce 1                          6.32***     6.419***      6.19***               0.13***     0.121***      0.12***
                                      (2.014)      (2.002)      (1.584)               (0.045)     (0.0457)      (0.038)
Spline pce 2                           -1.80       -1.845        -2.30                 -0.02       -0.0389       -0.05
                                      (1.743)      (1.753)      (1.827)               (0.042)     (0.0426)      (0.043)


                                                                                                                           58
Rural=1                                -25.58***     -4.36*    -1.906                 -0.79***   -0.37***   -0.273***
                                         (2.579)    (2.282)    (2.396)                 (0.068)    (0.061)    (0.0656)
Comm. average educ
Some primary =1                                                  4.211                                      0.0912
                                                                (7.217)                                     (0.162)
Compl. Primary = 1                                             16.89***                                     0.187*
                                                                (5.700)                                     (0.113)
Compl. Junior High = 1                                         28.55***                                      0.140
                                                                (6.739)                                     (0.137)
Compl. Senior High =1                                          29.90***                                     0.466**
                                                                (10.98)                                     (0.227)
Comm. average pce
Spline pce 1                                                    7.238                                         0.223
                                                               (8.649)                                       (0.173)
Spline pce 2                                                    6.589                                         0.121
                                                               (8.220)                                       (0.211)
Female x comm. variables interaction
Female x Some Primary                                           -5.586                                       0.203*
                                                                (4.441)                                      (0.116)
Female x Compl. Primary                                         -2.255                                       0.0567
                                                                (3.938)                                     (0.0951)
Female X Comp. Junior High                                      -6.236                                       0.0782
                                                                (5.021)                                      (0.118)
Female x Compl. Senior High                                     -1.716                                        0.305
                                                                (9.739)                                      (0.218)
Female x ln spline pce 1                                       -14.46**                                      0.0279
                                                                (6.158)                                      (0.148)
Female x ln spline pce 2                                         2.801                                      0.364**
                                                                (6.967)                                      (0.180)
Constant                               494.73***   254.96***   387.3***   301.60***   4.14***     -0.50      -0.639      -0.48
                                        (6.826)     (31.549)    (61.11)    (27.856)   (0.132)    (0.730)     (1.429)    (0.662)
Observations                             7,032       7,032       7,032      7,032      6,896      6,896       6,896      6,896
R-squared                                0.201       0.339       0.344      0.368      0.144      0.233       0.238      0.271
F-tests of joint significance

                                                                                                                                  59
Age groups                            184.90   103.40   105.80   97.08    81.97   47.20    46.81    48.67
 p-value                              0.000    0.000    0.000    0.000    0.000   0.000    0.000    0.000
Own educ. vars                                 240.40   226.00   315.00           195.80   182.20   166.20
 p-value                                       0.000    0.000    0.000            0.000    0.000    0.000
Own pce vars                                             5.15     7.64                      3.51     4.89
 p-value                                                0.006    0.000                     0.031    0.008
Comm vars. (level): education and
pce                                                     1.63                               2.75
  p-value                                               0.138                              0.012
Comm vars. (level): education only                      0.77                               1.20
  p-value                                               0.545                              0.310
Comm vars. (level): pce only                            2.76                               2.33
  p-value                                               0.064                              0.098
Comm. vars (level), comm. vars x
female interactions (education and
pce
                                                        4.87                               4.89
  p-value                                               0.000                              0.000
Comm. vars (level), comm. vars x
female interactions: education                          4.81                               2.67
  p-value                                               0.000                              0.007
Comm. vars (level), comm. vars x
female interactions: pce                                1.97                               4.21
  p-value                                               0.098                              0.002
Interaction vars: comm. pce vars x
female, comm. educ vars x female                        7.16                               2.84
  p-value                                               0.000                              0.010
Interaction vars: comm. educ vars x
female                                                  6.16                               1.41
  p-value                                               0.000                              0.229
Interaction vars: comm. pce vars x
female                                                  1.00                               1.45
  p-value                                               0.368                              0.236
Comm. vars + comm. vars x
female interactions (educ and pce                        6.75                               9.18

                                                                                                             60
  p-value                                                            0.000                                                   0.000
Comm. vars + comm. vars x
female interactions (educ only)                                      8.10                                                    4.55
  p-value                                                            0.000                                                   0.001
Comm. vars + comm. vars x
female interactions (pce only)                                         1.90                                                       2.70
  p-value                                                              0.151                                                     0.068
Community dummy vars                                                                   1.71                                                     1.82
  p-value                                                                             0.000                                                    0.000
The dependent variables are W-score (columns 1-4) and Word Recall (columns 5-8) described in the text. Base specification in columns (1) and (5)
include female, age group, and rural dummy variables only. Columns (2) and (6) add height, marital status dummy variables, and SES. Columns (3) and
(7) add community level variables as well as interaction variables between community level variables and female dummy variables. Finally, columns
(4 and (8) use community FE in place of community variables. Omitted variables dummy variables for are male, some primary schooling, age 45-49
and urban. Standard errors are clustered at the community level, with statistical significance at p<0.01 (***), p<0.05(**), and p<0.1(*) reported.




                                                                                                                                                       61
                         Appendix Table 3. Mental Intactness, China, 45-59


                                                          Mental Intactness
                                                + height + married   + female interacted
                                 Female only
                                                       +SES             w/ comm. var
VARIABLES                                                                                  community FE

Female =1                          -1.27***         -0.24***              -4.628*            -0.26***
                                    (0.067)          (0.073)              (2.600)             (0.069)
Age group
50-54 years old = 1                -0.39***         -0.39***             -0.396***           -0.39***
                                    (0.065)          (0.057)              (0.0565)            (0.060)
50-59 years old = 1                -0.91***         -0.46***             -0.468***           -0.45***
                                    (0.072)          (0.064)              (0.0632)            (0.064)
Own education
Some primary =1                                     1.32***              1.244***            1.34***
                                                    (0.145)                (0.145)           (0.113)
Compl. Primary = 1                                  2.25***              2.143***            2.22***
                                                    (0.099)               (0.0996)           (0.076)
Compl. Junior High = 1                              2.88***              2.773***            2.86***
                                                    (0.097)               (0.0978)           (0.075)
Compl. Senior High =1                               3.18***              3.080***            3.18***
                                                    (0.097)               (0.0980)           (0.091)
Height (cm)                                         0.03***              0.0281***           0.03***
                                                    (0.004)              (0.00439)           (0.004)
Married=1                                            -0.02                 -0.0225            -0.02
                                                    (0.078)               (0.0775)           (0.075)
Own pce
Spline pce 1                                         0.16***             0.155***            0.16***
                                                     (0.053)              (0.0531)           (0.047)
Spline pce 2                                           0.02                0.0113             -0.02
                                                     (0.048)              (0.0483)           (0.054)
Rural=1                            -0.92***         -0.29***             -0.197***

                                                                                                          62
                                       (0.070)   (0.065)   (0.0691)
Comm. average educ
Some primary =1                                              0.177
                                                            (0.214)
Compl. Primary = 1                                         0.694***
                                                            (0.155)
Compl. Junior High = 1                                     0.857***
                                                            (0.185)
Compl. Senior High =1                                      0.547**
                                                            (0.272)
Comm. average pce
Spline pce 1                                                0.426
                                                           (0.296)
Spline pce 2                                                0.161
                                                           (0.244)
Female x comm. variables interaction
Female x Some Primary                                       0.0788
                                                           (0.138)
Female x Compl. Primary                                     0.0255
                                                           (0.107)
Female X Comp. Junior High                                 -0.0368
                                                           (0.147)
Female x Compl. Senior High                                 -0.195
                                                           (0.270)
Female x ln spline pce 1                                    -0.330
                                                           (0.202)
Female x ln spline pce 2                                   0.379**
                                                           (0.188)
Constant                               6.34***   -2.13**     1.037     -0.81
                                       (0.225)   (0.905)   (1.892)    (0.822)
Observations                            6,918     6,918      6,918     6,918
R-squared                               0.212     0.389      0.396     0.420
F-tests of joint significance
Age groups                              80.35    34.22      35.10     30.19

                                                                                63
  p-value                             0.000   0.000    0.000    0.000
Own educ. vars                                296.70   274.90   428.00
  p-value                                     0.000    0.000    0.000
Own pce vars                                            5.15     6.02
  p-value                                              0.006    0.002
Comm vars. (level): education and
pce                                                    0.93
  p-value                                              0.470
Comm vars. (level): education only                     0.32
  p-value                                              0.862
Comm vars. (level): pce only                           2.66
  p-value                                              0.071
Comm. vars (level), comm. vars x
female interactions (education and
pce                                                    5.31
  p-value                                              0.000
Comm. vars (level), comm. vars x
female interactions: education                         5.83
  p-value                                              0.000
Comm. vars (level), comm. vars x
female interactions: pce                               3.21
  p-value                                              0.013
Interaction vars: comm. pce vars x
female, comm. educ vars x female                       6.97
  p-value                                              0.000
Interaction vars: comm. educ vars x
female                                                 8.13
  p-value                                              0.000
Interaction vars: comm. pce vars x
female                                                 1.82
  p-value                                              0.164
Comm. vars + comm. vars x
female interactions (educ and pce                      9.36
 p-value                                               0.000



                                                                         64
Comm. vars + comm. vars x
female interactions (educ only)                                                         10.38
  p-value                                                                               0.000
Comm. vars + comm. vars x
female interactions (pce only)                                                          2.80
  p-value                                                                               0.062
Community dummy vars                                                                                              1.89
  p-value                                                                                                         0.000
The dependent variable is Mental Intactness (column 1) as described in the text. Base specification in column (1) includes
female, age group, and rural dummy variables only. Columns (2) add height, marital status dummy variables, and SES.
Column (3) adds community level variablesc as well as interaction variables between community level variables and female
dummy variables. Finally, column (4) uses community FE in place of community variables. Omitted variables dummy
variables for are male, some primary schooling, age 45-49 and urban. Standard errors are clustered at the community level,
with statistical significance at p<0.01 (***), p<0.05(**), and p<0.1(*) reported.




                                                                                                                             65
                         Appendix Table 4. W-score and Word Recall, Indonesia, 45-59

                                            W- score                                        Word recall
                                                   + female                                         + female
                                     + height +                                       + height +
                          Female                  interacted               Female                  interacted
                                      married                                          married
                           only                   w/ comm.     community    only                   w/ comm.     community
                                        +SES                                             +SES
VARIABLES                                             var         FE                                   var         FE

Female=1                 -25.81***   -10.89***     -110.52     -12.13***   -0.15***    0.13**         -4.26      0.13**
                           (1.729)     (2.622)    (144.682)      (2.592)    (0.039)    (0.056)       (3.596)     (0.060)
Age group
50-54 years old = 1      -25.52***   -14.47***    -14.57***    -15.62***   -0.50***   -0.30***      -0.31***     -0.31***
                           (2.213)     (2.054)      (2.049)      (2.173)    (0.051)    (0.048)       (0.048)      (0.051)
50-59 years old = 1      -37.37***   -21.03***    -21.14***    -22.34***   -0.77***   -0.48***      -0.48***     -0.48***
                           (2.322)     (2.198)      (2.212)      (2.402)    (0.054)    (0.051)       (0.051)      (0.056)

Own education
Some primary =1                      36.23***     35.85***     34.43***               0.54***       0.53***      0.53***
                                      (4.144)      (4.202)      (3.312)               (0.082)       (0.084)      (0.077)
Compl. Primary = 1                   65.38***     64.82***     63.14***               1.03***       1.02***      1.02***
                                      (4.228)      (4.316)      (3.533)               (0.086)       (0.087)      (0.082)
Compl. Junior High = 1               80.24***     79.38***     78.68***               1.23***       1.22***      1.28***
                                      (4.552)      (4.683)      (4.214)               (0.100)       (0.101)      (0.098)
Compl. Senior High =1                103.42***    102.98***    100.72***              1.85***       1.86***      1.83***
                                      (4.451)      (4.666)      (3.948)               (0.092)       (0.094)      (0.092)
Height (cm)                            0.32*        0.33*         0.26                0.01**        0.01**        0.01*
                                      (0.168)      (0.168)      (0.166)               (0.004)       (0.004)      (0.004)
Married=1                              4.85*        4.93*        4.80*                 -0.03         -0.03        -0.01
                                      (2.512)      (2.517)      (2.676)               (0.061)       (0.061)      (0.062)
Own pce
Spline pce 1                           -1.36        -1.30        -0.05                   0.13          0.10        0.07
                                      (3.260)      (3.372)      (3.077)                (0.077)       (0.080)     (0.072)
Spline pce 2                          7.08***      7.09***      7.74***                 0.09*        0.11**      0.11**

                                                                                                                            66
                                           (2.055)     (2.171)     (2.380)                (0.047)    (0.049)   (0.055)
Rural=1                       -20.85***    -5.80**      -5.09*                -0.49***   -0.21***   -0.21***
                                (3.374)    (2.803)     (3.000)                 (0.075)    (0.063)    (0.067)
Comm. average educ
Some primary =1                                         -4.74                                         0.09
                                                      (45.181)                                      (1.134)
Compl. Primary = 1                                      -4.19                                         0.01
                                                      (45.692)                                      (1.128)
Compl. Junior High = 1                                  -0.06                                        -0.06
                                                      (45.861)                                      (1.130)
Compl. Senior High =1                                   -3.38                                        -0.15
                                                      (45.942)                                      (1.132)
Comm. average pce
Spline pce 1                                            -1.61                                         0.25
                                                       (8.843)                                      (0.258)
Spline pce 2                                            -6.75                                        -0.16
                                                       (5.799)                                      (0.145)
Female x comm. variables
interaction
Female x Some Primary                                    38.85                                        0.54
                                                       (35.473)                                     (1.053)
Female x Compl. Primary                                  42.56                                        1.01
                                                       (34.287)                                     (1.034)
Female X Comp. Junior High                               40.28                                        1.05
                                                       (34.309)                                     (1.035)
Female x Compl. Senior High                              45.22                                        1.22
                                                       (34.479)                                     (1.036)
Female x spline pce 1                                     4.14                                        0.25
                                                       (10.735)                                     (0.260)
Female x spline pce 2                                     9.81                                       -0.05
                                                        (6.880)                                     (0.177)
Constant                      538.64***   446.19***   471.65***   395.15***   4.18***      0.34      -2.66       0.93
                               (8.265)     (55.115)   (123.959)    (48.019)   (0.528)    (1.256)    (3.630)    (1.116)

                                                                                                                         67
Observations                      6,214    6,214    6,214    6,214    6,214    6,214    6,214    6,214
R-squared                         0.195    0.336    0.337    0.417    0.174    0.269    0.272    0.378
F-tests of joint significance
Age groups                        141.70   49.91    50.04    48.06    111.70   46.74    47.77    39.68
  p-value                         0.000    0.000    0.000    0.000    0.000    0.000    0.000    0.000
Own educ. vars                             197.40   173.30   193.70            134.20   128.80   119.90
  p-value                                  0.000    0.000    0.000             0.000    0.000    0.000
Own pce vars                                6.49     5.80     5.98              5.17     4.87     3.48
  p-value                                  0.002    0.003    0.003             0.006    0.008    0.031
Comm vars. (level): education
and pce                                             0.65                                0.93
 p-value                                            0.691                               0.470
Comm vars. (level): education
only                                                0.49                                0.67
 p-value                                            0.740                               0.614
Comm vars. (level): pce only                        0.81                                0.87
 p-value                                            0.443                               0.421
Comm. vars (level), comm.
vars x female interactions
(education and pce)                                 3.16                                2.90
  p-value                                           0.000                               0.001
Comm. vars (level), comm.
vars x female interactions:
education                                           3.45                                2.57
  p-value                                           0.001                               0.009
Comm. vars (level), comm.
vars x female interactions: pce                     0.71                                1.53
  p-value                                           0.587                               0.191
Interaction vars: comm. pce
vars x female, comm. educ vars
x female                                            1.53                                2.57
  p-value                                           0.165                               0.018



                                                                                                          68
Interaction vars: comm. educ
vars x female                                                     0.72                                                       2.93
  p-value                                                         0.580                                                      0.020
Interaction vars: comm. asset
vars x female                                                     1.35                                                       0.46
  p-value                                                         0.260                                                      0.631
Comm. vars + comm. vars x
female interactions (educ and
pce                                                               1.48                                                       3.28
  p-value                                                         0.182                                                      0.003
Comm. vars + comm. vars x
female interactions (educ only)                                   1.86                                                       2.58
  p-value                                                         0.115                                                      0.036
Comm. vars + comm. vars x
female interactions (pce only)                                       0.07                                                         4.66
  p-value                                                           0.793                                                        0.031
Community dummy vars                                                                 1.14                                                    1.53
  p-value                                                                            0.002                                                   0.000
The dependent variables are W-score and words recalled (columns 5-8) described in the text. Base specification in columns (1) and (5) include female,
age group, and rural dummy variables only. Columns (2) and (6) add height, marital status dummy variables, and SES. Columns (3) and (7) add
community level variables and interaction variables between community level variables and female dummy variables. Finally, columns (4) and (8) use
community FE in place of community variables. Omitted variables dummy variables for are male, some primary schooling, age 45-49, and urban.
Standard errors are clustered at the community level, with statistical significance at p<0.01 (***), p<0.05(**), and p<0.1(*) reported.




                                                                                                                                                        69
