                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                 RIDING THE CREDIT BOOM

                                      Christopher Hansman
                                         Harrison Hong
                                          Wenxi Jiang
                                          Yu-Jane Liu
                                        Juan-Juan Meng

                                       Working Paper 24586
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w24586


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2018




We thank Emi Nakamura, Haizhou Huang, Matthieu Gomez and seminar participants at
Columbia University for helpful comments, and Jingxuan Chen for excellent research assistance.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Christopher Hansman, Harrison Hong, Wenxi Jiang, Yu-Jane Liu, and Juan-Juan
Meng. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Riding the Credit Boom
Christopher Hansman, Harrison Hong, Wenxi Jiang, Yu-Jane Liu, and Juan-Juan Meng
NBER Working Paper No. 24586
May 2018
JEL No. E51,E71,G01,G4

                                          ABSTRACT

Research on leverage and asset-price fluctuations focuses on the direct effect of lax bank lending
enabling financially-constrained investors to take excessive risks. Ignored are unconstrained
investors speculating on higher prices during credit booms. To identify these two effects, we
utilize China's staggered liberalization of stock-margin lending from 2010-2015—which
encouraged a bank/brokerage-credit-fueled stock-market bubble. The direct effect is a 25 cent
increase in a stock's market capitalization for each dollar of margin debt. Unconstrained investors
led to an even larger increase in valuations of an additional 32 cents as they speculated on stocks
likely to qualify for lending.

Christopher Hansman                              Yu-Jane Liu
Imperial College Business School                 Guanghua School of Management
Imperial College London                          Peking University
South Kensington Campus                          Beijing 100871, China
London SW7 2AZ                                   yjliu@gsm.pku.edu.cn
U.K.
c.hansman@imperial.ac.uk                         Juan-Juan Meng
                                                 Department of Applied Economics
Harrison Hong                                    Guanghua School of Management
Department of Economics                          Rm. 323, Hall 2
Columbia University                              Peking University
1022 International Affairs Building              Beijing 100871, China
Mail Code 3308                                   jumeng@gsm.pku.edu.cn
420 West 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
hh2679@columbia.edu

Wenxi Jiang
Chinese University of Hong Kong
Room 1250, 12/F.
Cheng Yu Tung Building
12 Chak Cheung Street
Shatin, N.T.
Hong Kong
jiangwenxi@gmail.com
1     Introduction

An important macro-finance literature associates leverage cycles with asset price boom-bust patterns—

typically using panel regressions that exploit cross-country variation and long time series (see, e.g., Borio &

Lowe (2002), Schularick & Taylor (2012)).1 Prominent historical examples include the rise of margin lending

in the U.S. stock market preceding the Great Depression (Galbraith (2009)) and the growth of loan-to-value

ratios in the U.S. housing market preceding the Great Recession in 2008. This literature has understandably

attracted considerable interest from central bankers and other financial market regulators.

    Theories addressing these empirical patterns emphasize the “direct” effect: an expansion of bank lend-

ing to financially constrained households generating higher asset prices and financial fragility through a

variety of mechanisms. A non-exhaustive list includes (1) complacent or neglectful creditors underestimat-

ing downside or tail risk (Minsky (1977), Kindleberger & O’Keefe (2001), Gennaioli et al. (2012)); (2) reckless

lending in the form of lax screening of naive investors (Dell’Ariccia & Marquez (2006), Keys et al. (2012));

(3) leverage cycles (Geanakoplos (2010), Simsek (2013)); and (4) intermediary frictions or balance sheets

(Bernanke & Gertler (1989), Kiyotaki & Moore (1997), Adrian & Shin (2010), Brunnermeier & Sannikov

(2014)).

    Largely ignored in such narratives is the notion that periods of loose credit supply also draw in un-

constrained speculators who, anticipating higher prices, ride and amplify the credit boom, though some

have pointed to the importance of such speculation in the recent credit and housing cycle (see, e.g., Glaeser

et al. (2008)). An anecdotal example: a wave of investment property purchases and a surge in house-

flipping—both presumably by relatively unconstrained investors—coincided with the housing bubble (see,

e.g., Haughwout et al. (2011) and DeFusco et al. (2017)), particularly in subprime areas. More generally,

empirical research has implicated institutional investors with few financial constraints, e.g. hedge funds

and mutual funds, in riding booms such as the Internet Bubble of the late 1990s (Brunnermeier & Nagel

(2004) and Griffin et al. (2011)) or the South Sea Bubble (Temin & Voth (2004)). Theoretically, speculation

of this form, even by sophisticated investors, can greatly magnify asset price movements (De Long et al.

(1990), Lakonishok et al. (1992), Hong & Stein (1999), Abreu & Brunnermeier (2003)).

    Our goal in this paper is to quantify and separate both (i) the direct effect of credit booms, i.e. how

an exogenous shock to credit supply increases demand for assets by ex-ante constrained investors, and (ii)

the impacts of anticipatory speculation by ex-ante unconstrained investors. While a developing literature

utilizes geographical variation in credit supply or banking deregulation to try to gauge the direct effects of
   1 An antecedent literature in emerging markets associates banking crises with currency crises and international financial market

contagion (see, e.g., Kaminsky & Reinhart (1999)). Recent contributions also include Jordà et al. (2013), Mian et al. (2017), and Baron
& Xiong (2017). Credit booms might also be measured using credit spreads as opposed to leverage ratios (i.e., Krishnamurthy et al.
(2015) and López-Salido et al. (2017)).



                                                                  1
relaxed mortgage credit on home prices (Mian & Sufi (2011), Adelino et al. (2017), Favara & Imbs (2015)),

there is no work we know of that attempts to separately identify these two effects. Yet such an empirical

exercise is needed: if the dangers of credit booms stem from excessive trading or speculation—rather than

the extension of credit per-se—policy makers might be better served broadening or shifting their focus from

macro-prudential restrictions on leverage or credit to Tobin taxes or other anti-speculative measures.

    Our analysis considers the recent credit cycle in China as a venue to disentangle the direct effects of

credit supply on asset prices from anticipatory speculation. From 2010 to 2015, the Chinese stock market

received a large credit supply shock as a result of the Chinese government liberalizing margin lending and

further encouraging banks/brokers to lend to households to buy in the stock market. The liberalization

of stock margin lending generated a rapid expansion of margin debt, peaking at 3.5% of GDP and 4% of

market capitalization (see Figure 1). In the context of China, the size and rapid expansion of credit can

only have been supplied by government-owned banks. At the peak, nearly 2 trillion yuan of margin loans

were supplied to Chinese households to purchase in the stock market. Since China has stringent shorting-

constraints, speculation and credit gave rise to a bubble (Scheinkman & Xiong (2003), Geanakoplos (2010)),

which subsequently gave way to a crash and government bailouts.

    In other words, the Chinese stock market had a credit-fueled speculative stock market bubble that—

given the lack of corresponding productivity increases in China during this period—is suggestive of the

“direct” effects narrative found in the literature.2 However, by exploiting the unique staggered nature of

China’s margin lending liberalization, we show that market valuations actually rose prior to the expansion of

margin debt, as unconstrained investors drove up the prices of soon-to-be-marginable stocks in anticipation

of deregulation. Furthermore, these unconstrained investors’ buying led to an overshooting of prices.

    The Chinese experience provides an ideal context in which to differentiate anticipatory speculation, i.e.

riding the credit boom, from the direct effects of credit supply for at least three reasons. First, the timing

of the credit expansion is precisely observable. New credit became available to Chinese stock market par-

ticipants as the result of a specifically targeted liberalization program, which introduced margin lending

for particular stocks at particular moments in time. Second, the government staggered the deregulation

over a series of different vintages: including a new cohort of stocks in the margin lending liberalization at

five distinct points between 2011 and 2014. The partial and gradual nature of the deregulation enables a

difference-in-difference approach—comparing marginable stocks to not-yet or never marginable stocks be-

fore and after deregulation—but also provides a unique opportunity to isolate anticipation. Because of this

feature, we are able to explore whether there are staggered advance increases in asset valuations mirroring
  2 This narrative regarding the Chinese context is not dissimilar to arguments as in Mian & Sufi (2011) for an increase in subprime

mortgage loans in the face of deteriorating income among those households.




                                                                 2
the staggered nature of the liberalization. Third, for the last three of these five vintages the government

committed to a formal rule for screening and ranking, whereby new stocks qualified for margin lending in

according to a published formula based on publicly available information on market capitalization and trad-

ing volume. As a result, we are able to characterize the ex-ante information on the coming credit expansion

that was available to investors.

   Our empirical strategy attempts to test for and quantify three distinct empirical objects related to credit

expansions: (i) anticipatory effects, or ex-ante changes in asset prices in the lead up to a credit boom, (ii)

direct effects, the ex-post changes in asset prices that would occur in the absence of anticipation, and (iii)

overshooting, or the degree to which ex-ante speculation causes ex-post asset prices to exceed the level im-

plied by the direct effect. We proceed in several steps. To begin, we establish the existence of a baseline

correlation between margin debt and a stock’s market capitalization with a set of OLS regressions. Our

most conservative specification, with stock and time fixed effects, suggests that each additional dollar of

margin debt is associated with a 40 cent rise in market capitalization. To help interpret this relationship,

a useful—if somewhat extreme—benchmark is the case of full pass-through, under which an additional

dollar of margin debt would increase market capitalization by a dollar. Of course, it is unsurprising that

our estimates are smaller than a dollar, as there is likely to be substitution to other assets by price-sensitive

investors to the extent that valuations rise too high.

   Next, we turn to explicitly utilizing China’s staggered liberalization to understand the effect of margin

debt on stock valuations. We start by presenting standard difference-in-difference and IV difference-in-

difference estimates that exploit the difference between marginable and non-marginable stocks before and

after the roll-out of margin lending as a source of variation in margin debt. We refer to these specifications

as myopic, as their validity depends on the assumption of no anticipation—a requirement in any textbook

difference-in-difference strategy. There is naturally a strong first stage since margin lending cannot begin

without regulatory approval. The 2SLS estimates suggest that an extra dollar of margin debt leads to a 25

cent increase in market capitalization, which is smaller than our OLS estimates but nonetheless econom-

ically significant. However, the myopic nature of the approach makes it ineffective in capturing a world

with anticipation: speculation prior to deregulation generates pre-trends that bias traditional difference-in-

difference estimators. Furthermore, these specifications are unable to provide tests for or quantify the extent

of anticipation, which may be an interesting outcome in and of itself.

   To identify the presence of anticipation, and correct the bias in our standard estimates, we then im-

plement a quasi-myopic difference-in-difference estimator (see, e.g., Malani & Reif, 2015). This approach

allows for differential ex-ante effects amongst soon-to-be marginable stocks, enabling us to both account for

attenuation due to pre-trends and explicitly quantify the role of anticipation. With this strategy, we estimate


                                                         3
an overall effect that is much higher than our myopic estimates would suggest: a 57 cent increase in market

capitalization per dollar of margin debt. Additionally, we find strong evidence for anticipation: valuations

among soon-to-be marginable stocks rise differentially in the periods just before deregulation.

    Labeling our estimates as anticipation requires the assertion that the pre-trends we observe are caused

by agents in the economy adjusting their behavior in preparation for a publicly known event, rather than

reflecting some omitted variable. To this end, we present several pieces of evidence pointing to uncon-

strained institutional investors speculating on the timing of the margin roll-out across vintages, which are

summarized in Figures 3–5. In all figures, vertical lines display the start date of each of the three vintages for

which the criteria for a stocks inclusion was published ex-ante. Note that if there are no anticipation effects,

we should see price and trading effects for a given stock only at the moment at which or after margin be-

comes available. Alternatively, if there are anticipation effects, we expect prices and trading—i.e. buying by

unconstrained investors—to rise in advance of credit supply becoming available (but after the government

publicly announces their intentions). Notice that these increases need not be instantaneous and should be

gradual to the extent that unconstrained investors have holding costs or there is uncertainty regarding the

likelihood or form of deregulation.

    Perhaps the most direct evidence comes as a result of the staggered aspect of the liberalization. While an-

ticipatory speculation would naturally mirror the deregulation, with staggered anticipatory effects concen-

trated in the periods just prior to the roll-out of each vintage, it is difficult to imagine why a non-anticipatory

pre-trend—say due to some omitted variable—would impact these vintages in a staggered fashion. Consis-

tent with anticipation, Figure 3 shows that (residualized) prices of stocks in Vintages 2-4 rise roughly 6-12

months before margin lending is introduced in each specific vintage, with no corresponding pattern in the

set of stocks that are never marginable. Furthermore, because it was only after the announcement of the

second vintage that the government committed to a deregulation path (and published the screening and

ranking formula), we compare the later vintages, where should show stronger anticipation effects, to the

first two vintages. As expected, we find significantly stronger ex-ante rises in stock prices in those later

vintages.

    Further support is provided by sharp ex-ante increases in turnover within each vintage (Figure 5), and

the fact that unconstrained institutional investors purchased these vintages differentially just before each

roll-out and sold differentially just after (Figure 4).3 As an additional point of validation, we exploit vari-

ation in ex-ante uncertainty over which stocks would become marginable generated by the ranking proce-

dure. We find that anticipatory increases in valuations within each vintage are concentrated in the stocks
   3 We identify institutional ownership for each stock based both using data on mutual funds, and on shares held by the top 10

shareholders in a company. These owners tend to be institutions and pools of money outside the margin lending system.




                                                              4
most likely to be included in the deregulation ex-ante.

   Given anticipation, a stocks valuation at the moment of deregulation incorporates any direct effect of

margin debt, but might also be influenced by the extent to which anticipatory speculation over-estimated

(or under-estimated) this effect. In particular, if unconstrained investors over-estimated the direct effect

of margin lending on stock prices, we expect to see prices reverse after credit comes on. As a result, our

anticipation corrected estimate—that overall a dollar of margin debt leads to an increase of 58 cents in

market capitalization—is actually the sum of two distinct effects of interest: (i) the direct effect of margin

debt on market cap, and (ii) overshooting due to anticipation.

   To this end, we develop two empirical strategies to to test for the presence of overshooting, and to sep-

arate these two effects. The first utilizes the fact that anticipatory increases in valuations are concentrated

in those most likely to become marginable. Accordingly, we hypothesize that if anticipation led to over-

shooting than the ex-post valuations—among the set of all marginable stocks—should be highest for those

that were ex-ante most likely to become marginable. Second, under the assumption that prices eventually

settle, we measure the direct effect in the period several months after the credit roll out. While all these

estimates require different assumptions, all produce affirmative evidence of the presence of overshooting.

Our conservative estimates for the importance of this effect allow us to decompose our estimate of 57 cents

into a direct effect of 25 cents and an overshooting effect of 32 cents.

   We next provide correlational evidence that these anticipation effects played a role at the peak of the

bubble and crash in 2015, when shadow margin appeared. We have data on shadow margin lending from

a peer-to-peer platform that encompassed around 10% of the market during this period. Estimates place

shadow margin in 2015 at almost 1 trillion yuan, roughly half of the formal margin amount during at the

peak of the bubble and research implicate it in amplifying the market crash (Bian et al. (2017a), Bian et al.

(2017b)). Unconstrained investor holdings of non-marginable stocks going into 2015 went up significantly

relative to other stocks. These non-marginal stocks, which had previously under-performed the market,

outperformed the market during this period. This buying anticipated the rise in shadow margin lending

in the Chinese stock market which was concentrated in these non-marginable stocks. Our earlier findings

and these shadow-margin findings are reminiscent of and provide a tighter causal chain on Brunnermeier

& Nagel (2004) and Griffin et al. (2011) who found that hedge funds rather than shorting internet stocks

actually overweighted internet stocks going into the dot-com bubble. More generally, we view our quasi-

experiment as having external validity: investors forecasts and anticipation appear to at least partially drive

the joint dynamics of asset prices and credit supply.

   Our paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2, we provide the background to our empirical design and

describe our data. In Section 3, we develop our hypothesis. In Section 4, we present our results. We conclude


                                                        5
in Section 5.



2      Background and Data

2.1         China’s staggered deregulation of margin lending

The Chinese regulatory agency began experimenting with margin lending on February 13th, 2010. As a

pilot program, an initial set of 90 stocks (Vintage 0) were opened to margin lending. The stocks selected for

this initial vintage were simply those included in the two major stock market indices: the Shanghai 50 Index

(50 stocks) and the Shenzhen Component index (40 stocks). Investors with at least 500,000 RMB of assets in

their stock brokerage account and six months or more of trading experience qualified for margin—provided

by their brokerage firms—to buy these stocks.

      Effective on November 25th, 2011, the Chinese government officially began the margin lending program

for stock trading, extending the list of marginable stocks based on stocks’ membership in two broader mar-

ket indices. The extended list included 278 stocks: 180 stocks from the Shanghai 180 Index and 98 stocks

from Shenzhen 100 Index. Throughout, we refer to the stocks added at this point as Vintage 1. In the official

regulations released on margin lending, the exchanges explicitly stated that they would extend the list of

marginable securities in a staggered manner.4

      For the later extensions (Vintages 2-4), the regulatory agency adopted a screening-and-ranking rule to

determine which stocks would be included in each vintage. This procedure had two steps: (i) Screening out

stocks that did not satisfy several criteria that ruled particularly small, volatile, illiquid, and newly listed

stocks—the so called Article 24 for Shanghai and Rule 3.2 for Shenzhen.5 (ii) Ranking the remaining stocks

according to the formula described in Equation (1) and selecting the top 100 as the candidates for the next

vintage (with some discretion). As shown in Equation 1, the ranking is based on a value-weighted average

of a stock’s size and trading volume within the exchange.                  6   The ranking procedure was conducted by the

Shanghai (SH) and Shenzhen (SZ) exchanges separately.
    4 SeeArticle 28 in the Rule released by the Shanghai Stock Exchanges.
    5 The criteria to both exchanges are the same: they require stocks to satisfying all of the following criteria: (1) being traded for
more than three months; (2) the number of tradable shares is larger than 100 million or market value of tradable shares is larger than
500 million; (3) the number of shareholders is more than 4,000; (4) in the past three months, the following has never happened: a)
daily turnover is lower than 20% of the turnover rate of market index, b) the average of absolute value of price changes is higher or
lower than that of the market index by 4%, and c) volatility is higher than the market volatility for 500%; (5) has completed the share
reform; (6) not special treated stocks; and (7) other conditions. The official document from exchanges does not specify what the other
conditions refer to. See rules on stock trading with margin loans on each stock exchange’s website.
   6 Eq.(1) was released in exchanges’ announcements of the second to fourth extension of marginable stocks.




                                                                   6
                                             Average Tradable Market Value of Stock i
                      Rankingi = 2 ∗
                                       Average Tradable Market Value of All Stocks in SH/SZ
                                          Average Trading Volume in yuan of Stock i
                                  +                                                                                              (1)
                                    Average Trading Volume in yuan of All Stocks in SH/SZ

      According to the regulator’s public statements, the ranking procedure was based on market data over a

period before the start date of each vintage. As both the data used for the screening-and-ranking procedure,

and the procedure itself, is public, we were able to fairly successfully replicate the procedure for each exten-

sion on each exchange, we discuss this exercise below. More importantly, unconstrained investors would

plausibly be able to use these same guidelines starting at the end of 2011 to forecast in the roll-out of margin

lending in real time. While the stocks included in Vintages 0 and 1 were potentially difficult to forecast,

Vintages 2, 3 and 4 could in principle be predicted fairly easily.

      Vintages 2-4 were opened to margin lending on January 25th 2013 (Vintage 2), September 6th 2013 (Vin-

tage 3), and September 12th 2014 (Vintage 4). Each time, approximately 100 stocks from each of the two ex-

changes become newly marginable (Although there were 120 stocks from the Shanghai exchange included

in Vintage 2). After all five of these vintages, there were approximately 900 stocks in total that could be

bought on margin across the two exchanges.7 Table 1 summarizes the timeline of the deregulation and the

number of newly marginable stocks for each extension.


2.2     Margin lending and the bubble-crash episode of 2010-2015

Since the official announcement of margin deregulation at the end of 2011, margin lending in China ex-

panded dramatically. In Figure 1, we plot the ratio of margin debt to market capitalization and the total

market capitalization. One can see that the ratio of total margin debt to total market capitalization increased

from 0.5% around the end of 2012 to 4.5% in June 2015. In yuan terms, total margin debt increased from a

negligible amount at the beginning of 2012 to almost two trillion yuan in 2015.

      Coincident with the high level and rapid growth of margin debt, the Chinese stock market experienced

an enormous boom during this period. As shown in Figure 1, total market capitalization increased from

20 trillion yuan in mid-2014 to over 50 trillion at its peak in June 2015, after which the market collapsed by

more than 20% within two weeks. Over the same period, the Shanghai Composite index rose from about

2000 in mid-2014 to a peak of 5,166.35, on June 12, 2015. Subsequently, the market crashed to 3709 within

three weeks.
   7 The concrete number of newly marginable stocks in each extension may be slightly more than 100, as occasionally a few marginable

stocks become non-marginable for not stratifying the screening rule.




                                                                 7
2.3       Data and variable construction

We utilize stock price, trading, and financial information from CSMAR, excluding stocks on the Growth

Enterprise Board (GEB). Formal margin debt balance is released by Shanghai and Shenzhen stock exchanges

on a daily basis. Our sample is from March 2009, one year before margin lending starts, to October 2015.

The pre-crash period is from March 2009 to May 2015. Our analysis is primarily at the monthly level.

      The key independent variable of interest in our paper is Margin Debti,t , which refers to the dollar balance

of margin borrowing for stock i at the end of month t. Our primary outcome variable, Market Capi,t is the

market value of stock i’s tradable shares. We also consider Turnoveri,t , the number of shares traded over

month t scaled by the number of floating shares in Shanghai or Shenzhen stock exchange. As a control,

stocks are sorted into deciles based on the past year’s book equity value; we denote decile dummies as

BEi,t .

      A crucial piece of our analysis regarding anticipation effects revolves around trading behavior of uncon-

strained investors. While the margin lending deregulation was meant to help constrained households facing

financial constraints, there many are institutional investors in China who do not face such constraints, such

as insurance companies or mutual funds. We rely on two datasets to get at these investors’ trading behavior.

The first is an analog of the 13-F quarterly institutional ownership filings in US markets typical used in stud-

ies of trading by institutional investors. While data on institutional ownership in China is not quite as high

quality, public companies in China do have to disclose the largest ten shareholders and their ownership in

quarterly financial reports. This data comes with the names of the investors. The majority of top 10 share-

holders are institutions such as insurance companies, brokerages, and occasionally mutual funds. While not

a perfect measure of institutional ownership in a stock, this variable is likely to be highly correlated, and to

reflect the holdings of relatively unconstrained investors with lots of capital. For our analysis, we sum total

ownership across the top 10 holders of floating shares and label it as the Top 10 Investors Ownership Share.

      Our second measure of the holdings of unconstrained investors is based on mutual fund data from

CSMAR. In China, mutual funds are required to report their stock holdings on a quarterly basis. For each

stock, we calculate a Mutual Fund Ownership Share, which is the fraction of floating shares held by all

mutual funds.


2.4       Replicating the screening-and-ranking procedure using public data

To validate the relevance of the screening and ranking procedure discussed in Section 2.1, we use public

stock market data to try to predict the list of marginable stocks for vintages 2-4. It is worth mentioning that

there are a handful of limitations that may prevent us from doing so precisely. First, the exact time window


                                                         8
used by the exchange is not clear. However, according to some industry sources, the exchanges use data

on a three-month period before the formal announcement of each vintage, although we assume there must

be at least some small gap for calculation between the data-collection period and the announcement. Here,

we take the end of the most recent month prior to the formal announcement as the end of the three month

evaluation period. Second, there is some room at the margins for discretion on the part of the exchanges,

with little in the way of published detail. As such, we do not expect to be able to precisely predict inclusion.

    For each vintage, we examine the set of stocks that are non-marginable before the vintage is announced.

We follow the screening rule and first exclude stocks that do not meet the criteria over the three-month

window. Then, we calculate the ranking indicator as specified in Equation 1 for the remaining stocks and

rank them into descending order. We denote stock i’s rank for vintage k as Rank ki , where k = {2, 3, 4}.

    Let τik equal one if Rank ki ≤ C k and zero otherwise, where C k is the number of newly marginable stocks

in stock i’s exchange in vintage k. That is, τik is the predicted marginable status for stock i for vintage k.

Define the indicator of actual marginable status as Dik , which equals one if stock i becomes marginable for

vintage k. Because of the discretion that exchanges applied, τik does not perfectly predict Dik for all stocks.

Nonetheless, as long as τik is an effective predictor of Dik , we can still use it to proxy the anticipation effect

of credit supply. To formal test this, we follow Chang et al. (2014) and run the first-stage regression of a

fuzzy RD. That is, for vintage k and stock i satisfying the screening criteria,



                      Dik = α0l + α1l (Rankik − C k ) + τik [α0r + α1r (Rankik − C k )] + i                    (2)


    If τ can strongly predict D, we expect α0r to be close to one and the R-squared of the regression to be

high. Table 2 presents the results for each vintage. While the rankings for stocks are done by exchange, we

pool together observations from both exchanges to implement their regression. In column (1), the regression

is estimated using the sample of stocks for Vintage 4. The point estimate of α0r is 0.87, and R2 equals 0.87,

showing that predicted inclusion (τ ) can effectively forecast the announced inclusion (D). The results are

similarly strong for the other two vintages. In our following analysis, we use the pre-ranking, i.e., Ranki , to

identify stocks likely-to-qualify for the margin debt program.



3    Hypothesis Development

The destabilizing effects of institutional investors speculating on the path of prices are well-established in

the literature and can arise in a variety of settings. Here we emphasize a couple of key mechanisms from the

theoretical literature that are particularly relevant for our context. First, since China prohibits short-selling,



                                                        9
a speculative bubble can emerge as the result of trading on the part of overconfident investors (Scheinkman

& Xiong (2003), which we take to be retail household investors (these investors play a significant role in

the Chinese stock market). This stock market bubble will increase in size to the extent there is easier ac-

cess to leverage (Geanakoplos (2010)), which we associate with the government’s liberalization of stock

margin lending and encouragement of banks to lend large amounts to retail households—as described in

the introduction. If unconstrained speculators anticipate that overconfident retail investors will get access

to leverage and that prices will rise as a result, it is optimal for them to ride the credit-fueled stock price

bubble (Abreu & Brunnermeier (2003)).

    The timing of our staggered liberalization setting allows for a test of this anticipatory speculation at the

stock vintage or cohort level using a difference-in-difference design. We expect the following robust and

testable predictions from the literature.

    • The direct effect is positive, i.e. when a stock is qualified for margin lending, buying from households

      will lead to higher valuations or a larger bubble. This effect assumes that there are not large substitu-

      tion effects on the part of households into other stocks as a result. This assumption seems plausible

      since most retail investors hold only a few of their favorite speculative stocks.

    • The anticipatory effect is positive, i..e unconstrained investors or arbitrageurs, instead of substituting

      away from the stocks when credit is rolled out, will instead optimally ride the bubble and start buying

      stocks that they view as likely to qualify for margin lending in advance of the margin lending dereg-

      ulation . Notice that their buying and hence price adjustment will be gradual given that there is both

      uncertainty regarding the policy change and a cost of holding securities.

    • To the extent there are enough institutions buying, they will have a price impact and lead to even

      higher prices or overshooting relative to a world with no such anticipatory speculation. This addi-

      tional price effect or overshooting is particularly emphasized in De Long et al. (1990) and Lakonishok

      et al. (1992).



4    Empirical Strategy and Results

Our empirical exercises are designed to address three interrelated goals. First, to test for the presence of

anticipatory speculation on the introduction of margin debt by ex-ante unconstrained investors. Second, to

test whether this speculation led to a distortion of asset prices: in particular, overshooting relative to the

direct effect of margin debt on asset prices in the absence of anticipation. Third, to separate out the impact

of anticipation in order to explicitly quantify both the extent of overshooting and the direct effect.


                                                       10
      We begin by estimating basic OLS specifications to summarize the relationship between market capital-

ization and margin lending. We then estimate difference-in-difference IV specifications using the staggered

deregulation of margin lending by stock viintages, which would accurately capture the impact of margin

debt in a world with no anticipation. We refer to these as myopic. Next, we estimate a set of regressions that

explicitly allow for anticipation of the margin lending roll-out by unconstrained investors. These specifica-

tions, which we refer to as quasi-myopic, allow us to more accurately capture the net effects of the margin

lending rollout on asset price while also directly testing for the presence of anticipation effects. However,

these net effects pool the direct effect of margin debt with any overshooting generated by anticipation. Our

final step is to estimate a triple-difference regression, as well as a variation on our quasi-myopic approach,

in order to (i) provide direct evidence that anticipation led to overshooting, and (ii) to quantify the direct

effect of the rollout of margin debt on asset prices. Below, we discuss each of these in turn.


4.1     OLS

Our OLS specification to capture the relationship between margin debt and asset prices is the following. For

stock i in month t, we estimate


                 IHS (Market Capi,t ) = β0 + β1 IHS (Margin Debti,t ) + θ1 BEi,t + γi + δt + εit              (3)


where IHS (Market Cap)i,t and IHS (Margin Debti,t ) refer to the inverse hyperbolic sine of market cap and

margin debt for stock i in month t + 1 ,both in RMB. Book-equity deciles refer to dummy variables for inclu-

sion in each decile of book equity at the month level, and γi and δt are stock and month× year fixed effects,

respectively. β1 is expected to be positive. We are primarily interested in the economic magnitude of these

estimates, and because IHS-IHS as roughly similar to a log-log specification, we interpret the coefficient of

interest β1 as an elasticity.

      The results from our OLS specifications are shown in Table 3. The coefficients of IHS (Margin Debti,t ),

which we interpret as elasticities, are all positive and statistically significant. In column (1) where there are

no controls, the coefficient of margin debt is significantly positive at 0.081. In column (2) where we add

book-equity decile dummies and industry fixed effects, the coefficient is 0.038. In column (3) where we add

book-equity and time effects, the coefficient is .025.

      Our most conservative specification includes both time and stock fixed effects. Even for this conservative

specification, there is a precisely measured positive effect. As shown in Column (4), the estimated elasticity

is 0.005. Given the relative scales of market cap and margin debt in this context (margin debt is nearly

two orders of magnitude smaller than market cap), even this conservative estimate is economically sizable.


                                                         11
Evaluated at the means of both variable, this coefficient suggests that a one dollar increase in margin debt

corresponds to roughly a 40 cents increase in stock valuation.8 A useful comparison is the case of perfect

pass through, in which a one dollar increase in margin debt would correspondingly increase market cap by

one dollar.


4.2     Myopic Difference-in-Difference Specifications

To directly capture the variation in margin debt stemming from the staggered margin lending roll-out, we

next re-estimate Equation 3 using difference-in-difference IV strategy, and also consider the corresponding

reduced form difference-in-difference. In both cases, we compare stocks that are included in the margin

lending roll-out to those that are not, before and after margin lending is introduced for the stock in question.

This approach, similar to traditional approaches in the literature, effectively captures the direct effect of the

credit supply shock in a myopic world—one in which there is no speculation in anticipation of the shock.

      Our basic IV specification takes Equation 3 as a second stage. In the first stage, we estimate:


                IHS (Margin Debti,t ) = γ0 + γ1 Margin Trading Activei,t + λ1 BEi,t + ηi + τt + vit ,         (4)


Margin Trading Activei,t is equal to one only (i) if stock i is are included in one of the vintages of the

margin trading roll-out, and (ii) if margin trading is active for that stock in month t. Again, IHS (·) refers

to the inverse hyperbolic sine, BEit are book-equity decile dummies, and ηi , τt are stock and month×year

dummies, respectively. We refer to this as the collapsed instrument specification.

      We also consider a more elaborate first stage regression. While the above specification collapses the

effect of all 5 vintages of the margin-lending roll out into a single difference-in-difference, we also allow for

flexible effects across the different vintages ("full instruments specification"):

                                                           4
                     IHS (Margin Debti,t ) = γ0 +         ∑ γ1k Margin Trading Activei,t × V intage_ki        (5)
                                                         k =0

                                                       + λ1 BEi,t + ηi + τt + vit ,


where V intage_ki is an indicator equal to one if stock i is in vintage k. Thus, Margin Trading Activei,t ×

V intage_ki = 1 if margin lending is allowed in month t for stock i in vintage k.

      Our myopic reduced form difference-in-difference effectively repeats the first stage regression in Equa-

tion 4 above, but replaces IHS (Margin Debti,t ) with IHS (Market Cap)i,t in order to directly capture the

relationship between the introduction of margin lending and asset prices. In particular, we estimate:
  8 Average   market cap over our sample period is 80.8 times the size of average margin debt.


                                                                  12
                 IHS (Market Cap)i,t = β0 + β1 Margin Trading Activei,t + θ1 BEi,t + γi + δt + εit                        (6)


where again IHS (Market Cap)i,t is the inverse hyperbolic sine of market cap for stock i in month t , with

Market Cap in RMB. Margin Trading Activei,t is equal to one only (i) for stocks that are included in the

margin trading roll-out, and (ii) in months after margin trading is active for that stocks. Book-equity deciles

refer to dummy variables for inclusion in each decile of book equity at the month level, and γi and δt are

stock and month× year fixed effects, respectively. In all of these baseline specifications, β1 (which we expect

to be positive) provides a myopic estimate of the direct effect of deregulation on market cap, which will be

biased in the presence of anticipation.9

   In Table 4, we present the IV and reduced form myopic estimates. In the first two columns, we display

results from the first stage regressions described in Equations 4 and 5. The column labeled collapsed, cor-

responding to Equation 4, shows that there is a strong, positive, and statistically significant impact of the

margin lending rollout on margin debt itself, with a coefficient of just over 19. The column labeled full , cor-

responding to 5, shows that these effects are relatively constant across the 5 vintages, if marginally smaller

in earlier vintages.

   The following two columns display the reduced form estimates corresponding to Equation 6, which

would effectively capture the net impact of the introduction of margin lending on market cap in a myopic

world with no anticipation. The column labeled collapsed displays positive and statistically significant

impact of of the introduction of margin lending on market cap, with a coefficient of 0.065. In contrast to the

first stage, the column labeled full shows substantial heterogeneity across the different vintages, ranging

from negative and statistically significant for the first vintages to positive—and well above 0.065—in the

later vintages. We return to this heterogeneity below when discussing the relative ability of investors to

anticipate the different vintages.

   While the reduced form coefficients are somewhat difficult to interpret in economic terms, the IV specifi-

cations, presented in the 5th and 6th columns, directly provide estimated elasticities. The collapsed version,

displays an estimated elasticity of 0.003, while the full version displays an estimated elasticity of 0.004. In

dollar terms, evaluated at the means of margin debt and market cap, the collapsed elasticity suggests that a

one dollar increase in margin debt increases market cap by 24 cents. This 24 cents figure is lower that the 40

cents figure from the OLS specifications as we might expect. But it is nonetheless economically sizeable.
  9 We   also estimate a reduced form approach analogous to first stage “full instruments specification” in Equation 5.




                                                                   13
4.3     Accounting for Anticipatory Effects (Quasi-Myopic Approach)

While the myopic difference-in-difference specifications discussed above mirror common techniques in the

literature, their ability to capture a direct effect depends on the assumption that no anticipatory effects

exist. As noted in Malani & Reif (2015), failing to account for any ex-ante changes in anticipation of the

margin lending roll-out will cause a researcher to estimate the true (ex-post) direct effects with bias. In

particular, if stock prices rise in anticipation of future margin lending, the myopic approach will underesti-

mate the true effects. The intuition here is simple, the myopic difference-in-difference estimator compares a

post-treatment price to an artificially high pre-treatment price—which has already risen in anticipation of

treatment. Furthermore, these myopic specifications cannot quantify anticipatory effects, which might be of

interest independently.

      As Figure 3 makes clear, the assumption of no anticipatory effects appears to be untrue in the context of

the deregulation of margin lending in China. The figure, which plots the inverse hyperbolic sine of market

cap—after netting out stock, month, and book-equity decile fixed effects—displays evidence of sharp rises

in market cap for vintages 2, 3 and 4 in anticipation of the introduction of margin trading for those stocks.

In this figure—and many that follow—we omit vintages 0 and 1 in order to keep the graphs clear and avoid

over-cluttering. As discussed elsewhere, these vintages were difficult to predict and hence (as expected and

shown in Table 6) displayed minimal evidence of anticipation.

      There are evident pre-trends for the treated groups in the pre-treatment periods. While in other settings,

it might be difficult to attribute these pre-trends to anticipation—they might, for example, reflect the en-

dogeneity of treatment itself—we believe the staggered nature of the roll-out provides strong support of

anticipation. Replicating the roll-out, the increases in market cap are themselves staggered, with the rises

for each vintage just preceding deregulation for that vintage.

      In order to estimate these anticipatory effects, and to appropriately measure the net effects of the dereg-

ulation of margin trading in China, we consider quasi-myopic difference-in-difference specifications follow-

ing Malani and Reif (2015). The basic notion of this approach is to use the period well before the roll-out

took place as a pre-period, and to estimate separate difference-in-difference coefficients for (i) the months

just before the roll-out took place (anticipatory effects), and (ii) the actual treatment period in which margin

lending was active. As a conservative baseline, we include stocks from all vintages 0 through 4. We later

show in Table 6 that the effects are much stronger in vintages 2-4 compared to vintages 0-1.

      Specifically, we consider regressions of the following form:

                                                                     S
 IHS(Market Cap)i,t = α + β0quasi Margin Trading Activei,t +      ∑ βj
                                                                         quasi
                                                                                 Di,t+j + θ1 BEi,t + γi + δt + εit . (7)
                                                                  j =1



                                                        14
Here, Di,t+j is equal to one if margin trading initially becomes active for stock i in period t + j, and zero

otherwise. Put more simply, Di,t+j is variable that, for a specific stock i, indicates that margin lending is

about to roll-out. Here, S captures the number of periods in advance investors might feasibly speculate

upon the coming introduction of margin lending. The terminology “quasi-myopic” refers to the notion that

S is finite—that investors do not anticipate the possibility that lending might roll out at arbitrarily long

windows in the future. While in some settings this might be controversial, we believe this is reasonable

for deregulation of margin lending in China, particularly since there was no indication of which stocks

might become marginable prior to 2011. In our analysis, we consider a variety of windows S to allow for

anticipation at different lengths.

   In these specifications, βjquasi > 0 indicates the presence of anticipatory effects: the market cap of soon-

to-be marginable stocks grows relative to a control group in the period leading up to the roll out. Appropri-
                                                    quasi
ately accounting for anticipation, the coefficient β0        captures the effect of margin lending after adjusting

for anticipation.

   In order to provide economically interpretable estimates, we also consider IV versions of these specifi-

cations. In the second stage, we estimate:

                                                                 S
                                                                 ∑ βj
                                                                       quasi
       IHS(Market Cap)i,t = α + β0 IHS(Margin Debt)i,t +                       Di,t+j + θ1 BEi,t + γi + δt + εit .   (8)
                                                                j =1


In the first stage, we use Margin Trading Activei,t as an excluded instrument for IHS(Margin Debt)i,t While

market cap is the primary variable of interest in our analysis, we also consider quasi-myopic specifications

for a variety of other outcomes to support our analysis. In particular, we estimate similar specifications using

the proportion of institutional ownership of stocks and turnover of those stocks as dependent variables.

   Table 5 presents both reduced form and IV evidence from quasi-myopic specifications intended to cap-

ture the patterns presented in Figure 3. In the reduced form, the net effect of margin lending is captured

by the coefficient labeled Ex-Post Effect. The coefficients labeled IHS(Margin Debt) in our IV specifications

can be explicitly interpreted as elasticities of margin debt with respect to market cap. As a baseline, the

first and fourth columns, labeled Myopic, replicate the myopic reduced form and IV specifications shown

in Table 4. The remaining columns account for anticipation: columns two and four allow for six months of

anticipation, while columns three and six allow for six quarters of anticipation.

   Firstly, these estimates provide strong evidence of the existence of anticipatory effects, as evidenced

by the positive and significant coefficients labeled as ex-ante effects in these tables. Market cap grows

significantly in soon-to-be-marginable stocks in the months or quarters just prior to the margin lending

roll-out, when compared with stocks that are not marginable.


                                                        15
     Additionally, these estimates show that failing to account for anticipation substantially attenuates the

net impact of margin lending on market cap. When accounting for six months of anticipatory effects, the

estimated reduced form coefficient rises from 0.065 to 0.127, and further to 0.214 when accounting for six

quarters of anticipation. The IV estimates, which provide more economically interpretable coefficients,

suggest that the elasticity grows from 0.003 with no anticipation, to 0.007 or 0.011 with six months or six

quarters. Evaluated at the averages, our six month estimates suggest that—accounting for anticipation—

an additional dollar of margin debt leads to a 57 cent increase in market cap, compared to 24 cents in our

myopic specification.


4.3.1    Placebo Test: Heterogeneity in Early Versus Late Vintages

While the stocks included in vintages 2, 3 and 4 were included on the basis of a well defined and publicly

available rule, the early vintages were chosen in a less systematic and transparent way. As a result, we expect

that the marginable stocks in these vintages were more difficult to predict in advance of the rollout. To test

this prediction, we estimate a triple difference version of our quasi-myopic specifications, incorporating the

difference between early and later vintages. In particular, we run:



                                                                        S
  IHS(Market Cap)i,t = α + β0quasi Margin Trading Activei,t +          ∑ βj
                                                                              quasi
                                                                                      Di,t+j
                                                                       j =1
                                                                                        S
                        + η0quasi Margin Trading Activei,t × Late Vintagei +            ∑ ηj
                                                                                               quasi
                                                                                                       Di,t+j × Late Vintagei
                                                                                       j =1

                        + θ1 BEi,t + γi + δt + εit .                                                                        (9)


 quasi
ηj       > 0 provides further evidence for anticipatory effects: suggesting that the later, more predictable

vintages saw larger increases in market cap in the months prior to the rollout. Additionally, evaluating

the hypothesis η0quasi > 0 provides evidence of overshooting, suggesting that the stocks that were more

predictable ex-ante also had higher valuations ex-post.

     We also estimate IV versions of these specifications, where, in a second stage, we estimate:

                                                                 S
                                                                ∑ βj
                                                                       quasi
         IHS(Market Cap)i,t = α + β0 IHS(Margin Debt)i,t +                     Di,t+j
                                                                j =1
                                                                                 S
                                                                                ∑ ηj
                                                                                        quasi
                            + η0 IHS(Margin Debt)i,t × Late Vintagei +                          Di,t+j × Late Vintagei
                                                                                j =1

                            + θ1 BEi,t + γi + δt + εit .                                                                   (10)



                                                           16
In a first stage, we include Margin Trading Activei,t and Margin Trading Activei,t × Late Vintagei as ex-

cluded instruments for IHS(Margin Debt)i,t and IHS(Margin Debt)i,t × Late Vintagei . These IV estimates

provide coefficients that can be interpreted as elasticities.

      Table 6, which shows estimates from the specifications described in Equation 9, displays significant evi-

dence of both anticipation and overshooting. In monthly and quarterly specifications, there are positive and

highly significant differential ex-ante effects for late vintages, suggesting that later more predictable vintages

saw significantly larger anticipatory effects. Additionally, there is substantial evidence of overshooting: in

all specifications the ex-post effect is significantly larger for later vintages than for early vintages. In partic-

ular, the estimated elasticities—evaluated at the means of margin debt and market cap—suggest that, in the

monthly specification, an additional dollar of margin debt is associated with a 1.28 dollar larger increase in

market cap for later vintages compared with earlier vintages.


4.4     Further Evidence from Unconstrained Investors

To confirm that the results above are driven by anticipation, we next directly examine the behavior of two

groups of investors we expect to be relatively unconstrained even prior to the introduction of margin lend-

ing. Specifically, we examine the holdings of mutual funds, and of the largest holders of each stock—defined

as the top ten investors by quantity of shares at the stock-quarter level.

      There is strong evidence that these unconstrained investors increased their holdings in anticipation of

the roll-out of margin lending. Figure 4 displays the patterns of ownership by both mutual funds and the top

10 investors over our sample period for the vintages that display the most direct evidence of anticipation:

vintages 2, 3 and 4. We also include the shares held in never marginable stocks, as a comparison group. The

two panels plot residuals of the share of ownership by mutual funds and the top 10 investors, respectively,

after netting out stock, quarter, and book equity decile fixed effects. For all three vintages, there is graphical

evidence that these relatively unconstrained investors contributed to the anticipatory rise in market cap.

Relative to the never marginable group, the share of ownership for these unconstrained investors rose in

the months prior to the roll-out date of the vintage (and much farther in advance for vintage 2). Perhaps the

most pronounced evidence comes from vintage 4, which shows a steep increase in both groups in relatively

close proximity to the roll-out.

      Table 8 displays regression results corresponding to Figure 4, but, to be conservative, including stocks in

all vintages. The specifications are identical to those in Equation 7, but replace the dependent variable with

the share of ownership by unconstrained investors (defined as either mutual funds, or the top 10 investors).

They are estimated at the quarterly level, corresponding to the frequency of our data on these investors. In



                                                        17
our quasi-myopic specifications we show two quarters of ex-ante effects to match the 6 months shown in

our specifications that utilize monthly data.

   The first two columns of this table present results for mutual funds. As a baseline, the column labeled

Myopic shows results from a myopic difference-in-difference specification that does not account for antici-

pation. Ignoring anticipation, it appears that there is a marginally significant negative effect of the margin

lending rollout on mutual fund holdings. However, the column labeled Quarterly Lags shows that this nega-

tive effect is largely an artifact of anticipation. Allowing for two quarters of anticipation, the negative effect

drops and becomes insignificant.

   Perhaps more importantly, there are statistically significant positive coefficients representing ex-ante ef-

fects in each of the two quarters preceding the margin lending roll-out. These coefficients suggest that by

the quarter just prior to the roll-out, mutual fund holdings increased by 0.7 percentage points on average—

or 41 percent—relative to never marginable stocks. The top 10 investors show a similar pattern: a negative

(although insignificant) coefficient in the myopic specification, which is attenuated when allowing for an-

ticipation. Again, there are positive and statistically significant ex-ante effects for the top 10 investors in the

quarters just before the roll-out. These estimates suggest that these investors had increased their holdings in

soon to be marginable stocks by 3.6 percentage points, or 7.8 percent, in last quarter before margin lending

began.

   We also examine whether there is visible evidence of anticipation in turnover for the stocks that qualified

for margin lending. Figure 5 shows residualized turnover for vintages 2, 3 and 4, as well as for never

marginable stocks, over our sample period. Within each group, this figure plots average turnover after

netting out month, stock, and book-equity decile fixed effects. The plot shows sharp increases in turnover

for each of the vintages just prior to the margin lending rollout, particularly for vintages 2 and 3. For all

three vintages, these spikes recede fairly quickly following the roll-out.

   The final two columns of 8 display regression results corresponding to these figures. We once again

estimate a version of Equation 7 at the monthly level, but replace the dependent variable with our measure

of turnover. There are significant increases in turnover relative to the never marginable group both ex-ante,

in the two quarters preceding the roll-out, and after the rollout. The effect on turnover in the quarter before

the roll-out, at 0.164, is nearly double the ex-post effect of 0.087. These anticipatory increases in turnover are

directly consistent with the presence of unconstrained investors speculating in anticipation of the margin

lending roll-out.




                                                        18
4.5     Direct Effect versus Price Overshooting from Anticipation

We next develop two strategies that provide further evidence on the presence of anticipation, and allow

direct tests of overshooting. In the first, we further interact the quasi-myopic specifications above with a

variable intended to capture variation in investors ability to anticipate which stocks were likely to become

marginable: the likelihood of inclusion in the coming vintage. In the second, we separate the short run effect

of the margin lending—the period just after the roll-out—which ostensibly incorporates both the direct effect

of credit supply and the impact of anticipation, from the long run effect, which is more likely to reflect only

a stable, direct effect.


4.5.1    High vs. Low Ranking Stocks Within Later Vintages

The later vintages were determined on the basis of a well defined rule based on a stock’s ranking in terms

of volume and market value at the time of the rollout. As a result, in the months prior to the roll-out

itself, there was uncertainty over which stocks would have a sufficient ranking to qualify. We exploit cross-

sectional variation in this uncertainty by comparing, within the stocks that qualified for a given vintage,

those with the highest rankings (above median rank) to those with the lowest rankings (below median

rank). Assuming some stability over time, predicting that the highest ranking stocks would be included

in the next vintage was relatively certain. Alternatively, the lowest ranking stocks that were ultimately

included were somewhat less certain, as smaller changes in rank might disqualify them. To be explicit, we

estimate:



                                                                       S
      IHS(Market Cap)i,t = α + β0quasi Margin Trading Activei,t +     ∑ βj
                                                                             quasi
                                                                                     Di,t+j
                                                                      j =1
                                                                                     S
                           + η0quasi Margin Trading Activei,t × High Ranki +         ∑ ηj
                                                                                         quasi
                                                                                                 Di,t+j × High Ranki
                                                                                 j =1

                           + θ1 BEi,t + γi + δt + εit .                                                            (11)


ηjquasi > 0 provides additional evidence for anticipatory effects: suggesting that stocks that were relatively

certain to be included in the next vintage saw larger increases in market cap in the months prior to the
                                          quasi
rollout. Evaluating the hypothesis η0             > 0 provides a direct test of overshooting, suggesting that the

stocks that were more likely to be included ex-ante also had higher valuations ex-post.

      Just as in our comparison of early and late vintages, we also run IV versions of this specification. In a




                                                           19
second stage, we estimate

                                                                   S
        IHS(Market Cap)i,t = α + β0quasi IHS(Margin Debt)i,t +    ∑ βj
                                                                         quasi
                                                                                 Di,t+j
                                                                  j =1
                                                                                 S
                           + η0quasi IHS(Margin Debt)i,t × High Ranki +          ∑ ηj
                                                                                     quasi
                                                                                             Di,t+j × High Ranki
                                                                             j =1

                           + θ1 BEi,t + γi + δt + εit .                                                            (12)


   In a first stage, we include Margin Trading Activei,t and Margin Trading Activei,t × High Ranki as ex-

cluded instruments for IHS(Margin Debt)i,t and IHS(Margin Debt)i,t × High Ranki . These IV estimates pro-

vide coefficients that can be interpreted as elasticities.

   Figure 6 shows residualized IHS (Market Cap) for above and below median rank stocks in vintages 2,

3 and 4. Within each group, this figure displays average IHS (Market Cap) after netting out month, stock,

and book-equity decile fixed effects. Our results are evident in these plots: within each vintage, the stocks

which were likely to be included saw larger increases in the months before the roll-out, and sustained higher

levels of market cap ex-post, after the roll-out occurred.

   Table 8 shows estimates from the specification described in Equation 11, again providing evidence of

both anticipation and overshooting. In all specifications, there are a positive and significant differential

ex-ante effects for high ranking stocks when compared to low ranking (keeping in mind that both were

ultimately included in one of the vintages). Furthermore, there is substantial evidence of overshooting. The

estimated elasticities suggest that an additional dollar of margin debt was associated with a 64 cent larger

growth in market cap for high ranking stocks relative to lower ranking stocks.


4.5.2   Short- versus Long-run Approach

Our results above suggest that anticipatory speculation by unconstrained investors led to inflated stock

valuations both before margin lending began, and in the period directly after. As a final strategy, we separate

the short run effect of the margin lending—the period just after the roll-out—which ostensibly incorporates

both the direct effect of credit supply and the impact of anticipation, from the long run effect, which is more

likely to reflect only a stable, direct effect. In our specifications, we separately estimate difference-difference

coefficients for (i) the period just before the margin lending roll-out, and (ii) the entire period after the roll-

out (“long-run”) while (iii) allowing for differential effects in the period immediately after the rollout. (i)

Captures any anticipatory effects, (ii) captures the direct effect, and (iii) separately estimates the impact of




                                                          20
overshooting. Specifically, we estimate:

                                                                       S
IHS(Market Cap)i,t = α + β0quasi Margin Trading Activei,t +           ∑        βjquasi Di,t+j + θ1 BEi,t + γi + δt + εit .
                                                                   j =−(S−1)
                                                                                                                       (13)

Here, Di,t+j is equal to one if margin trading initially becomes active for stock i in period t + j, and zero

otherwise. For positive values of j, Di,t+j indicates that margin lending is about to roll-out. For negative

values, it indicates that margin lending has just rolled-out. Together, the positive and negative values allow

for differential effects in the periods just before and just after the roll-out. We interpret β0quasi as the long run

direct effect of margin lending on stock valuations, with one caveat: the choice of S, the period in which the

direct effect is contaminated by anticipatory effects, is somewhat arbitrary. In our preferred specification,

we set S to six months, and interpret our estimates as an upper-bound on the direct effects.



                                                                       S
                                                                       ∑
                               quasi                                             quasi
IHS(Margin Debt)i,t = α + β0           Margin Trading Activei,t +               βj       Di,t+j + θ1 BEi,t + γi + δt + εit .
                                                                    j =−(S−1)
                                                                                                                       (14)

   In a second stage, we then estimate

                                                               S
                                                              ∑
                                                                       quasi
  IHS(Market Cap)i,t = α + β0 IHS(Margin Debt)i,t +                   βj       Di,t+j + θ1 BEi,t + γi + δt + εit . (15)
                                                          j =−(S−1)


   Table 9 presents results from these specifications. There are two primary takeaways. First, these specifi-

cations are consistent with an interpretation of overshooting. In the months immediately after the roll-out,

market cap was significantly higher for marginable stocks, as evidenced by the positive and significant

coefficients on the ex-post effects in the six months (or quarters) following the roll-out.

      Furthermore, our IV estimates allow us to quantify the direct effect of margin debt on market cap. Our

preferred specification, which includes monthly lags, gives an estimated and statistically significant elastic-

ity of 0.004. Evaluated at the means of market cap and margin debt, this suggests that an additional dollar

of margin debt causally increases stock valuation by 32 cents. This stands in contrast to the 57 cents we re-

ported in Table 5, based on estimates that pool the direct effect of margin debt with the impact of speculation

by unconstrained investors.


4.6     Anticipating Shadow Margin the Peak of the Bubble in 2015

While our analysis has been constrained thus far to the official deregulation of margin lending, the notion

of anticipation we describe should, in principle, apply to any foreseeable expansion of credit. To conclude


                                                         21
our analysis, we briefly consider the expansion of what is often referred to shadow margin: the provision of

margin via peer-to-peer platforms distinct from formal brokerages, allowing smaller investors to informally

buy any stock on margin. Although the introduction of shadow margin was not as precisely delineated as

lending through formal channels, the process expanded rapidly in late 2014 and early 2015. Estimates place

shadow margin in 2015 at almost 1 trillion yuan, roughly half of the formal margin amount during at the

peak of the bubble.

   The patterns in Panel A of Figure 7 (which reproduces the later period of Figure 4). suggest that mutual

funds began to increase their relative positions in non-marginable stocks after the introduction of Vintage

4, the final official set of marginable stocks. Similar patterns can be seen for the top 10 investors, to a lesser

extent, in Figure 4. We now argue that this buying anticipated the rise in shadow margin lending in the

Chinese stock market which was concentrated in these non-marginable stocks. The non-marginable stocks,

which had previously under-performed the market, outperformed the market during the final period prior

to the crash (Figure 3).

   To show that this is indeed the case, we gather data on shadow margin lending from a peer-to-peer

platform that encompassed around 10% of the market during this period. We measure the presence of

shadow margin at the stock level using data from a large technology provider. This technology company

routed the trades of 180 peer-to-peer platforms that provided leverage for stock purchases. Each platform

had a master account which qualified for margin with the stock exchange. This master account was sub-

divided into smaller managed accounts for individual households that could then buy stocks on margin

provided by the platform. The technology company managed the website and routing of trades. As a result,

it aggregated for us all the buys and sells from the 180 peer-to-peer platforms. They calculate for us the net

buys and sells each day and the cumulative net buys and sells over time for each stock, which we then use as

a proxy for shadow margin. This shadow margin figure is not identical to the margin balance data from the

exchanges since the net buys and sells is marked to market daily. But it does provide a measure of shadow

margin activity across different stocks. In our analysis, we scale shadow margin by a factor of 10 to reflect

that the peer-to-peer platform we collected data only accounts for 10% of the market.

   Panel B of Figure 7 plots shadow margin debt for the different vintages, and for all stocks that were not

part of any vintage, in the latter part of our sample. Unsurprisingly, shadow margin begins to expand later

in the sample, around the end of 2014, suggesting that it is not a major concern for our primary analysis.

Further, the majority of shadow margin debt is concentrated in non-marginable stocks, suggesting that

mutual funds and unconstrained investors were at least matching—if not anticipating—the flows of shadow

margin debt. These findings are reminiscent of Brunnermeier & Nagel (2004) and Griffin et al. (2011) who

found that hedge funds rather than shorting internet stocks actually overweighted internet stocks going into


                                                       22
the dot-com bubble. The collection of these forces surely contributed to the dramatic surge and subsequent

crash in the non-marginable stocks (along with the rest of the market) in 2015.



5    Conclusion

In this paper we provide causal evidence that credit expansions lead to potentially destabilizing asset price

growth both through direct channels and via anticipation by unconstrained investors. Furthermore, we

show that this anticipation may, in practice, lead to overshooting—causing asset prices to rise above the

level they would reach through a direct effect alone. To do so, we exploit the staggered deregulation of

margin lending in China that took place between 2011 and 2014. At five different points across those years,

the Chinese regulators opened a new vintage (group of stocks) to margin lending. By the final vintage,

about 900 stock qualified for margin lending (out of approximately 2500 listed stocks). This deregulation

enabled a huge influx of margin lending, peaking at nearly 5% of market capitalization. For at least the last

three vintages, the margin lending roll-out was highly predictable: the stocks included in each vintage were

chosen on the basis of a published formula based on public data.

    To identify the impact of this credit expansion on asset prices, we employ a quasi-myopic difference-

in-difference estimator that compares stocks in each of the five vintages to non-marginable stocks, before

and after the vintage in question became marginable. To test for anticipation—and to correct the bias in

ex-post effects generated by anticipation driven pre-trends—the quasi-myopic estimator allows for differ-

ential effects in the treatment group (marginable stocks) in the periods just before deregulation. In these

specifications we find convincing evidence of anticipation, prices rise in soon-to-be marginable stocks in

the period before margin lending is allowed. Additionally, this approach enables us to estimate an overall

ex-post effect of margin debt on asset prices. Our results suggest that an additional dollar of margin debt is

associated with a 57 cent rise in market capitalization.

    We argue that this 57 cent estimate is the sum of two distinct effects: the direct effect of margin debt

on asset prices, and overshooting caused by anticipatory speculation. To disentangle these two effects,

we consider two additional generalizations of our quasi-myopic approach. The first, a triple difference,

compares—within each vintage of marginable stocks—the stocks that were ex-ante more versus less likely

to become marginable. We find that there are larger speculative increases in the stocks that investors could

be confident would become marginable. Furthermore, these higher prices were sustained in the early period

after the stocks actually became marginable, suggesting that speculation led to overshooting. Our second

approach differentiates the period just after margin lending becomes available, in which we expect the

impacts of anticipation effects to linger, to later periods in which prices have in principle converged to a level


                                                       23
that appropriately reflects the direct effect of margin lending. This approach provides what we argue is a

conservative estimate of the importance of overshooting due to anticipation: speculation by unconstrained

investors was responsible for 32 of the 58 cent increase in market capitalization per dollar of margin debt,

implying that the direct effect is responsible for the remaining 25 cents.

   The anticipatory speculation we highlight has both distributional and destabilizing consequences. De-

mand by unconstrained investors in advance of a credit expansion leads to larger price increases, limiting

the amount constrained agents can buy when credit becomes available (and potentially increasing the lever-

age they choose to take). Furthermore, the magnitudes of the effects we uncover suggest a potential shift

in policy discussions away from macroprudential regulations on credit access. Carefully designed restric-

tions on speculative behaviors may allow regulators to avoid the boom-bust cycles associated with credit

expansions without imposing onerous restrictions on borrowers.




                                                      24
References

A BREU , D ILIP, & B RUNNERMEIER , M ARKUS K. 2003. Bubbles and crashes. Econometrica, 71(1), 173–204.

A DELINO , M ANUEL , S CHOAR , A NTOINETTE , S EVERINO , F ELIPE , et al. . 2017. Dynamics of Housing Debt

  in the Recent Boom and Bust. NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 32.

A DRIAN , T OBIAS , & S HIN , H YUN S ONG. 2010. Liquidity and leverage. Journal of Financial Intermediation,

  19(3), 418–437.

B ARON , M ATTHEW, & X IONG , W EI. 2017. Credit expansion and neglected crash risk. The Quarterly Journal

  of Economics, 132(2), 713–764.

B ERNANKE , B EN , & G ERTLER , M ARK. 1989. Agency costs, net worth, and business fluctuations. American

  Economic Review, 14–31.

B IAN , J IANG , D A , Z HI , L OU , D ONG , & Z HOU , H AO. 2017a. Leverage network and market contagion.

B IAN , J IANGZE , H E , Z HIGUO , S HUE , K ELLY, & Z HOU , H AO. 2017b. Leverage-Induced Fire Sales and Stock

  Market Crashes. Working Paper.

B ORIO , C LAUDIO EV, & L OWE , P HILIP W ILLIAM. 2002. Asset prices, financial and monetary stability:

  exploring the nexus. Bank for International Settlements.

B RUNNERMEIER , M ARKUS , & N AGEL , S TEFAN. 2004. Hedge funds and the technology bubble. The Journal

  of Finance, 59(5), 2013–2040.

B RUNNERMEIER , M ARKUS K, & S ANNIKOV, Y ULIY. 2014. A macroeconomic model with a financial sector.

  American Economic Review, 104(2), 379–421.

C HANG , Y EN -C HENG , H ONG , H ARRISON , & L ISKOVICH , I NESSA. 2014. Regression discontinuity and the

  price effects of stock market indexing. The Review of Financial Studies, 28(1), 212–246.

D E L ONG , J B RADFORD , S HLEIFER , A NDREI , S UMMERS , L AWRENCE H, & WALDMANN , R OBERT J. 1990.

  Positive feedback investment strategies and destabilizing rational speculation. the Journal of Finance, 45(2),

  379–395.

D E F USCO , A NTHONY A, N ATHANSON , C HARLES G, & Z WICK , E RIC. 2017. Speculative dynamics of prices

  and volume. Tech. rept. National Bureau of Economic Research.

D ELL’A RICCIA , G IOVANNI , & M ARQUEZ , R OBERT. 2006. Lending booms and lending standards. The Journal

  of Finance, 61(5), 2511–2546.

                                                      25
FAVARA , G IOVANNI , & I MBS , J EAN. 2015. Credit supply and the price of housing. American Economic Review,

  105(3), 958–92.

G ALBRAITH , J OHN K ENNETH. 2009. The great crash 1929. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt.

G EANAKOPLOS , J OHN. 2010. The leverage cycle. NBER macroeconomics annual, 24(1), 1–66.

G ENNAIOLI , N ICOLA , S HLEIFER , A NDREI , & V ISHNY, R OBERT. 2012. Neglected risks, financial innovation,

  and financial fragility. Journal of Financial Economics, 104(3), 452–468.

G LAESER , E DWARD L, G YOURKO , J OSEPH , & S AIZ , A LBERT. 2008. Housing supply and housing bubbles.

  Journal of urban Economics, 64(2), 198–217.

G RIFFIN , J OHN M, H ARRIS , J EFFREY H, S HU , TAO , & T OPALOGLU , S ELIM. 2011. Who drove and burst the

  tech bubble? The Journal of Finance, 66(4), 1251–1290.

H AUGHWOUT, A NDREW, L EE , D ONGHOON , T RACY, J OSEPH S, & VAN DER K LAAUW, W ILBERT. 2011. Real

  estate investors, the leverage cycle, and the housing market crisis. Working Paper.

H ONG , H ARRISON , & S TEIN , J EREMY C. 1999. A unified theory of underreaction, momentum trading, and

  overreaction in asset markets. The Journal of finance, 54(6), 2143–2184.

J ORDÀ , Ò SCAR , S CHULARICK , M ORITZ , & TAYLOR , A LAN M. 2013. When credit bites back. Journal of

  Money, Credit and Banking, 45(s2), 3–28.

K AMINSKY, G RACIELA L, & R EINHART, C ARMEN M. 1999. The twin crises: the causes of banking and

  balance-of-payments problems. American economic review, 89(3), 473–500.

K EYS , B ENJAMIN J, S ERU , A MIT, & V IG , V IKRANT. 2012. Lender screening and the role of securitization:

  evidence from prime and subprime mortgage markets. The Review of Financial Studies, 25(7), 2071–2108.

K INDLEBERGER , C HARLES P, & O’K EEFE , R OBERT. 2001. Manias, panics and crashes. Springer.

K IYOTAKI , N OBUHIRO , & M OORE , J OHN. 1997. Credit Cycles. Journal of Political Economy, 105(2), 211–248.

K RISHNAMURTHY, A RVIND , M UIR , T YLER , & YALE , S. 2015. Credit spreads and the severity of financial

  crises. Unpublished Manuscript.

L AKONISHOK , J OSEF, S HLEIFER , A NDREI , & V ISHNY, R OBERT W. 1992. The impact of institutional trading

  on stock prices. Journal of financial economics, 32(1), 23–43.




                                                        26
L ÓPEZ -S ALIDO , D AVID , S TEIN , J EREMY C, & Z AKRAJŠEK , E GON. 2017. Credit-market sentiment and the

  business cycle. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132(3), 1373–1426.

M ALANI , A NUP, & R EIF, J ULIAN. 2015. Interpreting pre-trends as anticipation: Impact on estimated treat-

  ment effects from tort reform. Journal of Public Economics, 124, 1–17.

M IAN , ATIF, & S UFI , A MIR. 2011. House prices, home equity-based borrowing, and the US household

  leverage crisis. American Economic Review, 101(5), 2132–56.

M IAN , ATIF, S UFI , A MIR , & V ERNER , E MIL. 2017. Household debt and business cycles worldwide. The

  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132(4), 1755–1817.

M INSKY, H YMAN P. 1977. The financial instability hypothesis: An interpretation of Keynes and an alterna-

  tive to standard theory. Challenge, 20(1), 20–27.

S CHEINKMAN , J OSE A, & X IONG , W EI. 2003. Overconfidence and speculative bubbles. Journal of political

  Economy, 111(6), 1183–1220.

S CHULARICK , M ORITZ , & TAYLOR , A LAN M. 2012. Credit booms gone bust: Monetary policy, leverage

  cycles, and financial crises, 1870-2008. American Economic Review, 102(2), 1029–61.

S IMSEK , A LP. 2013. Belief disagreements and collateral constraints. Econometrica, 81(1), 1–53.

T EMIN , P ETER , & V OTH , H ANS -J OACHIM. 2004. Riding the south sea bubble. American Economic Review,

  94(5), 1654–1668.




                                                       27
                                 F IGURE 1: A GGREGATE M ARKET C AP.   AND   M ARGIN D EBT /M ARKET C AP. O VER T IME




                                                                                                                                           5%
                     60
    Aggregate Market Cap. in Trillions




                                                                                                                                                                  4%
                                                                                                                                             Margin Debt/Market Cap
                          40




                                                                                                                                                   2%     3%
           20




                                                                                                                                           1%
                                                                                                                                           0%
                     0




                       01jan2010                       01jan2012                      01jan2014                             01jan2016
                                                                        Year

                                                       Market Cap                     Margin Debt/Market Cap



Notes: Plot shows monthly aggregate market cap (in black) and the ratio of margin debt to market cap (in blue) for all stocks in sample. Both market cap
and margin debt are measured in trillions of yuan.




                                                                          28
                                               F IGURE 2: S TAGGERED R OLLOUT OF S TOCK M ARGIN L ENDING :
                                                          M ARGIN D EBT /M ARKET C AP BY V INTAGE
    Aggregate Margin Debt/Initial Market Cap
     0      .1     .2     .3      .4      .5




                                   2009m1      2010m1      2011m1      2012m1  2013m1                     2014m1             2015m1
                                                                           Month

                                                                    Vintage 0                         Vintage 1
                                                                    Vintage 2                         Vintage 3
                                                                    Vintage 4


Notes: Plot shows the average ratio of margin debt to initial market cap (measured as the 2009 average at the stock level) for each of the five vintages of
the margin lending roll-out. Both market cap and margin debt are measured in trillions of yuan. Vertical lines show the starting date of each vintage, with
black, gray, red, blue and green representing vintages 0, 1, 2, 3 and 4, respectively.




                                                                           29
                                             F IGURE 3: M ARKET A NTICIPATION OF M ARGIN L ENDING R OLLOUT:
                                                     R ESIDUALIZED IHS(M ARKET C AP )t+1 BY V INTAGE
    Month/Stock/B−E Residulized Market Cap
    −.2   −.1     0      .1     .2      .3




                                  2009m1       2010m1      2011m1     2012m1  2013m1                        2014m1              2015m1
                                                                          Month

                                                               Vintage 2                         Vintage 3
                                                               Vintage 4                         Never Marginable


Notes: Plots show residuals from regressions of IHS(Market Cap)t+1 at the stock-month level on stock fixed effects, month×year fixed effects and
dummies for membership in each decile of book equity at the month level. Market cap is measured in yuan. Residuals are calculated from a single
regression with all stocks in sample, and plotted separately for vintages 2, 3, and 4 of the margin lending roll-out and for the set of stocks that were never
marginable. Vertical lines show the starting date of each vintage, with red, blue and green representing vintages 2, 3 and 4, respectively.




                                                                             30
        F IGURE 4: U NCONSTRAINED I NVESTORS ’ A NTICIPATION OF M ARGIN L ENDING R OLLOUT:
                        R ESIDUALIZED I NSTITUTIONAL O WNERSHIP BY V INTAGE


                                                                      Panel A: Mutual Fund Ownership Share
                             Month/Stock/B−E Resid. MF Ownership
                          −.015 −.01 −.005      0     .005   .01




                                                        2009m1      2010m1   2011m1   2012m1    2013m1   2014m1      2015m1
                                                                                          Month

                                                                               Vintage 2          Vintage 3
                                                                               Vintage 4          Never Marginable


                                                                    Panel B: Top 10 Investors Ownership Share
                          Month/Stock/B−E Resid. Top 10 Ownership
                          −.05        0            .05         .1




                                                        2009m1      2010m1   2011m1   2012m1    2013m1   2014m1      2015m1
                                                                                          Month

                                                                               Vintage 2          Vintage 3
                                                                               Vintage 4          Never Marginable



Notes: Plots show residuals from regressions of the proportion of institutional ownership at the stock-quarter level on stock fixed effects, quarter fixed
effects and dummies for membership in each decile of book equity at the month level. Residuals are calculated from a single regression with all stocks in
sample, and plotted separately for vintages 2, 3, and 4 of the margin lending roll-out and for the set of stocks that were never marginable. Vertical lines
show the starting date of each vintage, with red, blue and green representing vintages 2, 3 and 4, respectively.




                                                                                           31
                                  F IGURE 5: A NTICIPATION M ARKET A CTIVITY: R ESIDUALIZED T URNOVER BY V INTAGE
                                         .4
      Month/Stock/B−E Residulized Turnover
    −.2          0           .2




                                  2009m1      2010m1      2011m1        2012m1               2013m1              2014m1               2015m1
                                                                          Month

                                                            Vintage 2                         Vintage 3
                                                            Vintage 4                         Never Marginable


Notes: Plots show residuals from regressions of turnover at the stock-month level on stock fixed effects, month×year fixed effects and dummies for
membership in each decile of book equity at the month level. Market cap is measured in yuan. Residuals are calculated from a single regression with
all stocks in sample, and plotted separately for vintages 2, 3, and 4 of the margin lending roll-out and for the set of stocks that were never marginable.
Vertical lines show the starting date of each vintage, with red, blue and green representing vintages 2, 3 and 4, respectively.




                                                                           32
              F IGURE 6: D IFFERENTIAL A NTICIPATION FOR P REDICTABLY M ARGINABLE S TOCKS :
                    R ESIDUALIZED IHS(M ARKET C AP )t+1 BY L IKELIHOOD OF I NCLUSION


                                                                                         PANEL A: V INTAGE 2 S TOCKS




                                                                                    .4
                                              Month/Stock/B−E Residualized Market Cap
                                            −.4      −.2        0          .2




                                                                             2009m1      2010m1      2011m1     2012m1      2013m1   2014m1   2015m1
                                                                                                                  Month

                                                                                                  High Rank (Inclusion Likely)        Low Rank



                                                                                         PANEL B: V INTAGE 3 S TOCKS
                                                                                  .4
                                            Month/Stock/B−E Residualized Market Cap
                                              −.2         0           .2




                                                                             2009m1      2010m1      2011m1     2012m1      2013m1   2014m1   2015m1
                                                                                                                  Month

                                                                                                  High Rank (Inclusion Likely)        Low Rank



                                                                                         PANEL C: V INTAGE 4 S TOCKS
                                                                                   .4
                                             Month/Stock/B−E Residualized Market Cap
                                            −.2          0            .2




                                                                             2009m1      2010m1      2011m1     2012m1      2013m1   2014m1   2015m1
                                                                                                                  Month

                                                                                                  High Rank (Inclusion Likely)        Low Rank




Notes: Plots show residuals from regressions of IHS(Market Cap)t+1 at the stock-month level on stock fixed effects, month×year fixed effects and
dummies for membership in each decile of book equity at the month level. Market cap is measured in yuan. Residuals are calculated from a single
regression with all stocks in sample, but plotted separately—within stocks ultimately included in vintages 2, 3 and 4—for stocks with above vs. below
median rank on the index that determines inclusion in the vintage. Those with low rank were ex-ante the most likely to be included in the next vintage,
whereas those with high rank were ex-ante the least likely to be included. Vertical lines show the starting date of each vintage, with black, gray, red, blue
and green representing vintages 0, 1, 2, 3 and 4, respectively.



                                                                                                                 33
                                                                       F IGURE 7: S HADOW M ARGIN D EBT BY V INTAGE

                                                              Panel A: Residualized Mutual Fund Ownership From Mid-2013 On



                                                        .01
                       Month/Stock/B−E Resid. MF Ownership
                    −.015  −.01   −.005    0     .005




                                                              2013m7         2014m1             2014m7       2015m1          2015m7
                                                                                                  Month

                                                                                    Vintage 2             Vintage 3
                                                                                    Vintage 4             Never Marginable


                                                                           Panel B: Aggregate Shadow Margin Debt
                                               .25
                  Aggregate Shadow Margin Debt
                    .05     .1    .150   .2




                                                              2013m7       2014m1        2014m7     2015m1          2015m7       2016m1
                                                                                              Month

                                                                                       Vintage 0             Vintage 1
                                                                                       Vintage 2             Vintage 3
                                                                                       Vintage 4             All Others


Notes: Panel A shows residuals from regressions of the proportion of mutual fund ownership at the stock-quarter level on stock fixed effects, quarter
fixed effects and dummies for membership in each decile of book equity at the month level. Residuals are calculated from a single regression with all
stocks in sample, and plotted separately for vintages 2, 3, and 4 of the margin lending roll-out and for the set of stocks that were never marginable. Panel
B shows aggregate shadow margin debt by vintage in trillions of yuan, calculated by scaling our observed shadow margin debt by a factor of 10. Vertical
lines show the starting date of each of the last two vintages, with blue and green representing vintages 3 and 4, respectively.



                                                                                                34
       TABLE 1: N UMBER OF M ARGINABLE S TOCKS BY V INTAGE

                Number of marginable stocks by vintage
                                   # of newly marginable
Vintage #      Effective time      Shanghai   Shenzhen     % of total cap
   0         February 13th, 2010        50       40           51.74%
   1        November 25th, 2011         131      60           66.31%
   2          January 25th, 2013        163      113          75.23%
   3        September 6th, 2013         104      102          77.95%
   4        September 12th, 2014        104      114          78.48%




                                   35
   TABLE 2: P REDICTIVE REGRESSIONS OF
MARGINABLE MEMBERSHIP (2 ND , 3 RD , AND 4 TH
                 VINTAGE )


                    Vintage 4        Vintage 3       Vintage 2
 Dep Var: D              (1)             (2)              (3)

 τ                   0.874***         0.776***        0.778***
                      (0.041)          (0.051)         (0.042)

 R2                    0.876           0.828            0.839
 N                     1,630           1,771            1,869
 Coefficients from predictive regressions of marginable member-
ship for vintages 2–4 as,

Dik = α0l + α1l (Rankik − C k ) + τik [α0r + α1r (Rankik − C k )] + i
where k = {2, 3, 4}. Dik is the indicator, which equals one if
stock i is added to the marginable list in vintage k; Rankik is
stock i’s ranking that we produce based on exchanges’ proce-
dure. C k is the number of stocks added to the marginable list in
vintage k. τik equals one if Rankik − C k ≤ 0; otherwise zero (i.e.,
predicted marginable status based on our ranking). The sample
only includes non-marginable stocks that satisfy screen criteria in
the evaluation period. For each extension, we run the regression
using the pooled sample of stocks in Shanghai and Shenzhen.
The evaluation window is 2014/06/01-2014/08/31, 2013/06/01-
2013/08/31, and 2012/10/01-2012/12/31, for the fourth, third,
and second vintage, respectively. The point estimate of is re-
ported and robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. *
p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                36
            TABLE 3: OLS E STIMATES OF A SSOCIATION B ETWEEN
               IHS(M ARKET C AP ) AND IHS(M ARGIN D EBT )

                                       XXXXXX        XXXXXX         XXXXXX         XXXXXX
                                                       IHS(Market Cap)
                                           (1)           (2)            (3)            (4)
 IHS(Margin Debt)                        0.081∗∗∗       0.038∗∗∗      0.025∗∗∗       0.005∗∗∗
                                        (0.003)        (0.002)       (0.003)        (0.001)
 Mean of Dep. Var.                       22.7           22.7          22.7           22.7
 R2                                      0.32           0.63          0.82           0.89
 N                                      137698         137698        137696         137696
 Book-Equity Deciles                      No             Yes           Yes            Yes
 Industry Fixed Effects                   No             Yes            No            No
 Month × Year Fixed Effects               No             No            Yes            Yes
 Stock Fixed Effects                      No             No             No            Yes
 Coefficients from OLS regressions of the inverse hyperbolic sine (IHS) of market cap in month t
on the inverse hyperbolic sine of margin debt in month t. Both market cap and margin debt are
measured in RMB at the stock-month level. Standard errors, clustered at the stock and month
level, are included in parentheses. Sample covers March 2009-May 2015. Mean of dep. var refers
to the mean of IHS(Market Cap)t . Book-equity deciles refer to dummy variables for each decile
of book equity in the previous fiscal year. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                              37
                                 TABLE 4: I MPACT OF M ARGIN L ENDING R OLLOUT
                                 ON IHS(M ARGIN D EBT ) AND IHS(M ARKET C AP )

                                         XXXXXX          XXXXXX          XXXXXX          XXXXXX          XXXXXX          XXXXXX
                                              First Stage:                  Reduced Form:                       IV:
                                           IHS(Margin Debt)                IHS(Market Cap)                 IHS(Market Cap)
                                        Collapsed           Full        Collapsed           Full        Collapsed           Full
 IHS(Margin Debt)                                                                                          0.004∗∗∗        0.003∗∗∗
                                                                                                          (0.001)         (0.001)
 Margin Trading Active                    19.045∗∗∗                        0.065∗∗∗
                                          (0.201)                         (0.023)
 Vintage 0 Margin Trading                                 18.650∗∗∗                      −0.168∗∗
 Active                                                   (0.487)                        (0.065)
 Vintage 1 Margin Trading                                 17.535∗∗∗                      −0.098∗∗
 Active                                                   (0.421)                        (0.041)
 Vintage 2 Margin Trading                                 19.581∗∗∗                        0.062
 Active                                                   (0.191)                         (0.043)
 Vintage 3 Margin Trading                                 19.873∗∗∗                        0.301∗∗∗
 Active                                                   (0.179)                         (0.047)
 Vintage 4 Margin Trading                                 20.081∗∗∗                        0.272∗∗∗
 Active                                                   (0.232)                         (0.040)
 Mean of Dep. Var.                          3.50            3.50           22.7            22.7            22.7            22.7
 R2                                         0.95            0.95           0.89            0.89            0.89            0.89
 N                                         137696          137696         137696          137696          137696          137696
 Book-Equity Deciles                         Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes
 Month × Year Fixed Effects                  Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes
 Stock Fixed Effects                         Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes
 Coefficients from regressions of IHS(Margin Debt) and IHS(Market Cap) on the indicators Margin Trading Active, as well as from IV
regressions of IHS(Margin Debt) on IHS(Market Cap) instrumented by Margin Trading Active indicators. These indicators are equal
to one only (i) for stocks that are included in the margin trading roll-out, and (ii) in months after margin trading is active in those
stocks. The columns labeled Collapsed include a single indicator for all stocks included in the rollout at any point. The columns
labeled Full include separate Margin Trading Active indicators for each of the five vintages of stocks that became marginable. The
first two columns represent the first stage of IV specifications, with IHS(Margin Debt) regressed on Margin Trading Active indica-
tors. The next two columns display reduced form specifications of IHS(Market Cap) regressed on Margin Trading Active. The final
two columns display results from the second stage IV specifications. Both market cap and margin debt are measured in RMB at
the stock-month level. Standard errors, clustered at the stock and month level, are included in parentheses. Sample covers March
2009-May 2015. Mean of dep. var refers to the mean of IHS(Margin Debt) or IHS(Market Cap). Book-equity deciles refer to dummy
variables for each decile of book equity in the previous fiscal year. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                   38
         TABLE 5: M ARKET A NTICIPATION OF I MPACT OF M ARGIN L ENDING R OLLOUT ON IHS(M ARKET C AP ):
                                           Q UASI -M YOPIC A PPROACH

                                           XXXXXX           XXXXXX                  XXXXXX            XXXXXX             XXXXXX                 XXXXXX
                                                                                         IHS(Market Cap)
                                                       Difference-in-Difference                                                    IV
                                            Myopic       Monthly Lags          Quarterly Lags          Myopic         Monthly Lags          Quarterly Lags
 Ex-Post Effect     (β̂0quasi )              0.065∗∗∗         0.127∗∗∗               0.214∗∗∗
                                            (0.023)          (0.025)                (0.031)
 IHS(Margin Debt)                                                                                       0.003∗∗∗           0.007∗∗∗               0.011∗∗∗
                                                                                                       (0.001)            (0.001)                (0.002)
 Ex-Ante Effect (t-1) (β̂1quasi )                             0.266∗∗∗               0.337∗∗∗                              0.266∗∗∗               0.336∗∗∗
                                                             (0.051)                (0.034)                               (0.052)                (0.035)
 Ex-Ante Effect (t-2) (β̂2quasi )                             0.272∗∗∗               0.281∗∗∗                              0.272∗∗∗               0.280∗∗∗
                                                             (0.044)                (0.027)                               (0.045)                (0.028)
 Ex-Ante Effect (t-3) (β̂3quasi )                             0.252∗∗∗               0.245∗∗∗                              0.252∗∗∗               0.244∗∗∗
                                                             (0.039)                (0.029)                               (0.040)                (0.029)
 Ex-Ante Effect (t-4) (β̂4quasi )                             0.228∗∗∗               0.186∗∗∗                              0.228∗∗∗               0.185∗∗∗
                                                             (0.033)                (0.028)                               (0.034)                (0.027)
 Ex-Ante Effect (t-5) (β̂5quasi )                             0.207∗∗∗               0.133∗∗∗                              0.207∗∗∗               0.131∗∗∗
                                                             (0.027)                (0.027)                               (0.028)                (0.027)
 Ex-Ante Effect (t-6) (β̂6quasi )                             0.199∗∗∗               0.086∗∗∗                              0.198∗∗∗               0.084∗∗∗
                                                             (0.027)                (0.027)                               (0.028)                (0.027)
 Mean of Dep. Var.                           22.7             22.7                   22.7                22.7              22.7                   22.7
 R2                                          0.89             0.89                   0.89                0.89              0.89                   0.89
 N                                          137696           137696                 137696              137696            137696                 137696
 Book-Equity Deciles                          Yes               Yes                   Yes                 Yes                Yes                    Yes
 Month × Year Fixed Effects                   Yes               Yes                   Yes                 Yes                Yes                    Yes
 Stock Fixed Effects                          Yes               Yes                   Yes                 Yes                Yes                    Yes
Results from myopic and quasi-myopic difference-in-difference and IV specifications of IHS(Market Cap)t on the margin lending roll-out in the vein of
Malani and Reif (2015). For our difference-in-difference specifications we report coefficients from the following regression
                                                                                                S
                                  IHS(Market Cap)i,t = α + β0quasi Margin Trading Activeit +    ∑ βjquasi Di,t+j + γi + δt + εit .
                                                                                               j =1

For the second stage of IV specifications, we replace Margin Trading Active with IHS(Margin Debt) in the above, and use Margin Trading Active as an in-
strument for IHS(Margin Debt) in a first stage. Market Cap and Margin Debt are measured in RMB at the stock-month level. Margin Trading Active is equal
to one only (i) for stocks that are included in the margin trading roll-out, and (ii) in months after margin trading is active in those stocks. Di,t+j is equal to
one if margin trading initially becomes active for stock i in period t + j, and zero otherwise. The number of ex-ante effect coefficients indicates the value of
S for the regression in question. The myopic approach includes no ex-ante effects, and is equivalent to the collapsed difference-in-difference approaches
presented above. Quasi-myopic specifications include indicators aimed at capturing ex-ante effects for the six months and six quarters leading up to the
roll-out for each stock. Standard errors, clustered at the stock and month level, are included in parentheses. Sample covers March 2009-May 2015. Mean of
dep. var refers to the mean of IHS(Market Cap)t . Book-equity deciles refer to dummy variables for each decile of book equity in the previous fiscal year. *
p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                               39
                      TABLE 6: D IFFERENCE IN I MPACT OF M ARGIN L ENDING R OLLOUT ON IHS(M ARKET C AP ):
                                    E ARLY (U NPREDICTABLE ) VS . L ATER ( PREDICTABLE ) V INTAGES

                                                XXXXXX             XXXXXX                XXXXXX             XXXXXX            XXXXXX                XXXXXX
                                                                                               IHS(Market Cap)
                                                             Difference-in-Difference                                                   IV
                                                 Myopic         Monthly Lags          Quarterly Lags         Myopic        Monthly Lags         Quarterly Lags
 Ex-Post Effect× Late Vintage                      0.272∗∗∗          0.311∗∗∗              0.263∗∗∗
                                                  (0.045)           (0.047)               (0.048)
 Ex-Post Effect (β̂0quasi )                      −0.109∗∗∗         −0.087∗∗                0.016
                                                 (0.036)           (0.040)                (0.045)
 IHS(Margin Debt)× Late Vintage                                                                               0.014∗∗∗          0.016∗∗∗               0.013∗∗∗
                                                                                                             (0.002)           (0.003)                (0.003)
 IHS(Margin Debt)                                                                                           −0.006∗∗∗         −0.005∗∗                 0.001
                                                                                                            (0.002)           (0.002)                 (0.003)
 Ex-Ante Effect (t-1)× Late Vintage                                  0.422∗∗∗              0.364∗∗∗                             0.423∗∗∗               0.364∗∗∗
                                                                    (0.039)               (0.041)                              (0.035)                (0.041)
 Ex-Ante Effect (t-2)× Late Vintage                                  0.374∗∗∗              0.352∗∗∗                             0.376∗∗∗               0.352∗∗∗
                                                                    (0.043)               (0.045)                              (0.042)                (0.045)
 Ex-Ante Effect (t-3)× Late Vintage                                  0.344∗∗∗              0.323∗∗∗                             0.345∗∗∗               0.323∗∗∗
                                                                    (0.039)               (0.038)                              (0.037)                (0.039)
 Ex-Ante Effect (t-4)× Late Vintage                                  0.303∗∗∗              0.248∗∗∗                             0.304∗∗∗               0.248∗∗∗
                                                                    (0.039)               (0.036)                              (0.037)                (0.036)
 Ex-Ante Effect (t-5)× Late Vintage                                  0.230∗∗∗              0.203∗∗∗                             0.231∗∗∗               0.202∗∗∗
                                                                    (0.048)               (0.038)                              (0.048)                (0.039)
 Ex-Ante Effect (t-6)× Late Vintage                                  0.195∗∗∗              0.184∗∗∗                             0.196∗∗∗               0.183∗∗∗
                                                                    (0.043)               (0.046)                              (0.043)                (0.046)
                             quasi
 Ex-Ante Effect (t-1) (β̂1           )                             −0.053                  0.059                              −0.054∗∗                 0.060
                                                                   (0.032)                (0.037)                             (0.027)                 (0.038)
 Ex-Ante Effect (t-2) (β̂2quasi )                                  −0.015                  0.096∗∗                            −0.016                   0.096∗∗
                                                                   (0.032)                (0.036)                             (0.027)                 (0.037)
 Ex-Ante Effect (t-3) (β̂3quasi )                                  −0.014                  0.205∗∗∗                           −0.015                   0.205∗∗∗
                                                                   (0.033)                (0.033)                             (0.030)                 (0.033)
 Ex-Ante Effect (t-4) (β̂4quasi )                                  −0.010                  0.145∗∗∗                           −0.011                   0.146∗∗∗
                                                                   (0.033)                (0.027)                             (0.032)                 (0.027)
 Ex-Ante Effect (t-5) (β̂5quasi )                                    0.019                 0.106∗∗∗                             0.017                  0.105∗∗∗
                                                                    (0.042)               (0.028)                              (0.041)                (0.028)
 Ex-Ante Effect (t-6) (β̂6quasi )                                    0.034                 0.058∗∗                              0.033                  0.058∗∗
                                                                    (0.029)               (0.028)                              (0.026)                (0.028)
 Mean of Dep. Var.                                 22.7              22.7                  22.7               22.7               22.7                  22.7
 R2                                                0.89              0.89                  0.89               0.89               0.89                  0.89
 N                                                137696            137696                137696             137696             137696                137696
 Book-Equity Deciles                                Yes               Yes                    Yes                Yes               Yes                   Yes
 Month × Year Fixed Effects                         Yes               Yes                    Yes                Yes               Yes                   Yes
 Stock Fixed Effects                                Yes               Yes                    Yes                Yes               Yes                   Yes
 Results from myopic and quasi-myopic triple-difference specifications of IHS(Market Cap)t on the margin lending roll-out, differentiated by early versus late vin-
tages. For our triple-difference specifications we report coefficients from the following regression

                          IHS(Market Cap)i,t = α + β0quasi Margin Trading Activeit + η0quasi Margin Trading Activeit × Late Vintageit
                                               S                                             
                                             + ∑ βjquasi Di,t+j + ηj Di,t+j × Late Vintageit + γi + δt + εit
                                                 j =1

For the second stage of IV specifications, we replace Margin Trading Active with IHS(Margin Debt) everywhere in the above, and use Margin Trading Active and
Margin Trading Activeit × Late Vintageit as instruments for IHS(Margin Debt) and IHS(Margin Debt)it × Late Vintageit in a first stage. Market Cap and Margin
Debt are measured in RMB at the stock-month level. Late Vintage is a dummy variable that indicates stocks in vintages 2, 3 and 4. Margin Trading Active is equal
to one only (i) for stocks that are included in the margin trading roll-out, and (ii) in months after margin trading is active in those stocks. Di,t+j is equal to one
if margin trading initially becomes active for stock i in period t + j, and zero otherwise. The number of ex-ante effect coefficients indicates the value of S for the
regression in question. The myopic approach includes no ex-ante effects, and is equivalent to the collapsed difference-in-difference approaches presented above.
Quasi-myopic specifications include indicators aimed at capturing ex-ante effects for the six months and six quarters leading up to the roll-out for each stock. Stan-
dard errors, clustered at the stock and month level, are included in parentheses. Sample covers March 2009-May 2015. Mean of dep. var refers to the mean of
IHS(Market Cap)t . Book-equity deciles refer to dummy variables for each decile of book equity in the previous fiscal year. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                                 40
        TABLE 7: I MPACT OF M ARGIN L ENDING R OLLOUT ON I NSTITUTIONAL O WNERSHIP AND T URNOVER :
                                          Q UASI -M YOPIC A PPROACH

                                          XXXXXX             XXXXXX              XXXXXX              XXXXXX              XXXXXX            XXXXXX
                                                                                      IHS(Market Cap)
                                              Mutual Fund Share                           Top 10 Share                                Turnover
                                          Myopic         Quarterly Lags          Myopic          Quarterly Lags           Myopic        Quarterly Lags
 Ex-Post Effect     (β̂0quasi )           −0.006∗            −0.004              −0.016              −0.009                0.055∗∗∗          0.087∗∗∗
                                          (0.003)            (0.003)             (0.011)             (0.013)              (0.016)           (0.016)
 Ex-Ante Effect (t-1) (β̂1quasi )                              0.007∗∗∗                                0.036∗∗                               0.164∗∗∗
                                                              (0.002)                                 (0.016)                               (0.034)
                              quasi
 Ex-Ante Effect (t-2) (β̂2            )                        0.006∗∗∗                                0.033∗∗                               0.081∗∗∗
                                                              (0.002)                                 (0.014)                               (0.022)
 Mean of Dep. Var.                         0.017               0.017               0.46                 0.46               0.50              0.50
 R2                                         0.51                0.51               0.62                 0.62               0.47              0.47
 N                                         38819               38819              38819                38819              137696            137696
 Book-Equity Deciles                         Yes                Yes                 Yes                  Yes                    Yes            Yes
 Month × Year Fixed Effects                  Yes                Yes                 Yes                  Yes                    Yes            Yes
 Stock Fixed Effects                         Yes                Yes                 Yes                  Yes                    Yes            Yes
Results from myopic and quasi-myopic difference-in-difference specifications of either the proportion of institutional ownership or turnover on the
margin lending roll-out in the vein of Malani and Reif (2015). We report coefficients from the following regression
                                                                                     S
                                  yi,t = α + β0quasi Margin Trading Activeit +       ∑       βjquasi Ds,t+j + γi + δt + εit .
                                                                                 j =−(S−1)

Where yi,t represents either the proportion of ownership by mutual funds of each stock, the proportion of ownership by the top 10 investors in each
stock, or turnover. The first two are at a quarterly frequency, while turnover is at a monthly frequency. Margin Trading Active is equal to one only (i)
for stocks that are included in the margin trading roll-out, and (ii) in half-years after margin trading is active in those stocks. Di,t+j is equal to one if
margin trading initially becomes active for stock i in period t + j, and zero otherwise. The number of ex-ante effect coefficients indicates the value of S
for the regression in question. For each outcome, we include a myopic approach with no ex-ante effects and a quasi-myopic approach with two quar-
ters of anticipation. Sample covers March 2009-May 2015. Mean of dep. var. refers to the mean of yi,t Book-equity deciles refer to dummy variables
for each decile of book equity in the previous fiscal year. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                            41
                  TABLE 8: D IFFERENCE IN I MPACT OF M ARGIN L ENDING R OLLOUT ON IHS(M ARKET C AP ):
             H IGH R ANK (L IKELY TO BE M ARGINABLE ) VS . L OW R ANK (L ESS L IKELY TO BE M ARGINABLE ) S TOCKS

                                               XXXXXX            XXXXXX                 XXXXXX             XXXXXX            XXXXXX                XXXXXX
                                                                                              IHS(Market Cap)
                                                            Difference-in-Difference                                                   IV
                                                Myopic        Monthly Lags          Quarterly Lags          Myopic        Monthly Lags         Quarterly Lags
 Ex-Post Effect × High Rank                      0.131∗∗∗           0.163∗∗∗              0.206∗∗∗
                                                (0.045)            (0.049)               (0.054)
 Ex-Post Effect (β̂0quasi )                      0.067∗             0.114∗∗∗              0.162∗∗∗
                                                (0.034)            (0.036)               (0.040)
 IHS(Margin Debt) × High Rank                                                                                0.006∗∗∗          0.008∗∗∗               0.010∗∗∗
                                                                                                            (0.002)           (0.002)                (0.003)
 IHS(Margin Debt)                                                                                            0.003∗∗           0.006∗∗∗               0.008∗∗∗
                                                                                                            (0.002)           (0.002)                (0.002)
 Ex-Ante Effect (t-1) × High Rank                                   0.227∗∗∗              0.271∗∗∗                             0.226∗∗∗               0.271∗∗∗
                                                                   (0.044)               (0.046)                              (0.043)                (0.046)
 Ex-Ante Effect (t-2) × High Rank                                   0.233∗∗∗              0.247∗∗∗                             0.233∗∗∗               0.247∗∗∗
                                                                   (0.038)               (0.046)                              (0.035)                (0.046)
 Ex-Ante Effect (t-3) × High Rank                                   0.231∗∗∗              0.198∗∗∗                             0.230∗∗∗               0.198∗∗∗
                                                                   (0.039)               (0.047)                              (0.037)                (0.047)
 Ex-Ante Effect (t-4) × High Rank                                   0.217∗∗∗              0.151∗∗∗                             0.217∗∗∗               0.150∗∗∗
                                                                   (0.038)               (0.044)                              (0.035)                (0.043)
 Ex-Ante Effect (t-5) × High Rank                                   0.208∗∗∗              0.104∗∗                              0.208∗∗∗               0.104∗∗
                                                                   (0.039)               (0.042)                              (0.037)                (0.042)
 Ex-Ante Effect (t-6) × High Rank                                   0.194∗∗∗              0.071∗                               0.194∗∗∗               0.071∗
                                                                   (0.039)               (0.039)                              (0.037)                (0.038)
                             quasi
 Ex-Ante Effect (t-1) (β̂1           )                              0.252∗∗∗              0.281∗∗∗                             0.252∗∗∗               0.282∗∗∗
                                                                   (0.043)               (0.038)                              (0.043)                (0.038)
 Ex-Ante Effect (t-2) (β̂2quasi )                                   0.241∗∗∗              0.198∗∗∗                             0.242∗∗∗               0.198∗∗∗
                                                                   (0.038)               (0.032)                              (0.038)                (0.032)
 Ex-Ante Effect (t-3) (β̂3quasi )                                   0.211∗∗∗              0.159∗∗∗                             0.212∗∗∗               0.158∗∗∗
                                                                   (0.033)               (0.035)                              (0.032)                (0.035)
 Ex-Ante Effect (t-4) (β̂4quasi )                                   0.183∗∗∗              0.108∗∗∗                             0.183∗∗∗               0.108∗∗∗
                                                                   (0.024)               (0.032)                              (0.021)                (0.032)
 Ex-Ante Effect (t-5) (β̂5quasi )                                   0.144∗∗∗              0.083∗∗∗                             0.144∗∗∗               0.082∗∗∗
                                                                   (0.025)               (0.029)                              (0.021)                (0.029)
 Ex-Ante Effect (t-6) (β̂6quasi )                                   0.136∗∗∗              0.056∗∗                              0.136∗∗∗               0.055∗∗
                                                                   (0.034)               (0.027)                              (0.033)                (0.027)
 Mean of Dep. Var.                                22.4              22.4                  22.4               22.4              22.4                   22.4
 R2                                               0.82              0.83                  0.83               0.82              0.83                   0.83
 N                                               117735            117735                117735             117735            117735                 117735
 Book-Equity Deciles                               Yes               Yes                   Yes                Yes                Yes                   Yes
 Month × Year Fixed Effects                        Yes               Yes                   Yes                Yes                Yes                   Yes
 Stock Fixed Effects                               Yes               Yes                   Yes                Yes                Yes                   Yes
 Results from myopic and quasi-myopic triple-difference specifications of IHS(Market Cap)t on the margin lending roll-out, differentiated by high vs. low rank-
ing stocks amongst those included in each vintage. For our triple-difference specifications we report coefficients from the following regression

                          IHS(Market Cap)i,t = α + β0quasi Margin Trading Activeit + η0quasi Margin Trading Activeit × High Rankit
                                               S                                            
                                             + ∑ βjquasi Di,t+j + ηj Di,t+j × High Rankit + γi + δt + εit
                                                  j =1

For the second stage of IV specifications, we replace Margin Trading Active with IHS(Margin Debt) everywhere in the above, and use Margin Trading Active and
Margin Trading Activeit × High Rankit as instruments for IHS(Margin Debt) and IHS(Margin Debt)it × High Rankit in a first stage. Market Cap and Margin
Debt are measured in RMB at the stock-month level. High rank is a dummy variable that indicates stocks in each vintage that are above median rank within the
vintage according to the index that determines inclusion. Margin Trading Active is equal to one only (i) for stocks that are included in the margin trading roll-out,
and (ii) in months after margin trading is active in those stocks. Di,t+j is equal to one if margin trading initially becomes active for stock i in period t + j, and
zero otherwise. The number of ex-ante effect coefficients indicates the value of S for the regression in question. The myopic approach includes no ex-ante effects,
and is equivalent to the collapsed difference-in-difference approaches presented above. Quasi-myopic specifications include indicators aimed at capturing ex-
ante effects for the six months and six quarters leading up to the roll-out for each stock. Standard errors, clustered at the stock and month level, are included in
parentheses. Sample covers March 2009-May 2015. Vintages 0 and 1 are excluded as inclusion in those vintages was not based upon a pre-defined rule. Mean
of dep. var refers to the mean of IHS(Market Cap)t . Book-equity deciles refer to dummy variables for each decile of book equity in the previous fiscal year. *
p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                                42
             TABLE 9: S HORT VS . L ONG R UN I MPACT OF M ARGIN L ENDING R OLLOUT ON IHS(M ARKET C AP )

                                           XXXXXX            XXXXXX                  XXXXXX            XXXXXX             XXXXXX                  XXXXXX
                                                                                          IHS(Market Cap)
                                                       Difference-in-Difference                                                     IV
                                           Myopic        Monthly Lags           Quarterly Lags          Myopic         Monthly Lags          Quarterly Lags
 Ex-Post Effect (Long-Run)                  0.065∗∗∗           0.070∗∗                0.048
                                           (0.023)            (0.028)                (0.039)
 IHS(Margin Debt)                                                                                         0.003∗∗∗           0.004∗∗                0.002
                                                                                                         (0.001)            (0.001)                (0.002)
 Ex-Post Effect (t)                                            0.180∗∗∗               0.256∗∗∗                               0.191∗∗∗               0.259∗∗∗
                                                              (0.045)                (0.038)                                (0.042)                (0.036)
 Ex-Post Effect (t+1)                                          0.182∗∗∗               0.246∗∗∗                               0.185∗∗∗               0.246∗∗∗
                                                              (0.035)                (0.037)                                (0.033)                (0.037)
 Ex-Post Effect (t+2)                                          0.171∗∗∗               0.203∗∗∗                               0.172∗∗∗               0.202∗∗∗
                                                              (0.035)                (0.033)                                (0.035)                (0.033)
 Ex-Post Effect (t+3)                                          0.163∗∗∗               0.181∗∗∗                               0.163∗∗∗               0.180∗∗∗
                                                              (0.035)                (0.032)                                (0.034)                (0.032)
 Ex-Post Effect (t+4)                                          0.174∗∗∗               0.160∗∗∗                               0.174∗∗∗               0.161∗∗∗
                                                              (0.035)                (0.032)                                (0.035)                (0.032)
 Ex-Post Effect (t+5)                                          0.167∗∗∗               0.121∗∗∗                               0.166∗∗∗               0.122∗∗∗
                                                              (0.039)                (0.029)                                (0.038)                (0.029)
                               quasi
 Ex-Ante Effect (t-1) (β̂1             )                       0.250∗∗∗               0.304∗∗∗                               0.250∗∗∗               0.304∗∗∗
                                                              (0.052)                (0.036)                                (0.053)                (0.036)
                               quasi
 Ex-Ante Effect (t-2) (β̂2             )                       0.256∗∗∗               0.257∗∗∗                               0.256∗∗∗               0.256∗∗∗
                                                              (0.045)                (0.028)                                (0.046)                (0.028)
                               quasi
 Ex-Ante Effect (t-3) (β̂3             )                       0.241∗∗∗               0.224∗∗∗                               0.241∗∗∗               0.223∗∗∗
                                                              (0.041)                (0.028)                                (0.042)                (0.027)
 Ex-Ante Effect (t-4) (β̂4quasi )                              0.217∗∗∗               0.165∗∗∗                               0.217∗∗∗               0.165∗∗∗
                                                              (0.035)                (0.026)                                (0.035)                (0.025)
 Ex-Ante Effect (t-6) (β̂6quasi )                              0.188∗∗∗               0.077∗∗∗                               0.188∗∗∗               0.076∗∗∗
                                                              (0.025)                (0.023)                                (0.025)                (0.023)
 Mean of Dep. Var.                          22.7               22.7                   22.7                22.7               22.7                   22.7
 R2                                         0.89               0.89                   0.89                0.89               0.89                   0.89
 N                                         137696             137696                 137696              137696             137696                 137696
 Book-Equity Deciles                         Yes                Yes                    Yes                 Yes                Yes                    Yes
 Month × Year Fixed Effects                  Yes                Yes                    Yes                 Yes                Yes                    Yes
 Stock Fixed Effects                         Yes                Yes                    Yes                 Yes                Yes                    Yes
Results from myopic and quasi-myopic difference-in-difference and IV specifications of IHS(Market Cap)t on the margin lending roll-out expanding on
Malani and Reif (2015). For our difference-in-difference specifications we report coefficients from the following regression
                                                                                                  S
                               IHS(Market Cap)i,t = α + β0quasi Margin Trading Activeit +        ∑ βjquasi Di,t+j + γi + δt + εit .
                                                                                                j =1

For the second stage of IV specifications, we replace Margin Trading Active with IHS(Margin Debt) in the above, and use Margin Trading Active as an in-
strument for IHS(Margin Debt) in a first stage. Market Cap and Margin Debt are measured in RMB at the stock-month level. Margin Trading Active is equal
to one only (i) for stocks that are included in the margin trading roll-out, and (ii) in months after margin trading is active in those stocks. Di,t+j is equal
to one if margin trading initially becomes active for stock i in period t + j, and zero otherwise. Note that contrary to previous tables, here we include in-
dicators for both the periods just before and just after the roll-out. The number of ex-ante effect and ex-post effect coefficients indicates the value of S for the
regression in question. The myopic approach includes no ex-ante or ex-post effects, and is equivalent to the collapsed difference-in-difference approaches
presented above. Quasi-myopic specifications include indicators aimed at capturing ex-ante effects for the six months and six quarters leading up to the
roll-out for each stock. Standard errors, clustered at the stock and month level, are included in parentheses. Sample covers March 2009-May 2015. Mean of
dep. var refers to the mean of IHS(Market Cap)t . Book-equity deciles refer to dummy variables for each decile of book equity in the previous fiscal year. *
p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                                43
