                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   HOW EFFECTIVE IS ENERGY-EFFICIENT HOUSING? EVIDENCE FROM A FIELD
                        EXPERIMENT IN MEXICO

                                       Lucas W. Davis
                                      Sebastian Martinez
                                       Bibiana Taboada

                                      Working Paper 24581
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24581


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    May 2018




For additional background information on this study see: http://dx.doi.org/10.18235/0000989. For
their contributions to the design and implementation of the study as well as valuable comments
and inputs during the preparation of this document, we are grateful to Claudio Alatorre, Juan
Muñoz, Ruben Perez Peña, Michelle Pérez and Gmelina Ramírez. Data collection was conducted
by SIMO consulting. IRB approval was obtained from the Committee of Research Ethics at the
Mexico Center for Clinical Research. We acknowledge generous support from the Clean
Technology Fund at the Inter-American Development Bank. Davis was a paid consultant to the
Inter-American Development Bank during the time this research was conducted. All opinions in
this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the Inter-
American Development Bank, its Executive Directors, the governments they represent, or
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Lucas W. Davis, Sebastian Martinez, and Bibiana Taboada. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
How Effective is Energy-Efficient Housing? Evidence from a Field Experiment in Mexico
Lucas W. Davis, Sebastian Martinez, and Bibiana Taboada
NBER Working Paper No. 24581
May 2018
JEL No. D12,H23,Q40,Q54

                                           ABSTRACT

Despite growing enthusiasm, there is little empirical evidence on how well energy efficiency
investments work. Evidence is particularly lacking from low- and middle-income countries,
despite a widespread view that these countries have many of the best opportunities. This paper
evaluates a field experiment in Mexico in which a quasi-experimental sample of new homes was
provided with insulation and other energy-efficient upgrades. A novel feature of our study is that
we deploy large numbers of data loggers which allow us to measure temperature and humidity at
high frequency inside homes. We find that the upgrades had no detectable impact on electricity
use or thermal comfort, with essentially identical temperature and humidity levels in upgraded
and non-upgraded homes. These results stand in sharp contrast to the engineering estimates that
predicted up to a 26% decrease in electricity use. Part of the explanation is that air conditioner
ownership is lower than expected, thus reducing the potential for reductions in energy use. In
addition, we document that most households have their windows open on hot days, nullifying the
thermal benefits of roof and wall insulation. Overall, we conclude that the benefits from these
investments are unlikely to exceed the costs, which added $400-$500 USD to the cost of each
home. Our results underscore the urgent need to fully incorporate socioeconomic conditions and
human behavior into engineering models of energy use.

Lucas W. Davis                                     Bibiana Taboada
Haas School of Business                            Inter-American Development Bank
University of California                           bibianat@iadb.org
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
and NBER
ldavis@haas.berkeley.edu

Sebastian Martinez
Inter American Development Bank
smartinez@iadb.org




A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at https://osf.io/vbrc3/
1    Introduction

Global energy consumption is expected to increase dramatically over the next several
decades, particularly in low- and middle- income countries. According to the U.S. Energy
Information Administration, energy consumption in non-OECD countries is expected to
grow by 71% by 2040, while growing only 18% in non-OECD countries over the same
period.1 Some economists have argued that energy consumption could grow even more
rapidly, driven by increased adoption of air conditioners and other energy-using assets
(Wolfram et al., 2012; Davis and Gertler, 2015).

Meeting this increased demand for energy will be an enormous challenge, particularly
because most of the world’s energy continues to come from fossil fuels. Carbon dioxide
emissions from fossil fuels is the largest contributor to global greenhouse gas emissions,
with 30+ gigatons in annual emissions (IPCC, 2014). Emissions are forecast to increase
steadily through 2040, with 90%+ of the growth in emissions coming from non-OECD
countries (DOE, 2016).

Faced with this daunting challenge, policymakers around the world are turning to energy
efficiency as a way of potentially curtailing energy demand growth. Supporters argue that
energy efficiency is a “win-win”, paying for itself in the form of reduced energy expendi-
tures while also reducing negative externalities.2 Many environmental groups and inter-
national organizations envision energy efficiency playing a large role in mitigating climate
change.3

But despite this growing enthusiasm for energy efficiency, there is little empirical evi-
dence on how well energy efficiency investments actually work (Allcott and Greenstone,
2012). Evidence is particularly lacking from low- and middle-income countries, despite
    1
      DOE, 2016, Table 1-1, “World Energy Consumption By Country Grouping” predicts energy consumption
for members and non-members of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, a group of
35 mostly higher-income countries.
    2
      Energy efficiency proponent Amory Lovins famously remarked about energy efficiency that, “It’s better
than a free lunch – it’s a lunch you are paid to eat.” (Lovins and Browning, 1992). McKinsey and Company
(2009) argues that energy efficiency is a “vast, low-cost energy resource” that could reduce U.S. energy
expenditures by billions of dollars per year, and similar analyses have identified billions of dollars in negative
net cost energy efficiency investments for Mexico (USAID, 2013).
    3
      For example, the International Energy Agency has predicted that half of all carbon dioxide abatement by
2030 will come from energy efficiency (IEA, 2015). Energy efficiency also features prominently in the Paris
climate agreement, with 143 out of 162 countries mentioning energy efficiency in their nationally determined
contributions (IEA, 2016).


                                                        1
a widespread view that these countries have many of the best opportunities (see, e.g.
USAID, 2013; IEA, 2015). Without credible empirical estimates, it is impossible to know
how large a role energy efficiency can play, or to know where investments should be best
targeted.

This paper evaluates a field experiment in Mexico in which a quasi-random sample of new
homes was provided with insulation and other energy efficiency upgrades. The area in
Northeast Mexico where the field experiment took place is hot and semi-dry during the
summer, so this is an ideal setting for studying energy-efficient housing. Based on an
energy-efficiency simulation model, the investments were expected to reduce electricity
demand by up to 26%, thus reducing carbon dioxide emissions, as well as to improve
thermal comfort.4

In contrast to the engineering predictions, we find that the upgrades had no detectable
impact on electricity use or thermal comfort. Across specifications there is no evidence of
decreased electricity use, and this is true for both homes with and without air conditioning.
Moreover, we find no differences in thermal comfort between upgraded and non-upgraded
homes, with essentially identical levels of temperature and humidity across all hours of the
day. Overall, we conclude that the benefits from these investments are unlikely to exceed
the costs, which add $400-$500 USD to the cost of each home (Sadasi, 2017).

The lack of evidence of impacts is not because of a lack of statistical precision. The
thermal comfort impacts, in particular, are extremely precisely estimated. With hourly data
on temperature and humidity from over 450 homes, we can rule out 1% improvements in
average temperature and humidity, even after adjusting our standard errors to account for
serial correlation. This statistical precision reflects the large sample size as well as the
relative homogeneity of the housing units in this housing development, with long rows of
nearly identical homes all constructed and sold at the same time.

Part of the explanation is that most households do not have air conditioners. Only 13%
of homes in the study sample have air conditioners, and we find the same rate of air
conditioner ownership in upgraded and non-upgraded homes. Without air conditioning,
the upgrades have much less potential to reduce energy use. In addition, we document
that most households have their windows open on hot days. We find, for example, that
96% of households had at least one window open on a hot day in June 2017 and that
  4
      See Section 2.2 for further details.


                                             2
households report having windows open for an average of 16.7 hours per day. An open
window provides air flow on hot and humid days, but it also largely nullifies the thermal
benefits of building insulation and the other energy-efficiency upgrades.

The field experiment takes place in a large housing development with a quasi-random
sample of new homes receiving upgrades. Despite not using explicit randomization, the
upgrades were distributed across sections of the housing development without any sys-
tematic pattern. In addition, home buyers were not aware of the upgrades when they
purchased their homes. Upgraded and non-upgraded homes were built and sold by the
same developer at the same time and at the same price. These features of the experiment
mitigate concerns about selection bias, and we show that household characteristics are
very similar in homes with and without upgrades.

Our study is the first that we are aware of to deploy large numbers of high-frequency data
loggers to measure interior temperature and humidity. We placed loggers in the living
areas of upgraded and non-upgraded homes and recorded hourly measures over 16+
months. This information provides highly-accurate, granular information about thermal
comfort, allowing us to observe the performance of the upgrades across hours of the day,
months of the year, and in a variety of different climatological conditions. In contrast,
most previous studies of thermal comfort use engineering analyses which rely on strong
assumptions about the performance of the building shell and household behavior.5 We
see broad potential for deploying data logger technology like this in evaluating similar
programs.

Our focus on a middle-income country differentiates this paper from the existing literature
on energy efficiency which has focused overwhelmingly on the United States (see, e.g.
Joskow and Marron, 1992; Metcalf and Hassett, 1999; Davis, 2008; Allcott and Taubin-
sky, 2015; Fowlie et al., forthcoming; Houde and Aldy, forthcoming) and Western Europe
(see, e.g. Brounen and Kok, 2011; Brounen et al., 2012; Aydin et al., 2017). Economists
have long argued that credit constraints play a large role in energy-investment decisions
(Hausman, 1979; Dubin and McFadden, 1984; Gertler et al., 2016; Ryan, 2017), making
studies from low- and middle- income countries particularly interesting.
   5
    The paper is also related to a substantial existing literature on adaptive thermal comfort and sustainable
buildings. See, e.g., Givoni (1992); Baker and Standeven (1996); Nicol and Humphreys (2002); Nikolopoulou
and Steemers (2003).




                                                      3
Another novel feature of our analysis is the focus on new homes. There is a large gap
between projected demand and supply of affordable housing in low- and middle-income
countries, and new home construction is a major focus of governments and development
agencies.6 Installing energy efficiency technologies at the time of construction also has
certain advantages compared to retrofitting existing homes. With large-scale social hous-
ing programs, the installation of energy-efficient upgrades at the time of construction by
the developer takes advantage of economies of scale in the procurement and installation
of materials.

Our analysis is thus also germane to a recent literature on the effectiveness of build-
ing codes (Aroonruengsawat et al., 2012; Jacobsen and Kotchen, 2013; Levinson, 2016;
Novan et al., 2017; Kotchen, 2017). This is another literature that has focused, up until
now, almost entirely on the United States and other high-income countries. In our field
experiment homes standing right next to each other were built to two different standards,
making this a particularly lucid illustration of the potential effectiveness (or ineffectiveness)
of building codes. Indeed, one of the policy implications of our study is that a building code
aimed at the type of energy-efficiency upgrades studied here would be unlikely to pass a
cost-benefit test.

The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides background about the housing devel-
opment and the field experiment, including details about the energy efficiency upgrades.
Section 3 presents results, first in graphical form and then regression estimates. Section
4 discusses possible mechanisms including open windows and evaluates cost effective-
ness. Section 5 concludes with a short summary and policy implications.



2     Background

2.1    The Housing Development

The field experiment we evaluate in this paper took place in a large housing development
in Northeast Mexico in the state of Nuevo Leon. The development is located west of
   6
     United Nations (2016) reports a shortfall of 980 million urban households lacking decent housing and
a billion new homes needed by 2025 at a cost of $9-11 trillion USD. Rojas and Medellin (2011) projects a
demand for 3 million new housing units per year in Latin America and Bouillon et al. (2012) shows a 34%
deficit nationally for Mexico, with higher rates in lower income quintiles.


                                                   4
Monterrey in the municipality of Garcia. Most of the homes were sold during 2013 or the
beginning of 2014, at prices ranging from $18,000 to $24,000 USD. Buyers in this housing
development tend to have relatively low incomes by Mexican standards.

In the ideal experiment, we would have assigned energy efficiency upgrades to homes
randomly. The developer was unwilling to use explicit randomization, however, because of
logistical impracticalities. These homes were constructed quickly and sequentially and the
additional materials and personnel necessary for the upgrades were not always available.
Instead, the developer distributed the upgrades in a “quasi-random” pattern as widely as
possible throughout the development.

Figure 1 is a map of the northwest corner of the housing development where many of
the upgrades were installed. Despite not using explicit randomization, the upgrades were
quite widely distributed without any systematic pattern. Along most streets there is a mix
of homes with and without upgrades, and the type of upgrades do not appear to follow
any regular sequence. The buildings in this part of the development have two stories,
with one owner on the first floor and a different owner on the second floor, and the figure
shows that there is a mix of units with upgrades on the first floor only, second floor only,
and both.

Throughout the building development homes are constructed in long rows of identical
units. The housing development includes one- and two-story buildings.7 Along any given
street, however, the homes are identical with exactly the same size and layout. More-
over, as we show later, all of the homes were constructed and sold at approximately the
same time. This homogeneity is valuable from an empirical design perspective because it
reduces scope for omitted variables to influence the results.
    7
      Overall, the sample is composed of 55% homes in one-story buildings and 45% homes in two-story
buildings. There are a total of four different prototypes in the sample, ranging in size from 39 to 58 square
meters. The specific models are “Roble” units of 39 square meters built in one-story buildings , “Ebano”
units of 55 square meters built on the first floor of two-story buidings, “Ebano” units of 45 square meters
built on the second floor of two-story buildings, and “Caoba” units of 58 square meters built on either floor
of two-story buildings. In our sample 55.3% of homes are Roble, 38.4% Ebano and 6.3% Caoba. Our full
regression specification controls for housing unit type. In addition, one might have been interested in testing
for interaction effects between first- and second-story homes but less than 5% of homes are in two-story
homes for which treatment status differs between the two floors.




                                                      5
2.2   The Field Experiment

As is the case in many new housing developments, buyers in this housing development
selected their homes before they were built. Potential buyers visited a furnished model
home that was identical in size, layout, and materials to the actual homes. Then if they
decided to buy a home, buyers selected a specific unit by looking at a map of the housing
development. At this point of purchase, buyers were not told which homes would have
energy efficiency upgrades. In fact, at this point of purchase, nobody including the sales
people knew which homes were going to be upgraded.

This “double blind” field experiment design greatly reduces the scope for selection bias. If
buyers had known in advance which homes were going to be upgraded this would have
raised serious concerns about self-selection. For example, home buyers might have first
selected the homes with upgrades. Moreover, if the developer had this information at the
point of sale there would potentially be concerns about more subtle forms of selection
bias, even if the salespersons were instructed not to share this information with potential
buyers.

This may seem like a subtle point, but mitigating selection bias is of paramount importance
in this type of study. Households influence energy use, temperature, and humidity in their
homes based on the number of household members, whether or not they are home during
the day, and through behaviors like closing blinds during the day, cooking patterns, as well
as the number and type of appliances. Were there systematic differences between the
households in homes with and without upgrades, it would be difficult to make any credible
inference about the causal impact of upgrades.


2.3   The Upgrades

In the field experiment, there were two different types of energy efficiency upgrades. Up-
grade 1 consisted of additional thermal insulation installed outside the house. All homes
have thermal insulation in the south-facing wall, but homes with upgrade 1 received ad-
ditional 1.5” EPS (Expanded Polystyrene) foam insulation on the east- and west-facing
walls, as well as 1” EPS foam on the roof. Upgrade 2 consisted of 1” EPS foam on the
roof, window shading on the south-facing windows, and a passive cooling system. The


                                             6
window shading was built with concrete and installed above the windows, reducing the
amount of solar radiation entering the home during the middle of the day. The passive
cooling system was a thermal chimney, running vertically from the kitchen to the roof with
a metal top which spins in the wind, lifting hot air up and out of the kitchen. The up-
grades are immobile, permanent features of the home that cannot be easily removed or
adjusted.

Our comparison group is homes that did not receive upgrades. It is worth noting that this
“base model” home already includes several energy-efficient features. Mexican govern-
ment housing policy has long encouraged energy efficiency and Mexico’s standard “green
mortgage” program requires homes to have LED lighting and other energy-efficient fea-
tures. Based on an energy efficiency simulation model, upgrades 1 and 2 were expected
to reduce electricity use and, thus, carbon dioxide emissions from electricity use, by 26%
and 8%, respectively.8


2.4    Data Collection

The evaluation sample was initially designed to include all the units in the housing devel-
opment that had energy-efficient upgrades and were sold between 2013 and 2014. An
equal number of units without upgrades, but located in the same blocks with the same
construction characteristics and sold at the same time, was included in the sample as
comparison homes. Homes located in corners and with different sizes, or located along
the main access roads of the development were excluded upfront.

During fieldwork nearly 50% of the initial sample had to be dropped from the analysis
because the units were temporarily or permanently uninhabited. These are homes that
   8
    These predictions come from the DEEVI model, an energy efficiency simulation model adapted for Mex-
ico (Passive House Institute, 2012). Upgrade 1 was expected to reduce annual electricity use from 89.5
to 66.34 kilowatt hours per square meter (26%) (DEEVI, 2014a) while upgrade 2 was expected to reduce
annual electricity use from 87.36 to 80.10 kilowatt hours per square meter (8.3%) (DEEVI, 2014b). These
predictions are for electricity only (not all energy) for the standard single story “Roble” home prototype. The
primary source of energy reduction in the DEEVI model is from lower consumption of air conditioning when
temperature surpasses 25◦ C. These DEEVI predictions were calculated in 2014 after many of the homes
were already constructed and sold. In the absence of air conditioning, the model predicted no improvement
in comfort for upgrade 1 (house above 25 degrees Celsius 56.6% of time with and without the upgrades), and
a 13.8% improvement in comfort for upgrade 2 (from 51.9% to 44.7% of time during which the house is above
25 degrees Celsius).



                                                      7
were sold, but not yet occupied or used too infrequently for the residents to be located
even after multiple repeat visits by our enumerators. This attrition was very similar for
upgraded (44%) and non-upgraded homes (44%) and thus is unlikely to bias our results.
In interpreting our cost-effectiveness results, however, it is important to take into account
that many homes are used less than was forecast.

The initial household survey took place between June and August 2016 and was carried
out by trained enumerators from an independent survey firm. The questionnaire included
modules on basic demographic characteristics, education, health and income of house-
hold members, self-reported perceptions of comfort, appliance ownership, and subjective
well-being. The application of the survey lasted 45 minutes on average.

Information on electricity use was captured in several ways. First, electricity consumption
was recorded from the electricity meters outside the homes. Meters record cumulative
electricity use and surveyors photographed and recorded this information during several
visits. Second, households were asked to recall the amount in pesos of their last electricity
bill. Third, households were asked to describe all the lightbulbs and appliances in the
home and the frequency with which they were used.

Finally, interior temperature and humidity were measured using the LogTag HAXO-8 log-
ger.9 Data loggers were installed by trained technicians from the same firm after the appli-
cation of the survey in each home. The data loggers were installed 1.8 meters above the
floor on an inner wall of the home facing the primary living quarters (living and dining room
area). Instructions were given to household members to not tamper with the data loggers.
Information from the loggers was then downloaded every three to four months over a 16+
month period. We also have data on outdoor temperature from a meteorological station
that we installed on the roof of one of the homes in the development.
    9
      The LogTag HAXO-8 logger can measure and record up to 8,000 readings, up to 167 days of dry bulb
air temperature and relative humidity if measured every 30 minutes. The meter is highly accurate, plus or
minus up to 1◦ C and up to 3% relative humidity. The LogTag logger works over a large range, −40◦ to 85◦
for temperature and 0% to 100% for relative humidity. Downloading logged data is performed using special
LogTag software included with the product and a small base which connects to the logger.




                                                   8
2.5   Covariate Balance

Table 1 reports mean characteristics for homes with and without upgrades. Mean house-
hold characteristics are very similar. For example, there are an average of 3.73 house-
hold members in homes with upgrades, compared to 3.76 members in homes without
upgrades. Number of children, proportion owner occupied, monthly income, as well as
the age, education, marital status, and employment status of the household head are all
very similar in the two groups.

The date the homes were sold is also very similar for homes with and without upgrades.
All of the homes were constructed and sold by the same developer during the same time
period. This is important because it mitigates potential concerns about changes over time
in materials or construction methods as well as about temporal or seasonal patterns in the
composition of buyers.

Appliance saturation is balanced too. Most homes own televisions, fans, and refrigera-
tors, and saturation is similar between homes with and without upgrades, albeit with a
somewhat higher refrigerator ownership rate in homes with upgrades (p-value .03). Air
conditioner ownership is 13% in upgraded homes and 12% in non-upgraded homes, so
essentially identical in the two groups, and well below the 36% which was assumed in the
engineering calculations (DEEVI, 2014a,b).

For all characteristics the table reports p-values for the null hypothesis of equal means
between homes with and without upgrades. Only for refrigerator ownership do we reject
the null hypothesis of equality at the 5% level. This balance provides reassurance that the
comparisons which follow will not be unduly biased by compositional differences between
the two groups. Although not derived from a true randomized experiment, the households
living in homes with upgrades are highly comparable to households living in homes without
upgrades.



3     Results

In this section we now turn to measuring the effect of upgrades on energy use and thermal
comfort. Section 3.1 introduces the data with a simple comparison of means. Section 3.2


                                             9
then compares mean daily outcomes over our time period. Sections 3.3 and 3.4 compare
outcomes by hour-of-the-day and for different levels of outdoor temperature, looking for
evidence of how the upgrades perform under different conditions. Finally, Section 3.5 re-
ports regression estimates, allowing us to perform formal statistical tests with a range of
different control variables, and Section 3.6 tests for a potential rebound effect by perform-
ing additional analyses on homes with air conditioning.


3.1    Comparison of Means

Table 2 compares mean outcomes for homes with and without upgrades. Overall, out-
comes are almost identical in the two groups. The last column in the table reports p-values
for the null hypothesis of equal means, and in almost all cases we cannot reject the null
hypothesis at the 5% level.

The table first describes thermal comfort. Across all hours in our sample, mean tempera-
ture is almost identical in homes with and without upgrades, 27.0◦ C compared to 26.9◦ C.
Temperature varies widely during the year so later in the paper we examine summer and
winter separately. Relative humidity is, surprisingly, somewhat higher in homes with up-
grades, 56.8% compared to 56.1%. The difference is statistically significant, but small in
magnitude. The table also reports the proportion of hours with temperature above 25◦ C.
Again there is no evidence of improved thermal comfort in homes with upgrades, with
about 70% of hours above 25◦ C in both upgraded- and non-upgraded homes.

The table next reports cumulative electricity consumption as of October 2016 and Novem-
ber 2017 as recorded from the electricity meters outside the homes. The table also re-
ports the difference in electricity consumption between October 2016 and November 2017.
Contrary to what was expected, all three measures indicate somewhat higher electricity
consumption in homes with upgrades, although the differences are not statistically signif-
icant. No evidence of electricity savings also implies no evidence of reductions in carbon
dioxide emissions which was one of the major objectives of the upgrades.

The next set of outcomes are self-reported measures of thermal comfort.10 Most house-
  10
    This emphasis on self-reported measures is germane to a growing literature in development economics
which uses self-reported measures of happiness and other “softer” measures to get at household well-being.
See, e.g. Cattaneo et al. (2009); Devoto et al. (2012); Galiani et al. (2015). Sometimes these broader
measures pick up other, perhaps unexpected impacts of investments as in the case of water connections


                                                   10
holds report their homes being “hot” or “very hot” in the summer, and this is similar in
homes with and without upgrades. About half of households also report their homes
being “cold” or “very cold” in the winter, though this is somewhat lower in homes with up-
grades (p-value .05). Outcomes are also similar with regard to whether households report
their homes having an “agreeable” temperature during different parts of the day during
the summer. So, although most of the differences are not statistically significant, these
self-reported measures provide some suggestive evidence of greater thermal comfort in
upgraded homes in winter.

Finally, the table reports a variety of additional self-reported outcomes. Television, fan,
and air conditioner usage are all similar between homes with and without upgrades. The
upgrades were intended to reduce energy consumption from air conditioning and other
appliances, but this does not appear to be the case. Nor are there differences in how
much people report having spent on their last electricity bill. Finally, had the upgrades
resulted in energy savings or other benefits, we would expect this to be capitalized into
the value of the property. Our measure of monthly rent is self-reported for renters and,
for homeowners, is a hypothetical question about how much the home would rent for.
This rental value is statistically indistinguishable for homes with and without upgrades,
providing no evidence of capitalized benefits.


3.2    Mean Daily Outcomes

We now turn to more detailed comparisons of thermal comfort using the information from
the data loggers. Figure 2 plots mean daily temperature and relative humidity for homes
with and without upgrades. Overall, temperature and humidity are very similar in the
two groups. Mean daily temperature, in particular, is essentially identical in homes with
and without upgrades. Mean daily humidity is also very similar, particularly during both
summers when humidity is of biggest concern. During the one winter for which we have
data, humidity tends to be higher in upgraded homes, though the differences are relatively
small. Thus, overall, Figure 2 provides no evidence that the upgrades have increased
thermal comfort. In the appendix we also plot daily measures for the proportion of hours
above 25◦ C and there is again no evidence of increased thermal comfort in upgraded
increasing the time available for leisure and reducing household conflicts on water matters (Devoto et al.,
2012).


                                                   11
homes.

In addition to the comparison between upgraded and non-upgraded homes, Figure 2
shows how thermal comfort changes over the course of the year. As we mentioned earlier,
this kind of high-frequency measurement of interior temperature and humidity made pos-
sible by our data loggers is novel and of significant independent interest. Strikingly, there
is wide variation in both temperature and humidity across days. Daily mean temperatures
range from about 14◦ C in the winter to 33◦ C in the summer, a very wide range. Daily mean
humidity ranges from 20% to 80%. Generally 40% to 60% relative humidity is considered
comfortable, so this range for humidity is also very wide.


3.3   Mean Hourly Outcomes

Figure 3 plots mean temperature and humidity by hour-of-day during the summer months.
Along the x-axis hours run from 1AM to midnight, so the figure shows mean outcomes
starting in the morning, then afternoon, and finally evening hours. Again, we plot means
separately for homes with and without upgrades. These figures include 95% confidence
intervals, calculated using standard errors that are clustered by household to account
for serial correlation. The hourly pattern for temperature and humidity is very similar in
the two groups. In both cases, the point estimates line up almost exactly on top of one
another. Temperature reaches its nadir in the morning, and then peaks around 6PM.
Humidity peaks much earlier, around 10AM, then reaches its nadir at 7PM.

Figure 4 provides additional detail, breaking the results up into upgrade 1 and upgrade
2. Recall that upgrade 1 is wall and roof insulation, while upgrade 2 is roof insulation,
shading and ventilation, so the two potentially have different impacts on thermal comfort.
There is no evidence, however, that either upgrade type outperforms homes without up-
grades. If anything, homes with upgrade 1 have somewhat higher average temperatures,
while homes with upgrade 2 have higher humidity. In the appendix, we provide additional
evidence, including mean hourly measures for the proportion of observations above 25◦ C,
as well as a complete set of results for non-summer months. Across all outcomes, there
is no evidence of increased thermal comfort in upgraded homes.




                                             12
3.4     Outdoor Temperature

Figure 5 plots mean indoor temperature as a function of mean outdoor temperature, in
three-degree temperature bins. As expected, there is a strong positive relationship be-
tween indoor and outdoor temperature. The thermal mass of the homes protects house-
holds from the most extreme temperatures, so indoor temperature varies somewhat less
overall than outdoor temperature. However, indoor temperatures still get very warm, for
example, above 32◦ C during hours in which the outdoor temperature exceeds 36◦ .

Indoor temperature is essentially identical in homes with and without upgrades for all
levels of outdoor temperature. The markers for the two groups are right on top of one
another, and very precisely estimated. The figure includes 95% confidence intervals for
the sample means, calculated using standard errors that are clustered by household to
account for serial correlation, and the confidence intervals are extremely narrow. Figure 6
plots estimates separately by upgrade type. Consistent with the other results, there is no
evidence that either type of upgrade improves thermal comfort. There is no evidence that
upgraded homes are cooler in the summer, nor warmer in the winter.


3.5     Regression Estimates

Table 3 presents regression estimates for mean temperature. We report estimates from
fifteen separate least squares regressions, all variations of the following regression equa-
tion,
                              yit = β1(U pgrade)i + ωt + it .                           (1)

The dependent variable yit in all regressions is temperature in logs. The covariate of
interest is an indicator variable equal to one for homes with upgrades. For all regressions
we report estimates of the parameter of interest β, which measures the difference in mean
temperature between homes with and without upgrades. Panel (A) reports estimates for
the entire sample, while Panel (B) restricts the sample to May to October, and Panel (C)
restricts the sample to November to April.

We add controls across columns. Column (1) has no controls, and thus simply reports the
difference in means. Column (2) adds fixed effects for all hours in the sample. We have
more than sixteen months of data, so this is more than 11,000 total fixed effects in Panel


                                             13
(A). These fixed effects control for outdoor temperature, sun, and other climatological
factors common to all homes. Columns (3), (4), and (5) add household characteristics,
housing unit fixed effects, and date of sale, respectively.

Across specifications there is no evidence that the upgrades improve thermal comfort. In
the full specification, upgrades are associated with a 0.002 decrease in mean tempera-
ture, in logs. This effect is negligible, equivalent to only two-tenths of one percent, and not
statistically significant. Nor is there any evidence that the upgrades improved thermal com-
fort during summer or winter. Mean temperature in upgraded homes is not lower during
the summer, nor is it higher during the winter. Point estimates vary across specifications
but in all cases are quite small in magnitude, much smaller than 1% in absolute value.
None of the fifteen regression estimates are statistically significant. Our standard errors
are clustered at the household level to allow for arbitrary serial correlation within housing-
unit observations, but are nonetheless quite small in magnitude. Across specifications the
estimates are precise enough to easily rule out a 1% change in temperature.

Table 4 reports regression estimates for electricity consumption. In all regressions the
dependent variable is cumulative electricity consumption as of November 2017, in logs.
Across specifications there is no evidence of a decrease in electricity consumption. In
Panel (A) with the complete set of homes all four estimates are positive. Although none
of the estimates are statistically significant, in three out of four cases they are estimated
with enough precision to rule out the 8% to 26% reductions predicted by the engineering
model. For homes with air conditioning in Panel (B), point estimates are negative in three
out of four specifications, but the standard errors are large. Finally, for homes without air
conditioning in Panel (C), all four point estimates are again positive. While the estimates
are again not statistically significant, in two out of the four cases they are estimated with
enough precision to rule out the reductions predicted by the engineering model. This is us-
ing 95% confidence intervals; with 90% confidence intervals we can reject the engineering
predictions in eight of eight cases in Panels (A) and (C).


3.6   Rebound Effect

Economists have long pointed out that energy efficiency lowers the cost of household ser-
vices, potentially leading households to consume more (see, e.g., Hausman, 1979; Dubin


                                              14
and McFadden, 1984; Dubin et al., 1986; Borenstein, 2015; Gillingham et al., 2016). In
our field experiment, upgraded homes are better insulated, so air conditioning potentially
delivers more cooling for a given level of energy input. If households in upgraded homes
respond to this decreased “price” by consuming more cooling, this would be a form of the
rebound effect.

To further evaluate the potential for a rebound effect, we performed additional analyses on
homes with air conditioning. As we showed earlier, the rate of air conditioner ownership is
almost exactly the same in upgraded homes (13%) and non-upgraded homes (12%), so
there is no evidence that the upgrades induced adoption. Instead, the additional analy-
ses are aimed at using our thermal comfort data to test whether households in upgraded
homes are using the air conditioners more intensively. As we describe in a simple con-
ceptual framework in the appendix, if there is a rebound effect we would expect it to take
the form of improved thermal comfort in upgraded homes.

Figures 7 and 8 plot mean hourly outcomes and outdoor temperature impacts for homes
with air conditioning. For these figures, both the upgraded and non-upgraded homes are
restricted to include only homes with air conditioning. There is no evidence of increased
thermal comfort in upgraded homes and, thus, no evidence of a rebound effect. Table
5 reports analogous regression estimates for homes with and without air conditioning.
There is no evidence of an improvement in thermal comfort in either group. Point esti-
mates are negative in all ten specifications, but small in magnitude and not statistically
significant.



4    Discussion

Thus across a wide variety of graphical and regression analyses, there is no evidence that
upgraded homes have resulted in reduced energy consumption or improved thermal com-
fort. Particularly relevant is the lack of any discernible improvement in thermal comfort,
across all hours of the day, all seasons of the year, and all levels of outdoor temperature. In
this section we explore potential mechanisms and perform a cost-benefit analysis.




                                              15
4.1   Mechanisms

Part of the explanation for the lack of energy savings is that the percentage of homes with
air conditioners (13% of homes in the study) is smaller than the percentage assumed by
the engineering model (36% for low-income homes in Monterrey). The energy savings in
the engineering model come from reduced air conditioner usage (Passive House Institute,
2012; DEEVI, 2014a,b). Specifically, the engineering model assumes that air conditioning
is used whenever the interior temperature of the home exceeds 25.0◦ C, adjusted by the
percentage of houses in the region and income segment that have air conditioners. Fur-
thermore, in the small fraction of homes with air conditioners, the way households buy and
use these devices may differ from the assumptions of the engineering model, including the
size of the air conditioner, hours of operation, or setting of the thermostat.

Without air conditioning there is less scope for improvements in thermal comfort. Insula-
tion and the other upgrades are valuable, in part, because they help keep cool air inside
the house. When homes use passive cooling, however, there is less cool air to keep
inside, so insulation is less valuable. Another part of the explanation for the lack of im-
provements in comfort is that most households have their windows open on hot days,
presumably in order to increase air flow when the indoor temperature is hot. The purpose
of insulation and many other energy-efficiency investments is to help maintain the interior
temperature, even when the exterior temperature is very different. In cold climates, this
means keeping a home warm in the winter and, in the context of Northeast Mexico, this
primarily means keeping a home cool during hot summer days. These thermal benefits
are largely nullified, however, if a household has a window or door open.

Table 6 shows that on a typical summer day, 96% of households had at least one window
open. These data come from observations made by our surveyors in the field in late June
2017. We also asked households about their window behavior, and 86% of households
reported generally having their windows open in the summer during the day. Moreover,
77% of households reported opening windows “every day” with an additional 10% report-
ing having their windows open “almost every day”. This pattern of open windows in the
summer holds even for households with air conditioners. Among households with an air
conditioner, 92% had at least one window open when we visited their homes in June 2017,
and 60% report opening windows “every day” with an additional 8% reporting “almost ev-
ery day”. Households with air conditioning report having windows open an average of


                                             16
13.3 hours per day, compared to 16.7 hours per day for all households.11


4.2    Cost-Effectiveness

We conclude that the benefits from the investments studied here are unlikely to exceed
the costs, which added $400-$500 USD to the cost of each home. We find no evidence of
energy savings or thermal comfort benefits, so it is difficult to justify this added expense
which, although not large compared to some types of energy-efficiency investments (see,
e.g. Fowlie et al., forthcoming), raise the total cost of these homes by a non-negligible 2-4
percent.

It is worthwhile to ask, however, how large the benefits would have needed to be to justify
this upfront cost. We focus on energy savings as they are the most easily monetized.12
Households in this housing development consume an average of 1,500 kilowatt hours
annually.13 Mexican households pay an average of $.05 (5 U.S. cents) per kilowatt hour,
and thus average annual electricity expenditures are $75.14

We find no evidence of energy savings. However, suppose these investments had reduced
electricity use by 5%. This would yield energy savings of about $4 annually. In addition,
these savings would yield external benefits in the form of reduced emissions of carbon
dioxide and local pollutants. With a social cost of carbon dioxide of $34 per ton, these
external costs are worth an additional $.04 per kilowatt hour.15 Thus a 5% reduction in
electricity use (75 kilowatt hours annually) would yield external benefits worth $3 annually
  11
     We do not observe whether households tend to leave the window open or not while concurrently running
the air conditioner.
  12
     This analysis takes into account only the benefits from energy savings, however public investments in
thermal comfort, while difficult to monetize, may also be justified.
  13
     As a point of comparison, the average U.S. household uses 10,800 kilowatt hours annually, according to
the U.S. Energy Information Administration.
  14
     For Mexican residential electricity rates see cfe.gob.mx. Mexican residential rates are increasing block
rates that vary by climate zone with longer steps in hotter areas. In Monterrey the relevant rate is the 1C
tariff, which in July 2017 was 0.70 pesos/kWh for the first 150 kilowatt hours per month, 0.82 pesos/kWh for
the next 150 kilowatt hours, then 1.05 pesos/kWh for the next 150 kilowatt hours. Most households in this
housing development are on the first or second tier, and thus paying the equivalent of $.04 or $.05/kWh, a
rate which is quite low by U.S. standards. There is a minimum monthly consumption level of 25 kilowatt hours
which is usually not binding and no monthly fixed charge.
  15
     This $0.04 per kilowatt hour includes damages from both carbon dioxide and local pollutants, and is
calculated using the average emissions intensity of electricity generation in Mexico. See Davis et al. (2014)
and Boomhower and Davis (2014) for details.



                                                    17
in addition to the private benefits of $4 annually.

Thus a 5% reduction in electricity use would yield $7 annually in benefits. The rate-of-
return for a $400 investment that pays back $7 annually over twenty years is negative 8%.
Air conditioning penetration is expected to increase over time, so energy savings could
increase in future years. However, even for a 10% reduction in electricity use, the rate-
of-return is still negative (-3%). Thus, overall, the benefits from these investments do not
seem to be large enough to justify the upfront costs.

Morover, it is worth emphasizing that this calculation is conservative along two dimen-
sions. First, we have assumed a 20-year time horizon, but that may be overly optimistic
given recent evidence from the United States which suggests energy-efficiency invest-
ments tend to become considerably less effective over time (Kotchen, 2017). Second,
we’ve used the bottom of the range for upfront costs. If one uses $500 rather than $400
for upfront cost, the implied rate-of-return is even lower.



5   Conclusion

An estimated one billion new homes will be built worldwide over the next decade (United
Nations, 2016). With good reason, policymakers are enthusiastic about incorporating
energy-efficiency into this construction. Energy-efficiency offers a potential “win-win”,
delivering both private savings and reduced externalities from energy use. Moreover,
economies of scale, both in construction and verification, mean that energy-efficient tech-
nologies can be incorporated into new buildings at lower cost than retrofitting older units.

The energy-efficient investments considered in this paper are aimed right at this sweet
spot. Insulation, window shading, and passive cooling systems were selected because
they were thought to be well-suited for Northeast Mexico’s hot climate. Indeed, these
technologies were expected to generate large energy savings based on an engineering
model. In sharp contrast to the engineering estimates, however, we find that the upgrades
had no detectable impact on energy use or thermal comfort. Particularly striking is the
lack of improvement in thermal comfort, in both summer and winter, and for both homes
with and without air conditioning. Overall, the benefits from these investments are almost
certainly smaller than the costs, which added $400-$500 USD per home.


                                              18
A novel feature of our analysis was the use of data loggers to record high-frequency mea-
sures of temperature and humidity. With three billion people living in the tropics, under-
standing how to build homes to improve thermal comfort is of large independent interest,
and we show how this technology can be used to test policy interventions. We show how
comparisons across hours of the day, months of the year, and across climatological con-
ditions can be used to perform a rigorous evaluation which is highly complementary to
analyses of energy demand.

Our results add to a growing number of analyses that find ex post energy savings well
below engineering estimates. See, e.g., Davis et al. (2014); Levinson (2016); Fowlie et al.
(forthcoming). In our case, the differences stem from low penetration of air conditioning,
one of the key sources of energy savings in the engineering estimates. In addition, we
document that most households have windows open during the summer, making building
insulation and the other energy-efficiency investments less effective than predicted by the
model.

Thus our results point to the urgent need to fully incorporate socioeconomic conditions
and human behavior into engineering models. Adjusting engineering estimates to account
for air conditioner ownership is relatively easy and can and should be done. Modeling
household window behavior is more challenging, and will require a better understanding
and more detailed data on how households use their windows.

This learning has great social value. Finding out what doesn’t work, and then pivoting
quickly to test promising alternatives, is a proven path to success and these findings will
motivate the search for alternative, more-effective technologies. If energy efficiency in-
vestments are going to play a significant role in improving thermal comfort, reducing en-
ergy consumption and lowering carbon dioxide emissions then we need to start optimizing
these investments as soon as possible.




                                            19
References
Allcott, Hunt and Dmitry Taubinsky, “Evaluating Behaviorally-Motivated Policy: Exper-
  imental Evidence from the Lightbulb Market,” American Economic Review, 2015, 105
  (8), 2501–2538.
  and Michael Greenstone, “Is There an Energy Efficiency Gap?,” Journal of Economic
  Perspectives, 2012, 26 (1), 3–28.
Aroonruengsawat, Anin, Maximilian Auffhammer, and Alan H Sanstad, “The Impact
  of State Level Building Codes on Residential Electricity Consumption,” Energy Journal,
  2012, 33 (1), 31.
Aydin, Erdal, Dirk Brounen, and Nils Kok, “Information Asymmetry and Energy Effi-
  ciency: Evidence from the Housing Market,” Maastricht University Working Paper, 2017.
Baker, Nick and Mark Standeven, “Thermal Comfort for Free-Running Buildings,” Energy
 and Buildings, 1996, 23 (3), 175–182.
Boomhower, Judson and Lucas W Davis, “A Credible Approach for Measuring Infra-
 marginal Participation in Energy Efficiency Programs,” Journal of Public Economics,
 2014, 113, 67–79.
Borenstein, Severin, “A Microeconomic Framework for Evaluating Energy Efficiency Re-
 bound and Some Implications,” Energy Journal, 2015, 36 (1), 1–21.
Bouillon, César Patricio et al., Room for Development: Housing Markets in Latin Amer-
 ica and the Caribbean, Springer, 2012.
Brounen, Dirk and Nils Kok, “On the Economics of Energy Labels in the Housing Mar-
  ket,” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 2011, 62 (2), 166–179.
  , , and John M Quigley, “Residential Energy Use and Conservation: Economics and
  Demographics,” European Economic Review, 2012, 56 (5), 931–945.
Cattaneo, Matias D, Sebastian Galiani, Paul J Gertler, Sebastian Martinez, and Rocio
  Titiunik, “Housing, Health, and Happiness,” American Economic Journal: Economic
  Policy, 2009, 1 (1), 75–105.
Davis, Lucas W., “Durable Goods and Residential Demand for Energy and Water: Evi-
  dence from a Field Trial,” RAND Journal of Economics, 2008, 39 (2), 530–546.
Davis, Lucas W, Alan Fuchs, and Paul Gertler, “Cash for Coolers: Evaluating a Large-
  Scale Appliance Replacement Program in Mexico,” American Economic Journal: Eco-
  nomic Policy, 2014, 6 (4), 207–238.




                                          20
   and Paul J Gertler, “Contribution of Air Conditioning Adoption to Future Energy Use
  under Global Warming,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 2015, 112
  (19), 5962–5967.
DEEVI, “Evaluación de Reducción de Emisiones, SADASI Los Heroes Capellanı́a, Garcı́a
 Nuevo Leon,” Ficha Numero B9 (Paquete #1) DEEVI 1.05 Actualizado al 15mar2014,
 2014.
  , “Evaluación de Reducción de Emisiones, SADASI Los Heroes Capellanı́a, Garcı́a
  Nuevo Leon,” Ficha Numero B4 (Paquete #2) DEEVI 1.05 Actualizado al 15mar2014,
  2014.
Devoto, Florencia, Esther Duflo, Pascaline Dupas, William Parienté, and Vincent
  Pons, “Happiness on Tap: Piped Water Adoption in Urban Morocco,” American Eco-
  nomic Journal: Economic Policy, 2012, 4 (4), 68–99.
Dubin, Jeffrey A., Allen K. Miedema, and Ram V. Chandran, “Price Effects of Energy-
 Efficient Technologies: A Study of Residential Demand for Heating and Cooling,” RAND
 Journal of Economics, 1986, 17 (3), 310–325.
Dubin, Jeffrey A and Daniel L McFadden, “An Econometric Analysis of Residential
 Electric Appliance Holdings and Consumption,” Econometrica, 1984, 52 (2), 345–362.
Fowlie, Meredith, Michael Greenstone, and Catherine Wolfram, “Do Energy Efficiency
  Investments Deliver? Evidence from the Weatherization Assistance Program,” Quar-
  terly Journal of Economics, forthcoming.
Galiani, Sebastian, Paul J Gertler, and Raimundo Undurraga, “The Half-Life of Hap-
 piness: Hedonic Adaptation in the Subjective Well-Being of Poor Slum Dwellers to a
 Large Improvement in Housing,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Pa-
 per, 2015.
Gertler, Paul J, Orie Shelef, Catherine D Wolfram, and Alan Fuchs, “The Demand for
 Energy-Using Assets among the World’s Rising Middle Classes,” American Economic
 Review, 2016, 106 (6), 1366–1401.
Gillingham, Kenneth, David Rapson, and Gernot Wagner, “The Rebound Effect and
  Energy Efficiency Policy,” Review of Environmental Economics and Policy, 2016, 10 (1),
  68–88.
Givoni, Baruch, “Comfort, Climate Analysis and Building Design Guidelines,” Energy and
  Buildings, 1992, 18 (1), 11–23.
Hausman, Jerry A, “Individual Discount Rates and the Purchase and Utilization of
  Energy-Using Durables,” Bell Journal of Economics, 1979, 10 (1), 33–54.



                                          21
Houde, Sébastien and Joseph E. Aldy, “Consumers’ Response to State Energy Efficient
 Appliance Rebate Programs,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, forthcom-
 ing.
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, “Mitigation of Climate Change, Contribu-
  tion of Working Group III to the Fifth Assessment Report,” Cambridge University Press,
  Cambridge, UK and New York, NY, 2014.
International Energy Agency, “Energy, Climate Change and Environment: 2016 In-
  sights,” 2016.
International Energy Agency (IEA), “Energy and Climate Change: World Energy Out-
  look Special Report,” 2015.
Jacobsen, Grant D and Matthew J Kotchen, “Are Building Codes Effective at Saving
  Energy? Evidence from Residential Billing Data in Florida,” Review of Economics and
  Statistics, 2013, 95 (1), 34–49.
Joskow, P. and D. Marron, “What Does a Negawatt Really Cost? Evidence from Utility
  Conservation Programs,” Energy Journal, 1992, 13 (4), 41–74.
Kotchen, Matthew J, “Longer-Run Evidence on Whether Building Energy Codes Reduce
  Residential Energy Consumption,” Journal of the Association of Environmental and Re-
  source Economists, 2017, 4 (1), 135–153.
Levinson, Arik, “How Much Energy Do Building Energy Codes Save? Evidence from
  California Houses,” American Economic Review, 2016, 106 (10), 2867–2894.
Lovins, Amory B and William D Browning, “Negawatts for Buildings,” Urban Land,
  1992, 51 (7), 26–29.
McKinsey and Company, “Unlocking Energy Efficiency in the U.S. economy,” 2009.
Metcalf, Gilbert E and Kevin A Hassett, “Measuring the Energy Savings from Home
 Improvement Investments: Evidence from Monthly Billing Data,” Review of Economics
 and Statistics, 1999, 81 (3), 516–528.
Nicol, J Fergus and Michael A Humphreys, “Adaptive Thermal Comfort and Sustainable
  Thermal Standards for Buildings,” Energy and Buildings, 2002, 34 (6), 563–572.
Nikolopoulou, Marialena and Koen Steemers, “Thermal Comfort and Psychological
  Adaptation as a Guide for Designing Urban Spaces,” Energy and Buildings, 2003, 35
  (1), 95–101.
Novan, Kevin, Aaron Smith, and Tianxia Zhou, “Residential Building Codes Do Save
 Energy: Evidence From Hourly Smart-Meter Data,” UC Davis Working Paper, 2017.



                                          22
Passive House Institute, “Technical Annex: Evaluation of Social Housing Building Types
  in Mexico, Study of Energy Efficiency, Additional Costs and CO2 Mitigation,” 2012.
Rojas, Eduardo and Nadine Medellin, “Housing Policy Matters for the Poor,” Inter-
 American Development Bank, 2011.
Ryan, Nicholas, “Is There An Energy-Efficiency Gap? Experimental Evidence from Indian
  Manufacturing Plants,” Yale University Working Paper, 2017.
Sadasi, “Analisis de Ecotecnologı́as, Costos Ecotecnı́as Tipo 1 y 2,” Cost Documentation
  for Upgrade Types 1 and 2, 2017.
United Nations Human Settlements Programme, “World Cities Report 2016: Urbaniza-
 tion and Development, Emerging Futures,” 2016.
U.S. Agency for International Development, “Updated Analysis on Mexico’s GHG Base-
  line, Marginal Abatement Cost Curve and Project Portfolio,” June 2013.
U.S. Department of Energy (DOE), Energy Information Administration, “International
  Energy Outlook 2016,” 2016.
Wolfram, Catherine, Orie Shelef, and Paul Gertler, “How Will Energy Demand Develop
 in the Developing World?,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2012, 26, 119–138.
                      Figure 1: Quasi-Random Assignment of Home Upgrades




Note: This is a map of the northwest corner of the housing development where the field experiment occurred. Although
explicit randomization was not possible, the developer distributed the upgrades widely throughout the development, result-
ing in this quasi-random pattern. The buildings in this part of the development have two stories, with one owner on the first
floor and a different owner on the second floor. In the map white indicates no upgrade. Blue is an upgrade on the first floor
only. Red is an upgrade on the second floor only. Green is upgrades on both floors.
                                              Figure 2: Mean Daily Outcomes

                         35
                         30
Temperature in Celsius
                         25
                         20
                         15




                              7/1/2016   10/1/2016    1/1/2017       4/1/2017    7/1/2017   10/1/2017

                                                        Homes with Upgrades
                                                        Homes without Upgrades
                         80
                         60
Relative Humidity
                         40
                         20




                              7/1/2016   10/1/2016    1/1/2017       4/1/2017    7/1/2017   10/1/2017

                                                        Homes with Upgrades
                                                        Homes without Upgrades
                                    Figure 3: Mean Hourly Outcomes, May to October

                         32
Temperature in Celsius
                         30
                         28
                         26




                              1AM   4AM        8AM         Noon               4PM    8PM   Midnight

                                                        Homes with Upgrades
                                                        Homes without Upgrades
                         65
                         60
Relative Humidity
                         55
                         50




                              1AM   4AM        8AM         Noon               4PM    8PM   Midnight

                                                        Homes with Upgrades
                                                        Homes without Upgrades
                              Figure 4: Mean Hourly Outcomes, May to October by Upgrade Type

                         32
Temperature in Celsius
                         30
                         28
                         26




                              1AM     4AM        8AM          Noon           4PM   8PM         Midnight

                                                          Upgrade Type #1
                                                          Upgrade Type #2
                                                          Homes without Upgrades
                         65
                         60
Relative Humidity
                         55
                         50




                              1AM     4AM        8AM          Noon           4PM   8PM         Midnight

                                                          Upgrade Type #1
                                                          Upgrade Type #2
                                                          Homes without Upgrades
                                                   Figure 5: Indoor vs. Outdoor Temperature

                              34
                              32
                              30
Mean Indoor Temperature
                              28
                              26
                              24
                              22
                              20
                              18
                              16
                              14




                                   8    10    12     14   16   18     20     22   24    26    28   30   32   34   36+
                                                                    Outdoor Temperature

                                                                     Homes with Upgrades
                                                                     Homes without Upgrades




                                       Figure 6: Indoor vs. Outdoor Temperature, By Upgrade Type
                              34
                              32
                              30
    Mean Indoor Temperature
                              28
                              26
                              24
                              22
                              20
                              18
                              16
                              14




                                   8     10   12     14   16   18     20     22   24    26    28   30   32   34   36+
                                                                    Outdoor Temperature

                                                                     Upgrade Type #1
                                                                     Upgrade Type #2
                                                                     Homes without Upgrades
Figure 7: Mean Hourly Temperature, May to October, Homes with Air Conditioning

                               32
 Temperature in Celsius
                               30
                               28
                               26




                                    1AM        4AM        8AM            Noon               4PM             8PM             Midnight

                                                                     Homes with Upgrades
                                                                     Homes without Upgrades




                                Figure 8: Indoor vs. Outdoor Temperature, Homes with Air Conditioning
                               34
                               32
                               30
     Mean Indoor Temperature
                               28
                               26
                               24
                               22
                               20
                               18
                               16
                               14




                                     8    10    12   14   16    18     20     22   24    26       28   30         32   34     36+
                                                                     Outdoor Temperature

                                                                      Homes with Upgrades
                                                                      Homes without Upgrades
                                   Table 1: Covariate Balance


                                                             (1)                 (2)              (3)

                                                        Homes with       Homes without          p-value
                                                         Upgrades          Upgrades            (1) vs (2)


Household Characteristics
Number of Household Members                                 3.73                3.76             0.81
Number of Children Under 18                                 1.59                1.58             0.90
Proportion Owner Occupied                                   0.86                0.84             0.39
Monthly Household Income, (Pesos, 1000s)                    10.1                10.4             0.85

Household Head Characteristics
Age, Years                                                  34.2                34.7             0.55
Education, Years                                            8.97                9.02             0.82
Proportion Married                                          0.88                0.84             0.24
Proportion Employed                                         0.93                0.93             0.94

Date Home was Sold
Date Sold, Contract Signed                                2013.85            2013.85             0.91
Date Sold, Keys Received                                  2013.96            2013.93             0.70

Appliance Saturation
Television                                                  0.96                0.93             0.18
Electric Fan                                                0.91                0.89             0.52
Refrigerator                                                0.92                0.86             0.03
Air Conditioner                                             0.13                0.12             0.88
Electric Heater                                             0.12                0.13             0.90

Note: This table compares mean characteristics of households living in homes with and without upgrades.
The last column reports p-values from tests that the means in the two subsamples are equal. There are 229
homes with upgrades and 238 homes without upgrades.
 Table 2: The Effect of Upgrades on Thermal Comfort and Electricity Consumption


                                                             (1)                (2)                 (3)

                                                       Homes with        Homes without           p-value
                                                        Upgrades           Upgrades             (1) vs (2)


Thermal Comfort
Temperature (in Celsius)                                    27.0               26.9                0.24
Relative Humidity (in percent)                              56.8               56.1                0.01
Proportion of Hours Above 25◦ C                             0.70               0.69                0.35

Electricity Consumption (kWh)
Cumulative as of October 2016                              3332                3030                0.21
Cumulative as of November 2017                             5018                4581                0.27
Difference October 2016 to November 2017                   2193                1994                0.46

Self-Reported Thermal Comfort
Home is Hot or Very Hot in Summer                           0.75               0.79                0.32
Home is Cold or Very Cold in Winter                         0.48               0.57                0.05
Home is Agreeable on Summer Mornings                        0.86               0.82                0.28
Home is Agreeable on Summer Afternoons                      0.45               0.41                0.41
Home is Agreeable on Summer Nights                          0.59               0.60                0.88

Other Self-Reported Outcomes
Television Usage (Hours per Day)                            8.1                 7.6                0.31
Electric Fan Usage (Hours per Day)                         11.1                11.1                0.96
Air Conditioner Usage (Hours per Day)                      10.7                 9.5                0.50
Expenditure on Last Electricity Bill (Pesos)                280                246                 0.29
Monthly Rent (Pesos)                                       1082                1070                0.58

Note: This table reports mean outcomes for homes with and without upgrades. The last column reports p-values
from tests that the means in the two subsamples are equal. There are 229 homes with upgrades and 238 homes
without upgrades. For self-reported appliance usage we report conditional means for homes with that appliance.
      Table 3: The Effect of Upgrades on Mean Temperature, Regression Evidence


                                             (1)             (2)              (3)             (4)                (5)


                                                                          A. All Days

1(Upgrade)                                 0.002           0.000            0.000          -0.003             -0.002
                                          (0.002)         (0.002)          (0.002)         (0.002)            (0.002)

Observations                            4,975,775        4,975,775       4,975,775       4,975,775          4,975,775
R-squared                                  0.00             0.94            0.94            0.94               0.94

                                                                     B. May to October

1(Upgrade)                                 0.003           0.002            0.002          -0.003             -0.002
                                          (0.002)         (0.002)          (0.002)         (0.002)            (0.002)

Observations                            3,124,038        3,124,038       3,124,038       3,124,038          3,124,038
R-squared                                  0.00             0.85            0.85            0.85               0.85

                                                                   C. November to April

1(Upgrade)                                -0.002          -0.003           -0.003          -0.003             -0.002
                                          (0.003)         (0.003)          (0.003)         (0.003)            (0.003)

Observations                            1,851,737        1,851,737       1,851,737       1,851,737          1,851,737
R-squared                                  0.00             0.91            0.91            0.91               0.91

Date by Hour-of-Sample FEs                   no              yes             yes              yes               yes
Household Characteristics                    no              no              yes              yes               yes
Housing Unit Type FEs                        no              no              no               yes               yes
Date of Sale                                 no              no              no               no                yes

Note: This table reports coefficient estimates and standard errors from fifteen separate least squares regressions. All
regressions include hourly data from 467 households. The dependent variable in all regressions is the natural log of
interior temperature in degrees Celsius. Date by hour-of-sample fixed effects are indicator variables for each hour of
each day throughout the entire sample period. Household characteristics are household size, number of children under
18, whether the home is owned, and, for the household head, age, number of years of education, marital status, and
employment status. Housing unit type fixed effects are indicator variables for six different housing unit types (e.g. layout
and number of bedrooms). Date of sale includes separate controls for when the contract was signed and when they keys
were received. Standard errors are clustered by household. None of the estimates are statistically significant at the 5%
level.
            Table 4: The Effect of Upgrades on Electricity Consumption


                                          (1)                (2)               (3)               (4)


                                                               A. All Homes

1(Upgrade)                               0.17               0.18              0.16              0.15
                                        (0.12)             (0.12)            (0.11)            (0.13)

Observations                             388                388               388               388
R-squared                                0.00               0.05              0.09              0.10

                                                  B. Homes with Air Conditioning

1(Upgrade)                               0.12               -0.17            -0.28              -0.14
                                        (0.36)             (0.41)            (0.38)            (0.46)

Observations                              44                 44                44                44
R-squared                                0.00               0.18              0.27              0.32

                                                C. Homes without Air Conditioning

1(Upgrade)                               0.17               0.20              0.18              0.19
                                        (0.13)             (0.13)            (0.12)            (0.14)

Observations                             344                344               344               344
R-squared                                0.01               0.06              0.09              0.11

Household Characteristics                  no               yes                yes               yes
Date of Sale                               no               no                 yes               yes
Housing Unit Type FEs                      no               no                 no                yes

Note: This table reports coefficient estimates and standard errors from twelve separate least squares
regressions. The dependent variable in all regressions is cumulative electricity use as of November 2017,
in logs. Robust standard errors are reported. None of these estimates are statistically significance at the
5% level.
      Table 5: The Effect of Upgrades on Temperature, By Air Conditioning Status


                                            (1)             (2)              (3)             (4)             (5)


                                                         A. Homes with Air Conditioning

1(Upgrade)                               -0.003           -0.004          -0.004          -0.017          -0.002
                                         (0.010)          (0.010)         (0.011)         (0.011)         (0.011)

Observations                             377,863         377,863         377,863         377,863          377,863
R-squared                                 0.00            0.72            0.73            0.74             0.75

                                                       B. Homes without Air Conditioning

1(Upgrade)                               -0.001           -0.003          -0.002          -0.002          -0.002
                                         (0.004)          (0.003)         (0.003)         (0.003)         (0.003)

Observations                            1,617,959       1,617,959       1,617,959       1,617,959       1,617,959
R-squared                                  0.00            0.91            0.91            0.91            0.91

Date by Hour-of-Sample FEs                  no              yes             yes             yes              yes
Household Characteristics                   no              no              yes             yes              yes
Housing Unit Type FEs                       no              no              no              yes              yes
Date of Sale                                no              no              no              no               yes

Note: This table describes the effect of upgrades on interior temperature during summer months. The table reports
coefficient estimates and standard errors from ten separate least squares regressions. The dependent variable in all
regressions is the natural log of interior temperature in degrees Celsius. Standard errors are clustered by household.
None of these estimates are statistically significance at the 5% level.
                          Table 6: Do Households Open Their Windows?


                                                                         All                  Households with
                                                                     Households               Air Conditioning


At Least One Open Window at Time of Interview                             96%                        92%
Household Reports Opening Windows During Summer                           95%                        81%
Windows Generally Open Summer Days                                        86%                        81%
Windows Generally Open Summer Nights                                      80%                        56%

How Many Days Per Week Do You Open Windows?
Every Day                                                                 77%                        60%
Almost Every Day                                                          10%                         8%
Sometimes                                                                  8%                        13%
Almost Never                                                               6%                        19%

Hours Per Day With Window Open                                            16.7                       13.3

Note: This table reports summary information about window opening behavior for all households and households with air
conditioning. This information comes from a survey administered June 2017. The first measure was recorded by the surveyor
at the time of the survey. All other measures were reported by the household.
                                                                              Appendix




                                                      Appendix Figure 1: Mean Daily Outcomes, Additional Measure
                                               1
Proportion of Hours Above 25 Degrees Celsius
                                               .8
                                               .6
                                               .4
                                               .2
                                               0




                                                    7/1/2016    10/1/2016   1/1/2017       4/1/2017    7/1/2017   10/1/2017

                                                                              Homes with Upgrades
                                                                              Homes without Upgrades
                                                                                Appendix




                                                          Appendix Figure 2: Mean Hourly Outcomes, May to October
                                               1
Proportion of Hours Above 25 Degrees Celsius
                                               .8
                                               .6
                                               .4
                                               .2
                                               0




                                                    1AM        4AM        8AM         Noon           4PM    8PM     Midnight

                                                                                  Upgrade Type #1
                                                                                  Upgrade Type #2
                                                                                  Homes without Upgrades
                                                        Appendix


                                Appendix Figure 3: Mean Hourly Outcomes, November to April

                         24
Temperature in Celsius
                         22
                         20
                         18




                              1AM     4AM        8AM         Noon           4PM     8PM      Midnight

                                                         Upgrade Type #1
                                                         Upgrade Type #2
                                                         Homes without Upgrades
                         70
                         65
Relative Humidity
                         60
                         55




                              1AM     4AM        8AM         Noon           4PM     8PM      Midnight

                                                         Upgrade Type #1
                                                         Upgrade Type #2
                                                         Homes without Upgrades
                                                                              Appendix




                                                      Appendix Figure 4: Mean Hourly Outcomes, November to April
                                               1
Proportion of Hours Above 25 Degrees Celsius
                                               .8
                                               .6
                                               .4
                                               .2
                                               0




                                                    1AM     4AM        8AM         Noon           4PM     8PM      Midnight

                                                                               Upgrade Type #1
                                                                               Upgrade Type #2
                                                                               Homes without Upgrades
                                                  Appendix




Appendix Table 1: The Effect of Upgrades on Mean Temperature, By Upgrade Type


                                         (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)              (5)


                                                                     A. All Days

1(Upgrade Type #1)                      0.003            0.002         0.002           -0.001            0.000
                                       (0.003)         (0.002)        (0.002)         (0.002)           (0.003)
1(Upgrade Type #2)                      0.001           -0.005         -0.006          -0.006           -0.005
                                       (0.004)         (0.003)        (0.003)         (0.004)           (0.004)

Observations                         4,975,775       4,975,775       4,975,775       4,975,775        4,975,775
R-squared                               0.00            0.94            0.94            0.94             0.94

                                                                  B. May to October

1(Upgrade Type #1)                     0.005*          0.005*         0.005*           -0.000            0.002
                                       (0.002)         (0.002)        (0.002)         (0.003)           (0.003)
1(Upgrade Type #2)                      -0.005          -0.006         -0.007          -0.007           -0.006
                                       (0.004)         (0.004)        (0.004)         (0.004)           (0.004)

Observations                         3,124,038       3,124,038       3,124,038       3,124,038        3,124,038
R-squared                               0.00            0.85            0.85            0.85             0.85

                                                                 C. November to April

1(Upgrade Type #1)                      -0.002          -0.003         -0.003          -0.002           -0.003
                                       (0.004)         (0.003)        (0.003)         (0.003)           (0.004)
1(Upgrade Type #2)                      -0.001          -0.003         -0.003          -0.004           -0.002
                                       (0.005)         (0.004)        (0.004)         (0.004)           (0.004)

Observations                         1,851,737       1,851,737       1,851,737       1,851,737        1,851,737
R-squared                               0.00            0.91            0.91            0.91             0.91

Date by Hour-of-Sample FEs               no              yes             yes             yes              yes
Household Characteristics                no              no              yes             yes              yes
Housing Unit Type FEs                    no              no              no              yes              yes
Date of Sale                             no              no              no              no               yes

Note: This table reports coefficient estimates and standard errors from fifteen separate least squares regressions
identical to the regressions in Table 3 except these regressions include separate indicator variable for the two
types of upgrades. A single asterisk indicates statistical significance at the 5% level; none of these estimates are
statistically significance at the 1% level.
                                         Appendix


Conceptual Model of the Rebound Effect

Suppose households derive utility from cooling z and all other consumption,

                                      U = (z, y − xpx )                                    (2)

where all other consumption is household income y minus what households spend on
energy for cooling x, which costs px per unit. Cooling z is produced in the home according
to the following production technology:
                           (
                                α1 ∗ x if home is upgraded
                       z=                                                               (3)
                                α2 ∗ x if home is not upgraded.

That is, upgraded homes produce α1 units of cooling per unit of energy input x, whereas
non-upgraded homes produce α2 units of cooling per unit of energy input. The presump-
tion is that upgraded homes are more energy-efficient so α1 > α2 .
Households maximize utility by equating the marginal rate of substitution with the price
ratio, where the “price” of cooling depends on the price of energy px and on the energy
efficiency of the home α. Households living in upgraded homes face a lower price of
cooling, and thus will tend to consume more,

                                      z ∗ (α1 ) > z ∗ (α2 )                                (4)

Here we have omitted income y and energy prices px as they are assumed to be the same
in both upgraded and non-upgraded homes.
The engineering estimates of energy savings for our field experiment ignored the rebound
effect, assuming that both upgraded and non-upgraded homes would be maintained at
the same level of thermal comfort. Under this assumption, z is the same in both sets of
homes, so the energy savings from the upgrades can be calculated,
                                          z   z
                                            −   .                                          (5)
                                          α2 α1
Energy savings thus depend on the relative magnitudes of α1 and α2 . If, for example, α1
is twice as large as α2 then the new homes will use half as much energy. In contrast, what
we observe in the data is the energy savings net of any behavioral response,

                                      z ∗ (α2 ) z ∗ (α1 )
                                               −          .                                (6)
                                         α2        α1
If there is a behavioral response, then z ∗ (α1 ) > z ∗ (α2 ), so observed energy savings will
                                           Appendix


be smaller than the engineering calculation. This may mean, for example, that upgrades
lead to smaller reductions in externalities than was predicted. However, this behavioral
response is a positive phenomenon from the household’s perspective. When z goes up
this is the household consuming more cooling, which increases their utility. It would be
naive to believe that households would not want to reoptimize their choice about how
much cooling to consume, and incorrect to exclude these utility benefits in valuing the
upgrades.
That said, our empirical results provide clear evidence against this type of behavioral
response. In our field experiment we observe thermal comfort, so we are able to show
that z ∗ (α1 ) and z ∗ (α2 ) are essentially identical. Thus while in theory the energy efficiency
upgrades might have led to increased consumption of thermal comfort, in practice, we
find no empirical evidence. Consequently, when we find that energy consumption x is
not significantly different in upgraded and non-upgraded homes, this is very unlikely to be
driven by the rebound effect.
