                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           INFORMATION AND MULTI-PERIOD
                              OPTIMAL INCOME TAXATION
                            WITH GOVERNMENT COMMITMENT




                                Dagobert L. Brito

                               Jonathan H. Hamilton

                                Steven M. Slutsky

                                Joseph E. Stiglitz




                              Working Paper No. 2458




                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 1987




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in Taxation.
Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                        NBER Working Paper #2458
                                                        December 1987



                       Informationand Multi-Period Optimal Income
                          Taxation with Government Commitment


                                       ABSTRACT

           The   optimal incaie taxation problem has   been   extensively studied in one-
    period nzxlels. When consi.niers work for many periods, this paper analyzes 'what
    information, if any, that the goverrient learns about abilities in one period
    can be used in later periods to attain re redistribution than in a one-
    period world. When the govertinent nhast cc*niit itself to future tax schedules,
    the gains c fran relaxing self-selection constraints by intertaiporal
    nonstationarity. The effect of nonstationarity is analogous to that of
    raridanization in one-period nh,dels.
           In a ncdel with two ability classes it is shown that the key use of
    information is that only a single lifetine self-selection constraint for each
    type of constziEr Ixiast be imposed. Sa'e necessary and sufficient conditions
    for randanization or nonstationarity are given. The planner can make
    additional use of the information when individual and social rates of tine
    discounting differ. In this case, the limiting tax schedule is a
    nondistorting one if the goverrrnt has a lower discount rate than
    individuals.
Dagobert L. Brito                                       Jonathan H. Hamilton
Department of Economics                                 Department of Economics
Rice University                                         University of Florida
Houston, TX 77251                                       Gainesville, FL 32611


Steven M. Slutsky                                       Joseph E. Stiglitz
Department of Economics                                 Department of Economics
University of Florida                                   Princeton University
Gainesville, FL 32611                                   Princeton, NJ 08544
I. Introduction
     Most optimal incare tax nixiels in the Mirrlees [1971] tradition analyze
only a single period. If individuals are identifiable across periods,
questions arise about the continued validity of the results in those models.
An obvious objection is that, in the first period, the goverrnEnt learns
  dividua' abilities and therefore should be able to attain a first best
result in the next period. If individuals do not recognize that their second
period taxes depend upon their first period behavior, this conclusion is
correct. However, if individuals correctly anticipate this linkage and adjust
their behavior accordingly, the gain fran using the information is at least
partially negated. This paper considers whether the first best outc can be
achieved in later periods despite this response by individuals and if not,
whether the use of any information fran period one can lead to an inprovmnt
over sfnle repetition of the one period optimal tax schedule.
     The model has individuals of t discrete ability classes. The
goverrnint knows the size and ability level of each class but does not
initially know to which class any particular individual belongs. This paper
thus adapts the one period model of Stiglitz [1982a1 to a many period
situation and relaxes assunptions about the preferences of the t classes.
     1 different assunptions about the governrent's use of information can
be made. One is that the goverrnnent is able to ccmiiit itself to the tax
schedules it will use in each period and thus to limit the extent to which it
uses information about an indivichial's ability, learned fran the taxes paid in
one period, to affect the taxes paid in later periods. The other is that the
governnnt cannot ccmnit itself in advance not to use information to the full
extent. Once an individual's ability is learned, the goverrilEnt is not only
able to impose hmp simi taxation but does so as soon as possible. Both
assurptions are rth studying. The second may be more realistic since it may
                                           2



in fact be impossible for goverrmEnts to carinit themselves even by constitu-
tiorial maans since later goverrirnts can change rules and constitutions. On
the other hand, the no cannitnEnt solution is feasible when caiinitnnt is
possible   but not   the reverse. Hence, the first assixnption allows studying a
benchnark case   'kere information   is used   optimally across periods.   In this
paper, the first assulption of    cannitnnt     is made.   Elsewhere, we analyze   the
no caimitnnt case.
     When the goverriint   can cannit itself, the following results are shown:
     (1) If first best is not optimal in a one period nxxlel, it is not
optimal in later periods of a milti-period mxlel.
     (2) The self-selection constraint creates a potential nonconvexity which
flip lies that somatiixs it may be desirable to have different tax functions in
each period.
     (3) When the tax structure differs between periods,         the information   frctn
the first period incorporated in later periods' schedules is only an
individual's ability class. The planner uses this to incorporate a large
penalty in later periods for an agent who acts in the second period as if his
ability differs fran that revealed in the first, thus forcing agents to be
consistent   in their behavior across periods.
     These results follow fran noting that a nultiperiod optimal tax nxdel and
a one period wdel with randan taxation as discussed in Stiglitz [1982a] are
essentially the sanE. The randan tax nxxiel has no restrictions on the
relative frequencies with which different schedules are offered. With an
infinite horizon, it is possible to exactly duplicate the randan solution.
Howsver, in a finite period iu,del, restrictions exist on the frequency with
which bundles can be offered over tinE. In addition, the nailtiperiod mdel
may be uore restrictive if it has period-by-period governnEnt budget
constraints instead of one intertenporal constraint. Despite these extra
                                         3


 restrictions, similar argnnts show that different tax schedules in different
 periods may be desirable. Intertiporal nonstationarity is an alternative
 rrthod of inip1nting randan taxes that does not require either ex ante or ex
 post violations of horizontal equity.
      (4) The "single crossing" assunption camKn to many self-selecticxi
 uodels is riot needed for uost results. At the optiniim, at nxst one self-
 selection constraint can bind whether or not single crossing is asstid. A
 ccxrplete characterization of the solution to the one-period probln, with and
 without randcm taxation, is given both in terms of taxes and the Pareto
 frontier. These results are re general than pLevic*is analyses since no
 specific relationship beten the classes is assuied.
     (5) en a self-selection constraint binds, randanization is desirable for
any indifference map under a sufficiently concave transformation of the utility
function of the class with the binding constraint. If a local randairLzation
inproves upon the nonrandctii solution, then for   any three probabilities, s
lottery with those probabilities inproves upon the nonrandan solution.
     In section II, the basic nxxlel is described and results for a one period
ndel with and without randanization are derived. In addition, nre general
conditions are derived for randcl,1i7.ation to be desirable than have previously
appeared in the literature. In section III, the niiltiperiod problan is
considered. Results are given for a single intert,oral goverr1int budget
constraint and for separate period-by-period constraints. The results depend
upon whether the goverritnt 's and individuals' discount rates differ. If they
are equal, information is used across periods only to nthnic randcxnization.
Wcien they differ, systratic use of information occurs since "trade" between
the goverrnt and individuals is now possible due to different discount
rates. In section IV, sa general conclusions are drawn about the use of
information in optimal tax nodels.
                                             4



II. Taxation in a One Period ?bdel
     In this section, we analyze the basic one period trodel.          The   results here
generalize those in Stiglitz [1982a1 and help draw the analogy between randan
taxation and nultiperiod taxation.

A.   Basic AssimptioflS
     A society is ccxnposed of two different classes of individuals denoted A
and B. The individuals within each class are identical but the two classes
differ either in tastes or abilities. The goverrint is assuxd initially not
to know to which class any individual belongs but to know the niithers of
individuals in each class, denoted            i = a, b. Individuals corisui a single
good, C, and earn incai, Y. People in each class have a utility function
overthesebundlesV1(C, Y), i=a, b, withV1/3C          >0                                     0.

The maxinun incam that individuals in each class can earn is bounded fran above
by K1 so that Y1       1(1,    = a, b. The marginal rate of substitution for a given
individual is     denoted     FIRS1(C, Y) -V/V > 0, i = a, b.

     The     following asstnnptions    are made about V1(C, Y):
                              a,   b, is twice continuously differentiable     in C and Y;
      (Al)    V1(C, Y), i =

      (A2) V1(C, Y), i =      a,   b, is strictly concave   in C and Y;
                               b(C Y) differ        at alnxst   every (C, Y) bundle   and
      (A3) MRSa(C, Y) and

              points sihere the MRS 's are   equal are not where the      indifference curves


              are tangent to    the no-tax budget   line.
 Assuliption
             (Al) is made for convenience but could be relaxed without
 difficulty. Assuiptiori (A2) of concavity (instead of quasiconcavity) insures
 that expected utility in the randan taxation nDdel and lifetize discounted
 utility in iiultiperiod nixiels describe convex preferences. Asstmption (A3) is
 crucial in guaranteeing that the two groups actually have different preferences
 since, if their indifference curves coincide, redistribution between groups is
                                                  5



 impossible.    Assurrption   (A3) allows   the    indifference curves of the two classes
 to have   railtiple crossings. If there     are uultiple      crossings, then there will be
bundles    at 'which the indifference curves of the two groups are tangent, having
eqial marginal rates of substitution. Such tangencies are not ruled out as long
as they form discrete lines in the (C, Y) planeJ
      A special case satisfying these assunptions is that considered in
Stiglitz [1982a1 in 'which the utility functions V1(C, Y) arise fran con
underlying preferences over corisunption and labor with the classes A and B
having different abilities (arid wages). Let L1 be hours worked arid w the wage
rate of group i. Then L1 = Y/w        and V1(C, Y) = U(C,       Yfw) 'where U is the ccxmon
utility function over C and L. If A is the nre able group (Wa > Wb) then
NRSa (C, y) <   b   (C, Y) at each (C, Y)             As shown below, such a "single
crossing" assunption is unnecessary for nxst of the standard results.

B.   Nonrandan Taxation
     AssunE that the governnEnt nnst :impose the sai tax on everyone who earns
the s inccxiE either to satisfy horizontal equity or for administrative
ease. It cannot randanly charge son individuals a different tax than others.
Since the goverriint cannot distinguish individuals of the two classes, it nust
therefore offer a single tax schedule T(Y) to all individuals . An individual
belonging to either class then faces a budget constraint C Y - T(Y) and
maximizes utility subject to this constraint taking the tax schedule as given.
For each possThle tax schedule, there will be a best consutption-incaiE vector
(C1(T), Y1(T)) for each class and a utility for each class v1T = V-(C1(T),
Y1(T)). It is clear that for any T, v1T V1& (T), Y3 (T)) i j, since 1LT is
the max nun given the constraint and (C3(T), Y3(T)) is a feasible vector for
both classes.4 Budget balance, NaT(Ya) + NbTd)                 0, mist also be satisfied
for eas         ty5 The governmant then seeks the tax function 'which yields the
                                          6



"best" pair of utilities (Va.T, vbT). This best pair could be selected according
to a social welfare function. For any social welfare function, the pair (VaT,
vbT will be a constrained Pareto optilmill. Thus, in this paper, we consider the
set of Pareto-optimal utilities without arbitrarily assuiing a particular
welfare function.
     Since directly searching over tax functions to find the optiimun is
difficult, an equivalent problan is solved of choosing (C1, Y1) pairs for each
class that satisfy self-selection constraints, V1(C1, Y1) V1(C3, Y3), i = a
and b and j   i. That is, individuals in neither class can prefer the bundle
assigned to the other class to their own. These self-selection constraints


t
are necessary and sufficient for there to exist a tax function under which the
    classes

above.
              optiially choose the assigned bundles. Necessity was argued
         To show sufficiency, note that   if Y1   y3 then C' > C3 trust also hold

or both classes prefer (C3, y3). Consider     the   tax function,


     T(Y) = Y, Y <   y, T(Y) = Y -C3, yJ Y < Y1, T(Y) =             - C'-,   y'

Under this step function, the only bundles which individuals in either class
could choose are (0, 0), (C3, Y3), and (C', Y'). This follows,           for   exanple,
since (C1, Y) is preferred to any bundle (C1, Y), Y> Y1, which are the only
ones possible for incaxes greater than Y'. In addition, under boundary
conditions on preferences, either bundle will be preferred to (0, 0). Under
this tax function, individuals in class i can do no better than (C', Y') and
                                              6
                                             Given the iridividn1s' budget
those in j can do no better than (C3,
constraints, budget balance is satisfied if Na(Ca -     + Nb (Cb - yb) 0

 (aggregate   consuiption no greater than aregate     incane).

     The goverruxent' s one   period nonrandan Pareto taxation problan then can be
written as mnaximization problen (P1)
                                                        7




(P1) Max CLNaVa(Ca, Ya) + (1              -
                                              a)NbVb(Cb, b)
               s.t.          V1(C1, y1)        V1(&, yJ), i = a, b, j             xi:
                             N(Ca - Ya) + NaWb              -   b)                   :   u
                               <   y1     K1, i =     a, b
                             C1     0, i =     a, b

where    a   is a paraneter       which   can be   varied between 0 and 1 to find the
constrained Pareto frontier, A, i = a, b, is the Lagrange nultiplier
associated with the self-selection constraint of class i; and is the

Lagrange niiLtiplier associated with the resource balance constraint.

Theorn I:        For
                                                                 *   *   J*
                       all a c [0, 1], there exists a solution ((Ca y ), ((                        j.*
                                                                                                  y ))
to   maximization probln (P1).

Proof: The constraint set is nonanpty since any                            =      = Ca =     min(K, Kb)
satisfies all the constraints in (P1). The constraint set is closed because all
constraint functions are continuous in the                      choice   variables and the constraints
are specified by weak inequalities. Inccts are bounded by assttption and these
bounds imply that consunptions are bounded through the resource constraint.
Hence, the constraint set is bounded. The objective function is continuous and
thus attains a maxinun on the nonnpty ccmpact constraint set.                                  Q.E.D.

        To characterize the solution to (P1), let C1 (a),                      y1 (a), and

V1(a)        V1(C1(a), Y1(c)), i =        a,   b, be the optiiiul bundles and utilities as
functions   of cz.     Let   V10, i = a,       b, be the utilities of each group in the no

tax   situation.

Theorn II: The solution to (P1) satisfies the following properties:
(i)  If V'(a) Vi then V1(&(a), Y3(a)) < V1(a), i = a, b and j i.
                                                            8



(ii) If V1(ct) = V1(C3(cL), y-()) then V3(cL) >                      V3(C1(a),     y3-(cL)),   i = a, b and
            j         i.
(iii)            >   0

(iv) If                    = 0 then MR&(C(ct),     Y(ci))   = 1, i = a,     b    and j   i
(v)



                      1 < MRS3 (C3(cL), y3(ci)) <    NRS1(C3(cx),    Y3(CL)), or



                     MRS1(C3(a), Y3()) < MR&(C3(ct), y3(c*)) <              1.

Before          proving Theoraii        II,   an explanation of     these   conditions   is in order.

The    first says that the self-selection constraint does not bind for a group
which receives higher utility than in the no-tax situation. The second says
that at nost one self-selection constraint can bind at the optTTIm -- even
with nultiple crossings of the indifference curves. The third says that
production efficiency is satisfied in that all production is consunEd (Na(Ca -
ya) + rccb - Yb) = 0).    The fourth says that, if the self-selection
constraint does not bind for group i, then the opt fimmi bundle for the group j
is one with no distortion -- the inplicit marginal tax rate is zero. The
fifth condition says that if the self-selection constraint for group i is
binding, then at group j's bundle, MR& lies between the marginal rate of
transformation and MRS1. The marginal rate of transformation (=1)                                can be

either          larger       or   smaller than the t MRS'       •


Proof:
        (i) Consider the no tax situation. The budget constraint of group i is
C-               and       the optinial   choice (Crn, y) satisfies C = y10              fr
monotonicity of                V'-(Ci, y1). If V'(C3, yJ) = V1(C1, y-)               V1°, then C1     y1

and    C3            y3 nust      hold with   strict inequality in the second unless (C3, Y3) =

(C1,    y) =             (C10, Y°). This latter possibility can occur only when
                                             9



V1(C1, y1)   = V1°   and NRS1(C10,   yin) = NF3(C1° yO) = 1.         Disregarding   this
special case, N(C1 - y) + N(CJ - yi > 0 trust hold, violating the resource
balance constraint. (See Figure 1).
     (ii) The no tax utilities (Vao, V'°) are feasible and mist lie on the
constrained Pareto frontier. It is impossible to raise both types'            'welfare
since no                               exist sai for which V1(a0) = V10
           distortions exist. There trust

i = a, b. Hence, for any other a, either Va(a) ,a(a) or Vb(a)
Frc*n (i), the group whose utility is at least at the no tax level cannot have
its self—selection constraint bind. It is thus impossible to have self-
select ion constraints binding for both groups.
     (iii) Rewrite the resource constraint as Na(Ca - Ya) +                  - b)   <

and let L(ct, y) be the value of the objective function of (P1) at the opt1m'
Then, frcin the envelope theorn, differentiating L around y = 0, L/ay =
For any y > 0, the extra resources can always be given to the groups whose
self-selection constraint is not binding without any of the constraints being
violated. This raises the value of the objective function, showing
        o.8
     (iv) Assure         =0   and the self-selection constraint for group i holds
with strict inequality. If MR&       (C3(ct), yJ   (a)) > 1, then, for small 6,
V3(C3(ct) — 5, Y3(ct) - 6) > V3 (C3 (a), Y3(a)) and V1(C3(a) — 6, Y3(a) — 6)         <


will hold. Since resource balance continues to hold, the bundle (C3(ct) - 6,
yJ (a) - (5) yields a higher value for the objective function. Similarly, if
MRS (C3 (a), Y3(a)) < 1, (C3(ct) + 6, Y3(a)        + 6) yields   a higher value of the
objective function. (See Figure 2). If = 0 but the self-selection
constraint holds with equality, then fran (ii), = 0 trust hold. The first
order conditions immEdiately yield the result since ternE fran neither
self-selection constraint enter.
                                                             10




MRS(C3(),            yJ())   <    1, (C() +         , Y(a)        +   )   yields a higher value of the

objective function.               (See figure 2). If Ai = 0               but the self-selection

constraint holds with                 equality,    then   fran (ii),       A1 = 0 trust hold. The first

order conditions inirediately yield the result since terms from neither

self-selection constraint enter.

      (v)        AssunE
                             Xa
                                  >    0 so that    fran (ii),        Ab = 0 trust   hold.    The first order

conditions with respect to                     and Yb are:


                                                                          =0
      (1 -
                 c)Nb   V(cb, yb) xV(C, yb) -                                                                    (1)



      (1 -
                 c)Nb V(Cb, yb) -             xV(C,       yb) +
                                                                  iNb
                                                                          = 0                                    (2)



Solving     for uNb and canbining terms yields:

            - )Nb[V(Cb, Yb)               +   V(Cb, Yb)]
                                                             =                  Yb) +   V(Cb, Yb)]               (3)
      (1
                                                                  Aa[V(Cb

or:


      (1 -                        Yb)[1 -         sb(cb, Yb)] = Aac
                                                                  V(Cb, Yb)             [1   - 4fa(Cb     yb)]
                 a)NbVb(Cb,
                      c
                                                                                                                 (4)

Mding      AaV(Cb yb)b(cb Yb)                      to both sides of (4), combining             terms,    and

substituting (1) yields
                 - b(Cb               Yb)] = Aac
                                               Va(Cb,     Yb)[sb(cb, b) - a(Cb                   Yb)]
                                                                                                                 (5)

Since Xe (by         assunption) and i (from part (ii))                   are   positive, the result
follows.
      If    Xb
                 >   0, similar        manipulation of the first order conditions for Ca                    and   111a


shows the required results.                                                                             Q.E.D.
                                                        11




  Requiring  taxes to raise net revenue does not change significantly any of the
  results. In Theorsm 11(i), instead of using the no tax situation as a
  benchmark, the situation with a luTp s.mi tax equal to the per capita share of
  net required revenue can be used and all the results follow.
             (2) If the "single crossing" assuaption is made, as in Stiglitz [l982aJ
 due to different abilities, MRSa <                     holds   at all (C, Y) bundles. Thus, part
  (v)       siuplifies to Aa > 0 inplies a(Cb(a)                         <   gb(b()         Yb(cs)) <   1   and
        >   0 inplies 1 < NRSa(Ca(CL)),      Ya(a)) <   5b((5(a)          ya(a))
             (3) The intuition behind part Cv) can be given
                                                                         by argunts similar to
 the proof of part         (iv).   Assure    A> 0   and      that gb(b yb) <           J   <5ab yb)
 Then, at least for small          'S >
                                          0, if the bundle      (d',         is
                                                                       Yb)        changed   to
 Cd' + cS,         +'S)   resce balance continues to be                satisfied. A's self-
 selection       constraint holds with strict inequality, and B's                 welfare   rises
 yielding a Pareto improvanent. (See Figure 3). If b(d' yb) <a(Cb Yb)
   1 or if 1 <MRSa(d', Yb)
                                     <MRSb(d), Yb), then mving
                                                       (d', Yb) along A's
indifference curve below the 450 line through (d', Yb leaves the self-
selection constraint for A holding with equality, raises B's utility, and
yields extra resources which can be given to A to yield a Pareto improvement.
(See Figure 4).
     (4) Along the Pareto frontier, there are regions in which each self-
selection constraint binds. Even if the t groups differ only because of
ability differences, it cannot be assuid that the self-selection constraint
of the able will bind. At sa points on the frontier, little redistribution
is done and neither binds. At others, the redistribution is fran the unable
to the able, so the self-selection constraint of the unable binds.
        (5) Our characterization of the optimal taxes permits canparisons between
the utility possibility frontiers (UPF) of the constrained problem and the full
                                                      12



    information probln (with no self-selection constraints). If neither self-
    selection constraint binds, then the t IJPF's coincide. If one binds, then the
    constrained UPF lies strictly below the full-information one. With the
    additional assumption that consumption and leisure are normal for both classes,
-
    the three regions of the UPF (neither constraint binds, the constraint on A
    binds, the constraint on B binds) are connected seIEnts. (See Figure 5).

    Corollary I: Under assumptions (Al)-(A3) and normality of consumption and
    leisure, if a self-selection constraint binds at a point on the 13FF then that
    constraint binds at all points on the 13FF with lower utility for that class.
    The UPF has three seients: first, one self-selection constraint binds; then,
    neither binds (this includes the no-tax point); lastly, the other self-
    selection constraint binds.

    Proof: Consider a solution to (P1) for son a such that Xa> 0. Denote this
                               where Va(C,'4) = Va(C, 4) and, fran Theorn
    solution as (Ct,'4, C, 4)
                                                                               1.                    be
    11(i),              14) < \7LO
                                      Fran TheornI(v),                   4)         Let (C, 4)
    the bundle      such that   Vb(C, 4) = Vb(C,           4)
                                       - 'f" subject to Vb(Cb,
                                                                and   b( 4)
                                                                         b) =
                                                                                =1    Then (4 4)
     is   the   bundle which   minimizes                       vb(( v1)
     strict concavity, it then follows that C - 4 < C - 4. Therefore,
                             niist hold. If not, and Va4, 4) Va(C, 4),                        then
     Va4, 4) > Va4, 4)
     the bundle (Ct, '14, C, 4)        xild     satisfy self-selection for both types and,
     as canpared to (C,'4, C,           '4)
                                              would give both types the s utility but

     'would use less net resources.           This   would contradict   the assunption that


            '4, c, 4) is        on the constrained 11FF.
            AssuI that the result    false so that there exists a solution for saie
                                        is

     other a, (C, '4, C, '4) which
                                      is on the constrained 13FF at a 1ocr utility for
     A and at 'which neither self-selection constraint binds. That is, asswe (i)
                                                    13


                     =

          (iii)
                4)            ) >            )               4, (ii)             4)    >
                                                                                                     4),
   and
                   MRSa(C, Y) =    b(cb 4) = 1.           Fran these   assunptions, it follows
   that
                   C and 4      4 cannot both hold.       If both held, then
                                                                  Va(C, 4)
   Va(C, 4) and hence, since Va(C, 4) > Va(C,
                                                  4) was shown above, Va(C, 4)
  Va(C, 4) which contradicts (i). Therefore, either            or
  hold. Since, fran (ii) and (iii),
                                                          <
                                                                      > 4 uust    4
                                     MRSb(C, 4) = b(cb 4) and
                                                                     Vb(C, 4) <
  Vb(c, 4),   the first inequality would imply that consiixptjon is inferior
                                                                             and
  the second that leisure is   inferior. In either case, a contradiction arises
  fran asstnriing the result is false.
                                                                                                Q.E.D.

          (6)     In the coristraj.n problem, the self-selection
                                                                       constraints imply
 minini utility levels for each group, while in the full
                                                                       information problem,
 utility for         a group can be pushed   down to V'(O, K').    Thus the utility
 possibility frontier        is truncated at higher utility levels. For example,
 suppose    the classes differ only in ability with
                                                    Wa > wb.            For any    Y>      0,
 Va(C,    Y) > Vb(C, Y) since A's need to wor1
                                                      less   to earn tFie sane   incon.
 Va(Ca, Ya) > Vb(Cb, Yb) since Va(Ca, Ya)
                                                     Vb(Cb, Yb)    <Va(Cb,   Yb)   violates
 A's   self-selection constraint.       Thus,   A niist   always achieve nire utility than
B. This         rins true if the problem is fornulated as maximizing V1
                                                                                      subject to
V3 being not less than a target level, and
                                           varying the             target to     map out the
utility possibility frontier. At low enough target levels, the
                                                                             target
constraint will not bind.
       (7) The ordering of MRS 'S at the distorted bundle, (C3, Y3)
                                                                                 if         >   0,
has an interpretation in terma of taxes. If the
                                                             group desiring to nTtmic (i)
has the steeper indifference curve through j 's bundle, then
                                                             group j is
subsidized cxi the margin. If i has the flatter indifference
                                                              curve through j 's
bundle, group j is taxed on the margin.
                                          14




B.     Randan Taxation
     The desirability of randanizatiOfl in optimal taxation ni,dels, or in
principal-agent uodels in general, has been studied by Weiss [1976], Stiglitz
                                                                          [1985].
[1982a1, Fellingham, Kn, and Neinan [1984], and Arnott and Stiglitz
                                                                   [19841 have
(A related problan is that of designing auctions; Naskin and Riley
established the desirability of randanizatiOfl of payoffs in optimal auctions.)
                                                                        randc*n
The results in this section generalize those in Stiglitz [1982a]. The
                                                                           but
action by the govermnt takes place after individuals reveal their type
before they decide their levels of effort. The govermnt COnStIUCtS t
                                                                    and one for
lotteries of tax schedules, one intended for individuals in group A
                                                                             in.
those in group B. Each individual nust decide 'which lottery to participate
                                                                The indivicb1,
Then, at randan, a tax schedule is assigned to the individual.
                                                                      Since the
given his tax schedule, decides cxi the anmt of inccxie to produce.
 individual has already declared his type, every schedule can be constructed to
 allow only one (C, Y) bundle to be chosen, even if the individual has
misrevealed his type. Thus, each lottery can be viewed as a lottery over
                                                                         be drawn.
 different (C, Y) bundles - one for each possible tax schedule that may
      Randanization before the effort decision cannot do rse than ranckiiriza-
                                                                   after the
 don after the effort decision. Assune the randanizatiOti occs
 effort decision. In all outcarEs, the individual produces the sSnE pre-tax
 incale but conslxnption differs depending upon the tax charged. This, at the
                                                                        which Y
 revelation stage, each lottery can be viewed as over (C, Y) bundles in
     is fixed and C differs. Such lotteries remain feasible 'èien the inccxie
     decision is made after randcinizatiOn but, in that case, other bundles with
     different Y's also are feasible. Hence, randani.zatiOfl after the incalE
     decision, yields a smaller feasible set for the goverrtnt and may be
     suboptimal.9
                                               15




        on   the other hand, randomization before revelation cannot inrove on
randomization after revelation. In such circumstances, the govertnt
randomly assigns tax schedules to individuals without knowing their type.
After receiving a schedule, an individual faces no further uncertainty. Each
schedule the goverrixnt randomizes over can be treated as a pair of (C, Y)
bundles, one for each type. When the govermnt's probln is trarisfornEd to
choosing pairs of (C, Y) bundles, then each pair corresponding to one tax
schedule nust satisfy the self-selection constraints for each type. When the
randomization occurs after revelation, only one self-selection constraint over
the expected utilities arises. Although the bundles under prerevelation
randainess will satisfy this expected constraint, it is clearly weaker and
hence the prerevelatiori ranckTlness may be suboptim1 10
        To   specify formally the gaverrmnt ' s optmi ation with the possibility of
randan taxation, consider the lotteries to be offered to the t groups A and
B.   Each group will be offered a      set of bundles and a probability for each
bundle in the set. The lotteries thus are L1 (        (C, Y), ir), i = a,b, and
h = 1,. .. ,k( i) where k(i) is SaiE finite nuiber. The goverriint can choose
both the bundles and the probabilities in each lottery. The one period
maximization prthln with randomization (P11) is then:


(P11)              a   ka)( ah) + (1 - c:t), kfb)
                       h=l                             h=1
                                                                               ybh


                                                                   = a,
         St.
                F,rihvi(ci1,   ylh)           jhvi(cih yJh)   i.          b,




              Na       1Tai( -        + N1)     bh      - ybh)      0: u
                                                        16



            k(i)
                   iT = 1,     i =   a,   b,     nih
                                                        0, i =    a, b and   h   =    1,...,k(i)
            h=1


                                i=a,b,h=1,...,k(i)

             0 C M', i               = a, b, h =       1,...,k(i)
As   in   (P1), a is a   weight which can be varied to find the entire Pareto
frontier, A and i        are   the niiltipliers on the self-selection and resource
constraints. The upper bounds M1 on                         bound the feasible
      In prob1n (P11), the objective function and constraints incorporate ex
ante expected values. For the self-selection constraints and the govermnt' s
objective function this is reasonable. The goverrnElt nx.ist design the tax
SchaTE and the      individuals niist          decide which type to declare before realization.
It is therefore of no consequence if,                  ex   post, saneone prefers the bundle
achieved by    sone of the           other     type. Heier, production ocs after the
realization of      the randan process. If the ex post               realization has total
consunption    greater than inccxne,           it is not feasible even though expected
consunption equaled expected incane. For the                    constraints      in   (P11), this   can
clearly occur. If sare          cth exceeds       NaKa + NbKb (maxinun total production), even
if it arises with very &nall probability, the outcaie is not feasible when this
bundle arises. Such ex post violations of feasibility can clearly occur even if
the M1 are set to restrict all C'' to be less than NaKa +
    One justification for the constraint is if the governnnt places one tax
                                                                                 l2
function for each individual of a particular type into an urn and the
individuals draw without replacIEnt. Then the ex ante expected net resce
use of an individual is achieved exactly ex post by the group. Hence the
constraint in (P11)      is    appropriate. An alternative justification of the
constraint in (P11) is that each individual of a revealed typed draws a tax
schedule at randan fran the same distribution. As the nunber of individuals
                                                    17


  gets large, the distribution of ex post resource balance will always have
                                                                             values
  violating the constraint. Howaver, the law of large numbers
                                                                implies that the
  per capita violation of the constraint goes to zero. Thus if the consunptjon
  vectors are reduced by even an arbitrarily small , the
                                                           probability that the
  constraint is satisfied goes to 1 as the population grows. Hence,
                                                                      the solution
  to (P11) can be viewed as an c-equilThrit in this case. Since
                                                                  the
  self-selection constraints holding with equality already
                                                           imply that the solution
  to (P11) is an c-equilibriun, this is not a real restriction.
       To sImmn-ize, there exist randomization procedures under which
                                                                      the resource
  constraint in (P11) is appropriate. Without
                                               specifying it in detail, such a
 procedure is assuned to be utilized by the goverrm1t. Care trust be
                                                                        taken,
 since for other procedures, the forrriilition in (P11) is
                                                           inappropriate.
      Under allowable procedures, a solution to (P11) always exists.

 Theoran III:
 ___________     For every a, there exists a pair of lotteries La*                  h* rh*),
   *              *                                                               ((C ,
         h=1, . . k (a) and Lb*          h* h*        *               *
                                                           h=1,. .. , k   (b)   which solve (P11).
 Proof: As in Theorn I, the constraint set
                                                         is nonnpty since       feasible bundles
 in (P1) can be       treated   as degenerate lotteries. The constraint set is closed
and all variables (1rh, cth, Yth)
                                  are bounded. Hence, the constraint set is
cciipact. The continuous objective function then attains a maxinun on the
noneipty cc*ipact constraint set.
                                                                                             Q.E.D.

       The optiiml lotteries which solve (P11) can be           characterized       in a    similar
manner to   the nonrandan optiniii.       As in the previous section, V°,             i = a,   b,
are   the utilities     in   the no tax situation,
                                                   ((Cth(cz), Yth(a)),
i = a,   b, h=1,. .    ,k* (i),   are   the optim1 lotteries
                                                                                lrth(a)),

                                                               as a function of a,          arid

(a) h(a)V1(Cth(a) Y(a)), i                           a, b, -          optil ected
utilities   achieved    as   functions of a.
                                                      18



Theorn IV: The               solution   to (P11) satisfies    the following   properties

(i)     If (a)               V1° then kfi)        OVi(cjh() yih) <(a),               i = a,   b,
                                        h=1
        j       i.
                              k(J)
(ii)    If EV1(cx)                .h
                                          vi(CJh(), ih) then EV (a)           >

                              h=1
        k(i)                             Y(a)), i =          b, and j    i.
                 ,rth(a)VJ(C (ci),
                                                        a,
        h=1

(iii)       >    0.
(iv) If         i's self-selection constraint does not bind, then an optimal solution
        existswithk(j) =1andMR&(C(a), 'f1(a)) =1, i=a, b, andj
                                                                                                   i.
                                                                                with
(v)     For i         = a,   b, and j i, if > 0 then an optimal solution exists
        k(j)           3   and at each h = 1,... ,k(j), either


                 1 <    NR& (C3FI(a), ih) < NRS1(CJh(a), yJh(a))


                 IYIRS1(CJh(ct),     yh)      <   NR&(C'(ct),   jh) < 1, or

                 NRS1(CJh(a), yjh()) = MR& (C(a), .]h()) = 1.

Proof:        See the Appendix.

                                                                 those of Theoran
 Conditions (i) - (iii) of Theorn IV are essentially the sama as
 II with the utilities replaced by expected utilities. Condition (iv) states
 that if the self-selection constraint of group i is not binding then it is
 desirable to have no randanizatiofl for group j and, as in Theorn II, there is
 no distortionary taxation at this bundle. Condition (v) states that there is no
 gain to having randcinization over nxre than three bundles and, if randanization
 is    over                      at each of those bundles the NRS1, FIR& and
                group j' s bundles,       then.

 NRT(=1) niist relate to each other in the ways specified in condition (v) of
                                                                         lie between MRS1 and 1. The
 Theorn II. That is, at each (CJh, Jh)                       NR& trust
                                          19


possibility that MRS1 = NRS =   1   at one of the bundles cannot be ruled out.
Note it is possible to raridanize with MRS1 and MR& greater than 1 at sane
bundles and less than 1 at others. Single crossing iioses the s relation
bet MRS1 arid MR& at all bundles in the lottery.

      In the solution to (P11), at nost one nondegenerate lottery is needed and
randanization over nire than three bundles is unnecessary. It has not been
shown that either group will face a nondegenerate lottery. First order
conditions are of little use for showing that a nondegenerate lottery exists or
for finding the randan solution, because the nonrandcni solution to (P1)
satisfies the first order conditions for (P11). To see this, denote the
nonrandan solution as a lottery over k(i) bundles where each bundle is identical
to the nonrandan bundle solving (P1). First order conditions with respect to
    are trivially satisfied and those with respect to Cth and     reduce to
those in (P1). Hence, a nondegenerate randan solution exists only when nultiple
solutions to the first order conditions exist, with the extra solutions
asyninetric (and not readily apparent). Hver, since the self-selection
constraints involve the difference in utilities and therefore do not define
convex sets, nnltiple solutions are possible. Theorn V shows that for any pair
of indifference maps satisfying assunptions (Al) - (Aill), sane allowable
transformation exists under which a randcxn solution is desirable. Maskin and
Riley [1980] show a similar result with a continwin of abilities for t1 special
case of preferences which are additive in consution and labor and linear in
consunpticxi.

Theorn V: Consider any V1 and V3 satisfying assuxption (Al)-(A3) and any a
such that A> 0, i = a, b. Then there exists sane concavification of V1 such
that k(j) > 1 holds in the solution to (P11), whether or not V3 is similarly
transfonned. Proof: See the Appendix.
                                        20



     In Theoran V, only the utility function of individuals in group i is
transforned. However, transforming the utility of individuals in group j as
well does not change the result since the randcxnizatiori involves bundles over
which j is indifferent. Hence, the result also applies to situations in which
the t groups have the sama utility functions but differ in ability.        See
Figure 6 for an illustration of the construction.
     The construction in the proof den,nstrates clearly how the nonconvexity
of the self-selection constraints can induce randcii ation. If group j has
the randan bundle, then the transformation makes group i 's utility function
nxre concave and thus reduces the desirability of j 's lottery to individuals
in group i. This weakens i's self-selection constraint and allows for
adjusnts which raise j 's expected utility. Having the initial randaniza-
tion over tv bundles which are chosen to be indifferent to the optiiiii
nonrandctn bundle given to j is a convenient way to dalDristrate that an
iinprovent over the solution in (P1) exists. This particular randcinization
has a special property -- it does not violate horizontal equity defined as
identical agents having equal utilities even if they have different budget
sets. All type j's receive equal utility, although with different consuition
bundles. The randanization only causes utilities to be stochastic for type
i's who nrimic type j's. Jhile this may not be the optimal randanization, it
rains feasible even when ex post horizontal equity is required..
     Theoren V shows that the desirability of randanization cannot be ruled
out frcin indifference maps since randanizaticxi can arise for essentially any
indifference maps under sai transformation. It is orth noting hever, that
the shape of the indifference map does have sai effect on whether randaniza-
tion is desirable. The next theoran gives a necessary and sufficient
conditn for local randcinization which depends in part on the curvature of
                                                       21



indifference curves. As str Aa > 0 in the solution to (P1) so that the
marginal tax rate is not zero at (Cb, Yb). Let H1 be the Hessian of the
utility function of type i at (Cb, Yb).


TheoranVI: Assun X> 0 in the solution to (P1) and consider any
probability triple 11, 2' 113). at least t of 'which are positive arid
TI1
      +      +   113 =   1.   There exists s local randanjzation with these
probabilities around the nonrandcxn solution to (P1) 'which improves on that
solution iff there exists q c                  such that

                          g}Ibgt                                 gg                         (6)
          V(Cb, Yb)l1 _b(cb, Yb)l                    V(Cb,    Yb)I1 _MRSa(Cb, Yb)


where qt is the transpose            of q. Proof: See the Appendix

The expression in (6) depends upon              properties of the indifference          map though
the MRS1(Cl), Yb) terRE            and the   qHlqt   terms   which depend   upon both the
curvature        of indifference curves and the transformation of utility.
          As a corollary, it follows that, if preferences of A' s and B's are
similar,      then local randcxrLzation will not be desirable. Assl.mE the utility
functions belong          to   a family   paranEterized      by P, Va(C,          and   (Vb(C, ''   b'
Corollary        II: ASSURE that preferences are related such that at all P = 'a                    =

Va(C, Y, P) = F(V1'(C, Y, F)). Then, for a                         b'
                                                        randclm7atiofl is

desirable unless F is sufficiently concave. Proof: See the Appendix.


A special        case of this result is t classes with identical preferences but
different        abilities. If the abilities are close to each other, no

randanization is desirable regardless of which group the redistribution
favors.13        Both Theorn V and Corollary II show that               concavifying    utility
                                                  22



makes    randanization desirable. Theoren V            concerns     the degree of    concavity   of
each   utility function separately, while Corollary II involves the concavity of
one   utility functionrelative to the other. For a n1es1 b' if both functions
undergo the same transformation, no local randanization will be desirable.
Theorn V daixnstrates that,          if a b'
                                          randctiization will be desirable if

the ccmix,ri transformation is extr enough. Thus, this randanization laist be

a   nonlocal randanization of bundles offered a group in a lottery.
       In order to see that the condition of Theoran VI               can be satisfied,

consider a special case of all individuals having identical additive utility
functions over consuition and            labor with the groups differing only           in ability.

Corollary     III: Consider      the utility functions V1 (C, Y) = * (C) - Y (Y/w),
i = a,   b, where the          are ability parameters with 0 <w <Was To satisfy
concavity     of V1, iji is   concave   and y convex. Let L1 = Y/w.
(A) Assume the self-selection constraint for                group   A is binding.

        (i)   No randanization     is desirable   if Ly"(L)/y"(L)            -   2, at all L.

        (ii) Consider    any probabilities             112, 113)
                                                                   with   at least to positive

              and with   111 +        = 1.     There exists sare local randanization
                               112 + 113
              with these   probabilities around        the nonrandan optinu        of (P1) which

              improves on the nonrandan       solution iff:


                   Wa2(1
                           -   ab ybfl ,2(1 - b(cb,
                           (ftCYb/Wa)         >          .yTt(yb/%)
                                                                          yb))
                                                                                          C




(B) Assure the self-selection constraint for group B is binding:
    (i) No randanization is desirable if Ly"(L)/y"(L) -2, at all L.
        (ii) Consider any probabilities (if1, ira, 113) with at least t positive
              and with in + + 113 = 1. There exists sai local randanization
              with these probabilities around the nonrandan optinhiTi of (P1) which
              improves on the nonrandan solution if f:
                                                  23




                          yI(Ya/wb)                     YlI(Ya/W)
                    ,2b(Ca ya) - 1)               WaZ(NRSa(Ca, ) -        1)
                                                                                     8


  Proof: See the Appendix.

          Consider the condition in A(ii). Since      and 1 - RSa(Cb, b) >
                                                 Wa>
  1      sb(cb yb) > 0, the denanjnator of the LHS exceeds that of the RHS in
  (7).    Hence, y"(Yb/w) nxist exceed y"(Yb/wb) by a sufficient anount for this
 condition to be satisfied. Since Yb/Wa <       this can be satisfied by a
                                                    Y"/Wb,
 sufficiently negative value of y". A sufficient condition for (7) to be
 satisfied is that the derivatji of -y"(Y/w) / [w2 (1 - MRS) I respect to w be
                                                                      with
 positive. Taking this derivative yields the following sufficient condition
 for the desirability of local raridcxnization with any probabilities which is
 stricter than the necessary condition in A(i) of Theoran VI:

         L(y"(L)/y"(L) < - 2   - [y'(L) + y"(L)}/[w'(C)      -
                                                                 y'(L)J            (9)

where    wi'(C) - y'(L) = w(C)(1 - NRS(Cb, Yb)) > 0. A similar calculation
                                                                              for
B(ii)    yields (9) with the inequality reversed as a sufficient condition for
local randaijzation when Ab >      0.
                                  Note that wçb'(C) - y'(C)           < 0 when Ab > 0    so
that this is stricter than the necessary condition B(i).
      Condjtion (Ai) and (Bi), which are niitually exclusive              unless
                 = -2,
                      are sufficient conditions for no randanization to be
desirable. Thus, randanjzatjon is desirable nowhere cxi the IJPF if
Lv" CL) /y" (L) = 2.14 F'urthernore, ranckinization cannot be desirable both
with     > 0 and     > 0 unless
                                  Ly'"(L)/y"(L) + 2 changes sign along the TJPF as
labor supply changes. Since sufficient conditions for local randmf 7ti
such as (7) and (8) are opposite in sign, randaiiization
                                                         is desirable sacthere
on the UPF, for many allowable     y   (.)   functions.15
                                            24




III.   Taxation in a 1hltiperiod MDdel

A.     AssuiiptioflS

       The trodel is an N period repetition of the one period orld of section II
(N may be finite or infinite). 1 classes exist and each individual belongs
to the sau class across periods. The nuthers in each group rin constant
over tine. Preferences over inca1 and consunptiOfl within each period satisfy
(Al) - (A3) and are identical across periods. Lifetin utility is the present
discounted value of the utility in the M periods. Individuals in both classes
have the sane discount factor denoted p. Denoting C1 (Ci,. . . ,C) and
                                                      =                 Y1 =

                                       consunption and inc for      class i and
(Y,.. ,Y) as the vectors of lifetijie
         .



V1(C1, Y1) as the lifetinE utility function for class i, then

                              N
             V1(C1,    Y) =         ptV1(C, Y), i = a, b                 (10)
                              t=1


 It follows that if there is randcxnizatiorl, with the individuals offered
           over lifetine inccze-constnhlptiofl vectors, then
                                                             this lottery can be
 lotteries
 deccxnposed into separate lotteries in each period and expected lifetinE
                                                                        in   the
 utility equals the present discounted value of the expected utilities
 different periods.
      Individuals are unable to save or to borrow across periods and thus face
 N separate budget constraints. This assutptiotl
                                                 is made to focus purely on the
 role of information transfer across periods in affecting taxation witlx,ut
 ca,licating the analysis with possibility of alth or interest taxation. In
 the first period, every individual faces the s tax function T1 (Y1) since
 the governneflt has no basis upon which to distinguish individii1s. TIre-
                                                                            and
 after, the goverriint can recall the inccilEs reported in previous periods
                                                                Thus, the tax
 can condition the tax functions on previous periods' incctte.
                                                     25


function      in period t >   1,   is written   as   Tt(YtIY1, .. .   Taking   the
sequence of tax functions as given, each individual chooses lifetinE
consuiiption and inccxi to solve the follcMing maximization:


         .x
                   pt_lV1(t, yl)
      (1, yl)
                s.t. C Y - T'(Y)
                     I-Il—
                         < V1
                           t Pt tVl              V- \
                              —
                                    "t   V1.               e. —
                                                           L  —




The   solution gives 1ifetin consulçtion and incalE vectors as functions of the
vector of tax functions C1 (T1,. .. , 'In),      Y1 (T1, . .. ,

       Given    the choices by individuals in each class and subject to budget
balance requireients, the governnent chooses the set of tax functions to
achieve its inax:inum. As in the one period iiodel, the decision on the choice
of tax functions can be transfornd into choice of lifetin consuulption inccxr
vectors for each class with (Ca, ) and (Cb,       sustainable by a systen of
tax functions if and only if lifetinE self-selection constraints are satisfied
for each class. There is only one lifetin constraint for each class and riot
period by period self-selection constraints. In the first period, individuals
will base their decisions whether or not to reveal their type through their
choice of incai on the entire lifetinE consequences that follow. If
individuals do reveal in the first period, the goverrnt knows thereafter who
they are and can prevent then fran acting as if they belonged to a different
class. After revelation through their first period choices, the second and
later period tax functions can incorporate a large penalty if any other bundle
is chosen than the one the governnEnt desires then to choose. For exanpie, a
taxfunctionoftheforinT(Y)=Y,Y<?,T(Y)=Y+K-?,Y?,willinduce
the individual to produce incaxe of?, raises revenue of K, for any K ?,              and
                                                26




allows                                                     I
       the indivichial to consi C = Y - T(Y) = - K. After the first period
revelation, the individuals in later periods no longer find the bundle of the
other group to be feasible. Hence, a self-selection constraint no longer
constrains the goverrnts' choices. Because the goverrmEnt has the ability
to cainiit itself, and separation is desirable in a single period problem
(Theorem II), separation will occur in every period.
    T separate budget balance requirenEnts for the goverEnt are
considered. One possibility is that the goverritent has a single nultiperiod
                        N
budget constraint           aa+ NbT I 0, where T1 is the tax revenue
                      ti [N Tt
raised from group i in period t and cS is the discount factor faced by the
governmEnt. Alternatively, the governmEnt could be required to balance its
budget separately in each period with NaT + NbT 0,                 t =   1,. .. ,M.   Clearly,

the second is a tighter constraint on the goverrmmnt' s            choices. It reflects

uxre closely the goal of considering pure information transfer beten periods
and is consistent with the no saving assimiption for individuals. On the other
hand, the single ntiltiperiod constraint is justifiable if the governmEnt has
access   to possibilities not available to individuals           such as   a storage

technology      feasible only   on a large scale or access to a rld market             closed
to trade by individuals.

        The governmEnt maximizes the present discounted value            of   a weighted sum

of utilities in each period where the weights a and (1 - a) are arbitrary and
can vary to change the distribution beten the groups but are constant over
tima.    The governmant' s discount     factor 6 need not equal that of          individw1 s.

Wnen they are equal (s = p), the govenmnt' s maximization corresponds to
finding the nultiperiod Pareto frontier as a varies fran 0 to 1. when they
differ    (6     p), the problem is no longer a Pareto         problem since the governmEnt

does not       respect individuals'   intertnporal preferences.      .Jhile nuch

literature analyzes       why private   and   social   discount rates could     differ, these
                                                     27



  do   not constitute the maj or reasons for allowing S                  p in this paper. The
  major focus is on the case of equal discount rates. Allowing than to differ
  gives rise to a case which serves as a useful benchmark for canparison when
  discussing the uses of information in the optimal tax structure. The use of
  information across periods when 6 =    is nuch less systanatic than when 6
                                             p
                                                                                                  p.
        With randcinization not available to the govertnt, r_ consider t
 maximization problans, (Pilla) and (P11Th), depending upon which budget
 constraint is used. For the single nultiperiod constraint the problan is:

 (Plila)      Max       6t [aNaVa(C, Y) + (1 -
                                               a)NbVb(C, Y)]

                    M        .   .   .
             s.t.                                                            a, b, j     i
                    t=1 pt_l[V1(C, Y) -      V1(C,        Y)]       0, i =




                    ti 6•1[N(C -            + Kb(C -                 0


                    OYK1, i=a,b, t=1,...,M

                        C0, i=a,b,
For the separate constraints on each period, the problan is identical except
                            t1[Na (C - Y)
that the constraint                                             -          0 is
                                                     ÷ Nb (C        Y)            replaced by:

(P11Th)     Na(C -   Y) + Nb(C - Y)          0,       t   =

The   Lagrange nxiltipliers on the self-selection constraints are still denoted
by Aa and Ab aitluigh their values will differ between problans (Pilla) and
(P11Th). The Lagrange nultiplier on the single budget balance constraint in
(Pilla) is denoted by i while            t = 1,. . . ,M denote the nultipliers on each
period's budget balance constraint in (P11Th).
       Section B presents the case of 6 =        p   and section C the case of 6             p.
                                                             28




B.         Optimal Taxation 'Jhen 6
           Characterization theorems of the optimal solution in (Pilla) similar to
Theorems II and IV for (P1) and (P11) continue to hold. Let C(ci) and Y),
t = a, b, and t =            1, . . ,M, be the solutions to                (Plila)       as functions of .

                          the optimal utility in            period    t of individuals in class i for
Vlt(a)       denotes

                   V10, i = a, b, again denotes
                                                one period utility with no taxes.
(Plila).


Theorem        VII: The optimal solution to                 (Plila) satisfies the following


properties:


 (i)        Ifpt_lV1(ct) vioLpt_1 thenpt_lV1(C(c),
                                                                                         yJ()) <pt_l1t(ç),

            i = a, b and j            i.
                              .            N                 .         .                   M
                   N                                   .


 (ii)        1:f          t_lVlt(a)    =         pt_lV1(C(a), y3())                        )    pt_1vJt()   >
                                                                                          t=1
                   t=1                     t=1

                   N
                         ptlVJ(C(), Y(cx)), i = a, b and                    j    i.
                   t=1


 (iii) ii          >0
                                                                  =                                             = 1,
 (iv) If                 = 0 then C(ct) =        C(ct), Y(ci)         Y(ct) dl1R&(C(c&), Y(a))
             i=a,b,ji,t=l,..,M
                                                                                          = 1,...,M either:
     (v)     For i =       a, b and   j     i,    if         0 then at each t


                    1 < MRS3
                                  (C(a),   Y(ci)) <    1RS1(C(ct), Y(a))

                                                   MRS3                         < 1
                    NRS1(C(ci), Y(a)) <                    (C(ci),    Y(a))

                                                                                     1
                    MRS'(C(ct), Y(ci))             MR&(C(ct), Y(ci)) =


     Proof:        See the Appendix.
                                            29




     Fran part (v) it follows that even if information is utilized, if
distortions exist in the first period then they persist in future periods.
Thus, information learned cannot be fully used to uL,ve to a first best result
after the first period. The govermnt nust ccmnit itself to use information
only to a limited extent.
     Theorn VII does not show that the goverrilEnt will use any information
gained in the first period to affect later period taxes. In fact, a s inpie
repetition of the one period nonrandan solution to (P1) satisfies all the first
order conditions in (Pilla). Hver, despite the apparent synhietry of the
first order conditions, nultiple asynmatric solutions may arise in the form of
nonstationarity of the optimal consunption-incai vectors. Such nonstationary
solutions arise fran the sama nonconvexity of the self-selection constraints
that gives rise to randan solutions in the one period probln. In fact, the
following theor show that there is an exact analo beten existence of a
nondegenerate solution to (P11) and a nonstationary solution to (Pilla).
     Let V'()    =
                     t=l
                           pt_lV1(C(a), Y(ct))/
                                                  t=1
                                                          ,   i = a, b,   be the average

utility   achieved by               its lifetiix. Let the normalized utility
                        each group over

possibility frontier be the utility possibility frontier in average utilities.

Theorn VIII: Assuma p        =6    2/3 and M =   . Then for every ci, there exists a
solution to (Pilla). This solution involves nonstationarity iff k(i) > 1,
i = a or b, in (P11). In addition, the normalized Pareto frontier arising in
(Plila) is identical to that in (P11). Proof: See the Appendix.

     Given   an infinite    horizon and a large enough discount factor, any one
period randan solution can be exactly duplicated by a nonstatiaiary solution.
The circuxistances in Theorn V and VI under which randanization will arise are
thus sufficient for nonstationsry solutions. Even if M is finite or 6 is
1l, nonstationarity can arise.
                                               30



Theorem     IX: If tS    = p and   if M is finite or ó < 2/3, then the normalized Pareto
frontier for (Pilla) y be interior to that for (P11). For any , a solution
will involve nonstationarity only if k(i) > i, i = a or b in (P11). For S 2/3,
there exists a sufficiently large finite M such that nonstationarity in a solution
to (Pilla) arises iff k(i) > 1, i = a or b in (P11). Proof: See the Appendix.

       In   many   cases,   the result for finite N or tS   < 2/3 may be stronger. As
shown in Theorem VI, 'when son local randanization inproves on the nonraridom
solution, then there exists a randanization with any probabilities in the
probability siuplex which iuproves on the nonrandan solution. In this case,
even though the optinal solution to (P11) cannot be duplicated, a nonstationary
solution to (Pilla) exists iff a local nonrandan solution exists in (P11).
       Problem (P11th) is the case of pure information transfer across periods
since neither the goverriInt nor individuals can borroc or save. It is not
possible to duplicate the one period randan solution by nonstationarity unless
randanization was over bundles with C           = (N /N) (C3 - Y3), h = 1, 2, 3.
                                                -


This   is not always true as shown by the exan,le in Theorem VI where only inca
is randcxn. Nevertheless, nonstationarity may still arise in (P11th) as long as
randanization arises in (P11Th). The Appendix contains a characterization of
the solution to (P11Th) as Theorem Al.
       The only significant difference between the results for (P11th) and those
for (PlIla) is that it cannot be shown that the sane bundle is given in every
period to group j        if group i's self-selection constraint is not binding.
However, any nonstationarity for group j is over bundles with no distortion.

Theorem X: If       p   = d, nonstationarity is possible in the solution to (P11th)
and arises only if k(i) > 1, i = a or b, in (P11). The normalized Pareto
frontier found in (P11th) is generally interior to that in (Plila) whenever

the solution to (Plila) involves nonstationarity. Proof: See the Appendix.
                                                    31


          If randcirness within periods is permitted as ll
                                                           as nonstationarity of
   the tax schedules, clearly, the goverruint can do as l1 as in the solution
   to (P11). This is         true for finite M and
                                            any discount rate. Only if randc]jl
  solutions are used for (P11) will either randan or
                                                      nonstationary solutions be
  used in the niilti-perjod problan, regardless of whether the
                                                               budget constraint
  is a single one or a period-by-perjj one. Allowing both
                                                             types of variation
  leads to tailtiple optimal solutions which canbine randanization
                                                                                   and
  nonstationaz.ity in different ways.

  C.     pptiinal Taxation when     6    p
         When the governmant and individuals
                                                                 rates,
                                             have different discount

 5ysttjc ncxlstationarity arises in the optinal solution. To contrast with
 the nonsysteitjc nonstationarity when 6 = , only
                                                   results for (Pilla) are
 given. Similar results hold if period-by-period budget balance is
                                                                   required or
 if additional randcwjzatjon is allowed. Note that similar
                                                           results arise if
 the t classes had different private discount rates instead of
                                                                                  identical
 private rates different fran the govertiirit's.
     The first order conditjon in (Pilla) are:

 r6tcNa + Aapt_i](aVa/aC) — Xbpt_i(Vb/aC)                —             = 0,
                                                                                         (ha)
                                                             pót_lNa
        t=
             +
                 Aapt_h] (aVa/ay) —     Apt(aVb/ya)      —
                                                             I.L6tN = 0,                 (hib)
       t = 1, . . . ,M
                   +         ](Vb/ac)) —                      —            = 0,
                       Abp                   Aapt_l(aVa/Cb)       p6thrq                 (lie)
       t=    1, . . . ,N
                  +
       t = 1,... ,M
                       xbP   ](av1'/aY) - Xapt_l(3V/Y) +          p6tl 0,                (lid)

       When 6 > p, it follows fran
                                         these conditions that as t increases, the
ecorKmy approaches the single period first best UPF for any values of Aa and
                                                       32



                                                            the   normalized     UPF based on average
       This, of course, does not tran               that
Ab.
utilities     is      the first best.


            XI: Consider (Pilla) *ien               S > p and M =       . AssunE that the utility
Theorn
                                                                                      and
functions satisfy the conditions that lirn(Va/3C)
                                       C+o
                                                  / (aVb/9C)
liI%(ava/ay)/(?)DIaY) are finite. Then, when Ab = 0 and Aa> 0,
K b (C, ) =                      1.    Since NRSa ( C, Y) =       1,   for   all t, as t grows,       the

                                       period-by-period Pareto frontier.
optinhlit approaches the
                                                                                                 = 1, for
Proof: Given Ab = 0,                (ha) and (lib) yield NRSa(C, ?)
                                      equations

all t.      Divide equation (lie) b:r 6t_1(3Jb/acl) and (lid) by
                                                                        = 0,
 (1 -
          )Nb
                  -   A   6)t [(           f9C)I(avb/aCt)I - Nb/(vb/ac)                               (12-a)




      -           -                                               - pNb/(3vb19) = 0,                   (12b)
 (1         Nb



                          is   finite for C > 0 and lifl(Va/C) / (aVb/aC)
                                                                                      is    finite,
 Since     av1/aC
                                                                                                            =
                                      /C)/(Va/aC)1 = 0.                      should   urn sup(aVb/aC)
 urn      p(p/s)t_ [(                                             Hence,


 then after sara t, the left hand side of (12a) ,uld be strictly positive
 violating the first order condition. Thus, no C sequence goes to zero,
                                                                       frcxn (12b), Urn sup           <Kb.
 guaranteeing that Urn inf                 C>     0. Similarly,


 refore, Em                      (/6)t(/aCb) = Urn                     (p/)t1 (3/3) = 0.

           Given      this, divide (lie) and (lid) by                    and solve for iisb(c, ) =

  _(/y)/(Vb/aC).
                                         - Aa(p/5)t1(aVa/)                                              (13)
           b(cb, yb) =                   ÷ X,145)      (3Va/9IP)

                                                                                                            Q.E.D.
  then     umrsbcb, Y) =                  1.
           t+co
                                                         33


       Note that the conditions on utility given in this theorn can be
  satisfied by the utility functions in Theorn VI with Wa >      Given the         wb.
  separability,    (aVa/aC)/(aVb/ac) =        1    at all C. The maxiimri incare            earned by
  the able exceeds that      earned    by the unable Ka> Kb. Hence, even                   if ay/aL goes
  into   infinity as   L approaches it maxinun value at K11w1, since Kb/Wa < Ka,Wa

  then 3Y(Kb/w)/ay and ljjn(DVa/ay)/(avb/ay) are                    finite.
                             y+1c
         Different discount rates cause            the   goverrunt and        individuals    of type A
  to have   difference preferences. Therefore, trade between th9n                        is possible.
 The goverrxrnt places a higher value on the                   fixture   than do individuals.
 Hence, the govemlent can       offer     typ. A individuaia             higher   current utility and
 lower   future utility 'while       doing   the   reverse for type B as canpared to the
 solution   when d = p. Self-selection will continue to be satisfied
                                                                     given the
 value of p but social welfare rises. To see this, note that fran equation
 (ha) and (hib), aVa/aC =
                            aVa/aY
                                     =
                                         b"a + Aa(P/(5)t_lj.. Hence, nrginal
 utility of consunption rises over tinE indicating that consuTption declines.
 As t goes to infinity, a3Va/aC goes to . For group B consuriptiori,
 (1 —
     )aVb/aC) u + a/N)(p/s)t_ la/C), which since urn inf C >                                        0,
mist at least eventually decline with C rising. As t goes to infinity,
(1 -
     a)(3Vb/C) goes to       Thus, in the limit, the solution is not                         only
Pareto optinial but it is first best in the sense of being the s as the
solution to the one period probln without self-selection constraints.
     If < p, the trade is still possible but tends to go in the opposite
direction. As t goes to infinity, C goes to infinity and Y goes to zero
along a   path with MRSa(C, Y) = 1,           at all
                                                   ihis, A's utility rises over
                                                          t.

                             follows that
            Fran (lic), it
                                          C mist also go to infinity as t rises.
However, Y going either to 0 or to Kb could be consistent with the first
order condition (lid). Whatever the specific solution, in this case as when s
> p, the paths of carnodities arid utilities
                                             nove systematically over tine and
do not vary solely to nthn-ic       randariizatiorj.
                                       34



IV. Conclusions
     These results indicate that when the governnent respects individual
discount rates, only in a weak sense does the optimal tax sys tan incorporate
                                                               over tine.
any information about individuals learned fran their responses
First, if the goverrment is able to randanize in each period, then no benefit
                                                                              A
is gained by keeping track of what jndividuals have earned in past periods.
lottery can be offered in each period, independent of other periods,
satisfying self-selection constraints and yielding the best possible outccxre.
Second, if the govertent cannot ranckxnize directly, then it can duplicate
ran&rnizatiOtl by intertanporal nonstationaritY. 3uch nonstationaritY requires
that the governnent keep track of individuals' past behavior since, after the
first period, self-selection constraints need not be satisfied. Third, even
when the goverment nust keep track of behavior and uses this in future
periods, the information is not used systanatically to yield continued
increases in the governnent objective function over tine. Instead, changes in
 the weighted suni of utilities across periods occurs only as the govertiient
 tries to mimic a one period randcin optimrun. If tax schedules mist vary over
 tine in a particular iner, it is not because of the need to learn
 individuals' abilities, but because utility in each period mist be ordered
 correctly to be consistent with lifetine utility constraints.
      By contrast, 'when the governnent discounts at a different rate than
 individuals, then there is systanatic change in the bundles given to
 individuals. In the limit, the distortions may be eliminated. This arises
 because the different intertaporal preferences of the govermnt and
 individuals leaves roan for "trade" between than. Over t:ine the differences
 between the utilities of the groups grows larger.
     The results in this paper show that nonstationaritY over tine and
 randanization within each period can substitute for each other in the opti1'l
                                        35



 intertnpora1  incai tax. It is not clear which approach is preferable since
 each has sr advantages.
      First, they are not perfect substitutes. Even if the goverrlnQnt has    a
 single intertanporal budget balance constraint, nonstationarity is guaranteed
 to do as well as randanization only with i infinite horizon and a
sufficiently large discount factor. If the goverruent has a separate budget
constraint in each period, the optimal randanization cannot be canpietely
icated by intertrporal variability, so that randanization along with
nonstationarity would be needed to reach this Pareto frontier.
     Second, political and administrative difficulties could prevent
inplaientation of either nethod. On one hand, the goverrinent may be reluctant
to incorporate randcinization explicitly in the tax code. This is especially
true since the optimal randanization requires individuals to declare their
type and then receive at randan a tax schedule before choosing their labor
supplies. The optimal randanization can generally not be iniplanented by
randcxn collection or eaforcannt after labor supply decisions. On the other
hand, intertanporal nonstatioriarity requires keeping track of past labor
supply decisions to determine individuals' current tax paynents. Hocver,

this is simplified since the goverrnent needs only to recall each individual's
type as revealed by past decisions instead of relearning this each period as
isrequired by randanization.
     Third, both ethically and to increase acceptance of the tax sys tan by
society, it is desirable that the systan be perceived as fair. A standard
notion of fairness is horizontal equity, that individuals in the sane
circinstances be treated the sane. Randcxnizatiori satisfies horizontal equity
ex ante but not ax post. Before the randctn selection, all individuals of the
sane type face the sane lottery. After receiving a randan draw of tax
functions, individuals of the sane type will be induced to choose bundles
                                       36


which need not yield the sama utility. Note, however, that suboptimal
randanization in which ex post horizontal equity is imposed may often still be
better than no randcxnization as the proof of Theorn V daionstrates. Inter-
tpora1 nonstationarity achieves horizontal equity both ex ante and ex post
in each period. Individuals of the s type are induced to choose the sara
bundles as each other in every period even though the choice varies over tinE.
     Fourth, both procedures induce asynnEtries in the bundles chosen by
individuals of a type either within a period in an expected sense under
randaEizaticxi or over tine under noristationarity. With strictly concave
utility functions, individuals desire to reduce these asyimtries.   Under

randonization, individuals might gain by purchasing insurance counteracting
the randamess in the tax systn. If such policies re forbidden, then
similar effects could be achieved by trades with other individuals of the sane
type. For the sane reason, under nonstationarity, individuals desire to
sncoth consuition and leisure over tinE by saving or borrowing. Saving or
insurance serves to counteract the weakening of self-selection constraints
which notivated asynixetry of bundles in the first place. 'fle ability to save
or buy insurance will be a factor in the decision to reveal one' s type
truthfully. The choice between nonstationarity or randaxriess may depend upon
whether it is easier to prevent saving or insurance. If these are desirable
for other reasons or cannot be prevented, then the simple repetition of the
solution to (P1) may be the best feasible solution. However, the opposite
probløn arises if only symxetric solutions are allowed when individuals have
nonconvex opportunity sets. Indivitbv1s may desire randmiation of
consuiiption about their bundles to convexify budget sets. Thus, gaibling
might have to be inhibited by the govermEnt. Any naiconvex tax structure
nust account for additional markets whose use might be encouraged by the tax
structure.
                                               37



                                           Footnotes
 1.    Guesnerie and Seade [1982] derived scxr results without global single
       crossing, but they assumed that MRS 's 'were not equal at the optimal
       bundles. We only assume that tangencies do not lie on the no-tax budget
       line and show that the MRS's are not equal at an optiim iii.

 2.    This   requires   an additional   assizptiori on U(C,L).    Note that MRS1 (C, Y) =
       _1hJL(C,L1)IwUc(C,I)n.      If    a> b then La      <   Lb. The result holds     if
       the   direct effect of the higher wage is not countered by the effects of a
       lower L on the MRS. Differentiating -
                                                    [UL (C ,Y/w) /'wlJ (C ,Y/w) I with respect
       to   w yields dMRS(C,Y) /dw = (UL/WU)    -   (L/w )d(_tJL/UC) /dL. A sufficient
       condition for dMRS(C,Y)/d <       0 is d(_UL/UC)/dL       0 'which holds if C   is
       not inferior. See Sadka [1976].

3.     The schedule T(Y) need not be differentiable. In fact, it will generally
       be nondifferentiable at the inccxlEs chosen by the t groups.

4. A lower ability class might be unable to produce the incam of a higher
    ability class. Such bundles can be assigned arbitrarily low utilities.

5.    The results are essentially unchanged if taxes had to raise net revenue
      as wall as redistributing across groups.

6.    Other tax functions could yield the sane result as long as the slope of
      the individual budget constraint is greater than both MRS 's, for Y less
      than Y1, and is smaller than both MRS's, for Y greater than Y1.

7.    A self-selection constraint may hold with equality so that one of the
      groups may be indifferent between the t bundles offered. The solution
      requires that all individuals in the group choose the bundle aiimed at that
      group. This can be achieved by assumiing that the goverrnt can assign
      indifferent individuals to whichever group it desires. Given that the
      goverment does not know to which group a particular individual belongs,
      this is not a reasonable assumption. An alternative view is that the
      solution to (P1) is really an c-equilibrium. Although it cannot itself
      be achieved, a bundle arbitrarily close to that solution can be found
                                         38



     which   satisfies resource balance and which has the self-selection
     constraint hold with strict inequality. If the self-selection
     constraints taist hold with strict inequality, then there may exist no
     solution to the maximization prob1n.

8.   This is true provided the group whose self-selection constraint does not
     bind does not have its weight equal 0. However, if a = 0 then B's
     self-selection constraint cannot bind since resources are being
     transferred to B. Similarly, if a = 1, then A's self-selection
     constraint    cannot bind. In addition,   there   is   an implicit assumption
     that the maximized value as a function of y     not have an inflection
                                                       does

     point at y = 0. Constraint qualification rules out such a possibility.

9.   If ex ante randaiiLzation is not possible, then ex post randatiization
     might still be desirable.

10. Again, if post     revelation randarriess is not possible, the prerevelation
     randamnessmay be desirable since it weakens the budget constraint of the
     governnnt.
                Such prerevelation randarriess can be desirable if there are
     nonconvexities in the utility possibility frontier (see Stiglitz
     [1982a]).

11. In (P1), the bounds onY1 along with resource balance autcinatically bound
     C1. Here. bounds on C do not foll fran the expected resource
     constraint since that constraint bounds the products 11. cih only. As
     sara ir goes to zero, the corresponding C could be made arbitrarily
     large. The M1 could be chosen sufficiently large to bound the feasible
     set without affecting the solution.

12. To guarantee ex post resource balance for all realizations of all randan
     mechanisms, a stronger constraint nust be imposed:

             N MaX[Cth -
              ah           Y] + N,, Nax[d)h
                                    h
                                            - bh < 0                          (Fl)


     where the max's are over those bundles with nonzero probability.
     Condition (Fl) says that, even if all individuals receive the bundle with
      the largest   difference   between C and Y, resce balance       still holds.
                                          39


     For sai types of randcinization, (Fl) may be required. For exairple,
     assuIE, in the lotteries, that one tax schedule (that is, one bundle) is
     chosen for every individual of a type. The objective function arid
     self-selection constraints are unaffected by the manner in which
     randairizaticjn occurs. If (Fl) is violated, then there is clearly s
     positive probability of assigning nore consulption than is available.
     On the other hand, for many machanisms, (Fl) is far too restrictive. It
     rules out balancing large corisuiiption to sai people frc*n a favorable
     draw for them against low consumption to others of the sama type. This
     can be achieved withxit violating the feasibility constraint ex post as
     discussed in the text.

13. This result holds not just because little redistribution is desired with
    similar abilities so that neither self-selection constraint binds. If
      = 0 in (P1) and the A's are nore able, redistribution is carried out so
    that A's self-selection constraint binds. Randaization will not improve
    on this solution.

14. If y = K1lnL + K2L, where K1 < 0 and 1(2 > 0, then Ly"/y" = -2 so that
     randaiization will never occur. (y' > 0 can be assumsd by the function
     at small values of L.) If there is quadratic disutility of labor with y
              then CM) is satisfied so that randcxnization does not occur when
     Xa >   0 Substituting into (Bii) shows that local randcii 7tion cannot
     occur when     >   0. Whether nonlocal randcxnization can occur is unclear.

15. Stiglitz [1982aJ derived the conditions in Theorem VI and Corollary III
    as sufficient for local randanizatiori over t bundles arising with equal
    probability. The results here are stronger: these conditions are both
    necessary and sufficient for any local randcznization to exist which
    iziproves on the nonrandan solution. The same condition applies with any
    arbitrary probabilities over three bundles. Due to an error in
    calculation, Stiglitz [1982a] asserts a result opposite that of
    Corollary II.

16. Transversatility conditions nust be checked to guarantee that this is a
    valid solution.
                                         40



                                     References

Arnott, R.J. and J.E. Stiglitz, "Randcziization with Asyniitric Infomtion: A
    Simplified Exposition," mirno, 1985.
Feflingham, J. C., Y. K. Kn and D. P. Necinan, "Ex Ante Randctization          in Agency
     MxIels," Rand Journal of Econctnics 15: 290-301 (1984).

Guesnerie, R. and     J.
                     Seade, "Nonlinear Pricing          in a "Pinite Econctiy," Jj
     of Public Econanics 17: 157-179 (1982).
Maskin,   E. and J.
                 Riley, "Optimal Auctions     with Risk-Averse       Buyers,"
     Econaitrica 52: 1473-1518 (1984).

_________     "Incct v.        Taxes," Discussion paper no. 174,
                           Leisure                                           UCLA
     Department of Econanics, August 1980.
Mirrlees,    J.A., "An Exploration in the Theory of Optiiui IncaIQ Taxation,"
     Review of Econanic Studies 38: 175—208 (1971).
Sadka, E., "O:i Incai Dtstribution, Incentive Effects and Optimal Incai
     Taxation," Review of Econcinic Studies 43:         261-268,   (1976).
Stiglitz, J.E., "Self-Selection and Pareto Efficient Taxation," Journal of
     Public   Econcinics 17: 213-240 (1982a).

________ "Utilitarianism and Horizontal Equity:            The Case for Randan
     Taxation," Journal of Public Econanics       18:    1-33 (198Th).

Weiss,      "rhe Desirability of Cheating Incentives and Randarness in the
          L.W.,
     Optimal Inccxi Tax," Journal of Political Econany 89: 1343-1352 (1976).
                                                       41



                                                APPE)IX
                                        PROOFS OF THECRE21S


                                                   k(i)
 PROOF OF THEORHvI IV: (i) Let          1(a)                ir(a) C (a)      and
                                                   h=1
 -.         k(i)
 Y1(a)
            h=1
                           ih
                    1rh(a)Y (a),    i = a,   b. Then       since   V1(C1, Y1) is strictly concave,

 V1((c), 11(a))              EV1(a), with    strict   inequality      if the i lottery is
                          k(j)                         .

 nondegenerate.        If 1r.h(a)V1(CJh(a), yJh(a)) =EV1(a)                  then V1(3(a),
    •          •         h=1
 13(a))     (a), with strict inequality if the j lottery is nondegenerate,
             ES!1


 also follows fran the strict concavity. By asstzrption, EV1(a) V1° so that
 V1((a), 11(a)) V1° and V1(&(a), ?3(a)) >                     rqlO   trust hold. Since the
 indifference curve through V10 is tangent to the line C = Y, 1(ct) > ?(a)                          and
 &(a) > 1(a) nust hold. Hence, N((a) - 11(a))                  - ?(a)) > + N(3(a)
trust hold.
=
    Ni((a)     -
                  1t N.

                    11(a))
                             hl1h -                   Y1h(a)) +
                             + (& (a), 13(a)) so resource balance is
                                                                     N   jh(()                 YJh(a))

                                                                                    violated unless
the     self-selection constraint for i holds with strict inequality.
         (ii) Since even with randanizatjon the point (Vao, Vb0) mist                   lie   on the
constrained utility possibility frontier, the proof follows as in that for
Theorn II.
        (iii) Given (ii), this result follows exactly as the corresponding result
in Theorn II.
        (iv) Consider the first order          conditions      with respect to each           and
ih in maximization problan          (P11). In each ccxidition,             ,jh nultiplies every
term so it drops out leaving conditions identical in form to those in (P1).
Since    = 0, it is inirdiate that at each h, MRS3 (C3F, yih) = 1.
     To see that k(j) > 1 is not needed at an optiimiii, consider the case where
the self-selection constraint for group i holds with strict inequality (that
                                               42




    f TrthV(C, i') > Tr.hV (C          yih))   Having k(j)
                                                                   > 1    in a
is,

nondegenerate lottery so there exist h arid k with lTjh and jk positive and
(Cjh,   y.Jh)    (cjk yjk)) cannot      be optimal. With the probabilities fixed,
consider a change in the (CJh, yJh) 'which uoves each closer to the mean bundle
without changing the mean. Such a shift will continue to satisfy both the
bounds on the cjh and     and the resonrce balance constraint. The
probabilities do not change, satisfying the constraints that they si.mi to 1.
               kj)                 -
Fran concavity, ).. ¶.V1(C3", Y3 ) will rise but since the self-selection
                    h=1
constraint      for i holds   with   strict inequality, if the shift is not too large,
                                                kU)         hh
this constraint will still hold. Since L 1.hVJ(CJ , Y3 ) rises, the
                                        h=1
self-selection constraint for group j trust still hold. Thus, the bundles
                                                         k,(j)       •h      h
                                                                           Y3 ) rises,
after the shift yield a feasible lottery. Since .h=1
                                                  1r.hVJ(CJ ,
the objective function rises showing that the prior bundle was not optimal.
     (v) The first order conditions with respect to cjh and jh are the sane
as those for C3 and Y3 in (P1) since the jh cancel fran the conditions.
Hence, the relations here can be shown exactly as in the proof of the Theoren
II. Unlike in that theorn, equal NRS's equal to unity can not be ruled out.
        To see that k(j) >is not required, consider the optimal lotteries.
                               3

 Fix the quantities (Ca', Y'), i = a, b, and h = 1,... ,k(i). Consider (P11)
 as a linear progranming probln in the ir. Fran part (iv), one of the
 lotteries is degenerate with     = 1. Fran part (ii), at txxst one

 self-selection constraint cart bind. Thus, of the five original constraints,
 at nxst three (a self-selection constraint, the resc*irce balance constraint,
 and the constraint that the probabilities in the nondegenerate lottery sii to
 1) are binding. A solution exists with the
                                             tuther of nonzero variables no
 greater than the nutiber of binding constraints.                         Q.E.D.
                                                     43



 PROOF     OF THEORE2 V: The proof requires the following

      Larrna I: Consider any utility function 11(X), any bundles X1, X2, and
 with U(X1) > U(X) and 11(X3) >         and any , 0 < i < 1. There exists                              sa
 concave increasing transformation V(X) = F(U(X))               such that     ,rV(X') + (1 -
 ,r)V(X2) <    V(X).

 Proof: It is sufficient to provide an example of a transformation under which
 the result holds. Let U2 U&) consider F(U) (U - U2)1". Then
 V(X2)
           = (U(X2)   - U2)1 = 0                 then reduces to there
                                         for all n. The result

existing an ti with wV*(X') <V(X3). This in turn follows if there exists
an    for which V*(X3)/V(X') = [(U(X3) - U2)/(U(X') -           . Since
liin[(U(X3) -      U2)/(U(X1)     -   U2)]1' = 1 and since iT    < 1,   the   existence of       the

required     n follows.                                                                          Q. E . D.


Proof     of Theorn: Given a,           let (C1, Y1) and   (C3, Y3) be the solutions to
(P1).      Since      > 0 and    NRS3(C3(a), Y3(cz))       1 from Theorn 11(v), there nust
exist     t bundles (C1, yJi) and            (C2,   yJ2) with V(C1, Y3') =        V(C2,          y32) =
V3(C3(a),     Y3(ct)) and      such that C' —      > C3(a) — Y3(a)       >    C   —   y32•
Therefore, a; I            <    < 1), mist exist with ;C1 — y31)         ÷ (1 —   ;)(C2      -    yJ2)
=   C3 (a) - Y3 (a). It also follows fran Theorn
                                                             11(v)   that V1 (&2, Y3 2) >
V' (C3   (a), Y3 (cx)) >   V1 (Cf, y3') since the indifference curve of j
                                                                                      through
(C3 (a), Y3 (a)) lies between indifference           curve   of i and the 450     line   through
that bundle     (see Figure      6). Fran Ltx I, there exists a transformation                   of V1
such     that ;F(V1(C3l, yJi)) + (1 - ;)F(V(C2, y2)) < F(V1(&(ct), Y3(a))) =
F(V1(C1(cz), Y1(a)). Since V(C1, Y1) =                V(C2      y.]2)    V3(C3(a), Y3(a)),
;V(Ci1               ;)V(C2, y32) > V3(C1(a), Y'(a)) so the self—selection
            yJi) + (1 -

constraint for j continues to be satisfied. The self-selection constraint for

i is now! satisfied with strict inequality. Hence, all constraints hold. If
                                                      44




1 > NRS3(C3(ci),        y3()) > MRS1(C3(x),Y3(a)), the bundles (C1, Y) and                         (C2,
yi2) can be chosen         close   enough to (C(a), Y3(cz)) so         that 1    >   MR&(C1, yJi)

and 1 > NRS3 (C2, yJ 2)            Then    consider   the bundles     (C1 + ,          +       5) and   (C2
+       yj2 + • These continue to satisfy resource balance. For small enough
          itwill still follow that ;F(V(C1 + ,     + ) + (1   - ;)F(V1(&2 +
(5 >   0,
       i2 +       <    F(V(C1(c),       Y1(ct))   so its self-selection constraint             still
holds. Since 1 > MRS at both                bundles,   V (C3 + , y3 + 5) > V3 (Cf,             y3 1) anci
                 yJ     + ) > V3 (Cf,       y3 2)    Hence, the lottery ((C1 +             ,   y' + ,
     (C2 + ,
(C2 + ,               + , ;) is feasible, raises i's 'welfare and thus improves                        upon

the    nonrandan solution (C3(c), Y(a)). If 1 <                 W&(C3(), Y3(a))         < NRS1(C3(a),


Y3(a))    a similar proof follows with (C1 ,                    y3    and (C2          ,y              -)
forming       the lottery improving         on (C3(a),     Y3(c&)).                                    Q.E.D.


                                                                            = 0 and so it is not
PROOF OF 'flIEOREM VI: Frcxn Theorn IV, Xa> 0 implies Ab

desirable to          randanize   A's   tax schedule.       Furthernore, the optimal
                       to offer B need involve at nx)st          three tax schedules.           This
randcii1 zation
result carries over to finding lotteries which improve on the rionrandcxn
solution to (P1) even if the optimal lottery is not found. That is, if a
 lottery over k> 3 bundles is better than the nonrandan solution, a lottery
 over just 3 bundles uiist exist which also does better. Hence, we can restrict
 the analysis to lotteries h' cbh, ybh) h = 1,2,3, 'where h 1. Let
                                                                 =


 (Ca,          cb, b) denote the nonrandan solution to (P1).
         A lottery exists which improves upon (Ca, 1a,                ci', Yb)   if, holding
    (Ca, ya) fixed:

                                           bh                                                      (Al)

                  -       +                 - Ybh      0                                           (A2)


                         Ybh)      Vb(d, Yb)                                                       (A3)
                                                    45



 and at least one of (Al) to (A3) holds with strict inequality. (Al) and                            (A2)
 guarantee the lottery is feasible while (A3) says that B's expected utility
 does not decline.        (Al) can
                                replaced by an equality since, if it held with
                                     be

 strict inequality, a uan preserving shrink of the
                                                    lottery would continue to
 satisfy (Al) and would raise XllhVb(CML,ybh) leaving (A3) satisfied. Since
 (Al) is assunEd to hold with             inequality, a small rise in hVa(CbhI, ybh)
                                     strict

would not     violate   it. Of course, such a shrinkage would cause (Al) to hold with
 equality before all randamess was            eliminated,      else there would      exist   a
nonrandan vector      better           cb, Yb), a contradiction. If (Al) holds
                                than (Ca, Ya,




                                                                                                 )
with strict inequality, Ca could be raised to get an improvaxent while, if (A3)
holds with strict inequality, the iinproveint is direct. Since Na(Ca -      +
Nb(Cb - Yb) = 0, equation (Al) can be rewritten as

                - Ybh) - d + Yb           0                                                  (A4)

       Consider   any probability     vector 11 112, 113). A local randanization is a
path   (Ch(t), Y1'(t)), h=l,2,3 with (Ch(O), Yb(O))             = (Cb,     Yb),   all h,   and such
that for t > 0 at least two bundles with nonzero probabilities differ fran

each   other. A local randanization           is   improving   for   this probability vector if

a path exists with


           Va(Ch(),     Y"(t)) = Va(Cb, Yb)                                                  (AS)

                  - C'(t))       Yb - C?                                                     (A6)

                      'Y'(t))     vd, Yb)                                                    (A7)

Differentiating (AS) - (A7)      with respect to t around t =          0   and recalling that
       =
           -V/V yields:
                                                             46



           d(O) - Sa(Cb,
            dt                                (O) =               o                                    ()
                        dCh(O)
           ______
             dt             dt         -
                                       > o                                                             (A9)


           dC'(O)
             dt         b(cb' b               dY1'(O)
                                                 dt I             0                                    (AlO)


Substituting (A8) into (A9) and                  (AlO)   yields:


     [1     MRSa(Cb, b)1 h d'Y'(O)
                              dt                         o                                             (All)


        [}RSa(Cb, yb) -         b(cb b)J hdthW)
                                           dt                                                          (A.12)



Frcxn Theorn 11(v),         1 -       !RSa(Cb,   Y1) and 3I(Ib yb) - b(cb, b) mist
opposite signs so        that     (All) and (A12) can both hold if and only if
   ______ = o                                                                 dC'(O) = 0.           the
                     iich frcin (AS) inplies                 that
                                                                        11h     dt          This,         first

order   effects      along an itxproving          path nhist be          zero. The gain to randomization

niist care fran second           order effects. If either the second derivatives                          of net
resources   or    of B' s expected utility are                    positive,      then, since     the first
derivatives      are zero       at t   = 0,    for t >       0,       for t > 0 the first derivatives and

hence the   functions will becai positive as required.                                 These second

derivatives at t        =   0   are:

                                             d2d'(0)
        JIhSha
                 +                    b)                 + V(Cb, b) d2?O)1 =                 0            (A13)
                                               dt                                 dt

           d2YF(0) - d2Ch(0)
             dt2                dt2
                                       10                                                                 (A14)




                 +                     b)    d2d'co)
                                               dt
                                                         + vb(Cb        ,y)b    d(o)
                                                                                  dt
                                                                                    2
                                                                                                          (A15)
                                                            47




             S' =                                   dYb(O)         d(O)
 where                   (dCh(O))2
                            dt     V1
                                 the
                                    cc (Cb, Yb) + 2                  d cy
                                                                        V1 (di, Yb) + (d))2
   yy
        (cb, yb)          Fran         fact that the     utility fiuictions     are strictly concave,
  for   any h with dCh (0) /dt            or   dY' (0) Idt not   zero, S mist be negative. For
 convenience, the argunents of partials of V1 are deleted since all partials
 are evaluated at (Cb, Yb).
         Substituting (A13) into (A14) and (A15) yields


         Z      (1        NR h d2Yh(O)
                                 dt
                                       + hS'' 0                                                (A16)



                     -   b1 h          d2YT1(0)
                                                  + [(sbh/\,b) (S/V)] 0                        (A17)



 Solving (A16) for ii d'Y10) and substituting into (A17) gives:

                1)
         (1 _MRSa)
                            (11h S) iv +          (sbh) ,         b    - MRSa)

                                                                    (1 _MRSa)
                                                                                   z           (A18)



Fran Theoran 11(v), 1 -
sign. Hence, (A18) can be rewritten as
                                       MRSa,    1-   b     and NRSb - uRSa    all have



        ___________              ___________                      - MRSaI
        v'ji.   _b, aI' NRSaI j _a b1 z                                            0           (A19)



        Given any                          ?1'(t)), h = 1,2,3, yields a local
                                 It2, 113), a path    (Ch(t),
   _____
ran&njzatjon hich inroves on the nonrandcin solution to (P1) iff dCi'(0)
d(O) d2Ch(O) and d2Y¼O) are suth that
  dt ' dt2           dt2
                                             dCh(0)
                                            ______
                                               dt
                                                           d?'(0) 0 but, for
                                                           ______
                                                             dt
sare h, (dch(o)
          dt
                 h            dt x
                          0, and (A15), (A16), and (A19) hold with a strict
inequality in (A16) or (A19). Note that since (1 - MRSa)                           0   and
are otherwise unrestricted, for any (dCh(0)/dt, d(0)/dt),                         h = 1,2,3,
                                                        48




d'(O)/dt2, h = 1,2,3, can be chosen                     to   make Z defined in (A16)         take any

                         choice         of d2Yh(O)/dt2, h =         1,2,3,   d2Ch(O)/dt2, h =       1,2,3,
value. Given      this

               be chosen   to   make (A13)        hold.       It therefore follows that         local
can   always
randcnizatiOn is desirable               iff there exists a (dC'(O) /dt,             dyh(O) /dt),


h = 1,2,3, such that


         hS
               -b        > ___________
                                i
                                -        a
Necessity      of (A20) follows directly frii (A19).                   If    (A20)   holds, then, given
(A16) d2Y1(O)/dt2 can be chosen to make Z small enough that (A19) holds.
    If (A20) holds, then for at least one h, s'/(vl1 - b1) >
S/(VI1 - NRSaI) nijst hold. For this h, set X = (dd(O)/dt, d(O)fdt)
                                                                                                          and

necessity is shown. To              show                (, X) = (dCc (0)/ dt,
                                           sufficiency, let            =

dYh(O) /dt), h = 1,2,3        and ass there exists a Y = (Y1, Y2) such that
                               > (?layt)/cJbIl -             b)
                                                       Given 1' 2' and fl3 SC1I

allowable xh, h = 1,2,3             will exist that          is   equivalent   to    (Y1, Y2) if the


following      five conditions           are   satisfied:


                                                                                                     (A21)
        1114+1124+1134=0
                                                                                                     (A22)
        111X2 + 1124 + 1134 = 0

                                                                                                     (A23)
        111(4)2 + 2(4           + 11(X3) =          4
                                        11(4) = 4
                   + 112(4)         +                                                                (A24)
        111(4)2

        111X]X2 + 11244
                              + 11344 =          'l'2                                                (A25)


                                                                                     =                     = o
 Conditions      (A21) and    (A22)       guarantee that 11h(dC'(0)/dt)                  11h(dYh(O)/dt)
                 - (A25) guarantee that T(XHb (h) t)                   = y}jbyt      and that
 while   (A23)
                                                             49


                         =   Hayt.       Given the assunptions on Y, any               solution to   (A21)-

 (A25) would satisfy (A20). Since at least two of the 11h trust be positive,

 assurre without loss of generality that                          > 0 and 112 >   0.    Consider
     =    = 0, X =           =
                   -(n1/112)X Y1L111/(112(111 + 112))j, and X = (mh/u2) =
               +
 Y2[rr1/(n2(n1 112flj. Substituting these values shows that (A21)-(A25) are
 satisfied shdng sufficiency.                                                                           Q.E.D.

PROOF OF COROLlARY II:

Let 'a' "by = Ii - NRSaI q}bgt                                       ggt                me      III, local

randcxnizatjon is desirable at sane                          > 0.
                                     'a and b' a'                     1'a =
no   redistribution is possible since their indifference maps are identical so
              = 1. Hence Q a's, "by =
                                      o. Differentiating Q with respect to
around p =      b yields



                                           '
         c(P, P)     =   dli - Sat g}jbgt -              dli - b1      gHagt
                                                                                                     (A26)
                                           vbC
                                                              a         Vc
Since Va = F(Vb),            V = F'V,                        + r(vb)2 V =
     =F
                                                   = F'VC
                                                                                       F'V + r(vb)2 j
          'V + F"VV. when a = b' substituting these into (qHaqt) /V                                   yields:


      qt =Hbt
      _____
           g,g +                               -         2
                                   ,      q1       q2)                                               (A27)



Substituting (A27) into (A26) yields



      dQ(PP)
                                   _____ - dli - b1
                         qHbq df 1 - MRsal

                                                             dl'a


            -   __ (q1         -
                                   q2)
                                         2dl1NRsal
                                               ,a                                                    (A28)
                F'
