NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SAFETY NET INVESTMENTS IN CHILDREN
Hilary W. Hoynes
Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach
Working Paper 24594
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24594

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2018

Paper prepared for March 2018 Brookings Papers on Economic Activity. We thank Janet Currie,
Gordon Dahl, Robert Doar, Janice Eberly, Ryan Nunn, Dottie Rosenbaum, Louise Sheiner, Arloc
Sherman, Jim Stock, and BPEA participants for helpful comments, and Marianne Bitler, Stacy
Dean, Manasi Despande, Julia Isaacs, Melissa Kearney, Douglas Rice, Danielle Sandler, Lara
Shore-Sheppard, Lexin Cai, and Matt Broaddus for useful discussions about the scope of the
project and the data collection. Krista Ruffini and Abigail Pitts provided excellent research
assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Hilary W. Hoynes and Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Safety Net Investments in Children
Hilary W. Hoynes and Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach
NBER Working Paper No. 24594
May 2018
JEL No. H53,I38
ABSTRACT
In this paper, we examine what groups of children are served by core childhood social-safety net
programs—including Medicaid, EITC, CTC, SNAP, and AFDC/TANF—and how that’s changed
over time. We find that virtually all gains in spending on the social safety net for children since
1990 have gone to families with earnings, and to families with income above the poverty line.
This is the result of welfare reform and the expansion of in work tax credits. We review the
available research and find that access to safety net programs during childhood leads to benefits
for children and society over the long run. This evidence suggests that the changes to the social
safety net may have lasting negative impacts on the poorest children.

Hilary W. Hoynes
Richard & Rhoda Goldman School of Public Policy
University of California, Berkeley
2607 Hearst Avenue
Berkeley, CA 94720-7320
and NBER
hoynes@berkeley.edu
Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach
Institute for Policy Research
Northwestern University
2040 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
dws@northwestern.edu

I.

Introduction

A persistently large number of children in the U.S. live in poverty, despite sustained
economic growth. Recognizing the social and moral imperative to alleviate child
poverty, we have a patchwork of tax and transfer programs targeting low-income
families with children aimed at reducing child poverty. In 2016, the federal government
spent about $200 billion on such programs, and they had a substantial impact on
reducing childhood poverty.1 Including the value of government tax and transfers
reduces child poverty from 25 percent (no taxes or transfers) to 15 percent (current law)
(Shapiro and Trisi 2017)—lifting 7.4 million children out of poverty, yet 11.1 million
remain in poverty. Growing up poor not only harms children in the short run, but by
limiting investments in their human capital it also harms them in the long run.

Thus, considerable government tax and transfer spending on children is aimed at
reducing poverty—with a justification primarily on humanitarian grounds. In contrast,
another substantial public sum is spent on child human capital policies where an
investment (rather than humanitarian) criteria is employed. In a standard human capital
investment model, resources are spent upfront that generate returns over the longer
run across a variety of measures—potentially including better labor market outcomes,
improved health, and higher educational achievement. Early childhood education
programs are promoted within this framing, and more generally the provision of public
education is a primary mechanism for our investments in children. Many compelling
studies have found that there is also a substantial investment component to safety net
programs that alleviate childhood poverty, suggesting that it is also appropriate to

1

This includes spending on to families with children through the EITC, the Child Tax Credit, SNAP, TANF, and public
housing and spending on children in Medicaid and SSI. Our data and these calculations are discussed below.

1

consider a portion of safety net spending through the investment framework. Yet to
date, the investment component of safety net spending has not been widely discussed.

Our paper is motivated by the interest in summarizing what is known about the longrun benefits of childhood safety net benefits and in reevaluating current policies in light
of this evidence. There are three components to the paper. First, we review the
research evaluating the long-run effects of social safety net benefits, which shows that
investments in early life can have large impacts on later-life outcomes—perhaps strong
enough to suggest that reallocation of investments over the life course to earlier
periods can be efficiency-enhancing. Recent research has focused on quantifying the
benefits to health and productivity in adulthood of the social safety net. In particular we
review the available evidence about the three pillars to the U.S. social safety for
families with children: the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP), the
Earned Income Tax Credit, and Medicaid. These studies suggest that in addition to the
humanitarian and social insurance reasons to have a safety net, there is also a supplyside case. That is, providing certain safety net programs ends up benefiting children
and society over the long run. Both private and public benefits result from these
investments. These findings imply that the benefits of the social safety net are broader
than is commonly assumed, and indeed that this spending yields impacts that have
downstream benefits to taxpayers (through increased tax revenues and potential
declines in spending on healthcare and the safety net), in addition to the affected
families.

A second part of the paper analyzes the data on government spending on children,
how it features in broader public spending, and how it has changed over time. Overall,
we find that government spending is not in line with our increasing understanding of
2

the importance of resources during early life, and the positive spillovers from safety net
spending on children.2 The U.S. spends a relatively low level on children, and spending
has remained relatively flat over the last two decades at between 1.5 to 2 percent of
GDP (Isaacs et al. 2017). In contrast, per capita spending on the elderly in the U.S. has
grown substantially over the same timeframe and in 2015 amounts to 9.3 percent of
GDP.3 U.S. child spending is very low by international standards: the U.S. is near the
bottom of OECD countries in “family benefits public spending” as a share of GDP
(third from the bottom above only Mexico and Turkey) with a share less than half the
OECD average (OECD 2018a). Yet U.S. spending on the elderly, based on “pension
spending” as a share of GDP, is just below the OECD average (OECD 2018b).

We also analyze how the composition of spending on children has changed over time.
Fundamental changes have occurred in the social safety net for children in the past 25
years. The Earned Income Tax Credit expanded substantially creating subsidies to
work, welfare reform dramatically reduced the availability of cash assistance, and health
insurance for low income children expanded dramatically through Medicaid. We use a
unique approach, based on administrative data, to examine who is benefiting from
changes to the social safety net and who is being left behind. In particular, we estimate
the changes over time in how government spending is allocated across the income
distribution (e.g. those below poverty versus those above poverty) and how it is
allocated across working and nonworking families. This analysis shows that there have
been substantial shifts over the past 20 years in their composition. We find that an
increasing share is going to children near and above the poverty threshold, while a
2

The 2017 tax reform legislation includes an expansion of the Child Tax Credit, including the refundable portion
that is targeted to lower-earning families.
3
To be sure some of the elderly spending may have spillovers onto children. For example, providing Social Security
to grandparent frees up some family resources that may be spent on children.

3

decreasing share is directed to the poorest children living below the poverty threshold
despite a relatively stable share of children living in poverty. Additionally, there has
been a massive shift towards in-work transfers and health insurance, with a declining
share in unrestricted cash benefits. Our approach, which uses administrative data
wherever possible, makes an important contribution because it circumvents the welldocumented undercounting of safety net spending in survey data, the source of data
typically used to examine the composition of spending.

Pulling the two parts of the paper together, we evaluate the state of the social safety
net for families with children. The literature is not sufficiently developed to provide
strong guidance on precisely how to optimally allocate funds across eligible groups,
and across different programs. Nonetheless the broad patterns are clear: the research
shows there are important benefits to having access to the safety net during childhood
that should be considered by policymakers. Furthermore, there are strong returns
across the cash, tax based, near cash and health insurance programs that we examine,
with potentially larger impacts for the most disadvantaged children. These consistent
findings imply that there are substantial potential social and individual benefits from
spending on children and their families. Additionally, the decline in availability of
benefits for the most disadvantaged children, primarily due to welfare reform, is likely
to lead to worse outcomes for these children in adulthood. Any cuts to current
programs that will reduce resources going to children would have direct, negative
impacts on children in both the short- and long-term. It is also crucial to recognize that
the modal recipient family is combining safety net use with employment; the view that
all spending is welfare and going to out of work families is not the case. Instead the
social safety net is acting to top up earnings to help families make up for stagnating
and declining wages (Autor 2012). In light of this, it is important to make sure that
4

policies can work with the labor market. Specifically, there are costs to adding work
disincentives to programs—such as eligibility notches that abruptly remove access to
benefits above an income threshold. Furthermore, policies that require labor market
participation do not provide rapid response in replacing income lost during recessions.

II. An Overview of the Private and Public Safety Net for Children
We begin by describing the broader set of social safety net programs for children in
the U.S., how they compare to spending for other groups, and how this has changed
over time. Figure 1, reproduced from Isaacs et al. (2017), reports federal expenditures
on children in 2016. The spending takes the form of tax expenditures (e.g. Earned
Income Tax Credit, Child Tax Credit, dependent exemption, and tax exclusion of
employer-provided health insurance), direct transfers to families (e.g. SNAP, Social
Security, TANF, and SSI) and transfers from the federal to state and local governments
(e.g. Title 1, special education). Note that this graph focuses on Federal spending on
children, and omits the sizeable transfers made by states, including the state share of
Medicaid and child welfare services, state EITCs, and education spending.

There are a number of programs that provide benefits to low-income children ranging
from cash to insurance. Medicaid, which provides public health insurance to lowincome children, is the largest program, with $89 billion spent on children (after
removing the share spent on the elderly and disabled). The Children’s Health Insurance
Program or CHIP ($14 billion) is another public health insurance program; it supports
children in families with income above the Medicaid eligibility limits. The Earned
Income Tax Credit or EITC ($61 billion) is a refundable tax credit for working families

5

with children.4 In 2017 the maximum EITC credit was $5,616 for families with two
children, and $3,400 for those with one child. More than 40 percent of tax filers with
children received the EITC. The Child Tax Credit or CTC ($50 billion) is a partially
refundable tax credit of $1,000 for each child in working families.5 The CTC provides
important benefits to low-income families with children, but a substantial share of the
CTC cost goes to families much higher up the income distribution.6 Supplemental
Assistance for Needy Families or SNAP ($31 billion) provides vouchers for food
assistance and eligibility is generally limited to those with income below 130 percent of
the federal poverty line. In 2017, the average monthly SNAP benefit is $125 per
person. In contrast to the tax credits, both working and nonworking families are eligible
for SNAP. The other child nutrition programs ($22 billion) include Special Supplemental
Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children (WIC) as well as school feeding
programs.

Historically, a cornerstone of the safety net was Aid to Families with Dependent
Children (AFDC), a cash welfare program not tied to work. The program was
overhauled in 1996 into Temporary Assistance to Needy Families (TANF), block
granting it to states who were allowed tremendous flexibility in terms of how to
administer the program, with funds frozen at their 1996 level in nominal terms, and
strict work requirements and lifetime time limits enacted (Bitler and Hoynes 2016).
Today only 2.4 percent of the child based safety-net spending goes to TANF (Figure
There is also a small credit for low-income working families without children; those dollars are
excluded from the calculations presented here.
5
The refundable portion of the CTC is known as the Additional Child Tax Credit (ACTC) and is limited
to 15% of earned income above $3,000. Throughout this paper we present the combined CTC and
ACTC and refer to it simply as the CTC.
6
In 2017, the $1,000 credit is phased out starting at incomes of about $80,000 ($120,000) for single
parent (married couple) families. The credit is fully phased out at incomes of about $100,000 ($130,000)
for single parent (married couple) families. The recent tax bill expands the CTC to raise the credit
amount and expand the range of income over which families are eligible.
4

6

1), and the program’s reach is low—only 23 percent of children in poor families
received TANF cash assistance in 2016 compared to 76 percent in 1996 (Floyd et al.
2017).7 Supplemental Security Income (SSI) is another cash welfare program, providing
benefits to low-income disabled and elderly persons. Following a court decision in
1990, the definition of disability was expanded to allow more children to receive SSI
(Duggan et al. 2016). Notably, Figure 1 shows that cash welfare is a very small share of
U.S. social safety net spending on children. Instead, most spending on children consists
of public health insurance, tax credits that are linked to paid work (EITC, CTC), and
SNAP.

Figure 2, adapted from Isaacs et al. (2017), contrasts trends in federal spending on
children and the elderly for 1980-2015.8 To account for trends in population size, each
category is presented in terms of spending per capita (e.g. per child, per elderly), in
inflation-adjusted 2015 dollars. Per capita federal spending on the elderly is currently
$35,000 and has doubled over this time frame. To be sure, spending on the elderly is
not entirely analogous to spending on children—for example, part of spending on the
elderly is a pension linked to prior work and payroll taxes, and a higher share comes in
the form of health insurance. However, two points to recognize are that spending on
the elderly is relatively generous, and it also involves substantial redistribution to the
lower-income elderly. Per capita federal spending on children is only about $5000 per
year. When spending on public elementary and secondary schools is included—

TANF is 2.4% of all spending items in Figure 1. If we limit the set of programs to cash and near cash
direct transfers to households (dropping Medicaid/CHIP, Title I, Special Ed) and omit the tax reductions
(e.g. dependent exemption, value of untaxed employer sponsored insurance, etc.) TANF still remains
below 5% of spending.
8
A large share of the federal spending on the elderly is for Medicare and Social Security. Those
programs also serve some non-elderly (primarily disabled adults); the trends in Figure 2 omit the
spending on adults. Although much smaller, we also limit SSI to the spending on the elderly (dropping
spending on disabled children and adults). Child spending is the total of programs shown in Figure 1.
7

7

$11,222 per pupil in the most recent year spent at state and local levels—total
spending on children increases, but a large gap in per-capita spending remains (Figure
2). At the end of this period, in 2015, federal spending on children is only 2.1 percent
of GDP compared to more than 9 percent for the elderly. More striking is the
significant growth in per-capita spending for the elderly alongside the modest
spending levels and upward trends for children. This imbalance has implications for
future productivity given the fact that spending on children can be viewed as an
investment while spending on the elderly is not.

Trends in public spending should be analyzed alongside trends in private resources
available to children. By some measures, including parental time with children (proxied
by number of parents in the household) and income, children in lower income
households have stagnant or fewer private resources available. As shown in Figure 3,
over the past 40 years there has been a marked decline in the share of children living
with married parents among children whose mothers have less than a college
education; by 2016, only 60 percent of children with mothers without a college degree
lived with married parents, compared with 85 percent of children with collegeeducated mothers. Over the same period, large numbers of both single and married
mothers have joined the workforce, as shown in Figure 4. Since 2000, single mothers’
labor force participation has been nearly identical to single childless women’s (Black et
al. 2017) and above the participation rate of married women with children (Figure 4).
However, real wages among workers with low education levels have been stagnant or
declining, as shown in Figure 5. As we show below in Section IV, an increasing share of
benefits is going to families that combine work with safety-net use, and the safety net is
supporting families that face stagnant economic opportunities. Finally, along some
other dimensions, there have been positive changes in private resources available to
8

children, including a decline in the total number of children per family, and an increase
in parental education.9

As we proceed below, our analysis focuses on a subset of Federal safety net programs
with substantial spending on low-income children. We are particularly interested in
discussing those programs and policies for which we have evidence on their long-run
impacts on children. Therefore, in the rest of the paper we cover Medicaid, EITC, CTC,
SNAP, TANF and SSI.10 As shown in Figure 1, this captures four of the top five
programs (in terms of expenditures).

III.

Findings from the recent literature

In recent years, researchers have made strong advances toward understanding the
long-run impacts of safety net spending and other early-life events. Reviewed recently
by Almond, Currie and Duque (forthcoming), this research shows that there are critical
times both during the prenatal period and in early childhood that deserve particular
policy focus. This line of inquiry was built off of a large literature spanning research in
public health, epidemiology, and more recently economics that documents important
later-life impacts on health and mortality of extreme negative shocks—such as famines,

Over this period, parental educational attainment has increased. Whereas the median mother had a
high school education in the early 1990s, beginning in 1995, the median mother had some college
education. Due to these educational attainment changes, the trend for the low education group may
partially reflect compositional changes rather than structural trends. In fact, if we instead reexamine
Figure 3 for women with below median (versus above median) educational attainment, the trends in
child living arrangements are much more stable. Throughout the period, about 60 percent of children
with a low-educated mother (below median educational attainment) lived with married parents. The
increase in employment among low educated mothers (Figure 4) is similar over our period under both
measures but rises slightly less for high-educated mothers using the alternative definition (above
median).
10
Below, when we present more detailed data on the CTC, we consider expenditures on the tax credit
that go to families with income below 200 percent of the federal poverty line. This allows us to
incorporate this relatively large program but to limit it to our population of interest.
9

9

wars, and the 1918 Pandemic Flu. Much of the early work focused on prenatal
exposure to shocks, and tested Barker’s “fetal origins” hypothesis. Barker argued that a
poor prenatal environment (in particular inadequate nutrition) “programs” the fetus to
be at higher risk of metabolic conditions and disease risk in adulthood (Barker 1990).
The economic literature subsequently documented that these extreme negative shocks
also impact economic well-being—including educational attainment, IQ, and
earnings.11 As the literature has continued to evolve, it has turned to testing more mild,
commonplace shocks, encompassing positive as well as negative shocks. These studies
have further documented the importance of the post-natal environment—particularly
early childhood—leveraging variation in access to nutrition, maternal stress, exposure
to alcohol and tobacco, and environmental toxins and public health interventions to
identify impacts. The literature clearly supports the conclusion that relatively mild earlylife shocks can have impacts on later-life health and labor market outcomes. It is more
recent that this literature has turned to evaluating the impacts of the social safety net
on long run outcomes.

To do this work, a number of factors must come together. First, adequate longitudinal
data are necessary, including information both about childhood circumstances and
adult outcomes. In some cases, year of birth and the location of birth or residence in
early life is sufficient to determine whether the individual had access to a program. In
other cases, information on measures or proxies for family income during childhood is
also necessary. Much of the path-breaking work on early-life influences and later-life
outcomes has come from countries with extensive population-level panel data like
Norway and Sweden, but such data are typically harder to come by in the United
States.
11

For excellent reviews of the early literature, see Almond and Currie 2011a, 2011b.

10

Because safety net programs typically serve people who need the program when they
need it, it is empirically difficult to disentangle the (likely positive) impact of the safety
net from the (likely negative) impact of the circumstances that made a family eligible
for the program. To overcome this challenge, researchers need a credible research
design that allows them to isolate the impact of the program—and that can be
implemented with the available data.

Of course, long-term effects can only be measured after an appropriate amount of time
passes; this is true broadly across the literature evaluating the long-term impacts of
early life events. Prior to the availability of longer-term outcomes, many studies
examined short-term proxy measures such as birth weight—which has been shown to
be an important marker of long-run outcomes and which is often more readily
available. There is consistent evidence, for example, that links birth weight to cognitive
outcomes in childhood (Figlio et al. 2014; Bharadwaj et al. 2013) as well as a wide
range of adult outcomes such as wages, disability, adult chronic conditions, and human
capital accumulation (Almond et al. forthcoming). Other studies use educational
measures as short-term proxies, such as test scores. As longer-term data become
available, many studies have revealed larger long-term impacts across a wider variety
of measures than the short-run proxies would have implied (Krueger and Whitmore
2001; Ludwig and Miller 2007; Deming 2009; Chetty et al. 2011). In particular,
outcomes in adulthood need not operate solely though health at birth (Almond, Chay,
and Lee 2005; Almond and Currie 2011a). This suggests that a complete analysis of the
long-run effects of the social safety net for childhood requires observing outcomes for
affected children when they reach adulthood. Because of the time lag required for
measuring long-term outcomes, the evidence we report here is necessarily related to
11

programs that were implemented or expanded two decades ago or longer. To the
extent that these policies have been similar over time, or that the impacts measure
basic economic channels through which policies flow, these evaluations of older
programs are still relevant today. On the other hand, if circumstances or policies have
changed dramatically, then the inference to today’s policies may be more limited.

Below we present evidence from the four primary types of safety net programs for lowincome families, covering in-kind food benefits, tax credits linked to paid work,
unconditional cash transfers, and public health insurance.12 We include studies that
produce causal estimates of the impact of the safety net on long-run outcomes, and
related work on short- and medium-run effects. As described below, each program
type has been evaluated using credible research designs that are capable of identifying
the causal impact of program access or participation on a range of outcomes.

a. In-Kind Food Benefits: The Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP)
SNAP is a means-tested voucher program designed to supplement low-income
families’ food budgets. The vouchers are structured to fill the gap between the
resources a family has available to purchase food and the resources required to
purchase an inexpensive food plan. Eligible families typically have income below 130%
of the poverty line. A maximum benefit is extended to those with zero income and the
benefit is phased out at a 30 percent rate with increases in income (after deductions).
Vouchers are paid monthly and can be used to purchase most foods at grocery stores
and farmers’ markets that are intended to be taken home and prepared. In 2016, 13.6
percent of the population participated in SNAP, and average monthly benefits were

See Almond et al. (forthcoming), Butcher (2017) and Sherman and Mitchell (2017) for other reviews of
these studies.
12

12

$255 per household, or $126 per person. After accounting for the underreporting of
benefits, SNAP is estimated to have lifted 3.8 million children out of poverty in 2015
(Wheaton and Tran 2018).

Economic theory predicts that inframarginal participants—that is, those who receive
SNAP benefits in an amount less than they would otherwise spend on food, who
comprise the vast majority of participants—will treat their benefits like cash. There is
some empirical debate about whether SNAP benefits are spent in the same manner as
an equivalent cash transfer would be, or if instead the marginal propensity to consume
food is higher out of SNAP than from regular income (Hoynes and Schanzenbach 2009;
Hastings and Shapiro 2017). In any case, SNAP represents a sizeable income transfer to
participants, and is expected to change the amount and/or quality of food purchased.
Like any means-tested income transfer that is not conditioned on work, there are
potential disincentive effects on work effort. Understanding the effect of a program on
work is relevant for quantifying the impact on total household financial resources and
also for parental time spent with children. Studies find that such effects for SNAP are
small in practice (Hoynes and Schanzenbach 2009; East forthcoming).

There have been relatively few expansions or other changes in SNAP that yield a
credible research design to study the impacts of the program. Benefit levels do not
vary by geography (except Alaska and Hawaii), and eligibility is universal, typically
conditioned only on income and assets. One source of variation leveraged by
researchers is the program’s gradual, cross-county introduction during the 1960s and
1970s. Another source was the temporary exclusion of legal immigrants from the
program that was adopted in 1996 as part of the welfare reform law and reversed in
2003.
13

Using cross-county variation in the timing of the introduction of SNAP and Vital
Statistics data on the universe of births in the U.S., Almond, Hoynes, and Schanzenbach
(2011) find that SNAP reduced the incidence of low-birth weight by 7 percent for
whites and 5-11 percent for blacks. In addition, although results are not statistically
significant, point estimates suggest the introduction of Food Stamps reduced neonatal
mortality. Examining legal immigrants’ loss of benefits in the years after welfare reform,
East (2017) finds that parental access to SNAP during pregnancy improves the child’s
health at birth, as measured by birth weight. She also examines the impact on mediumrun health, finding that a child’s SNAP access before age five improves the child’s
parent-reported health in adolescence. She finds suggestive evidence that SNAP
reduces school absences, doctor visits and hospitalizations, all of which are suggestive
of long-term benefits.

Hoynes, Schanzenbach and Almond (2016) provide direct evidence, finding that
childhood access to SNAP improves adult health status and economic outcomes. In
particular, individuals with access to food stamps in childhood had better health in
adulthood—as measured by a “metabolic syndrome index” combining measures of
obesity, body mass index, and the presence of chronic conditions such as diabetes and
high blood pressure. There are similarly positive overall impacts on economic
outcomes, as measured by a “self-sufficiency” index measure that includes their
current earnings and family income, and indicator variables for whether the individual
graduated from high school, is currently employed, is currently not living in poverty,
and is not participating in the TANF and SNAP safety net programs.

14

Impacts were largest among those who had access at the youngest ages, particularly
ages 0-5, underscoring the importance of providing protection in early childhood
(Barker 1990; Heckman 2006). While health improvements were similar across gender,
the economic self-sufficiency improvements were present only for women (with small
and statistically insignificant effects for men). The long-term impacts were largest in for
those who spent their childhoods in the most disadvantaged counties.

The Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women Infants and Children (WIC) is
another food and nutrition program, providing vouchers for purchases of specific food
items (e.g. fortified cereal, eggs, cheese, milk, juice, dried legumes, etc.) to pregnant
and postpartum women, infants, and children under 5. Families with income below
185% of poverty are eligible for WIC. Despite the relatively low budget cost of WIC ($6
billion in 2016), the reach of the program is significant, especially to the youngest
children—about half of births are to WIC recipients (Hoynes and Schanzenbach 2015).
There is a large set of studies with robust evidence that WIC benefits for pregnant
women leads to improvements in birthweight and infant health. This is suggestive that
WIC may also lead to long-run improvements, though this has yet to be tackled in the
research.

b. Tax Credits Tied to Paid Work: EITC
A large and increasing share of safety net programs are tied to employment. The most
important of these programs is the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC). The EITC is
available to lower-income families with positive earned income. It is refundable, so
when a family’s income is too low to generate tax obligations, the family receives a
refund check from the Internal Revenue Service. In 2017, a single mother with two
children with earnings between $14,040 and $18,340 (a full time-full year minimum
15

wage worker earns $15,080) would receive the maximum credit of $5,616, fully 40
percent of pre-tax earnings. In 2015 the average benefit for families with children was
$3,189 (IRS 2017). The Child Tax Credit (CTC) is similar in structure to the EITC but is
available to families earning substantially more than the EITC. The CTC is also not fully
refundable, which limits the reach of the program to lower income families (Hoynes
and Rothstein 2016). Together these tax credits represent the largest anti-poverty
program for children; the EITC (and the child tax credit) raised 4.8 million children out
of poverty in 2015 (Renwick and Fix 2016).13

Because the EITC is only available to families with positive earned income, the credit is
expected to lead to increases in employment, especially among less-skilled workers.14
The research finds consistent evidence that the EITC leads to increases in employment
(for recent reviews see Hoynes and Rothstein 2016; Nichols and Rothstein 2016). For
example, Meyer and Rosenbaum (2001) find that the EITC raised employment by more
than 7 percentage points for single women with children relative to those without
children between 1984 and 1996. As shown by Hoynes and Patel (forthcoming), the
household earnings gain as a result of the increase in employment is as large a
component to the increase in household (after tax) income as the government outlay
from the EITC. This is important as it establishes a strong “first stage” for the effect of
the EITC on family resources. More generally, changes in maternal employment may
have direct effects on children—potentially positive to the extent that employment
brings more income to the family, or potentially negative to the extent that the child
attends low-quality childcare or receives fewer time investments from his or her
There is little research on the CTC, though one would expect similar impacts as the EITC where the
two programs overlap. All of the studies on the short- and long-term benefits of the tax credits come
from analysis of the EITC.
14
One exception is secondary earners married to low income primary earners; hours of work are
predicted to fall for those secondary earners (Eissa and Hoynes 2004).
13

16

parents. In sum, because the EITC provides both a direct income transfer to families
and a boost to maternal employment, studies of the EITC are measuring a dual
“treatment”.

There is a recent and growing literature that uses the increase in after-tax income
generated by the EITC to examine impacts on downstream outcomes. These studies
use quasi-experimental approaches leveraging legislated expansions of the credit.
Many studies focus on the 1993 expansion of the federal credit, when the maximum
credit more than doubled for families with two children and increased by more than 40
percent for those with one child. This policy variation is leveraged using a difference-indifference approach with comparisons across time and family size. The EITC has been
expanded several other times (in 1986, 1990, and 2009), providing additional variation
for researchers. Other researchers use the schedule of the credit—which is phased in at
low earnings levels, level across some income range, and then is phased out above a
higher earnings level, providing variation that can be used for research—to estimate its
impacts. In addition, 29 states (plus Washington, D.C.) have adopted state add-on
EITC programs, providing another source of variation.

Several studies find that the EITC leads to increases in infant health, including an
increase in average birth weight (Baker 2008; Strully et al. 2010). Hoynes, Miller, and
Simon (2015) find that a $1,000 induced increase in after-tax income due to the EITC
leads to a 2-3 percent reduction in low birth weight births. Evans and Garthwaite (2014)
find that the EITC leads to improvements in maternal health, including reducing the
incidence of risky biomarkers such as measures of inflammation, high blood pressure
and elevated cholesterol and improving mental health, and suggesting an income
pathway for a reduction in stress.
17

Additionally, there are several studies documenting a link between the EITC and
cognitive and human capital outcomes. Dahl and Lochner (2012, 2017) use an
instrumental variables approach leveraging the EITC expansions and find that a $1,000
increase in family income due to the EITC leads to an increase in combined math and
reading test scores by 0.04 standard deviations. Chetty, Friedman, and Rockoff (2011),
using the nonlinearity of the EITC schedule and administrative data from New York City
public schools, find that $1,000 in income due to the EITC leads to a 0.06-0.09
standard deviation increase in test scores.15 Bastian and Michelmore (2018) find that a
larger EITC during childhood leads to an increase in completing high school, college
attendance and employment in young adulthood. These effects are more important,
they find, for the EITC received in the teen years. Additionally, Manoli and Turner
(2014) and Maxfield (2013) look at the contemporaneous effects of a more generous
EITC on education and the transition to college. Both studies find that the impact is
larger for children affected at younger ages, while Maxfield additionally finds larger
effects for boys and minority children. Manoli and Turner (2014) use the universe of
federal tax records and the nonlinearity of the EITC schedule to examine the effect of
the EITC in the senior year of high school on college attendance. They find that an
additional $1000 in EITC leads to a 2-3 percentage point increase in college going.
Although direct evidence on longer-term outcomes beyond educational attainment is
limited, we would expect that the increase in human capital shown in the literature will
result in better adult economic and health outcomes, similar to those found for other
interventions.

A related paper using variation across Canadian provinces in the generosity of child tax benefits over
time and finds quantitatively similar effects on children’s cognitive test scores (Milligan and Stabile
2011). They also find positive contemporaneous effects on mental health and some physical health
outcomes.
15

18

c. Unconditional Cash Transfers
AFDC provided cash assistance to poor families (primarily single mother families) with
children beginning in 1935. There is little evidence on the long run effects of the AFDC
program, though Currie and Cole (1993) find that AFDC leads to improvements in birth
outcomes. Federal welfare reform took place in 1996 and, as discussed above,
replaced AFDC with TANF leading to a reduction in funding and a shrinking role of
cash assistance. A large literature examines the effects of welfare reform on short-term
outcomes such as maternal employment, family income, and health (see reviews by
Grogger and Karoly 2006; Moffitt 2003; Ziliak 2016). However, the evidence on the
long-run impacts of providing cash transfers to needy families or the long-term impact
of welfare reform is limited. The best evidence we currently have on the impacts of the
welfare policies on children are from research syntheses that combine the data in
several state welfare experiments in the years prior to federal welfare reform. For
example, the results in Duncan et al. (2011) imply that an additional $1,000 in family
income increases student achievement by 0.05-0.06 standard deviations—a similar
magnitude as the impacts of the EITC described above.16 This achievement gain would
be predicted to raise subsequent earnings by about 1 percent.

Prior to AFDC, some states operated cash welfare programs for families with children—
termed Mothers’ Pension programs. Aizer et al. (2016) use unique historical data to
evaluate the effect of child access to cash welfare on wide range of long term
outcomes. The researchers digitize records from social service agencies in many states

These results come from pooling data across randomized experiments across U.S. states (and one
from Canada) where one group received the welfare reform program and the other the pre-existing
AFDC program. The impact of income on child outcomes is identified using variation across different
programs and an instrumental variables approach (the instrument is random assignment across states).
16

19

to determine who either applied for or received benefits and use a research design
that compares children in families that were accepted into the program to children in
families that were rejected from the program. Using data from the military, death
records and several state historical censuses, they find that receipt of cash assistance
has a host of positive impacts, including reducing the probability of being underweight
by half (data available only for men), increasing educational attainment by 0.4 years,
and living an additional 1.5 years of life. There is suggestive evidence that the impacts
may be larger for children exposed at younger ages. While this evidence, from more
than 100 years ago, may have limited applicability to the benefits from current
programs, it provides a unique and comprehensive set of findings measuring the
impact over the very long run of providing additional cash resources to disadvantaged
children.

An interesting set of studies sheds additional light on the impact of additional cash
income to disadvantaged populations. Akee et al. (2010) trace the effects of a casino
opening among the Eastern Band of Cherokee Indians in North Carolina. Using the
casino revenues, the tribe initiated “per-capita payments”—a sort of universal basic
income provided to tribe members. Using variation across cohorts over time,
compared to a geographically proximate control group, the researchers found that an
additional $4000 per year in income to the poorest households led to sizeable
improvements in educational attainment and a reduction in criminal activities, with no
adverse impact on employment. Additionally, the cash transfer led to more parental
investment and positive interactions between the parent and child, and beneficial
effects on children’s emotional and behavioral health and personality traits during
adolescence (Akee et al. forthcoming).

20

d. Public Health Insurance: Medicaid
Medicaid provides public health insurance to children (and others) in low-income
families. Originally, only families receiving cash welfare were for eligible for Medicaid,
but federal law led to significant expansions in the 1980s and 1990s (Gruber 1997).
Though states were required to meet particular expansion targets (e.g. OBRA 1989
required states to cover pregnant women and children under 6 in families below 133%
of the federal poverty level), the states took very different expansion paths—leading to
variation in coverage across states, time, family income and child age. A large literature
takes advantage of these expansions estimating difference-in-difference models to
investigate the long-run effects of access to health insurance and medical care.
Another approach takes advantage of the fact that the Medicaid expansion legislation
stipulated that states had to expand coverage only to children born after September
30, 1983, creating a sharp increase in Medicaid eligibility that is used in a regression
discontinuity design. For example, poor children born in October 1983 experienced 5
more years in Medicaid eligibility compared to a poor child born in September 1983
(Card and Shore-Sheppard 2004; Wherry and Meyer 2015). A few studies discussed
below examine the introduction of Medicaid in 1965 which allows for investigation of
the impacts over a much longer period.

Using the significant policy expansion in the 1980s and 1990s, work on the short-term
impacts of Medicaid eligibility found sizeable impacts on infant health, including
reduced infant mortality and low birth weight (Currie and Gruber 1996). Infant health
impacts were stronger when expansions were restricted to low-income women,
compared with broader expansions. By expanding eligibility and breaking its link to
AFDC, the reforms also resulted in decreased AFDC participation and an increase in
employment among affected mothers (Yelowitz 1995).
21

A large literature has recently emerged examining the effects of childhood exposure to
Medicaid on health and economics outcomes in the teen years through young
adulthood. Currie and Schwandt (2016) find that over this time period, mortality for
infants and children declined overall, and inequality in mortality fell as well (in contrast
to the trends among older adults). Currie et al. (2008) find that Medicaid coverage in
early childhood (ages 2-4) leads to an improvement in self-reported health in later
childhood. Wherry and Meyer (2015) find that additional Medicaid in late childhood
(ages 8-14) leads to a 19 percent reduction in mortality rates from internal causes
among blacks ages 15-18. They do not find any significant mortality change among
whites, or blacks at non-teen ages, although death rates for children older than age 1
and younger than 15 are quite low. Additionally, Wherry et al. (2015) find that Medicaid
eligibility during childhood is associated with fewer hospitalizations and emergency
department visits in early adulthood for blacks, with largest reductions for visits related
to chronic conditions and among individuals living in low-income neighborhoods.
Miller and Wherry (forthcoming) find that Medicaid eligibility between conception and
age 1 results in lower rates of chronic conditions and fewer hospitalizations related to
diabetes and obesity in young adulthood. East et al. (2017) find that Medicaid’s health
benefits extend to the next generation: children of mothers who had more exposure to
Medicaid in their childhood themselves go on to have healthier infants.

The positive effects of Medicaid are not limited to health outcomes. Brown et al. (2015)
use administrative tax data and find that increased exposure to Medicaid during
childhood increases education and earnings through age 28. Miller and Wherry
(forthcoming) find that expansions in Medicaid between conception and age 1 lead to
increases in high school graduation. These results are also supported by Cohodes et al.
22

(2016) who find that increased Medicaid eligibility during childhood reduces high
school dropout rates and increases and college completion, and Levine and
Schanzenbach (2009) who find it increases standardized test scores in fourth and eighth
grade.

Since these policy expansions are relatively recent, the population of treated people
are still in young adulthood. Examining the mid-1960s introduction of Medicaid allows
for a longer-run evaluation of health insurance. Using the timing of the rollout of
Medicaid across states, Bourdreaux et al. (2016) find that increases in Medicaid
exposure between ages 0-5 leads to reductions in chronic conditions (particularly high
blood pressure) in adulthood. Using cross-state variation in AFDC rules and the
introduction of Medicaid, Goodman-Bacon (2016) finds that additional childhood
exposure reduces adult mortality and disability and increases adult employment.

Overall, this recent research on Medicaid, documents a strong link between greater
access to public health insurance during childhood and improved health and economic
well-being in adulthood. There is much more to learn, including the mechanisms for
these improved long-run impacts.

e. Implications of Safety Net Research
Overall, the literature across programs finds positive long-run benefits of having access
to safety net programs in childhood, leading to improvements to both health and
economic productivity in adulthood. Prior to the emergence of this recent literature,
the discussion of the costs and benefits of the social safety net was focused on the
narrow lens of the short run. Many of the long-run benefits are private (improved own
earnings and own health), though public benefits are also present due to increased
23

taxes and decreased in health-related government outlays. While the literature does
not suggest that the benefits “pay for themselves” in the long run, these programs
nonetheless have substantial positive external benefits that have been quantified.
Additionally, many additional aspects have not yet been quantified—for example,
impacts on criminal activity and longer-term impacts on health—which have large
public components to them and may further increase the benefits.

The literature points to some findings that could be helpful in considering the design
or redesign of the social safety net. First, in the limited number of cases that have
explored differential returns by child age of exposure, the evidence points to greater
long-run returns to exposure in early childhood than later childhood. Second, the
benefits are larger for more disadvantaged groups, especially African Americans. One
caveat on this finding, though, is that it can be difficult to disentangle whether the
larger effects for more disadvantaged groups are due to higher rates of exposure to
these programs or larger returns to exposure. Other dimensions—such as whether
long-run returns differ across cash transfers, in-kind benefits, or health insurance—are
important to ascertain but as yet the evidence is too incomplete to be able to make
such comparisons to inform better design of policy.

IV.

The Recent Evolution of the Safety Net for Children

Having summarized the recent findings documenting long-run benefits of childhood
exposure to the social safety net, we now examine in more detail what population
these core programs are serving and how this has changed over time. In particular, we
use administrative data to examine aggregate trends in social safety net spending, how
the spending varies across working and non-working families, and how it varies across
the income distribution. We do this for seven programs (Medicaid, EITC, CTC, SNAP,
24

AFDC/TANF, SSI and public housing) and our analysis covers the period 1990 through
2015. In light of the evidence presented in the previous section, not only may these
trends have implications for the welfare of children, families and the economy today,
but they may also impact individuals and the aggregate economy in the long run.

The analysis of trends in safety net spending for different subgroups is complicated by
the well-documented fact that social safety net income is increasingly under-reported
in household surveys (Meyer et al. 2009; Meyer et al. 2015). Since this underreporting
has increased over time, relying on household survey data may be particularly
unsuitable for examining trends in the social safety net. Therefore, our analysis relies as
much as possible on program-specific administrative data.17 In general, we begin with
administrative aggregates and identify the total spending on families with children. For
programs that serve populations beyond families with children, we use available
administrative data to identify the amount that goes to families with children.18 We then
apportion total child spending into four groups based on the share going to those
families with incomes less than 50% poverty, 50-99% poverty, 100-149% poverty, and
150-199% poverty.19 We also apportion total child spending into the amount going to
families with earned income and families without earned income. Unlike the data in

Administrative data are not perfect. They are generated as part of program administration and as
such and often have limited demographic information and only capture family members and family
resources that are part of eligibility and benefit determination. The advantage of household survey data
is that it provides a more comprehensive picture of the household.
18
To be more specific, the EITC, CTC, SNAP, TANF and housing provide benefits to “family units” – our
case families with children. Two programs, Medicaid and SSI, provide benefits targeted to particular
individuals. We count spending on the entire family (parents and children) for the family unit programs
and count spending for the children for Medicaid and SSI. For more detail, see the appendix.
19
The CTC extends to families earning far above 200% of the poverty line – we estimate that almost 40%
of the $54 billion in CTC spending in 2015 goes to families above 200 percent of the poverty line.
Among the other social safety net programs little or no spending goes to families above 200% of the
federal poverty line. To maintain our focus on programs targeting the low-income population,
throughout our analysis in this section we limit CTC spending to families below 200% of poverty.
17

25

Figures 1 and 2 (which contain only federal data), our administrative aggregates for
state-federal programs (AFDC/TANF, Medicaid) consist of the combined federal and
state spending.

To construct the spending across the four income-to-poverty bins requires a definition
for family resources and the poverty threshold (a family is poor if resources<poverty
threshold). For the poverty threshold, we use SPM poverty thresholds, projected back
to 1990 using methods in Wimer et al. (2014). The SPM threshold bases needs on a
broader array of necessary expenditures and makes other technical improvements
relative to the official poverty measure (which is based on food costs alone). For
reference, the SPM threshold for a family with two adults and two children in 2016 is
$26,104, compared to $24,300 for the official poverty threshold. We define resources
to be earned income plus cash transfers plus in-kind transfers (excluding Medicaid)
minus taxes (including the EITC and CTC)—essentially after-tax and transfer income
following Bitler and Hoynes (2016) and Bitler, Hoynes and Kuka (2017). This definition
of resources is aligned with—though not identical to—the resource measure in the
Supplemental Poverty Measure (SPM) measured by the Census since 2011.20 However,
each administrative data source provides a different subset of these resources
elements. We come as close as we can to measure after tax and transfer income
consistently across the administrative data sources, imputing missing elements in some
cases. Note that poverty is typically defined based on annual resources. While the EITC
and CTC measures contain annual income data, the administrative data for SNAP and
The SPM resource measure subtracts medical out-of-pocket expenditures and work-related expenses
(including child care and other expenses). These elements are not measured in the administrative data
and thus excluded from our resource measure. Additionally, each of our administrative data cover
different income and transfer measures. For example, the tax data which we use for the EITC and CTC,
does not include any nontaxable income sources (such as SNAP). The SNAP administrative data, does
not include measures of tax credits (EITC). We make an effort to calculate resources consistently across
sources; see the Appendix for details.
20

26

AFDC/TANF only measure monthly income, which we then use to approximate annual
income by multiplying it by 12. We are able to apportion spending into the four
poverty and two earnings groups relying solely on administrative data for SNAP, EITC,
CTC, and AFDC/TANF. For the remaining three programs (Medicaid, SSI, and public
housing) no suitable administrative data are available; we instead use the Current
Population Survey to apportion aggregate spending into the groups. For more detail
on our approach, see the data appendix.

Figure 6 plots the real aggregate spending on families with children between 1990 and
2015, by program.21 Overall total spending is increasing, from under $100 billion in
1990 to about $270 billion in 2015 (in real 2015 dollars). However, the overall trend
masks substantial differences across individual programs. Cash welfare (not tied to
work) for families with children declined substantially following 1996 federal welfare
reform; cash assistance through AFDC totaled $34 billion in 1990 compared to $8
billion (under TANF) in 2015.22 In contrast, the introduction of the CTC and expansion
of both tax credits (EITC and CTC) have led to large increases in spending – from $12
billion in 1990 (for the EITC) to about $100 billion in 2015 for the combined EITC and
CTC.23 SNAP spending had been fairly consistent over the first two decades of the time
series, before increasing sharply during the Great Recession. Medicaid spending has
also increased substantially over this twenty-five-year period, reflecting the policy
expansions that led to increases in health insurance coverage among children. Housing
assistance and SSI, by contrast, have remained fairly small contributors to overall

Here, and throughout the rest of the paper, we limit CTC spending to that going to families with
income below 200% of poverty.
22
This is labeled TANF but it spans the period in the transition from AFDC (1990-1996) to TANF (1997present).
23
In 2015, the total CTC cost was $54 billion, the cost limited to those with income below 200% of
poverty was $33 billion.
21

27

federal child spending. In sum, the composition of the social safety net for children
have changed substantially over this time period. In 1990, the majority of spending was
received by families with children receiving cash welfare.24 Today there is minimal
unconditional cash welfare spending, instead the vast majority of public expenditures
are for tax credits tied to paid work and health insurance.

To further investigate these changes, we next examine how social safety net spending
has changed across the income distribution. To do this we apportion total spending in
each program into four bins of after-tax and transfer income relative to the SPM
poverty threshold (<50%, 50-99%, 100-149%, 150-199%) and sum up across the
programs. Figure 7 presents the tabulations based on spending on SNAP, EITC, CTC
and AFDC/TANF. We limit to these four programs because apportioning into poverty
(and earnings) groups is possible using only administrative data. Appendix Figure 1
presents a comparable figure that also includes public housing, SSI and Medicaid
(where apportioning into groups relies on the Current Population Survey). In the top
panel we plot aggregate spending (by poverty category) year by year, in real 2015
dollars, and in the bottom panel we plot the share of total spending each year going to
each of the four poverty categories. These figures show that overall spending has
increased most dramatically for families between 100 and 149 percent of the poverty
line, from less than $10 billion in 1990 to $54 billion in 2015. Spending directed to
families between 150 and 200 percent of poverty has also notably increased, from
essentially zero in 1990 to $14 billion in 2015. Spending on families between 50 and
100 percent of poverty dropped in real terms from 1995 to 2002, then increased
sharply during the Great Recession before coming down again in recent years. Panel
(b) shows that the share of the social safety net going to families with children in
24

Prior to welfare reform, Medicaid was limited to families receiving cash assistance (AFDC or SSI).

28

poverty (particularly 50-99% poverty) has declined substantially over this period; the
share of spending on families with income below poverty has fallen from 87 percent in
1990 to 56 percent in 2015. This has been replaced by gains in the share going to
families with income in 100-149% of poverty and to a lesser extent 150-200% poverty.

The qualitative findings are similar for the results on the full set of seven programs
(Appendix Figure 1). While there are gains in the level of spending in each income-topoverty group, the share of spending for families below the poverty threshold has
fallen steeply.

Another lens to examine this change is to apportion spending to families with earned
income compared to families without earned income. We present those results
(excluding Medicaid, SSI and public housing) in Figure 8 (and with these programs in
Appendix Figure 2). These striking results show that virtually all of the gains in
spending on the social safety net for children since 1990 has gone to families with
earnings (Figure 8A). In real terms, spending on families without earnings has fallen
from $45 billion in 1990 to $33 billion in 2015. The share of total spending going to
families without earnings has fallen even more—from almost 70 percent of spending in
1990 to 20 percent in 2015 (Figure 8B). The same patterns are evident for the full set of
7 programs (Appendix Figure 2).

The results in Figures 7 and 8 show that the distribution of spending has changed
substantially over time—away from the lowest income levels and away from nonworkers. Part of this is the result of the contraction of some programs (e.g.
AFDC/TANF) and the expansion of others (EITC, CTC). Figure 9 provides a summary of
the policy changes between 1992 (Figure 9A) and 2015 (Figure 9B). Each figure shows
29

the sources of support for a hypothetical family consisting of a single mother with two
children. We simulate the benefits (e.g. AFDC/TANF, SNAP, EITC, CTC, etc.) for a
range of annual earnings; all benefits and earnings are in 2015 dollars.25 In 1992,
welfare reform has not yet occurred, the EITC is quite small, there is no CTC, and the
benefits are targeted at the bottom of the earnings distribution. In 2015, in contrast,
TANF is no longer an entitlement (so is excluded here), the EITC has expanded, the
CTC has been introduced, and SNAP remained much the same. On net resources have
shifted away from the lowest earnings levels and moved up the income distribution.
These illustrative policy changes are born out in the empirical analysis in Figures 7 and
8.

A natural question to ask is to what extent are the trends in spending across poverty
and work categories (Figures 7 and 8) driven by changes in the number of children
across these groups? These changes may be a direct result of the changes in the
policies illustrated above as well as other factors. However, the administrative data do
not allow for this measurement, and so counting the number of children by poverty
group (or by parental work status) requires using the CPS data which are known to
contain substantial measurement error. Nonetheless, Figure 10 presents the percent of
children in each of the poverty groups, using CPS data from 1990 to 2015. The percent
of children below 50% of poverty has remained quite steady. The share in 50-99% of
poverty dropped sharply in the 1993-2000 period due to welfare reform, the EITC
expansion and the rise in employment (Meyer and Rosenbaum 2001; Grogger 2003)
and has slightly trended up before falling at the end of the period. We can use the
poverty counts underlying Figure 10 (and for earnings, Figure 4) and convert the

These figures exclude income taxes paid (only include positive elements). AFDC/TANF benefits are
calculated under the rules of the state of Colorado.
25

30

spending in a poverty group (or earnings group) into spending per number of children
in that group. As shown in Figure 11A, per-child spending in all the income-to-poverty
groups exhibits a steady upward trajectory, particularly for the highest income-topoverty groups—for example from under $1000 in 1990 to more than $4000 in 2015
for those between 100-149% of poverty (real 2016 dollars). The trends for the lower
two groups are quite flat, by comparison, except for increases in the Great Recession
and its aftermath. This is particularly apparent when the trends by poverty group are
expressed relative to their 1990 levels. Figure 11B shows the relatively small changes
for the lower poverty groups in per capita spending compared to the six fold increase
for those with incomes between 100-149% (in fact we had to omit the relative trend for
the highest income group as it increases 45 times over this period, from a very low
baseline in 1990).

As we showed in Figure 4, children are much more likely to live in families with working
parents. This is important to take into account when viewing the trends over time in
spending by earnings group (Figure 8). Figure 12 presents per capita spending by
earnings group in levels (Figure 12A) and growth in per capita spending relative to
1990 (Figure 12B). These graphs clearly show that the spending per child has increased
dramatically for children in families with earnings (increasing fivefold over this period)
compared to a (small) decline in per capita spending for children without working
parents.

To gain more insight into how these changes in the social safety net break down along
the different programs, Figure 13 presents spending for those below poverty (pooling
<50% and 50-99%) and above poverty (pooling 100-149% and 150-199%) in 1990 and
2015, program by program. This figure reveals several important facts. Welfare reform
31

and the decline in unconditional cash assistance is fully felt by those with the lowest
incomes. More than half of the increased spending for the EITC and more than threequarters of the increased spending for the CTC goes to those with income between
100-199% of poverty. Most of the increases in Medicaid spending are also going to
those above poverty. Additionally, Figure 14 shows that across each program, the
increases in spending are going to those with earned income.

Ours is not the first study to examine the evolution of the social safety net for children
and families. However, to our knowledge, we are the first to rely almost exclusively on
administrative data to analyze data by poverty status and work status. For example,
Moffitt (2015) in his Presidential Address to the Population Association of America,
presents similar calculations by poverty status where he uses the Survey of Income and
Program Participation to apportion spending into poverty bins. The Congressional
Budget Office (2013), in their analysis of the distribution of taxes and spending across
income quintiles, uses the IRS’s Statistics of Income Public Use Tax File (for taxable
transfers, EITC, CTC and other taxes—as we do) but uses the Current Population
Survey for nontaxable transfers. Meyer and Mittag (2015) show that relying on
household surveys such as the CPS have important misclassification of the level and
composition of families defined as poor. Isaacs et al. (2017) use the Urban Institute
TRIM3 model to adjust for underreporting of transfers, but their study focuses on
aggregate trends and does not show the results by poverty or work status. In Appendix
Figure 3, we compare the CPS and administrative estimates of the share of social
safety net spending by poverty group. The CPS shows much higher amounts of
spending on the above-poverty group than does the administrative data, consistent
with underreporting among lower-income survey recipients. The CPS underreporting

32

is also becoming greater over time for the below-poverty group—the ratio of CPS to
administrative counts fell from almost 50 percent in 1990 to 27 percent in 2015.

In summary, the level and composition of the social safety net for families with children
has changed substantially over the past 25 years. One major finding is the decline of
cash assistance and the rise of Medicaid and tax credits that are linked to paid work.
Spending on Medicaid and tax credits have grown both absolutely and as a share of
total expenditures, and they now represent three quarters of all spending on low
income families with children. A second major finding is the shift in spending to workcontingent programs away from traditional out-of-work assistance. A third finding,
related to the first two, is the shift in spending from the most disadvantaged to
somewhat higher up the income distribution. Finally, through this period of change,
SNAP has remained steady and significantly important for low-income families.

An implication of this shift is less protection to negative (labor market and other) shocks
among disadvantaged families. In fact, building a safety net around work leaves
families with little protection during times of high unemployment. Bitler, Hoynes and
Kuka (2017) show that spending on tax credits is (pro) cyclical and thus provides little
protection against economic downturns. Bitler and Hoynes (2015, 2016) show that an
implication of the massive shift in the social safety net is that deep poverty increased
by more in the Great Recession than we would have predicted from prior downturns.26
This shift would also be expected to increase income volatility for the most

The Bitler and Hoynes work estimates regressions of the relationship between the state-level
unemployment rate and (poverty and) deep poverty rates, finding that in the Great Recession deep
poverty increased by more than would be predicted based on the relationship from prior recessions.
The Bitler and Hoynes data are not adjusted for underreporting. Sherman and Trisi (2015) find that the
overall rate of children's deep poverty, after adjusting for underreporting, did not rise between 2007
(2.7%) and 2010 (2.6%).
26

33

disadvantaged. Because unemployment rates are higher and more cyclical for African
Americans, this reorientation of the safety net is likely to have particularly harmful
consequences for black children (Hoynes, Miller and Schaller 2012). The mounting
evidence presented above on the long-term impacts of resources in childhood,
however, suggests that children’s additional vulnerability to economic downturns likely
will have downstream costs in terms of worse later-life health and economic outcomes.
V.

Conclusions and Future Research

Increasing income and resources at bottom of the distribution may generate
substantial benefits, both private and public, in the longer run that have only recently
begun to be quantified. There may be particularly large returns to these investments
when children are young and to the most disadvantaged children. This implies that the
benefits of safety net are broader than previously thought and that there are positive
external benefits to taxpayers. With interest in more “evidence-based policy making,”
it is important to keep in mind that the costs are easily measured today but many of
the benefits are harder to measure and may not appear until the longer run.

Moving forward there is much more we would like to know. There are more outcomes
to be quantified, including outcomes that, if improved, would yield substantial public
cost savings such as disability, crime, and later-life health. There are programs with
demonstrated positive short-run impacts (WIC, SSI) where we have no research on
long-run impacts. In addition, it is important to determine whether there are
interactions between programs, and if so, are they substitutes or complements? What
is effective for remediation for early childhood deprivation? How do these investments
vary across children? When and for whom are the benefits the greatest? Are the returns
consistently greater in early life? Are there differences by gender, or gender-by-race?
34

Finally, we need to fill in gaps in our understanding of the effects of programs between
early life and adulthood; this should help us learn about mechanisms.

Given the early stages of this research, we do not think it is possible at this point to
make conclusions about the rates of return, their magnitudes or how they vary across
different programs. Given the emerging evidence, we don’t think it is likely that these
long-run benefits will be sufficiently large for the programs to “pay for themselves.”
However, these long-run benefits currently are largely ignored in policy discussions,
and it may be important for gaining insight into the nature of material depravation and
the gains to a more generous and counter-cyclical social safety net.

The research is developed enough today, though, to provide some guidance to
policymakers. First, it documents the importance of a robust social safety net. Cuts to
programs that reduce resources going to children, which are currently being discussed,
will have direct, negative impacts on children in both the short- and long-term. Second,
employment and earnings have become an increasingly important source of income for
the poor, and as a result safety net programs are acting as a partial income supplement
during normal economic times (extremely important given the prevalence of wage
stagnation in the lower half of the wage distribution), and consumption insurance when
earnings are lost or fewer hours are available. As such, maintaining the strong work
incentives (Kosar and Moffitt 2017) will allow for support of a broader population and
also to ensure that programs can respond quickly to replace lost income during
recessions. This suggests that reforms such as block grants that are unchanged during
downturns—or require Congressional approval and the delays that come with it—are
less effective than programs that can automatically respond and quickly enroll families
once they become eligible for benefits. Third, devoting more effort to raising
35

enrollment among eligible children will increase the the long-run benefits of these
programs. Fourth, building a safety net based largely on work contingent programs
means they provide incomplete insurance against earnings and employment losses.
The fact that we lack a significant out of work social safety net means higher rates of
deep poverty (less than 50% poverty) that harms children in the short and long run.
Putting this all together, since there is a substantial investment component to safety
net spending, and because there have been positive returns on expansions in
spending, the evidence suggests there could be further returns to additional safety net
spending for the young.

36

References
Aizer, Anna, Shari Eli, Joesph Ferrie, and Adriana Lleras-Muney. 2016. “The Long-Run
Impact of Cash Transfers to Poor Families.” American Economic Review 106, no. 4:
935–971.
Akee, Randall K.Q., William E. Copeland, Gordon Keeler, Adrian Angold, and E. Jane
Costello. 2010. “Parents’ Incomes and Children’s Outcomes: A Quasi-Experiment
Using Transfer Payments from Casino Profits.” American Economics Journal: Applied
Economics 2, No. 1: 86-115.
Akee, Randall, Emilia Simeonova, E. Jane Costello, and William Copeland.
Forthcoming. “How Does Household Income Affect Child Personality Traits and
Behaviors?” American Economic Review.
Almond, Douglas, Kenneth Chay, and David S. Lee. 2005. “The Costs of Low Birth
Weight.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 120 (3): 1031–83.
Almond, Douglas, and Janet Currie. 2011a. “Killing Me Softly: The Fetal Origins
Hypothesis.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 25, no. 3: 153-172.
———. 2011b. “Human Capital Development Before Age Five.” In Handbook of Labor
Economics, Volume 4B, edited by David Card and Orley Ashenfelter. Amsterdam:
North-Holland.
Almond, Douglas, Janet Currie and Valentina Duque. Forthcoming. “Childhood
Circumstances and Adult Outcomes: Act II.” Journal of Economic Literature.
Almond, Douglas, Hilary W. Hoynes, and Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach. 2011. “Inside
The War On Poverty: The Impact Of Food Stamps On Birth Outcomes.” Review of
Economics and Statistics 93, no. 2: 387–403.
Baker, Kevin. 2008. “Do Cash Transfer Programs Improve Infant Health: Evidence from
the 1993 Expansion of the Earned Income Tax Credit.” University of Notre Dame
Working Paper.
Barker, David J. 1990. “The Fetal and Infant Origins of Adult Disease.” BMJ: British
Medical Journal 301, no. 6761: 1111.
Bastian, Jacob, and Katherine Michelmore (forthcoming). “The Long-Term Impact of
the Earned Income Tax Credit on Children’s Education and Employment Outcomes,”
Journal of Labor Economics, forthcoming.
Ben-Shalom, Yonatan, Robert A. Moffitt, and John Karl Scholz. 2012. An Assessment of
the Effectiveness of Anti-Poverty Programs in the United States. In Oxford Handbook of
the Economics of Poverty, ed. Jefferson, Philip N. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
37

Bharadwaj, Prashant, Katrine Vellesen Løken, and Christopher Neilson. 2013. “Early
Life Health Interventions and Academic Achievement.” American Economic Review
103, no. 5: 1862-1891.
Bitler, Marianne, and Hilary Hoynes. 2015. “Heterogeneity in the Impact of Economic
Cycles and the Great Recession: Effects Within and Across the Income Distribution.”
American Economic Review 105, no. 5: 154-160.
———. 2016. “The More Things Change, the More They Stay the Same? The Safety
Net and Poverty in the Great Recession.” Journal of Labor Economics 34, no. S1 (Part
2): S403-S444.
Bitler, Marianne, Hilary Hoynes, and Elira Kuka. 2017. “Do In-Work Tax Credits Serve
as a Safety Net?” Journal of Human Resources 36, no. 2: 358-389.
Black, Sandra E., Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach, and Audrey Breitwieser. 2017. “The
Recent Decline in Women’s Labor Force Participation,” in Diane Whitmore
Schanzenbach and Ryan Nunn, eds., The 51%: Driving Growth through Women’s
Economic Participation. Washington, D.C.: Hamilton Project.
Boudreaux, Michel H., Ezra Golberstein, and Donna D. McAlpine. 2016. “The Longterm Impacts of Medicaid Exposure in Early Childhood: Evidence from the Program's
Origin.” Journal of Health Economics 45: 161-175.
Brown, David, Amanda Kowalski, and Ithai Lurie. 2015. “Medicaid as an Investment in
Children: What is the Long-Term Impact on Tax Receipts?” Working Paper no. 20835.
Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2018. “Consumer Price Index Research Series Using Current
Methods.” https://www.bls.gov/cpi/research-series/home.htm.
Butcher, Kristin. 2017. “Assessing the Long-Run Benefits of Transfers to Low-Income
Families.” Working Paper no. 26. Hutchins Center on Fiscal & Monetary Policy at
Brookings.
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. 2015. “Medicare and Medicaid Statistical
Supplement.” www.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-Data-and-Systems/Statistics-Trendsand-Reports/MedicareMedicaidStatSupp/
Chetty, Raj, Emmanuel Saez, and Jonah Rockoff. 2011. New evidence on the long-term
impacts of tax credits. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Internal Revenue Service, November.
Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, Nathaniel Hilger, Emmanuel Saez, Diane Whitmore
Schanzenbach, and Danny Yagan. 2011. “How does your kindergarten classroom
affect your earnings? Evidence from Project STAR.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 126, no. 4: 1593-1660.
38

Chetty, Raj, John Friedman, and Emmanuel Saez. 2013. “Using Differences in
Knowledge Across Neighborhoods to Uncover the Impacts of the EITC on Earnings.”
American Economic Review 103, no. 7: 2683-2721.
Chetty, Raj, and Emmanuel Saez. 2013. “Teaching the Tax Code: Earning Responses
to an Experiment with EITC Recipients.” American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics 5, no. 1: 1-31.
Cohodes, Sarah R., Daniel S. Grossman, Samuel A. Kleiner, and Michael F. Lovenheim.
2016. “The Effect of Child Health Insurance Access on Schooling: Evidence from Public
Insurance Expansions.” Journal of Human Resources 51, no. 3: 727-759.
Congressional Budget Office. 2013. “The Distribution of Federal Spending and Taxes
in 2006.” Washington. https://www.cbo.gov/sites/default/files/113th-congress-20132014/reports/44698-distribution11-2013.pdf
Congressional Budget Office. 2015. “Detail of Spending and Enrollment for Medicaid
– CBO’s March 2015 Baseline.” Washington.
https://www.cbo.gov/sites/default/files/recurringdata/51301-2015-03-medicaid.pdf
Currie, Janet, Sandra Decker, and Wanchuan Lin. 2008. “Has Public Health Insurance
for Older Children Reduced Disparities in Access to Care and Health Outcomes?”
Journal of Health Economics 27, no. 6: 1567-1581.
Currie, Janet, and Nancy Cole. 1993. “Welfare and Child Health: The Link Between
AFDC Participation and Birth Weight.” American Economic Review 83, no. 4: 971-985.
Dahl, Gordon B., and Lance Lochner. 2012. “The Impact of Family Income on Child
Achievement: Evidence from the Earned Income Tax Credit.” American Economic
Review 102, no. 5: 1927–56.
———. 2017. “The Impact of Family Income on Child Achievement: Evidence from the
Earned Income Tax Credit: Reply.” American Economic Review 107, no. 2: 629-631.
Duncan, Greg J., Pamela A. Morris, and Chris Rodrigues. 2011. “Does Money Really
Matter? Estimating Impacts of Family Income on Young Children’s Achievement with
Data from Random-Assignment Experiments.” Developmental Psychology 47, no. 5:
1263-1279.
East, Chloe N. 2017. “The Effect of Food Stamps on Children’s Health: Evidence from
Immigrants’ Changing Eligibility.” Working Paper.
https://www.chloeneast.com/uploads/8/9/9/7/8997263/east_fskids_r_r.pdf.
East, Chloe N. Forthcoming. “Immigrants’ Labor Supply Response to Food Stamp
Access.” Labour Economics.
39

East, Chloe N., Sarah Miller, Marianne Page, and Laura Wherry. 2017. “Multigenerational Impacts of Childhood Access to the Safety Net: Early Life Exposure to
Medicaid and the Next Generation’s Health.” Working Paper no. 23810. Cambridge,
Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Edin, Kathryn and H. Luke Shafer. 2015. $2.00 a Day: Living on Almost Nothing in
America. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt.
Eissa, Nada, and Hilary Williamson Hoynes. 2004. “Taxes and the labor market
participation of married couples: The earned income tax credit.” Journal of Public
Economics 88, no. 9–10: 1931–1958.
Eissa, Nada, and Hilary Hoynes. 2006. “Behavioral Responses to Taxes: Lessons from
the EITC and Labor Supply.” In Tax Policy and the Economy, Vol. 20, edited by James
Poterba. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Evans, William N., and Craig L. Garthwaite. 2010. “Giving Mom a Break: The Impact of
Higher EITC Payments on Maternal Health.” American Economic Journal: Economic
Policy 6, no. 2: 258–90.
Floyd, Ife, Ladonna Pavetti, and Liz Schott. 2017. “TANF Reaching Few Poor Families.”
Center on Budget and Policy Priorities. https://www.cbpp.org/research/family-incomesupport/tanf-reaching-few-poor-families
Fox, Liana. “Supplemental Poverty Measure: 2016.” U.S. Census Bureau Report
Number P60-261.
Grogger, Jeffrey. 2003. “The Effects of Time Limits, the EITC, and Other Policy
Changes on Welfare Use, Work, and Income Among Female-Headed Families.” Review
of Economics and Statistics 85, no. 2: 394-408.
Grogger, Jeffrey, and Lynn A. Karoly. 2005. Welfare Reform. Cambridge: Harvard
University Press.
Goodman-Bacon, Andrew. 2016. “The Long-Run Effects of Childhood Insurance
Coverage: Medicaid Implementation, Adult Health, and Labor Market Outcomes.”
Working Paper no. 22899. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Gruber, Jonathan. 1997. “Health Insurance for Poor Women and Children in the US:
Lessons from the Past Decade.” In Tax Policy and the Economy, Vol 11, edited by
James M. Poterba. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research;
Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Hastings, Justine, and Jesse M. Shapiro. 2017. “How are SNAP Benefits Spent?
Evidence from a Retail Panel.” Working Paper no. 23112. Cambridge, Mass.: National
Bureau of Economic Research.
40

Heckman, James J. 2006. “Skill formation and the economics of investing in
disadvantaged children.” Science 312, no. 5782: 1900-1902.
Hoynes, Hilary, Douglas Miller, and Jessamyn Schaller. 2012. “Who Suffers During
Recessions?” Journal of Economic Perspectives 26, no. 3: 27-48.
Hoynes, Hilary, Douglas Miller, and David Simon. 2015. “Income, the Earned Income
Tax Credit, and Infant Health.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 7, no. 1:
172–211.
Hoynes, Hilary, and Ankur Patel. Forthcoming. “Effective Policy for Reducing
Inequality? The Earned Income Tax Credit and the Distribution of Income.” Journal of
Human Resources.
Hoynes, Hilary, and Jesse Rothstein. 2017. “Tax Policy Toward Low-Income Families.”
The Economics of Tax Policy 2.
Hoynes, Hilary, Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach, and Douglas Almond. 2016. “LongRun Impacts of Childhood Access to the Safety Net.” American Economic Review 106,
no. 4: 903-934.
Internal Revenue Service. 2017. “Individual Income Tax Returns 2015.” Publication
1304, September 2017.
Internal Revenue Service. 1990-2011. “Public Use Tax File.” Washington.
———. 2017. “Individual Income Tax Returns 2015.” Publication 1304, September
2017. Washington. https://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-soi/15inintaxreturns.pdf
———. 2018. “Individual Income Tax Returns: Table A.” Washington.
www.irs.gov/statistics/soi-tax-stats-individual-income-tax-returns-publication-1304complete-report
Isaacs, Julia B., Cary Lou, Heather Hahn, Joycelyn Ovalle, and C. Eugene Steurle. 2017.
“Kids’ Share 2017: Report on Federal Expenditures on Children Through 2016 and
Future Projections.” The Urban Institute.
Kaiser Family Foundation. 2017. “Medicaid Spending by Enrollment Group.”
www.kff.org/medicaid/state-indicator/medicaid-spending-by-enrollment-group/
Kosar, Gizem and Robert Moffitt. 2017. “Trends in Cumulative Marginal Tax Rates
Facing Low-Income Families, 1997–2007,” Tax Policy and the Economy, Volume 31,
Number 1.
MACPAC. 2016. “MACStats: Medicaid and CHIP Data Book.” www.macpac.gov/wpcontent/uploads/2016/12/MACStats_DataBook_Dec2016.pdf

41

Manoli, Day, and Nick Turner. 2018. “Cash-on-Hand & College Enrollment: Evidence
from Population Tax Data and the Earned Income Tax Credit.” Forthcoming, American
Economic Journal: Economic Policy.
Mathematica Policy Research. 2017. “Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program
Quality Control Data Public Use Files.” https://host76.mathematicampr.com/fns/Download.aspx
Maxfield, Michelle. 2013. “The Effects of the Earned Income Tax Credit on Child
Achievement and Long-Term Educational Attainment.” Michigan State University Job
Market Paper.
https://msu.edu/~maxfiel7/20131114%20Maxfield%20EITC%20Child%20Education.pd
f
Meyer, Bruce, and Nikolas Mittag. 2015. “Using Linked Survey and Administrative Data
to Better Measure Income: Implications for Poverty, Program Effectiveness and Holes in
the Safety Net.” Working Paper no. 21676. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of
Economic Research.
Meyer, Bruce, Wallace Mok, and James Sullivan. 2015. “Household Surveys in Crisis.”
Journal of Economic 29, no. 4: 199-226.
———. 2009. “The Under-Reporting of Transfers in Household Surveys: Its Nature and
Consequences.” Working Paper no. 15181. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of
Economic Research.
Meyer, Bruce D., and Dan T. Rosenbaum. 2001. “Welfare, the Earned Income Tax
Credit, and the Labor Supply of Single Mothers.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 116,
no. 3: 1063–1114.
Miller, Sarah, and Laura R. Wherry. 2017. “The Long-Term Effects of Early Life
Medicaid Coverage.” Forthcoming, Journal of Human Resources.
Milligan, Kevin, and Stabile, Mark. 2011. “Do Child Tax Benefits Affect the Well-Being
of Children? Evidence from Canadian Child Benefit Expansions.” American Economic
Journal: Economic Policy 3, no. 3: 175-205.
Moffitt, Robert. 2015. “The Deserving Poor, the Family, and the U.S. Welfare System.”
Demography 52, no. 3: 729-749.
Nichols, Austin, and Jesse Rothstein. 2016. “The Earned Income Tax Credit.” In
Economics of Means-Tested Programs in the United States, Volume I, edited by Robert
Moffitt. National Bureau of Economic Research Conference Report. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press.

42

Office of Management and Budget. 2018. Historical Tables, Budget of the United
States Government.
OECD (2018a), Family benefits public spending (indicator). doi: 10.1787/8e8b3273-en
(Accessed on 08 April 2018).
OECD (2018b), Pension spending (indicator). doi: 10.1787/a041f4ef-en (Accessed on
08 April 2018)
Renwick, Trudi and Liana Fox. 2016. “The Supplemental Poverty Measure: 2015.”
Current Population Reports P60-258. U.S. Census Bureau.
Saez, Emmanuel. 2010. “Do taxpayers bunch at kink points?” American Economic
Journal: Economic Policy 2, no. 3: 180–212.
Shapiro, Isaac, and Danilo Trisi. 2017. “Child Poverty Falls to Record Low,
Comprehensive Measure Shows Stronger Government Policies Account for Long-Term
Improvement.” Center on Budget and Policy Priorities.
https://www.cbpp.org/research/poverty-and-inequality/child-poverty-falls-to-recordlow-comprehensive-measure-shows
Sherman, Arloc and Tazra Mitchell. 2017. “Economic Security Programs Help LowIncome Children Succeed over Long Term, Many Studies Find.” Center on Budget and
Policy Priorities. https://www.cbpp.org/research/poverty-and-inequality/economicsecurity-programs-help-low-income-children-succeed-over
Sherman, Arloc, and Danilo Trisi. 2015. “Safety Net for Poorest Weakened After
Welfare Law but Regained Strength in Great Recession, at Least Temporarily.” Center
on Budget and Policy Priorities. www.cbpp.org/research/poverty-andinequality/safety-net-for-poorest-weakened-after-welfare-law-but-regained
State and Local Government Finance Data Query System. The Urban InstituteBrookings Institution Tax Policy Center. Data from U.S. Census Bureau, Annual Survey
of State and Local Government Finances, Government Finances, Volume 4, and Census
of Governments (Years). http://www.taxpolicycenter.org/slf-dqs/pages.cfm.
Strully, Kate W., David H. Rehkopf, and Ziming Xuan. 2010. “Effects of Prenatal Poverty
on Infant Health: State Earned Income Tax Credits and Birth Weight.” American
Sociological Review 75, no. 4: 534–62.
Social Security Administration. 2016. Annual Report of the Supplemental Security
Income Program. Washington. https://www.ssa.gov/oact/ssir/SSI16/ssi2016.pdf.
U.S. Census Bureau. 2015. “CPS Annual Social and Economic Supplement (ASEC).”
Washington. www.census.gov/cps/data/
43

U.S. Department of Agriculture Food and Nutrition Service. 2017. “Characteristics of
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program Households.” Washington.
———. 1998-2015. “Reaching Those in Need.” Washington.
U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics. 2017. The
Condition of Education 2017.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2017. “Characteristics and Financial
Circumstances of TANF Recipients.” Washington.
———. 1994. Quality Control AFDC files. Washington.
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. 2017. Picture of Subsidized
Households. Washington. https://www.huduser.gov/portal/datasets/assthsg.html.
University of Kentucky Center for Poverty Research. 2016. “UKCPR National Welfare
Data, 1980-2015.” Lexington, Kentucky: University of Kentucky, Gatton College of
Business and Economics. www.ukcpr.org/data
Wheaton, Laura, and Victoria Tran. 2018. “The Antipoverty Effects of the Supplemental
Nutrition Assistance Program.” Urban Institute Research Report.
Wherry, Laura R., and Bruce D. Meyer. 2015. “Saving Teens: Using a Policy
Discontinuity to Estimate the Effects of Medicaid Eligibility.” Journal of Human
Resources 51, no. 3: 556-588.
Wherry, Laura R., Sarah Miller, Robert Kaestner, and Bruce D. Meyer. 2018. “Childhood
Medicaid Coverage and Later Life Health Care Utilization.” Forthcoming, Review of
Economics and Statistics.
Wimer, Christopher, Liana Fox, Irv Garfinkel, Neeraj Kaushal, and Jane Waldfogel.
2013. “Trends in Poverty with an Anchored Supplemental Poverty Measure.” Columbia
Population Research Center Working Paper.

44

Data Appendix
This paper documents how the social safety net for children has changed over time,
including (1) aggregate spending; (2) spending across different parts of the income
distribution and by work status; (3) spending across cash assistance versus in-kind
programs. One issue affecting much of the literature in this area is underreporting of
benefits in household surveys. Therefore, this analysis relies as much as possible on
administrative data.
The basic approach is as follows; program-specific details are provided below:
1. Using administrative total spending for program i in year t for all persons,
𝐸!"!"" , we limit the program to spending on children and their families,
𝐸!"!"# = 𝐸!"!"" ∗ 𝑆!!"# . All annual expenditures are presented in 2015 dollars and
adjusted for inflation using the CPI-U-RS.
2. Apportion the aggregate spending going to families with children into five
groups based on after-tax-and-transfer income (ATTI) and Supplemental
Poverty Measure (SPM) status into five bins (<50% poverty, 50-99% poverty,
100-149% poverty, 150-199% poverty, and 200+% poverty).
For all programs except Medicaid and SSI, 𝐸!"!"# is defined as expenditures going to
families with children. We limit Medicaid and SSI expenditures to payments to children.
ATTI is defined as earned income plus cash and near-cash assistance (AFDC/TANF and
SNAP, respectively), minus taxes paid (payroll taxes, as well as federal and local income
taxes, including tax credits such as the EITC and CTC; and the employee’s share of
payroll taxes). As information on all resources available to families are not available in
each administrative source, this income definition is less comprehensive than the
measure used to estimate SPM poverty. For example, our ATTI does not include child
care expenses, housing assistance, medical out-of-pocket expenditures, or workrelated expenses. In cases where the administrative data do not include information on
each income source, we impute this information based on statutory program eligibility
and take-up rates. Details on each program are provided below and in Appendix Table
A1.
We use an “anchored poverty threshold”, defined as the average SPM poverty
threshold in calendar year 2014 for renter families, adjusted for family size; for each
45

year we adjust the threshold for changes in prices using the CPI-U-RS following the
approach of Wimer et al (2014).
Tax credits
EITC: The Internal Review Service Statistics of Income (IRS SOI) publishes data on total
federal EITC expenditures by number of children and family type for tax years 19962015. For those years we have a direct measure of 𝐸!"!"# . For tax years 1994 and 1995,
we multiply the published total federal payments going to all families with children by
the estimated the share of total EITC payments going to families with children using
the IRS SOI Public Use microdata file (SOI PUF). Prior to tax year 1994, only families
with children were eligible for the EITC; all EITC expenditures for 1990-1993 are
allocated to families with children.
CTC: This analysis includes the refundable (ACTC) and non-refundable component
(CTC) of the Child Tax Credit, which we refer to throughout as the “Child Tax Credit.”
The IRS SOI publishes data on both the refundable and non-refundable component for
tax years 1998-2015.
We estimate the fraction of EITC and CTC payments going to families in each incometo-poverty bin using SOI PUF files for 1990-2011. These data provide information on
earned income and taxes paid. We assume that families receiving refundable credits
do not have AFDC/TANF income. We estimate SNAP payments by calculating
potential benefits under the statutory benefit formula and assuming monthly income is
one-twelfth annual income. We randomly assign SNAP receipt to credit recipients so
that the share of SNAP-eligible credit recipients matches the overall SNAP take-up rate
each year.27 For years 2012-2015, we hold the share of benefits going to each incometo-poverty bin at the 2011 shares (the most recent PUF year).28 As this analysis focuses
on safety net programs to families with children, our aggregate figures limit CTC
expenditures to the fraction of the credit going to families below 200 percent of
poverty.
Filers must have earned income to receive the EITC and CTC. Therefore, all EITC and
CTC expenditures are allocated to working families.

27

During our period of analysis, overall SNAP take-up rates among the eligible population range from 53 percent in
2001 to 83 percent in 2012.
28
Beginning in tax year 2009, the IRS public-use files top-code the number of dependents (and EITC children) at
three for all households (in previous years, the topcode only applied to high-income households). We estimate the
income-to-poverty ratio based on the number of reported dependents. As 97 percent of filers with children have
three or fewer children in 2008, this calculation affects relatively few filers.

46

Non-tax income assistance
AFDC/TANF: We limit AFDC/TANF payments to cash (basic) assistance payments paid
for with federal funds and state maintenance of effort (MOE) dollars. Prior to welfare
reform, program expenditures were almost entirely cash assistance. Under TANF, a
small share of the block grant is used on cash assistance; 26% nationwide in 2015
(Bitler and Hoynes 2016). State-level annual basic assistance information comes from
the Department of Health and Human Services, Administration for Children and
Families. We sum expenditures for the 50 states and DC to obtain national totals.
For years 1990-1994, we estimate the share of AFDC benefits going to each incometo-poverty bin and employment status using the AFDC Quality Control (QC) files. The
AFDC QC files provide detailed administrative data necessary to establish eligibility
and benefits, such as family characteristics, income sources (those that count towards
benefits) and so on. For these years, we observe earned income and simulate taxes
using NBER TAXSIM. SNAP payments are not observed in this data as they are not
countable income towards AFDC benefits. We estimate Food Stamps benefits using
the statutory formula and reported earned income in each year, assuming that families
take the maximum shelter deduction and no dependent care exemption. We assume
full take-up among AFDC/TANF families.
For years 1995 through 2015, we estimate the share going to each income-to-poverty
bin using the maximum grant amounts by state-family size-year. We assume for
simplicity that earned income reduces a family’s TANF grant dollar-for-dollar; therefore,
the maximum grant determines a family’s income level.29 We add SNAP benefits to
cash assistance by taking the reported share of the maximum SNAP benefit accruing to
AFDC families in 1994 (the most recent year of the QC file estimates) and multiply this
fraction by the contemporaneous Food Stamps benefit in subsequent years. Finally, we
multiply these state-by-family-size bins by state total basic expenditures, and
aggregate state expenditures to the national level.
HHS's "Characteristics and Financial Circumstances of TANF Recipients" provides
employment rates for TANF families for 1995-1996 and 2000-2015. Over this period,
most welfare recipients do not have earned income and thus receive the full benefit:
the work participation rate is around 12 percent. To estimate the share of employed
households for the remaining years, we assume that all child-only cases do not work
and assign the adult recipient employment rate to the remaining households. For
29

In practice many states lowered the implicit tax rate on TANF from the 100% rate that existed under AFDC.
Unfortunately, we don’t observe earnings for years post-welfare reform so cannot simulate the distribution of
benefits as we can in the years prior to TANF.

47

1995-2015, we assign equal benefits to working and non-working households, so that
the employment rate is the share of cash assistance received by working households.
These AFDC and TANF calculations are all based on monthly income (that is what is
used in program administration). We multiply all amounts by 12 to get annual income;
which is necessary for assigning poverty.
Food Stamps/SNAP: Annual SNAP expenditure information comes from the US
Department of Agriculture. We scale this total amount by the fraction of SNAP benefits
going to families with children, using an estimate of 𝐸!"!"# calculated using the SNAP
Quality Control (QC) files for 1990-2015.
We estimate the share of SNAP payments going to each income-to-poverty bin and
household work status using information on SNAP benefit amounts and household
income and cash assistance from the annual SNAP QC files. As with AFDC, the SNAP
QC files provide detailed administrative data necessary to establish eligibility and
benefits, such as family characteristics, income sources (those that count towards
benefits) and so on. Using the QC data, we calculate after tax and transfer income
using observed data on earnings and AFDC/TANF cash assistance. Estimated federal,
state, and payroll taxes (including tax credits EITC, CTC) are calculated using TAXSIM.
As with AFDC/TANF, the SNAP QC data contains monthly income and we multiply by
12 to get annual income.
Medicaid: We limit Medicaid expenditures to state and federal expenditures on
children (excluding pregnant women and parents) with annual expenditure data from
the Centers on Medicare and Medicaid Services (MSIS) from 1990 through 2011.
Publicly available Medicaid expenditures for children are not available from CMS for
later years.30
For years 2012 and 2013, we apply the percentage change in Medicaid expenditures
to children estimated by the Medicaid and CHIP Payment and Access Commission
(MACPAC) since 2011 to the level reported by CMS in 2011. For 2014, we estimate the
percent change between 2013 and 2014 using estimates from the Kaiser Family
Foundation (KFF) from 2014 and MACPAC for 2013, adjusted using the ratio of
30

Unlike the benefits discussed above, Medicaid eligibility is individual based, rather than family based. Therefore
we measure expenditures directly for children. This is somewhat inconsistent with our measurement of the family
benefits. For example with SNAP we measure the total spending to families with children, rather than carving out
the benefit amount that is attributed to the child. Given the fungibility of spending within households, we think
this is the best approach. The published Medicaid expenditure data does not allow us to identify pregnant women
or adults in families with children. Therefore we limit the measurement to payments going to child coverage.

48

KFF/MACPAC estimated expenditures for 2011. For 2015, we apply the estimated
percentage change in expenditures on children between 2014 and 2015 using CBO’s
March 2015 baseline.
Administrative data on income levels and sources for child Medicaid recipients is not
available in the administrative data. In order to allocate Medicaid expenditures to each
poverty bin, we use information on self-reported Medicaid receipt and family after-tax
and transfer income from the Annual Social and Economic Supplement to the Current
Population Survey, estimating federal, state, and payroll taxes (including tax credits
EITC, CTC) using NBER TAXSIM.
Public Housing: Housing expenditures are defined as outlays to the public housing
operating and capital funds, as well as project-based and tenant-based rental
assistance vouchers. Historical outlays for each program are tabulated by the Office of
Management and Budget. For simplicity, we assume an equal dollar value for each unit
of housing. We then estimate the share of housing assistance for families with children
as the fraction of total units received by single- and two-parent families from HUD’s
Picture of Subsidized Households dataset. We calculate this fraction separately for
public housing and vouchers. Information on the share of units going to families with
children is available annually from 2004 through 2015 and intermittently between 1993
and 2004. For years where HUD data is unavailable, we linearly interpolate the share of
assistance units going to households with children.
Following an approach similar to allocating Medicaid dollars, we estimate the share of
families with children in each income-to-poverty category using information on housing
assistance receipt and family after-tax and transfer income from the Annual Social and
Economic Supplement to the Current Population Survey, estimating federal, state, and
payroll taxes (including tax credits EITC, CTC) using NBER TAXSIM.
SSI: Historical federal SSI payments to children are listed in the 2016 Annual Report of
the Supplemental Security Income Program. We define child SSI expenditures as
payments to blind or disabled individuals ages 0-17.
As with Medicaid expenditures, we estimate the share of child SSI payments going to
each income-to-poverty bin by using estimates of the number of children in each family
receiving SSI, as well as family after-tax and transfer income from the Annual Social and
Economic Supplement to the Current Population Survey. We estimate federal, state,
and payroll taxes (including tax credits EITC, CTC) using NBER TAXSIM.

49

Figure 1: Spending and Tax Programs with the Highest Federal Expenditures on Children,
2016

Tax
Reductions

Source: Isaacs et al (2017).

50

Figure 2: Per-capita spending on children and elderly

Source: Adapted from Isaacs et al (2017) with education spending from U.S. Department of
Education.

Figure 3: Share of Children with Married Parents

Source: Authors’ calculations of the Current Population Survey Annual Social and Economic
Supplement 1976-2016.

51

Figure 4: Share of Children with a Working Mother

Source: Authors’ calculations of the Current Population Survey Annual Social and Economic Supplement
1976-2016. Restricted to mothers age 25-54.

Figure 5: Trends in Real Wages of Full-time Workers, by Education and Sex

Source: Authors’ tabulations based on published historical earnings by education and gender
among workers ages 25 and older.

52

Figure 6: Spending on Children, 1990-2015, by Program (Billions of 2015$)

Source: Authors’ calculations based on various administrative sources. See appendix for details.

53

Figure 7: Spending on Children by Family Income to Poverty (SNAP, TANF, EITC, CTC)
Panel A: Aggregate spending, by poverty

Panel B: Share of total spending, by poverty

Source: Authors’ calculations based on various administrative sources. See appendix for details.

54

Figure 8: Spending on Children, by Parent Earnings (SNAP, TANF, EITC, CTC)
Panel A: Total Spending by Earnings

Panel B: Share of Spending, by Earnings

Source: Authors’ calculations based on various administrative sources. See appendix for details.

55

Figure 9: Tax and Transfer Benefits for Universally Available Cash and Near-Cash
Programs, Single adult with two children, Colorado (2015 dollars)
Panel A: 1992

Panel B: 2015

Notes: Adapted from Steuerle and Quakenbush (2015) using program parameters from Internal Revenue
Service, Tax Policy Center, Ways & Means Green Book and Department of Agriculture.

56

Figure 10: Percent of Children in SPM Bins

Note: The lines represent the share of all children living in households with income-to-poverty in each
range. Calculated using the Annual Social and Economic Supplement to the CPS for 1991-2016; see text
for details.

57

Figure 11: Per Child Spending on Children by Family Income to Poverty (SNAP, TANF,
EITC, CTC)
Panel A: Per-child spending, by poverty group

2015 $
10000
8000
50-100%
6000
4000

2000

<50%

100-150%
150-200%

0
1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

Panel B: Growth in per-child spending, by poverty group

Source: Authors’ calculations based on various administrative sources. See appendix for details. Note in
Panel B we omit the series for 150-200% of poverty because of the very high growth rate for this group
(value in 2015 relative to 1990 is 45).

58

Figure 12: Per Child Spending on Children by Parent Earnings (SNAP, TANF, EITC, CTC)
Panel A: Per-child spending, by earnings

Panel B: Growth in per-child spending, by earnings

Source: Authors’ calculations based on various administrative sources. See appendix for details.

59

Figure 13: Spending on Children, by Poverty Status, Select Programs
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
1990

2015

EITC

1990

2015

Child Tax
Credit

1990

2015

Medicaid
<100%

1990

2015

TANF

1990

2015

SNAP

>100%

Source: Authors’ calculations based on various administrative sources and (for Medicaid) the
Annual Social and Economic Supplement to the Current Population Survey. See appendix for
details.

60

Figure 14: Spending on Children, by Parent Earnings, Select Programs
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
1990

2015

TANF

1990

2015

SNAP

1990

2015

Child tax
Credit

No work

1990

2015

EITC

1990

2015

Medicaid

Work

Source: Authors’ calculations based on various administrative sources and (for Medicaid) the
Annual Social and Economic Supplement to the Current Population Survey. See appendix for
details.

61

Appendix Figure 1: Spending on Children by Family Income to Poverty (SNAP, TANF,
EITC, CTC, Medicaid, Public Housing and SSI)
Panel A: Aggregate spending, by poverty

Panel B: Share of spending, by poverty

Source: Authors’ calculations based on various administrative sources and (for Medicaid, SSI
and public housing) the Annual Social and Economic Supplement to the Current Population
Survey. See appendix for details.

62

Appendix Figure 2: Spending on Children, by Parent Earnings (SNAP, TANF, EITC, CTC,
Medicaid, Public Housing and SSI)
Panel A: Total Spending by Earnings

Panel B: Share of Spending by Earnings

Source: Authors’ calculations based on various administrative sources and (for Medicaid, SSI
and public housing) the Annual Social and Economic Supplement to the Current Population
Survey. See appendix for details.

63

Appendix Figure 3: Spending on Children by Family Income to Poverty (SNAP, TANF,
EITC, CTC), Comparison of Administrative Data to CPS
Panel A: Aggregate spending, by poverty

Panel B: Share of total spending, by poverty

Source: Author’s calculations based on various administrative sources and the Annual Social
and Economic Supplement to the Current Population Survey. See appendix for details.

64

Appendix Table 1: Components and sources of ATT income:
After-tax-and-transfer income components
Earned income
AFDC/TANF
SNAP
Taxes
Tax credits
CTC
Admin
assume $0
Imputed from earnings
Admin
EITC
Admin
assume $0
Imputed from earnings
Admin
Non-tax income assistance
AFDC/TANF
Admin or $0
Admin
Admin
TAXSIM
SNAP
Admin
Admin
Admin
TAXSIM
Public
CPS
CPS
CPS
TAXSIM
Housing
Medicaid
CPS
CPS
CPS
TAXSIM
SSI
CPS
CPS
CPS
TAXSIM
Note: This table summarizes the source of each component of after-tax income by
program. For AFDC/TANF, for AFDC years we observe earned income and use
TAXSIM to assign taxes. For the TANF period we don’t observe earnings so assume
they are 0. See data appendix for details.

65

