                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             DO CORPORATE TAX CUTS INCREASE INCOME INEQUALITY?

                                         Suresh Nallareddy
                                           Ethan Rouen
                                     Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato

                                        Working Paper 24598
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w24598


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2018




We are especially thankful to Jon Bakija, Scott Dyreng, Michele Hanlon, Dan Garrett, John Graham,
Mark Lang, Edward Maydew, Andreas Peichl, Mohan Venkatachalam, and seminar participants at
Duke University, the Harvard Business School brownbag, the Harvard Business School Information,
Markets, and Organizations Conference, the NBER Conference on Business Taxation, the University
of Chicago, and the University of North Carolina for providing detailed comments. Linh Nguyen provided
excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2018 by Suresh Nallareddy, Ethan Rouen, and Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Do Corporate Tax Cuts Increase Income Inequality?
Suresh Nallareddy, Ethan Rouen, and Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato
NBER Working Paper No. 24598
May 2018, Revised August 2019
JEL No. H2,H22,H25,H7,H71

                                             ABSTRACT

We study the effects of corporate taxes on income inequality. Using state corporate taxes as a setting,
we provide evidence that corporate tax cuts lead to increases in income inequality. This result is robust
across regression, matching, and synthetic controls approaches, and to controlling for a host of potential
confounders. We use Statistics of Income data from the IRS to explore mechanisms behind this result.
We find tax cuts lead to higher income for both top and bottom earners, but the gains to capital income
for top earners exceed the gains to total income for bottom earners. This result suggests that, while
all earners appear to benefit from a corporate tax cut, the relation between tax cuts and inequality is
positive, in part, because high income individuals shift their compensation to reduce taxes.


Suresh Nallareddy                             Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato
Duke University: The Fuqua School of Business Department of Economics
100 Fuqua Drive                               Duke University
Durham, NC 27708                              213 Social Sciences Building
suresh.nallareddy@duke.edu                    Box 90097
                                              Durham, NC 27708
Ethan Rouen                                   and NBER
Harvard Business School                       jc@jcsuarez.com
383 Morgan Hall
Boston, MA 02163
erouen@hbs.edu
 The question of whether corporate tax cuts benefit capital owners or workers is always at the
center of debates over corporate tax reform. Proponents of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (TCJA)
of 2017 argued that, following a federal corporate tax cut from 35% to 21%, American workers
would see an increase in their wages of $4,000 (CEA, 2017). Estimating the effects of taxes on
inequality is challenging since the equilibrium effects of corporate tax changes rely on changes in
investment decisions, factor reallocation, and the tightness of the labor market. Indeed, critics
of the TCJA noted that these wage increases would only be realized if a series of effects ranging
from increases in investment to wage increases took place (Clausing, 2017).
   This paper informs this debate by directly estimating the causal effect of state corporate tax
cuts on top income inequality. We exploit a new data series from Frank et al. (2015) who compute
inequality measures at the state-year level. We then use regression and matching approaches to
analyze the effects of state corporate tax cuts on various measures of income inequality. A causal
interpretation of these analyses relies on the assumption that the decision to cut corporate taxes
is not correlated with other forces that may lead to changes in income inequality. We conduct
three sets of exercises to explore the validity of this assumption. First, we show that tax cut
states had similar trends in income inequality to states without tax cuts. Second, we focus our
analysis on tax cuts that were not motivated by local economic conditions. To do so, we rely
on the narrative analysis of Giroud and Rauh (2018) who explore the legislative process behind
each state tax cut and classify tax-cut events into those that are motivated as a response to
local economic conditions, and those that are likely to be exogenous from economic motivations.
Finally, we use regression and matching approaches to control for potential confounders.
   The evidence suggests that corporate tax cuts increase income inequality over a three-year
period. Focusing on the share of income accruing to the top 1%, we find that a 1 percentage point
(pp.) cut in corporate taxes increases this share by 0.90pp. For comparison, the share of income
accruing to the top 1% grew by 6.1pp from 1990-2010. Thus, the usual state corporate tax cut
of 0.5pp would explain 7.4% of the increase to the top 1% during this time period. This effect
is robust to using regression and matching approaches, and to controlling for a host of potential
confounders. We also find similar effects when focusing on alternative measures of inequality.
   We then study the potential mechanisms that may drive this result. First, we compare our
estimate to the mechanical increase in the income share of the top 1% that we would expect to



                                                1
find if there were no behavioral responses.1 We find that this mechanical effect accounts for only
36% of the total increase in the share accruing to the top 1%. Second, we explore whether tax
cuts were associated with changes in labor force participation and government spending, and we
find no significant effects.
    We then explore whether the increase in income inequality is driven by changes in top income
compensation, or by increases in state-level investment. We use data from the IRS Statistics
of Income to study labor and capital income at the top (income above $200,000) and bottom
(below $200,000) of the income distribution. We find that corporate tax cuts benefit all earners
in the tax-cut state, but the benefits are not evenly distributed. Taxpayers in the top of the
distribution see an increase in capital income of 12.6%. In contrast, we do not find a statistically
significant increase in the capital income of taxpayers in the bottom of the distribution. Further,
while the salary of bottom income earners increases by 1.3%, the salary of top earners decreases
by 4.4%. These effects are consistent with four mechanisms: (1) a model where managers may
respond to tax cuts by extracting surplus from employers (Piketty, Saez and Stantcheva, 2011),
(2) a change in the compensation of capitalists who work in their businesses (Smith et al., 2017),
(3) income relabeling (DeBacker et al., 2017), and (4) with corporate tax cuts spurring additional
investment.2 We test channel (4) using data from the Annual Survey of Manufacturers (1997).
We do not find that corporate tax cuts increase capital investment. Therefore, the increase in
capital income for top earners points to a combination of channels (2) and (3). These results
suggest that top earners shift income from wages to capital income to reduce taxes and thereby
increase the share of total income that accrues to the top 1%.
    This paper is related to the public finance literature on the incidence of corporate taxes.
Academic economists disagree on who bears the incidence of corporate taxes (Harberger, 1962;
Kotlikoff and Summers, 1987). Recently, advocates of corporate tax cuts have argued that they
are the best way to help American workers, since they presume the incidence of the tax cuts
ultimately falls on labor (Kotlikoff, 2014). Clausing (2017) notes that the effect of taxes on labor
income requires multiple channels, including an increase in investment and labor productivity,
   1
      While the data from Frank et al. (2015) do not account for the effect of the personal income tax system
on inequality, corporate tax changes have a mechanical effect on inequality since after-tax corporate profits are
then reported as income by individual taxpayers.
    2
      Relabeling of wage income into capital income could help reduce taxes for several reasons: First, taxes
will decline if the marginal personal tax rate is greater than the marginal capital tax rate; second, taxes will
decline if personal income taxes are greater than capital income taxes (i.e., dividends and capital gains); third,
by relabeling wage income into capital income, payroll taxes could be reduced.


                                                        2
and for workers to capture the gains from increased productivity in the form of higher wages.
Suárez Serrato and Zidar (2016) analyze the incidence of state corporate tax cuts and find that
the largest gains go to business owners. Their model takes a medium-term perspective (10 years)
and allows for the direct benefit of lower taxes to incentivize business relocation, and thus spur
wage growth. Using data from Germany, Fuest, Peichl and Siegloch (2018) find that a substantial
portion of local business taxes are passed on to workers. They analyze short-term effects, which
are closer to the setting in this paper. This paper contributes to this debate by directly estimating
the effects of corporate tax cuts on state-level measures of inequality, which eschews from many
of the mechanisms behind the equilibrium effects of corporate tax changes.
   This paper is also related to a literature on the effects of state corporate tax changes. We
use variation in state-level taxes to investigate the relation between corporate taxes and income
inequality for several reasons. First, unlike federal tax rate changes, which are rare and affect
all firms, state-level corporate rate changes are more frequent. Second, state-level corporate tax
changes affect only a subset of states, which leaves unaffected states as potential controls that
can be used to estimate the effects of tax changes. Third, there is significant cross-sectional
variation in state-level corporate tax changes during our sample period. A resurgent literature
has leveraged these facts to provide analyses of the effects of state taxes on firm location (Giroud
and Rauh, 2018), corporate debt (Heider and Ljungqvist, 2015a), employment (Ljungqvist and
Smolyansky, 2015), entrepreneurship (Curtis and Decker, 2018), tax revenues (Suárez Serrato
and Zidar, 2017), investment (Ohrn, 2016), tax harmonization (Fajgelbaum et al., 2015), income
shifting (DeBacker et al., 2017), and innovation (Akcigit et al., 2018) among others.
   This paper is also related to a literature measuring the rise in income inequality over time
(Piketty and Saez, 2003). Smith et al. (2017) argue that the rise of business income accounts for
most of the rise in top incomes during recent years. In particular, they find that the income of
active owner-managers plays an important role in driving top income inequality. Our results on
changes in top income compensation are consistent with these results. They are also consistent
with Rubolino and Waldenström (2018a), who find evidence at the country level that reductions
in personal income tax progressivity increases income for top earners. In addition, our findings are
related to a large literature that documents that top earners are more sensitive to taxation than
other tax payers (Feenberg and Poterba, 1993; Feldstein, 1999; Slemrod, 1996; Gruber and Saez,
2002; Saez, 2004; Saez, Slemrod and Giertz, 2012; Piketty, Saez and Stantcheva, 2011; Rubolino


                                                 3
and Waldenström, 2018b,a; Saez, 2017). Troiano (2017) analyzes the effects of institutional
changes in the state taxation of personal income on income inequality. He finds that income
inequality increased following the expansion of states’ capacities to tax personal income. Finally,
our paper is related to the literature that investigates the role of corporate tax deductions in
stimulating the real economy (e.g., Lester (2019)).
    The paper proceeds as follows. Section 1 discusses our data sources and main variables.
Section 2 discusses different channels through which changes in corporate tax rates may affect
inequality. Section 3 presents our main results, and Section 4 studies the potential mechanisms
behind these changes. Section 6 concludes.



1     Data
This section describes the data and variables we use in the analysis. All variables are defined in
Appendix A.


1.1    Measures of Income Inequality

We obtain U.S. state-level income inequality data from the Frank-Sommeiller-Price Series for
Top Income Shares (Frank, 2009, 2014; Frank et al., 2015; Sommeiller and Price, 2014). The
main variables of interest are the share of total state income going to a certain top percentage
of the population (e.g., the total income going to the top 1% of earners). These variables
are calculated using data from the IRS Statistics of Income on adjusted gross income (before
personal income taxes are paid). Pre-tax adjusted gross income includes wages, salaries, and
capital income (dividends, interest, rents, royalties, and business income) (Frank, 2014). These
data also include other measures of income inequality including the Gini coefficient, the Theil
index, the relative mean deviation, and Atkinson’s measure, which is based on a social welfare
function. Our main analysis focuses on the shares of income accruing to the top 10%, 5%, 1%,
etc., but we also analyze these other measures in robustness checks.




                                                4
1.2       Corporate Tax Rates and Tax Changes

We use data on state-level corporate tax rates from Suárez Serrato and Zidar (2017). We merge
these data with two other data sets on corporate tax changes. First, we consider the corporate
tax changes described in Heider and Ljungqvist (2015b), which span from 1989-2012 and identify
two types of tax changes: changes to the top corporate income tax rate and changes to tax
surcharges. Second, we use data on the narrative analysis of Giroud and Rauh (2018). They
analyze whether states changed corporate taxes in response to local economic conditions or if the
tax changes were made in response to budgetary needs. They then classify these tax changes as
exogenous if they are not related to concerns about the local economy. Our analysis of tax cuts
coincides with those in Heider and Ljungqvist (2015b) which are also classified as exogenous by
Giroud and Rauh (2018).
   We make three sample restrictions in our matching analysis. First, we restrict the control
observations to include only states that did not have corporate tax changes in the six years
around the changes of the treated observations. Second, we examine only the first tax cut or
tax increase for each state. Finally, we avoid interactions with the 1986 Tax Reform Act. These
restrictions yield a dataset on tax changes from 1991-2013.


1.3       Control Variables and Additional Outcomes

We construct several measures of local economic activity using data on Gross Domestic Product
(GDP) from the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA). First, GDP-per-capita is the natural log
of GDP scaled by total population. We also use a measure of the log output gap, which is
the natural log of the relative distance of GDP per capita to its filtered value.3 The share of
GDP in finance, the size of government, and military are the natural logs of the portion of GDP
attributable to each of these sectors scaled by total population. Finally, we construct a measure
of spillover GDP per capita as the weighted value of the natural log of neighboring states’ GDP
per capita in the prior year. In addition, we use BEA measures of state-level population growth,
defined as the year-over-year percent change in population.
   We measure the unemployment rate and the labor force participation rate for the working age
population using data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). All of our regressions control
   3
       This measure is calculated following Aghion et al. (2015) using an HP filter of λ equal to 6.25.



                                                          5
for the state top personal income tax rate as well as for apportionment factors for state corporate
taxes using data from Suárez Serrato and Zidar (2017).
   We use data from the IRS Statistics of Income on the composition of income by state and
income level. These data include measures of adjusted gross income, salary and wage income,
and capital income (interest, dividends, businesses income, and capital gains). We use total
measures of these variables and we also consider their breakdown across the income distribution.
For each of these types of income we calculate the income accrued to taxpayers earning less that
$200,000 per year (bottom) and to those earning more that $200,000 per year (top). While this
income cutoff does not line up perfectly with data from Frank (2014), the SOI data allow us to
explore different mechanisms that give rise to changes in top income inequality. These data are
available starting in 1997.
   Finally, we measure capital investment at the state-industry level using data from the Annual
Survey of Manufactures.


1.4    Descriptive Statistics

Our main dataset consists of 1,250 state-year observations from 1988-2012. Table 1 reports
descriptive statistics for these variables. The average state-level corporate tax rate is 6.63%.
While several states changed their tax rate during this time period, the average tax rate did not
change considerably.
   Table 1 shows that, on average, the top 10% of earners at the state level receive 42% of
the income, and the top 1% of earners receive 16%. However, these averages mask considerable
changes across time, and heterogeneity across states. Panel A in Figure 1 plots the density of the
share accruing to the top 1% for 1980, 1995, and 2010. These densities are shifting rightward over
time, denoting increases in the average share of income for the top 1%. Moreover, the densities
become more dispersed over time with the right tail expanding considerably by 2010. Panel B of
Figure 1 plots the average increase in the share of the top 1%, and breaks down this share into
smaller groups. This graph shows that, on average, the top 0.01% of taxpayers capture about 5%
of a states’ total income. Panel A of Figure 2 shows the cross-state heterogeneity in the top 1%
share in 1980. Even by 1980, several states, including Nevada, Texas, Florida, and New York,
had more than 10% of their income accruing to the top 1% of taxpayers. Panel B of Figure 2
shows the increase in the share to the top 1% between 1980 and 2010. This map shows that,

                                                6
while several states saw double-digit increases in the share to the top 1% (California, Florida,
Illinois, New York), several others saw much smaller changes in income inequality over this time
period (e.g., North Carolina, Ohio, Indiana).



2          Accounting for Corporate Taxes in Income Inequality
We now present a framework to trace out how changes in corporate taxes may affect income
inequality based on the model of Suárez Serrato and Zidar (2016). Consider total income in a
given state s:
                                                                                                                       
                                                 ρ                       X                                       ρ
            Ls × ws + (1 −   tcs )πs    ws ,                 Es Ss,s +            (1 −   tcs0 )πs0    w s0 ,                  Es0 Ss,s0 .      (1)
                                               1 − tcs                   s0 6=s
                                                                                                               1 − tcs0


The first component of income in a state is labor income, which equals the average wage times
the number of workers. A corporate tax cut may increase labor income if workers migrate to a
state following a tax cut, or if increased demand for workers raises wages.
       The second and third components are after-corporate-tax profits from business income. Since
business owners pay taxes in their state of residence, business income in a given state flows
from businesses in the same state, as well as in other states. Let Es denote the number of
establishments in state s and let Ss,s denote the share of these businesses in state s that are
owned by residents of state s. The second component multiplies average after-corporate-tax
                                        
                          c           ρ
profits in state s, (1 − ts )πs ws , 1−tc by the share of the number of businesses owned by
                                                   s
                               4
residents of state s, Ss,s .       Note that, while the data from Frank et al. (2015) do not account
for personal income taxes, the income reported by individuals will be mechanically affected by
the corporate rate as it affects their after-corporate-tax profits. In addition, average profits are
                                                                                                                                             ρ 5
also affected by changes in the wage rate ws as well as by changes in the cost of capital                                                   1−tcs
                                                                                                                                                  .
Business income from this second component will increase mechanically with a corporate tax cut.
Current firms may increase investment as the cost of capital decreases, and additional firms may
enter the state. These forces may place upward pressure on wages, which may partially decrease
πs .
       4
      Note that this simple accounting formula abstracts from the choice of whether to organize a business as a
corporation or a passthrough entity. Further, we assume that all after-tax profits are paid out as dividends.
    5
      We assume ρ is the cost of equity capital which is constant across states and demands a constant after-tax
return.

                                                                  7
   Finally, the third term accounts for business income from businesses owned by residents of
state s, but that are located in other states, s0 6= s.
   Consider now the effect of a state corporate tax cut on total income. The following expression
describes the percentage change in total income following the tax cut:


          Earnings Shares (∆Ls + ∆ws ) + Business Income Shares × (1 + ∆πs + ∆Es ) ,              (2)


where ∆ denotes a percentage change, and where we assume that out-of-state businesses are not
affected by changes in other-state-taxes. As described above, workers and business owners may
relocate in response to changes in corporate taxes (∆Ls , ∆Es ), and wages and profits may also
adjust (∆ws , ∆πs ).
   This equation helps set ideas for how a corporate tax cut may affect income inequality.
Assume, for instance, that all businesses are owned by top-income taxpayers. A corporate tax
cut may reduce inequality if the tax cut leads to additional labor demand, which boosts labor
income. The entry of new businesses competes away the mechanical increase in after-corporate-
tax profits, as well as the reduction in the cost of capital. Indeed, Suárez Serrato and Zidar (2016)
find large elasticities of firm location with respect to the business tax rate, ∆Es . Alternatively,
a corporate tax cut may increase inequality if wage income does not rise as much as the direct
and indirect effects of profits on capital income.
   One specific hypothesis is that a corporate tax cut only has direct effects on income, so that
behavioral and wage effects can be ignored. If this were the case, and if tax payers in the top 1%
own all businesses, we would expect that the share of income for the top 1% would increase by
the Business Income Shares . In practice, we can use the share of business income to taxpayers
earning above $200,000 as an estimate for the share of capital income accruing to top earners.
This is a useful reference point for our empirical analysis. In addition, note that worker migration
and wage increases would push the effect on the share to the top 1% to be below this number.
In contrast, if business formation and additional investment provide additional income to top
earners, we would expect to find a larger increase on top income inequality.
   This simple framework ignores important mechanisms that may also affect income inequality.
For instance, active owner-managers can choose whether to receive compensation in the form of
labor or capital income. As shown in Smith et al. (2017), business income of this sort may be a


                                                  8
large driver of recent increases in income inequality. A corporate tax cut may then incentivize
owner-managers to shift their compensation from labor to capital income. This would lead to a
larger increase in inequality than that prescribed by the mechanical effect above.



3     Corporate Taxes and Income Inequality
This section presents our main results. We first explore the effects of corporate taxes on inequality
using a simple difference-in-differences analysis. We complement these results with a matching
approach, where we analyze the effects of tax cuts and tax increases.


3.1    A Difference-in-Differences Analysis

We start our analysis of the effects of corporate taxes on inequality by estimating the following
regression:
                        Income Inequalityst = αs + γt + βτstc + ΨXst + εst ,                     (3)

where Income Inequalityst is the share of income that accrues to the top x% of the income
distribution. αs and γt are state and year fixed effects that capture permanent differences in
inequality across states, as well as common time trends. Xst is a vector of controls that includes
GDP per capita; population growth; the natural log of the output gap; the share of GDP in
the finance, government, and military; a measure of spillover in GDP from neighboring states;
and the unemployment rate. In order to interpret the coefficient β as the causal effect of the
corporate tax rate τstc on our measures of inequality, we make the assumption that changes in
tax rates are independent of other drivers of inequality εst that are omitted from the regression.
We allow εst to be clustered at the state level.
    Table 2 documents the relation between tax rates and income inequality in our full sample.
The first six columns report estimates of β for various measures of top income inequality without
controlling for the covariates in Xst . These estimates are all negative and statistically signif-
icant. We find that a tax cut of 1pp increases the income share of the top 10% and top 1%
by 0.40pp. In columns (6)-(12) we explore whether controlling for the covariates in Xst affects
these estimates. If states with higher growth in GDP per capita or with a higher share of GDP
in finance experienced a faster rise in income inequality, we would expect that controlling for
these confounders would attenuate our results. We find that controlling for these covariates has a

                                                   9
very small effect on our estimates. In particular, the conclusion that corporate tax cuts increase
income inequality is robust to including these potential confounders.


3.2      A Matching Approach

We now take a matching approach to estimating the effects of state corporate tax changes on
income inequality. This approach has the benefit that it clarifies which states are used as controls
in our counterfactual comparisons. In particular, while the analysis in the previous section uses
all other states as controls for states with tax changes, this approach allows us to select control
states from states without recent tax changes, that are geographically proximate, and that have
similar economic characteristics.
    We analyze the effects of tax cuts and tax increases separately. For each event, we categorize
a state as treated during the six years around its first corporate tax change. That is, each state
with a tax cut can only be a treatment state once, and is considered “treated” from year t-3 to
year t+3, where year t is the year of the initial tax cut. We identify the pool of potential control
states as states in the same years as the treated states, that are in the same Census division, and
that had no tax changes from years t-3 to t+3.6 Within these eligible controls, we find a match
for each treated state by comparing the propensity score of the likelihood that a state had a tax
change.
    We use the following logistic model to estimate the propensity score of the likelihood that a
state had a tax change:
                                                                                                                      
                                        
                   Pr(Tax Changest )                   X                                  X
       log                                   = αs +               Ψi Xs,t−i +                             βij Topjs,t−i  ,
                 1 − Pr(Tax Changest )                i=1,...,3                  j∈{10,5,1,0.5,0.1,0.01}

where αs are state fixed effects, and where we include three lags of the covariates in Xst . The last
summation notes that we also use lags in our measures of top income inequality in estimating
the propensity score. Lastly, we match each treatment state with the control state in the same
geographic division with the most similar propensity score.
    Figure 3 shows that this matching procedure is successful at balancing the covariates across
treatment and control groups. This figure plots the difference in means between treated and
   6
      Using a six-year window allows for a large enough pool of control states to create a balanced matched
sample. Increasing the window significantly reduces the number of states that are geographically and econom-
ically similar but did not have a tax cut. In addition, as we show in the dynamic analysis below, the six-year
window provides ample time for the impact of the tax cut to take effect.

                                                             10
controls states for years t-3 to t-1 normalized by the overall mean of each variable. The figure
also plots 95% confidence intervals that show all of these differences are statistically insignificant
at the 5%-level. Table A.2 in Appendix C reports the t-tests of the differences in means and
provides further support that the covariates are balanced.


3.3     The Impacts of Corporate Tax Cuts on Income Inequality

We now estimate the effects of a corporate tax cut on our matched sample using the following
regression:
                 Income Inequalityst = αs + γt + βPostst × Tax Cutst + ΨXst + εst .                        (4)

The data we use to estimate these regressions consists of the treated and matched states during
a six year window around the year of the tax cut. Since states may serve as controls in more
than one tax cut event, this specification allows for different state and year fixed effects for every
tax cut event.7 The controls in this equation are the same as those in Equation 3 and we again
allow εst to be clustered at the state level. The coefficient of interest is now β, which measures
the average effect of a tax cut on income inequality. There are 25 states that had at least one
tax cut from 1991-2010. We drop the year in which the tax cut occurred, leaving a sample size
of 300 state-years.8
   In Table 3, we report results from a seemingly unrelated regression model of Equation 4 for the
outcomes of the matched tax-cut sample. This procedure increases the efficiency of the statistical
inference by exploiting the fact that the income inequality measures are related to each other. For
all measures of income inequality, the coefficient on Post X Tax Cut is positive and significant.
For example, column (1) reports that a corporate tax cut increases the share of income to the top
10% by almost 0.55pp, and to the top 1% by 0.48pp. This again implies that most of the effect is
                                                                   0.48
                                                                        
concentrated at the top of the income distribution with 87% ≈ 0.55        of the increase in top 10%
                                                  0.30
                                                       
concentration accruing to the top 1% and 54% ≈ 0.55      to the top 0.01%. Columns (7)-(12) show
that these relations also hold when including potential confounding factors in Xst , providing
robust evidence that state-level corporate tax cuts result in increased income inequality.
   7
      This practice follows the recommendation of recent papers that analyze the behavior of difference-
in-differences estimators with variation in treatment timing (Goodman-Bacon, 2018; de Chaisemartin and
D’Haultfoeuille, 2018).
    8
      The tax change data begin in 1988 and end in 2013, and we require three years of tax-change data before
and after each change, so the tax change sample is constrained to the period 1991-2010.


                                                      11
   As discussed in Section 1.4, states have seen an increase in income inequality over our sample
period. On average, the share of income to the top 1% increases by 6.1pp between 1990 and
2010. This implies that the average tax cut would explain about 7.4% ≈ 0.45
                                                                            
                                                                        6.1
                                                                              of the increase
in top income inequality over this period, which is an economically significant effect.
   To further examine how tax cuts impact income inequality over time, we examine year-by-
year changes in income inequality around tax cuts using the matched sample. Examining these
dynamic effects provides additional evidence that alleviates potential concerns related to the
confounding factors or time-series patterns. To estimate the dynamic effects of tax cuts on
income inequality, we create indicator variables for each year around a tax cut. These variables
are equal to 1 for the treated state and 0 for the control state. We regress these variables on the
measures of income inequality with and without controls and plot the coefficients in Figure 4.9
Figure 4 shows that states with tax cuts had similar pre-trends to the control states, since none
of the effects prior to the tax cut are statistically significant. In contrast, we see an increase in
all of the measures of top income inequality in years t+1 to t+3. The timing of these results
confirms the hypothesis that corporate tax cuts increase top income inequality.
   One potential concern when analyzing effects with few treated observations is that the es-
timated effects are due to some form of spurious correlation. We conduct a placebo test for
each measure of income inequality to allay this concern. The tests consist of assigning a random
non-tax-cut year to each treated state and treating that year as if it were the actual year in
which the state had its first tax cut. We then match this state-year with a control state using
the methodology described in Section 5.1, and estimate Equation 3.2 using this placebo tax cut
year. We run this simulation 1,000 times for each coefficient and present the cumulative distribu-
tion functions (CDFs) of the coefficient values in Figure 5. The vertical line identifies where the
actual coefficient values from Table 3 (Columns (7) - (12)) fall within the distributions. For all
measures of income inequality, the values of the coefficients fall outside the extreme right tails,
meaning that the probability of randomly receiving coefficient values equal to those in Table 3
is less than 0.1%.10
   9
       Table A.4 in Appendix C reports the full regression results used to create the coefficients.
  10
       In Figure A.3 in Appendix B, we report the probability density functions of the coefficients.




                                                         12
3.4     Corporate Tax Increases and Income Inequality

Next, we investigate the relation between inequality and corporate tax increases. We conduct
the same matching analysis as described above, except for tax increases. The matched sample
consists of the 22 states that had at least one tax increase during the sample period as well as
their control state.
    Table 4 presents estimates of a version of Equation 4 for tax increases. We find that the coef-
ficients on the variables of interest (Post X Tax Increase) in Table 4 are negative and significant,
providing evidence that tax increases decrease income inequality. Figure 6 also reports effects
across time. For completeness, we report the distribution of the coefficients from the placebo
tests in Figure 7.11



4 Alternative Mechanisms Linking Tax Cuts to Inequality
The previous section provides robust evidence that state corporate tax cuts increase income
inequality. This section explores different mechanisms that may give rise to this increase in
inequality including how tax cuts may affect state spending, labor market conditions, investment,
and the form of compensation across the income distribution.12
    Before we explore these mechanisms, we first consider whether the effects estimated in the
previous section could be due to mechanical changes. As discussed in Section 2, while the data
from Frank et al. (2015) compute income shares before personal income taxes are taken into
account, state corporate taxes can have a mechanical effect on top income inequality. Consider
the case where a corporate tax cut has no effect on the location of firms, workers, wages, or
investment. From IRS data, we observe that, on average, 32% of capital income accrues to top
earners. This implies that a 0.5pp tax cut would mechanically increase the top 1% share by about
                                              0.16
                                                   
0.16pp. However, this is only about 36% ≈ 0.45       of our effect. Note also that this is an upper
bound on the increase we would expect if wages and employment increased as a consequence of
a corporate tax cut. Other mechanisms, such as changes in the form of compensation of owner-
managers or returns to investment that accrue to top earners would result in a larger increase in
  11
     Appendix C reports the results of the regressions used to calculate the coefficients in Figure 6 in Table A.5
and the PDFs of the placebo coefficients in Figure A.4.
  12
     For completeness, we conduct the same analysis for the tax increase sample and report the results in the
Appendix.


                                                       13
inequality.


4.1    Government Spending and the Labor Market

One mechanism that may link corporate tax cuts and inequality is related to government spend-
ing. If corporate tax cuts lead to a decrease in government spending and this leads to worsened
labor market outcomes, we might expect to see a decrease in income for low income individuals,
which would contribute to an increase in income inequality. We examine this conjecture in Table
5 by examining whether states that cut corporate taxes see a change in government size or labor
force participation compared to the matched sample of control states. The tests in these tables
are similar to those described in Equation 4, except that the dependent variables are government
size in columns (1) and (2), and labor force participation in columns (3) and (4). For both
dependent variables, the coefficient on Post X Tax Cut is insignificant, suggesting that states
that cut corporate taxes see no meaningful change in government size or workforce participation
compared to states that do not cut taxes.


4.2    Effects on Industry-level Investment

We now examine whether lower corporate tax rates lead to increased private-sector investment.
A justification for tax cuts is that companies will be encouraged to invest because the value of
potential projects is increased through lower (tax) costs. We explore this hypothesis using data
at the industry-state level from the Annual Survey of Manufactures. Table 5 provides estimates
of Equation 4 where the outcome is log investment at the state-year level. The evidence suggests
that the relation between tax cuts and investments is insignificant at the state level.


4.3    Gains in Compensation and Changes to the Form of
       Compensation

One possible explanation for the increase in income inequality following a corporate tax cut is
that top earners reap higher gains and shift their taxable income from wages to capital income in
order to take advantage of lower tax rates (Rubolino and Waldenström, 2018b). As the corporate
tax rate decreases relative to the personal rate, top earners may find it beneficial to recategorize
a portion of their income as coming from capital as opposed to from wages.

                                                14
   Table 6 examines whether corporate tax cuts impact income and result in income shifting
among individual tax payers. As described in Section 1.3, Statistics of Income data from the
IRS are available beginning in 1997, which further reduces the sample size to 84 state-year
observations. In Table 6, we use the fact that these outcomes are related to each other and
estimate a seemingly unrelated regression model of Equation 3.2.
   Columns (1)-(3) examine the impact of corporate tax cuts on adjusted gross income (AGI).
While the AGI of all earners significantly increases, the income of those earning less than $200,000
per year increases by 1.2% following a tax cut, while the AGI for those that earn more than
$200,000 increases by 4.2%. These columns show that low earners have modest benefits from
tax cuts, while the gains for top earners are more than three times as large. Overall, total AGI
increases by 2.5% after a tax cut.
   We next examine whether the gain in AGI are driven by salary or capital income. Columns
(4)-(6) report the relation between tax cuts and reported taxable income attributable to salary
and wages. We find that salary and wage income increases by 1.3% for bottom earners following
a tax cut. In contrast, tax payers in the top of the distribution see wage income decrease by
4.4%. The combined effect is that total wage and salary income increases by 1.2%. Finally,
columns (7)-(9) report the effects of tax cuts on capital income. For the top earners, capital
income increases by 12.6% following a tax cut. We do not find a statistically significant increase
in the capital income for bottom earners.
   These results suggest that, while all earners see increases in income following a tax cut, top
earners receive a greater benefit, in part by responding to corporate tax cuts by shifting taxable
income into capital to take advantage of the lower rate. Those making less than $200,000 do
not have a similar response. Back of the envelop calculations suggests that a sizable fraction
of the effects in Table 3 can be explained by this channel. Specifically, differential changes in
capital income and salary and wages between top and bottom earners explain 52% percent of
the income inequality effect we document in Table 3 for the tax cuts. This calculation compares
the relative earnings between top and bottom earners in Table 6 to the implied increase in top
income from Table 3. That is, Table 6 shows differential capital income increases of 12.6% for
the top earners. For salary and wages, top earners see a decrease of 4.4% and bottom earners
see an increase 1.3%. When we compare the relative increase in income that would accrue to the



                                                15
top earners, we find that it is 52% of the increase in the income of top 5% earners.13



5        Alternative Design and Robustness
In this last section, we examine whether our results are sensitive to our research design choices
or how income inequality is measured.


5.1      A Synthetic Controls Event Study Approach

As an alternative to the propensity score matching methodology in the main analysis, we now take
a synthetic controls event study approach to estimating the effects of state corporate tax changes
on income inequality to examine whether our results are robust to alternative methodological
choices. States that had a corporate tax cut compose the treated sample. The synthetic controls
are composed of combinations of states that had no tax changes in the comparison period. This
approach follows Severnini (2014) in combining synthetic control methods (Abadie, Diamond
and Hainmueller, 2010) and event study techniques (Jacobson, LaLonde and Sullivan, 1993),
allowing us to compare the treated sample with a sample of states that have similar economic
characteristics but no tax changes.
     For each tax cut between 1991 and 2010 we construct a synthetic control (Abadie, Diamond
and Hainmueller, 2010) state by taking a weighted average of potential control states to estimate
the outcome trajectory that the treated state would have in the absence of the tax change.
The potential control states are selected such that they are not located in the same region as
the treated state (to provide a robust set of potential control states and avoid spillover effects)
and do not have a tax cut within a seven-year window from three years before to three years
after the treated state’s tax change. The weights are calculated such that the trajectory of all
the primary outcomes of interest (the measures of income inequality) as well as values of other
state economic characteristics (GDP per Capita, population growth, government spending, etc.),
averaged over the pretreatment period, are similar between the treated state and the constructed
synthetic control state. As in the case of our matching approach, the synthetic control procedure
is successful at balancing the covariates across treatment and control groups for years t-3 to t-1.
    13
    Those making more than $200,000 a year (from the IRS data) are comparable to the top 5% of earners.
Our results remain economically significant if we alter that assumption to examine other top x% earners.



                                                    16
Figure 8 shows that tax cust states had similar trends in inequality as their synthetic controls
prior to the tax cut.
     Under the assumption that synthetic controls represent a valid counterfactual for states that
experience a tax change, the differences in the post treatment values of inequality can be at-
tributed to the tax change. We compute this difference by estimating Equation 4 on the sample
of states with tax cuts and their synthetic controls. Our SUR estimation mirrors our previous
estimates by including the same fixed effects, controls, and by clustering standard errors at the
state level.
     Table 7 reports results from this analysis. This table confirms our previous results: corporate
tax cuts increase income inequality. The estimates are generally of a similar order of magnitude.
For instance, this table finds that the share of income accruing to the top 1% increases by
0.375pp, while Table 3 estimates an increase of 0.45pp. Figure 8 presents dynamic effects of the
tax cut and confirms the results of Figure 4.


5.2      Alternative Measures of Inequality

To ensure that our results are robust to how income inequality is measured, we examine the
relation between tax cuts and alternative measures of income inequality (the relative mean devi-
ation, Gini coefficient, Atkinson index, and Theil’s entropy index).14 Table 8 reports the result
of a seemingly unrelated regression of Equation 4 on these outcomes. The coefficients on the
Gini coefficient and the relative mean deviation are positive and statistically significant. These
results are robust to including potential confounders. In Table A.6 in Appendix C, we also report
the results of dynamic analyses, where we allow the effect of the tax cut to vary across relative
years. Overall, these outcomes also show that corporate tax cuts increase income inequality.



6        Conclusions
The evidence in this paper suggests that corporate tax cuts increase top income inequality. We
document this evidence using regression and matching techniques. Relative to recent trends, we
find that a state corporate tax cut of 0.5pp would explain about 7.4% of the average rise in the
    14
    For completeness, we conduct identical analysis for the tax increase sample and report the results in Ap-
pendix C.



                                                      17
share of income accruing to the top 1% between 1990 and 2010. We show that the size of the
effect is greater than that implied by a mechanical increase in after-tax income to business owners.
We also provide evidence that top earners can shift their form of compensation between capital
and labor income, and that this mechanism is responsible for most of the measured increase in
income inequality.
   These results illuminate the mechanisms through which corporate tax cuts affect the local
economy. In the model of Suárez Serrato and Zidar (2016), wages rise as lower corporate taxes
encourage business formation, which then increases the demand for labor. Since the results of
this paper focus on short-term effects, it may be the case that these effects may be partially
reversed over the medium term. Note, however, that the benefits to existing owners are front-
loaded, while the benefits to workers are back-loaded and only materialize after competitive
forces drive down after-tax profits. This clarifies that attempts to use corporate tax cuts as
a means to boost the local economy depend on increases in top income inequality to generate
additional economic activity. In contrast, other approaches such as government spending at the
local level (e.g., Suárez Serrato and Wingender (2011)) or tax cuts to low-income earners (e.g.,
Zidar (2015)) may stimulate the economy without increasing inequality.




                                                18
References
Abadie, Alberto, Alexis Diamond, and Jens Hainmueller. 2010. “Synthetic Control
  Methods for Comparative Case Studies: Estimating the Effect of California?s Tobacco Control
  Program.” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 490(105): 493–505.

Aghion, Philippe, Ufuk Akcigit, Antonin Bergeaud, Richard Blundell, and David
  Hémous. 2015. “Innovation and Top Income Inequality.” NBER Working Paper Series No.
  21247.

Akcigit, Ufuk, John Grigsby, Tom Nicholas, and Stefanie Stantcheva. 2018. “Taxation
  and Innovation in the 20th Century.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
  24982.

Annual Survey of Manufacturers. 1997. “Report Series (Volume 1).”

CEA. 2017. “The Growth Effects of Corporate Tax Reform and Implications for Wages.” The
  Council of Economic Advisers Report (Accessed 2 September 2011).

Clausing, Kimberly. 2017. “Would Cutting Corporate Taxes Raise Workers’ Incomes?” Econo-
  Fact.

Curtis, E. Mark, and Ryan A. Decker. 2018. “Entrepreneurship and State Taxation.”
  Federal Reserve Board Divisions of Research & Statistics and Monetary Affairs, Finance and
  Economics Discussion Series.

DeBacker, Jason, Bradley T. Heim, Justin M. Ross, and Shanthi P. Ramnath. 2017.
  “The Impact of State Taxes on Pass-Through Businesses: Evidence from the 2012 Kansas
  Income Tax Reform.”

de Chaisemartin, Clément, and Xavier D’Haultfoeuille. 2018. “Two-way fixed effects
  estimators with heterogeneous treatment effects.” Working Paper.

Fajgelbaum, Pablo D., Eduardo Morales, Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato, and Owen M.
  Zidar. 2015. “State Taxes and Spatial Misallocation.” National Bureau of Economic Research
  Working Paper 21760.


                                             19
Feenberg, Daniel, and James Poterba. 1993. “Income inequality and the incomes of very
  high-income taxpayers: evidence from tax returns.” In Tax Policy and the Economy. Vol. 7, ,
  ed. James Poterba, 145–177.

Feldstein, Martin. 1999. “Tax Avoidance and the Deadweight Loss of the Income Tax.” The
  Review of Economics and Statistics, 81(4): 674–680.

Frank, Mark W. 2009. “Inequality and growth in the United States: Evidence from a new
  state-level panel of income inequality measures.” Economic Inquiry, 47(1): 55–68.

Frank, Mark W. 2014. “A New State-Level Panel of Annual Inequality Measures over the
  Period 1916 - 2005.” Journal of Business Strategies, 31(1): 241–263.

Frank, Mark W., Estelle Sommeiller, Mark Price, and Emmanuel Saez. 2015. “Frank-
  Sommeiller-Price Series for Top Income Shares by US States since 1917.” Sam Houston State
  University.

Fuest, Clemens, Andreas Peichl, and Sebastian Siegloch. 2018. “Do Higher Corpo-
  rate Taxes Reduce Wages? Micro Evidence from Germany.” American Economic Review,
  108(2): 393–418.

Giroud, Xavier, and Joshua D. Rauh. 2018. “State Taxation and the Reallocation of Busi-
  ness Activity: Evidence from Establishment-Level Data.” Journal of Political Economy, forth-
  coming.

Goodman-Bacon, Andrew. 2018. “Difference-in-Differences with Variation in Treatment Tim-
  ing.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 25018.

Gruber, Jon, and Emmanuel Saez. 2002. “The elasticity of taxable income: evidence and
  implications.” Journal of Public Economics, 84(1): 1–32.

Harberger, Arnold C. 1962. “The Incidence of the Corporation Income Tax.” Journal of
  Political Economy, 70(3): 215–240.

Heider, Florian, and Alexander Ljungqvist. 2015a. “As Certain as Debt and Taxes: Es-
  timating the Tax Sensitivity of Leverage from Exogenous State Tax Changes.” Journal of
  Financial Economics, 118(3): 684–712.

                                              20
Heider, Florian, and Alexander Ljungqvist. 2015b. “As certain as debt and taxes: Estimat-
  ing the tax sensitivity of leverage from state tax changes.” Journal of Financial Economics,
  118: 684–712.

Jacobson, Louis, Robert LaLonde, and Daniel Sullivan. 1993. “Earnings Losses of Dis-
  placed Workers.” American Economic Review, 4(83): 685–709.

Kotlikoff, Laurence J. 2014. “Abolish the Corporate Income Tax.”

Kotlikoff, Laurence J., and Lawrence H. Summers. 1987. “Tax Incidence.” In Handbook of
  Public Economics. Vol. 2, , ed. Alan J. Auerbach and Martin Feldstein, Chapter 16. Elsevier.

Lester, Rebecca. 2019. “Made in the U.S.A.? A Study of Firm Responses to Domestic Pro-
  duction Incentives.” Journal of Accounting Research, forthcoming.

Ljungqvist, Alexander, and Michael Smolyansky. 2015. “To Cut or Not to Cut? On the
  Impact of Corporate Taxes on Employment and Income.” Divisions of Research & Statistics
  and Monetary Affairs, Federal Reserve Board, Washington, D.C. Discussion Paper 2016-006.

Ohrn, Eric. 2016. “Investment and Employment Responses to State Adoption of Federal Ac-
  celerated Depreciation Policies.” Grinnell College.

Piketty, Thomas, and Emmanuel Saez. 2003. “Income Inequality in the United States,
  1913-1998.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(1): 1–39.

Piketty, Thomas, Emmanuel Saez, and Stefanie Stantcheva. 2011. “Optimal Taxation
  of Top Labor Incomes: A Tale of Three Elasticities.” NBER Working Paper Series No. 17616.

Rubolino, Enrico, and Daniel Waldenström. 2018a. “Tax Progressivity and Top Incomes:
  Evidence from Tax Refoms.” Working Paper, University of Essex and Paris School of Eco-
  nomics.

Rubolino, Enrico, and Daniel Waldenström. 2018b. “Trends and Gradients in Top Tax
  Elasticities: Cross-Country Evidence, 1900-2014.” Working Paper, University of Essex and
  Paris School of Economics.

Saez, Emmanuel. 2004. “Reported incomes and marginal tax rates, 1960-2000: evidence and
  policy implications.” In Tax Policy and the Economy. Vol. 18, 117–174.

                                               21
Saez, Emmanuel. 2017. “Taxing the rich more: Preliminary evidence from the 2013 Tax In-
  crease.” NBER Working Paper Series No. 22798.

Saez, Emmanuel, Joel Slemrod, and Seth Giertz. 2012. “The elasticity of taxable income
  with respect to marginal tax rates: A critical review.” Journal of Economic Literature, 50(1): 3–
  50.

Severnini, Edson. 2014. “The Power of Hydroelectric Dams: Agglomeration Spillovers.” Work-
  ing paper, Institute of Labor Economics.

Slemrod, Joel. 1996. “High income families and the tax changes of the 1980s: the anatomy of
  behavioral response.” In Empirical Foundations of Household Taxation. , ed. Martin Feldstein
  and James Poterba. University of Chicago.

Smith, Matthew, Danny Yagan, Owen Zidar, and Eric Zwick. 2017. “Capitalists in the
  Twenty-First Century.” Working Paper.

Sommeiller, Estelle, and Mark Price. 2014. “The Increasingly Unequal States of America:
  Income Inequality by State, 1917 to 2011.” Economic Policy Institute Report.

Suárez Serrato, Juan Carlos, and Owen M. Zidar. 2016. “Who Benefits from State Cor-
  porate Tax Cuts? A Local Labor Markets Approach with Heterogeneous Firms.” American
  Economic Review, 106(9): 2582–2624.

Suárez Serrato, Juan Carlos, and Owen M. Zidar. 2017. “The Structure of State Corporate
  Taxation and Its Impact on State Tax Revenues and Economic Activity.” NBER Working
  Paper Series No. 23653.

Suárez Serrato, Juan Carlos, and Philippe Wingender. 2011. “Estimating the Incidence
  of Government Spending.” U.C. Berkeley and International Monetary Fund Working Paper.

Troiano, Ugo. 2017. “Do Taxes Increase Economic Inequality? A Comparative Study Based
  on the State Personal Income Tax.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
  24175.

Zidar, Owen M. 2015. “Tax Cuts for Whom? Heterogeneous Effects of Income Tax Changes
  on Growth and Employment.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 21035.

                                                22
                                         Figure 1: Trends in Top Income Inequality


        A. The shift in densities for the percent of income going to the top 1% of earners
                       .3
                       .2
             Density
                       .1
                       0




                                   0             10                     20                     30                 40
                                                                       Top 1

                                                      1980                    1995                  2010



                                         B. Trends of top 1% of earners and above
                       25
                       20
             Fraction of Income
                10     5
                       0   15




                                  1980                1990                           2000                       2010
                                                                       Year

                                         Top 1               Top 0.5                 Top 0.1               Top 0.01


Notes: Figure 1 describes how the distribution of income has shifted from 1980-2010 in aggregate.
                                                                  23
                            Figure 2: Maps of Income Inequality by State


                       A. Fraction of Income Going to Top 1% by State: 1980




                                                                                            10.48 − 14.48
                                                                                            9.93 − 10.48
                                                                                            9.31 − 9.93
                                                                                            8.57 − 9.31
                                                                                            8.16 − 8.57
                                                                                            5.33 − 8.16

              B. Change in Fraction of Income Going to Top 1% by State: 1980-2010




                                                                                           10.44 − 20.47
                                                                                           7.82 − 10.44
                                                                                           6.98 − 7.82
                                                                                           6.23 − 6.98
                                                                                           5.30 − 6.23
                                                                                           3.15 − 5.30

Notes: Figure 2 describes how the distribution of income has shifted from 1980-2010 at the state level.
                                                      24
                   Figure 3: Differences Between Treatment and Control Groups


                                                   A. Tax Cuts
                                 Top 10
                                  Top 5
                                  Top 1
                                Top 0.5
                                Top 0.1
                               Top 0.01
                       GDP Per Capita
                     Population Growth
              Share of GDP in Finance
                       Log Output Gap
                      Government Size
               Share of GDP in Military
              Spillover GDP Per Capita
                   Unemployment Rate
                                          -1.5      -1      -.5      0        .5       1       1.5


                                                 B. Tax Increases
                                 Top 10
                                  Top 5
                                  Top 1
                                Top 0.5
                                Top 0.1
                               Top 0.01
                       GDP Per Capita
                     Population Growth
              Share of GDP in Finance
                       Log Output Gap
                      Government Size
               Share of GDP in Military
              Spillover GDP Per Capita
                   Unemployment Rate
                                          -1.5      -1      -.5      0        .5       1       1.5

Notes: Figure 3 describes the differences in means for all variables of interest for the treatment and control
groups for years t-3 to t-1. Horizontal bars represent the 95% confidence interval. All variables are defined in
Appendix A.                                            25
                                                                               Figure 4: Dynamic Effects of Tax Cuts


                                                            A. Top 0.01                                                                                                       B. Top 0.1
                 .75




                                                                                                                                  .75
                 .5




                                                                                                                                  .5
                 .25
   Effect of Tax Cut




                                                                                                                    Effect of Tax Cut
                                                                                                                                  .25
           0




                                                                                                                            0
  -.25




                                                                                                                   -.25
                 -.5




                                                                                                                                  -.5
                 -.75




                                                                                                                                  -.75
                                   -2                -1           0             1           2             3                                         -2                -1           0            1           2             3
                                                                        Year                                                                                                             Year

                                        Specification:    Without Controls          95% Confidence Interval                                              Specification:    Without Controls         95% Confidence Interval
                                                          With Controls             95% Confidence Interval                                                                With Controls            95% Confidence Interval



                                                             C. Top 0.5                                                                                                         D. Top 1
                 .75




                                                                                                                   -.75 -.5 -.25 0 .25 .5 .75
                       .5
     Effect of Tax Cut




                                                                                                                                Effect of Tax Cut
  -.25    0     .25
                 -.5
                 -.75




                                   -2                -1           0             1           2             3                                         -2                -1           0            1           2             3
                                                                        Year                                                                                                             Year

                                        Specification:    Without Controls          95% Confidence Interval                                              Specification:    Without Controls         95% Confidence Interval
                                                          With Controls             95% Confidence Interval                                                                With Controls            95% Confidence Interval



                                                               E. Top 5                                                                                                        F. Top 10
  -.75 -.5 -.25 0 .25 .5 .75




                                                                                                                   -.75 -.5 -.25 0 .25 .5 .75
               Effect of Tax Cut




                                                                                                                                Effect of Tax Cut




                                   -2                -1           0             1           2             3                                         -2                -1           0            1           2             3
                                                                        Year                                                                                                             Year

                                        Specification:    Without Controls          95% Confidence Interval                                              Specification:    Without Controls         95% Confidence Interval
                                                          With Controls             95% Confidence Interval                                                                With Controls            95% Confidence Interval


Notes: Figure 4 shows how tax cuts impact income inequality over time for all measures of income inequality.
Year 0 represents the year in which the treated state cuts its corporate tax rate.



                                                                                                              26
                          Figure 5: The CDFs of the Coefficient on Post X Tax Cut across Placebo Tests

                                                 A. Top 0.01                                                                                                   B. Top 0.1
                                                                                      Actual Estimate                                                                                                   Actual Estimate
                     1                                                                                                         1



                     .8                                                                                                        .8
     Empirical CDF




                                                                                                               Empirical CDF
                     .6                                                                                                        .6



                     .4                                                                                                        .4



                     .2                                                                                                        .2



                     0                                                                                                         0
                          -.2              -.1                 0                .1                   .2                             -.33          -.23       -.13       -.03       .07        .17                .27           .37
                                                 Estimated Placebo Coefficients                                                                                Estimated Placebo Coefficients



                                                  C. Top 0.5                                                                                                     D. Top 1
                                                                                      Actual Estimate                                                                                                   Actual Estimate
                     1                                                                                                         1



                     .8                                                                                                        .8
     Empirical CDF




                                                                                                               Empirical CDF




                     .6                                                                                                        .6



                     .4                                                                                                        .4



                     .2                                                                                                        .2



                     0                                                                                                         0
                          -.42   -.32    -.22       -.12    -.02    .08       .18     .28      .38                                  -.56   -.46     -.36   -.26 -.16 -.06 .04       .14     .24     .34         .44     .54
                                                 Estimated Placebo Coefficients                                                                                Estimated Placebo Coefficients



                                                   E. Top 5                                                                                                     F. Top 10
                                                                                      Actual Estimate                                                                                                   Actual Estimate
                     1                                                                                                         1



                     .8                                                                                                        .8
     Empirical CDF




                                                                                                               Empirical CDF




                     .6                                                                                                        .6



                     .4                                                                                                        .4



                     .2                                                                                                        .2



                     0                                                                                                         0
                          -.47   -.37   -.27     -.17   -.07    .03    .13      .23    .33     .43                                  -.65 -.55 -.45 -.35 -.25 -.15 -.05 .05 .15 .25                .35     .45     .55    .65
                                                 Estimated Placebo Coefficients                                                                          Estimated Placebo Coefficients




Notes: Figure 5 reports the cumulative distribution function of the coefficient on Post X Tax Cut for placebo
tests for all measures of income inequality. The placebo tests consist of assigning a random non-tax-cut year to
each treated state and treating that year as if it were the actual year in which the state had its first tax cut.
This state-year is matched with a control state using the methodology described in Section 5.1. Next, we run
Equation 3.2 using the as-if tax cut year. This simulation is run 1,000 times for each coefficient, and the CDF is
reported here. The vertical line identifies where the actual coefficient values from Table 3 (Columns (7) - (12))
fall within the distributions.
                                                                                                          27
                                                                 Figure 6: Dynamic Effects of Tax Increases


                                                A. Top 0.01                                                                                                  B. Top 0.1
           .75




                                                                                                                    .75
           .5




                                                                                                                    .5
                 .25




                                                                                                                      .25
   Effect of Tax Cut




                                                                                                        Effect of Tax Cut
           0




                                                                                                                0
  -.25




                                                                                                       -.25
           -.5




                                                                                                                    -.5
           -.75




                                                                                                                    -.75
                       -2                -1           0             1           2             3                                    -2                -1           0            1           2             3
                                                            Year                                                                                                        Year

                            Specification:    Without Controls          95% Confidence Interval                                         Specification:    Without Controls         95% Confidence Interval
                                              With Controls             95% Confidence Interval                                                           With Controls            95% Confidence Interval



                                                 C. Top 0.5                                                                                                    D. Top 1
           .75




                                                                                                                    .75
           .5




                                                                                                                         .5
                 .25
   Effect of Tax Cut




                                                                                                       Effect of Tax Cut
                                                                                                                    .25
           0




                                                                                                       -.25 0
  -.25




                                                                                                                    -.5
           -.5




                                                                                                                    -.75
           -.75




                       -2                -1           0             1           2             3                                    -2                -1           0            1           2             3
                                                            Year                                                                                                        Year

                            Specification:    Without Controls          95% Confidence Interval                                         Specification:    Without Controls         95% Confidence Interval
                                              With Controls             95% Confidence Interval                                                           With Controls            95% Confidence Interval



                                                   E. Top 5                                                                                                   F. Top 10
           .75




                                                                                                                    .75
           .5




                                                                                                       -.75 -.5 -.25 0 .25 .5
  Effect of Tax Cut




                                                                                                               Effect of Tax Cut
  -.25    0-.5
           -.75 .25




                       -2                -1           0             1           2             3                                    -2                -1           0            1           2             3
                                                            Year                                                                                                        Year

                            Specification:    Without Controls          95% Confidence Interval                                         Specification:    Without Controls         95% Confidence Interval
                                              With Controls             95% Confidence Interval                                                           With Controls            95% Confidence Interval


Notes: Figure 6 shows how tax cuts impact income inequality over time for all measures of income inequality.
Year 0 represents the year in which the treated state cuts its corporate tax rate.



                                                                                                  28
                Figure 7: The CDFs of the Coefficient on Post X Tax Increase across Placebo Tests

                                                   A. Top 0.01                                                                                                      B. Top 0.1
                                                     Actual Estimate                                                                              Actual Estimate
                     1                                                                                                              1



                     .8                                                                                                             .8
     Empirical CDF




                                                                                                                    Empirical CDF
                     .6                                                                                                             .6



                     .4                                                                                                             .4



                     .2                                                                                                             .2



                     0                                                                                                              0
                                                          -.03                            .07                                                         -.14              -.04            .06               .16
                                                    Estimated Placebo Coefficients                                                                                 Estimated Placebo Coefficients



                                                     C. Top 0.5                                                                                                       D. Top 1
                          Actual Estimate                                                                                                Actual Estimate
                     1                                                                                                              1



                     .8                                                                                                             .8
     Empirical CDF




                                                                                                                    Empirical CDF




                     .6                                                                                                             .6



                     .4                                                                                                             .4



                     .2                                                                                                             .2



                     0                                                                                                              0
                          -.33      -.23           -.13       -.03       .07        .17           .27         .37                        -.5    -.4          -.3   -.2    -.1     0     .1      .2   .3     .4   .5
                                                     Estimated Placebo Coefficients                                                                                 Estimated Placebo Coefficients



                                                       E. Top 5                                                                                                         Top 10
                          Actual Estimate                                                                                                Actual Estimate
                     1                                                                                                              1



                     .8                                                                                                             .8
     Empirical CDF




                                                                                                                    Empirical CDF




                     .6                                                                                                             .6



                     .4                                                                                                             .4



                     .2                                                                                                             .2



                     0                                                                                                              0
                          -.41    -.31      -.21       -.11     -.01    .09       .19       .29         .39                              -.76 -.66 -.56 -.46 -.36 -.26 -.16 -.06 .04 .14 .24 .34 .44 .54 .64 .74
                                                    Estimated Placebo Coefficients                                                                               Estimated Placebo Coefficients




Notes: Figure 7 reports the cumulative distribution function of the coefficient on Post X Tax Increase for placebo
tests for all measures of income inequality. The placebo tests consist of assigning a random non-tax-cut year to
each treated state and treating that year as if it were the actual year in which the state had its first tax cut.
This state-year is matched with a control state using the methodology described in Section 5.1. Next, we run
Equation 3.2 using the as-if tax cut year. This simulation is run 1,000 times for each coefficient, and the CDF is
reported here. The vertical line identifies where the actual coefficient values from Table 4 (Columns (7) - (12))
fall within the distributions.
                                                                                                              29
                                 Figure 8: Dynamic Effects of Tax Cuts Using Synthetic Controls Event Study


                                                  A. Top 0.01                                                                                       B. Top 0.1
           .75




                                                                                                            .75
           .5




                                                                                                            .5
  Effect of Tax Cut




                                                                                                   Effect of Tax Cut
                .25




                                                                                                                 .25
          0




                                                                                                           0
  -.25




                                                                                                   -.25
           -.5




                                                                                                            -.5
           -.75




                                                                                                            -.75
                          -2              -1           0           1          2           3                                -2              -1           0           1          2           3
                                                            Year                                                                                             Year

                               Specification:   Without Controls       95% Confidence Interval                                  Specification:   Without Controls       95% Confidence Interval
                                                With Controls          95% Confidence Interval                                                   With Controls          95% Confidence Interval



                                                   C. Top 0.5                                                                                        D. Top 1
           .75




                                                                                                            .75
           .5




                                                                                                                      .5
  Effect of Tax Cut




                                                                                                    Effect of Tax Cut
                .25




                                                                                                                .25
          0




                                                                                                           0
  -.25




                                                                                                   -.25
           -.5




                                                                                                            -.5
           -.75




                                                                                                            -.75




                          -2              -1           0           1          2           3                                -2              -1           0           1          2           3
                                                            Year                                                                                             Year

                               Specification:   Without Controls       95% Confidence Interval                                  Specification:   Without Controls       95% Confidence Interval
                                                With Controls          95% Confidence Interval                                                   With Controls          95% Confidence Interval



                                                    E. Top 5                                                                                        F. Top 10
           .75




                                                                                                            .75
                     .5




                                                                                                                      .5
   Effect of Tax Cut




                                                                                                    Effect of Tax Cut
               .25




                                                                                                               .25
          0




                                                                                                          0
  -.25




                                                                                                   -.25
           -.5




                                                                                                            -.5
           -.75




                                                                                                            -.75




                          -2              -1           0           1          2           3                                -2              -1           0           1          2           3
                                                            Year                                                                                             Year

                               Specification:   Without Controls       95% Confidence Interval                                  Specification:   Without Controls       95% Confidence Interval
                                                With Controls          95% Confidence Interval                                                   With Controls          95% Confidence Interval


Notes: Figure 8 shows how tax cuts impact income inequality over time for all measures of income inequality
using a synthetic controls event study methodology. Year 0 represents the year in which the treated state cuts
its corporate tax rate.


                                                                                              30
                                      Table 1: Summary Statistics
                                                 count     mean       p25      p50       p75
              Top 10                             1250      41.86     38.55    41.17     44.42
              Top 5                              1250      30.37     26.97    29.56     32.49
              Top 1                              1250      15.93     12.90    15.13     17.63
              Top 0.5                            1250      12.30      9.66    11.31     13.80
              Top 0.1                            1250       7.05      5.02     6.23      8.07
              Top 0.01                           1250       3.10      1.94     2.57      3.59
              Corporate Rate                     1250       6.63      5.50     7.00      8.84
              GDP Per Capita                     1250      10.39     10.12    10.41     10.65
              Population Growth                  1250       0.01      0.00     0.01      0.01
              Share of GDP in Finance            1250      8.63       8.25     8.65      8.98
              Log Output Gap                     1250       0.00     -0.01     0.00      0.01
              Government Size                    1250       8.39      8.12     8.39      8.64
              Share of GDP in Military           1250       5.97      5.42    6.01       6.48
              Spillover GDP Per Capita           1250      14.32     14.05    14.35     14.62
              Unemployment Rate                  1250      5.63       4.30     5.30      6.60
              Sales Apportionment                1250      54.91     33.34    50.00     60.00
              Personal Tax Rate                  1250       5.20     3.40      5.97      7.15
Notes: Table 1 presents the descriptive statistics for inequality measures and other macroeconomic variables.
The sample has 1,250 state-years from 1988-2012. All variables are defined in Appendix A.




                                                     31
                       Table 2: Difference-in-Differences Estimates of the Effects of Corporate Taxes on Income Inequality

                                   Top 10       Top 5       Top 1      Top 05      Top 01     Top 001      Top 10       Top 5       Top 1      Top 05      Top 01     Top 001
      Corporate Rate              -0.401∗∗∗   -0.461∗∗∗   -0.399∗∗∗   -0.375∗∗∗   -0.292∗∗∗   -0.182∗∗∗   -0.399∗∗∗   -0.440∗∗∗   -0.374∗∗∗   -0.350∗∗∗   -0.272∗∗∗   -0.170∗∗∗
                                   (0.062)     (0.063)     (0.055)     (0.053)     (0.044)     (0.030)     (0.061)     (0.061)     (0.053)     (0.050)     (0.042)     (0.029)

      GDP Per Capita                                                                                       0.162      1.151∗∗∗    1.319∗∗∗    1.311∗∗∗    1.028∗∗∗    0.639∗∗∗
                                                                                                          (0.238)     (0.342)     (0.283)     (0.285)     (0.218)     (0.132)

      Population Growth                                                                                    1.715       3.452       3.335       3.341       2.404       1.325
                                                                                                          (1.918)     (2.522)     (2.251)     (2.295)     (1.760)     (1.063)

      Share of GDP in Finance                                                                              -0.045      -0.202      -0.160      -0.165      -0.132      -0.082
                                                                                                          (0.131)     (0.172)     (0.154)     (0.157)     (0.120)     (0.073)

      Log Output Gap                                                                                       0.550       0.427       0.202       0.291       0.209       0.098
                                                                                                          (0.663)     (0.883)     (0.780)     (0.793)     (0.608)     (0.368)

      Government Size                                                                                      -0.207      0.065       0.131       0.126       0.120       0.095
                                                                                                          (0.232)     (0.305)     (0.272)     (0.277)     (0.213)     (0.129)
32




      Share of GDP in Military                                                                            0.099∗       0.046       -0.012      -0.005      -0.010      -0.014
                                                                                                          (0.054)     (0.071)     (0.064)     (0.065)     (0.050)     (0.030)

      Spillover GDP Per Capita                                                                            2.977∗∗∗     -0.137      0.061       -0.027      -0.096     -0.236∗∗∗
                                                                                                          (0.159)     (6.406)     (2.232)     (0.187)     (0.234)      (0.087)

      Unemployment Rate                                                                                    -0.005     -0.042∗∗    -0.043∗∗∗   -0.043∗∗∗   -0.034∗∗∗   -0.021∗∗∗
                                                                                                          (0.012)     (0.016)      (0.015)     (0.015)     (0.011)     (0.007)

      Sales Apportionment                                                                                  0.001      -0.002∗     -0.002∗∗    -0.002∗∗    -0.002∗∗    -0.001∗∗
                                                                                                          (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.000)

      Personal Tax Rate                                                                                    -0.004     0.052∗∗∗    0.041∗∗     0.041∗∗     0.034∗∗∗    0.023∗∗∗
                                                                                                          (0.014)     (0.018)     (0.016)     (0.016)     (0.013)     (0.008)
      Observations                  1250        1250        1250        1250        1250        1250        1250        1250       1250        1250         1250        1250
      Year Fixed Effects            Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
      State Fixed Effects           Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes.
      Number of States               50          50          50          50          50          50          50          50         50           50          50          50
     Notes: Table 2 documents the relation between tax changes and income inequality for the full sample of state-years estimated using the specification in
     Equation 3. Corporate Rate is the top marginal corporate tax rate in the state. Top X is the percent of income received by the top X%, where X is 10, 5,
     1, 0.5, 0.1, or 0.01. p-values are reporter in parentheses. Standard errors are clustered at the state level. All variables are defined in Appendix A
                             Table 3: Matching Estimates of the Effects of Corporate Tax Cuts on Income Inequality

                                    Top 10      Top 5     Top 1     Top 05    Top 01     Top 001   Top 10        Top 5        Top 1       Top 05      Top 01      Top 001
      Post X Tax Cut                0.548∗∗∗   0.411∗∗   0.480∗∗∗   0.383∗∗   0.298∗∗∗   0.173∗∗   0.522∗∗∗     0.371∗∗∗     0.450∗∗∗     0.338∗∗∗    0.268∗∗∗    0.157∗∗∗
                                    (0.179)    (0.165)   (0.154)    (0.149)   (0.114)    (0.069)   (0.147)      (0.131)      (0.121)      (0.115)     (0.091)     (0.057)

      GDP Per Capita                                                                               8.915∗∗∗     10.731∗∗∗    10.472∗∗∗    9.555∗∗∗    7.392∗∗∗    4.166∗∗∗
                                                                                                   (2.092)       (1.988)      (1.849)     (1.815)     (1.342)     (0.759)

      Population Growth                                                                              5.014        1.534        6.382        7.641      5.340       2.908
                                                                                                   (12.720)     (12.085)     (11.237)     (11.035)    (8.160)     (4.614)

      Share of GDP in Finance                                                                       1.739∗∗      1.344∗        0.823       1.150       0.749       0.416
                                                                                                    (0.853)      (0.810)      (0.753)     (0.740)     (0.547)     (0.309)

      Log Output Gap                                                                               -11.006∗∗∗   -11.557∗∗∗   -10.584∗∗∗   -9.097∗∗∗   -7.221∗∗∗   -4.148∗∗∗
                                                                                                     (3.445)      (3.273)      (3.043)     (2.989)     (2.210)     (1.250)

      Government Size                                                                                2.637        2.638       3.046∗∗     3.547∗∗     2.414∗∗     1.293∗∗
                                                                                                    (1.708)      (1.623)      (1.509)     (1.482)     (1.096)     (0.620)
33




      Share of GDP in Military                                                                       0.104        0.136        -0.086      0.227       0.079       0.028
                                                                                                    (0.299)      (0.284)      (0.264)     (0.260)     (0.192)     (0.109)

      Spillover GDP Per Capita                                                                     -6.668∗∗∗    -8.584∗∗∗    -9.140∗∗∗    -9.414∗∗∗   -7.055∗∗∗   -3.965∗∗∗
                                                                                                    (1.254)      (1.191)      (1.108)      (1.088)     (0.804)     (0.455)

      Unemployment Rate                                                                              -0.069       -0.036       -0.033      0.001       -0.010      -0.009
                                                                                                    (0.066)      (0.062)      (0.058)     (0.057)     (0.042)     (0.024)

      Sales Apportionment                                                                            -0.007       -0.008       -0.006      -0.005      -0.004      -0.002
                                                                                                    (0.007)      (0.007)      (0.006)     (0.006)     (0.004)     (0.003)

      Personal Tax Rate                                                                             -0.141∗∗     -0.139∗∗     -0.117∗     -0.129∗∗    -0.090∗∗    -0.050∗∗
                                                                                                    (0.070)      (0.066)      (0.062)     (0.060)     (0.045)     (0.025)
      Observations                    300       300        300       300        300        300        300          300          300         300         300         300
      Year x Event Fixed Effects      Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
      State x Event Fixed Effects     Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes.
      Number of States                32        32         32        32         32         32          32           32           32          32          32          32
     Notes: Table 3 reports the results of implementing Equation 4 for the matched tax-cut sample. Post X Tax Cut is an indicator equal to 1 in years t+1 to
     t+3 for states that had tax cuts, and 0 otherwise. Top X is the percent of income received by the top X%, where X is 10, 5, 1, 0.5, 0.1, or 0.01. p-values
     are reporter in parentheses. Standard errors are clustered at the state level. All variables are defined in Appendix A
                           Table 4: Matching Estimates of the Effects of Corporate Tax Increases on Income Inequality

                                      Top 10       Top 5       Top 1      Top 05    Top 01 Top 001     Top 10       Top 5       Top 1      Top 05    Top 01 Top 001
      Post X Tax Increase            -0.667∗∗∗   -0.377∗∗∗   -0.452∗∗∗   -0.304∗∗    -0.126  -0.032   -0.646∗∗∗   -0.367∗∗∗   -0.411∗∗∗   -0.262∗∗    -0.111  -0.029
                                      (0.144)     (0.140)     (0.139)    (0.119)    (0.096) (0.063)    (0.142)     (0.137)     (0.136)    (0.116)    (0.095) (0.062)

      GDP Per Capita                                                                                  -2.136∗∗    -2.710∗∗     -1.774      -1.293     -0.492    -0.249
                                                                                                      (0.997)     (1.193)     (1.154)     (1.002)    (0.734)   (0.472)

      Population Growth                                                                                1.695       -0.172      4.003       3.646      1.484     0.580
                                                                                                      (4.942)     (5.917)     (5.722)     (4.969)    (3.640)   (2.339)

      Share of GDP in Finance                                                                         0.923∗      1.274∗∗     1.164∗      1.030∗∗     0.558     0.289
                                                                                                      (0.518)     (0.621)     (0.600)     (0.521)    (0.382)   (0.245)

      Log Output Gap                                                                                  3.556∗∗     4.047∗      3.656∗      3.002∗      1.581     0.867
                                                                                                      (1.795)     (2.150)     (2.079)     (1.805)    (1.322)   (0.850)

      Government Size                                                                                  -0.409      -0.926      -0.007      -0.005     -0.108    -0.184
                                                                                                      (0.613)     (0.734)     (0.710)     (0.616)    (0.452)   (0.290)
34




      Share of GDP in Military                                                                         -0.027      0.066       -0.093      -0.053     0.003     0.021
                                                                                                      (0.126)     (0.151)     (0.146)     (0.127)    (0.093)   (0.060)

      Spillover GDP Per Capita                                                                        4.195∗∗∗    3.883∗∗∗    1.752∗∗     1.219∗      0.576     0.313
                                                                                                      (0.700)     (0.838)     (0.810)     (0.704)    (0.515)   (0.331)

      Unemployment Rate                                                                                -0.001      0.007       -0.005      -0.007     0.001     0.003
                                                                                                      (0.037)     (0.044)     (0.042)     (0.037)    (0.027)   (0.017)

      Sales Apportionment                                                                              -0.001      -0.003      0.000       -0.000     -0.000    -0.001
                                                                                                      (0.002)     (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.002)    (0.002)   (0.001)

      Personal Tax Rate                                                                                0.017       0.038       -0.006      -0.018     -0.005    0.001
                                                                                                      (0.030)     (0.036)     (0.035)     (0.030)    (0.022)   (0.014)
      Observations                     264         264         264         264       264      264       264         264         264         264        264       264
      Year x Event Fixed Effects       Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes       Yes      Yes       Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes       Yes
      State x Event Fixed Effects      Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes       Yes      Yes       Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes      Yes.
      Number of States                 34          34          34          34        34       34         34          34          34          34         34        34
     Notes: Table 4 reports the results of implementing Equation 4 for the matched tax-increase sample. Post X Tax Increase is an indicator equal to 1 in
     years t+1 to t+3 for states that had tax increases, and 0 otherwise. Top X is the percent of income received by the top X%, where X is 10, 5, 1, 0.5, 0.1,
     or 0.01. p-values are reporter in parentheses. Standard errors are clustered at the state level. All variables are defined in Appendix A
Table 5: Corporate Tax Cuts, Government Spending, Labor Market, and Industry-Level Inves-
ment

                                              Government Size Labor Force Participation         Investment
                                                (1)       (2)       (1)          (2)            (1)      (2)
    Post X Tax Cut                             0.001     0.000     0.037        0.155         -0.042    0.003
                                              (0.011)   (0.010)   (0.359)      (0.222)       (0.062)   (0.068)

    Population Growth                                    1.937               115.409∗∗∗                -21.212∗
                                                        (1.277)               (23.226)                 (12.741)

    GDP Per Capita                                                              6.622                   2.034
                                                                               (9.029)                 (2.382)

    Share of GDP in Finance                                                     1.536                   -0.231
                                                                               (2.008)                 (0.803)

    Log Output Gap                                                             -14.392                  -0.540
                                                                              (11.441)                 (2.681)

    Government Size                                                             1.074                  3.374∗
                                                                               (3.865)                 (1.860)

    Share of GDP in Military                                                    0.333                   -0.253
                                                                               (0.569)                 (0.377)

    Spillover GDP Per Capita                                                   216.705                 -102.030
                                                                              (161.658)                (69.187)

    Unemployment Rate                                                         -1.031∗∗∗                 -0.071
                                                                               (0.156)                 (0.045)

    Sales Apportionment                                                        0.024∗                   0.003
                                                                               (0.014)                 (0.004)

    Personal Tax Rate                                                           0.040                   -0.031
                                                                               (0.220)                 (0.063)
    Observations                               300       300       300           300          3087       3087
    Year x Event Fixed Effects                 Yes       Yes       Yes           Yes                     Yes
    State x Event Fixed Effects                Yes       Yes       Yes           Yes
    State x Industry x Event Fixed Effects                                                     Yes       Yes
    Number of States                            32        32        32           32
    Number of StateXIndustry                                                                   560       560
Notes: Table 5 reports how tax cuts impact other factors that may effect income inequality. Post X Tax Cut
is an indicator equal to 1 in years t+1 to t+3 for states that had tax cuts, and 0 otherwise. Government Size is
government spending per capita. Labor Force Participation is the percent of the working-age population that is
employed. Investment is the natural log of total corporate investment, measured at the industry level. p-values
are reporter in parentheses. Standard errors are clustered at the state level. All variables are defined in Appendix
A




                                                        35
                                      Table 6: Corporate Tax Cuts and the Distribution of Labor and Capital Income
                                                  AGI                                    Salary                                              Capital Income
                                     Bottom         Top       Total        Bottom           Top         Total               Bottom                  Top                  Total
                                    AGI Bottom   AGI Top    AGI Total   Salary Bottom   Salary Top   Salary Total   Capital Income Bottom   Capital Income Top   Capital Income Total
      Post X Tax Cut                 0.012∗∗∗     0.042∗∗    0.025∗∗∗      0.013∗∗∗      -0.044∗∗∗     0.012∗∗∗              0.017               0.126∗∗∗              0.081∗∗∗
                                      (0.003)     (0.017)    (0.004)        (0.002)       (0.015)      (0.002)              (0.011)               (0.035)               (0.020)

      GDP Per Capita                 0.287∗∗∗    1.864∗∗∗    0.408∗∗∗      0.423∗∗∗      1.511∗∗∗      0.467∗∗∗             0.034                2.298∗∗∗               0.364
                                     (0.062)     (0.410)     (0.097)       (0.056)       (0.362)       (0.059)             (0.269)               (0.836)               (0.482)

      Population Growth                -0.527    -7.320∗     -1.775∗∗       0.133         -3.837        0.037              -5.374∗∗              -10.351               -7.897∗
                                      (0.570)    (3.783)     (0.899)       (0.513)       (3.347)       (0.548)             (2.487)               (7.716)               (4.450)

      Share of GDP in Finance          0.029      0.020       0.056         -0.015       -0.281∗        -0.033             0.293∗∗∗               0.468                0.411∗∗
                                      (0.026)    (0.171)     (0.041)       (0.023)       (0.151)       (0.025)             (0.112)               (0.349)               (0.201)

      Log Output Gap                   -0.047    -1.214∗∗     -0.025        -0.088        0.527         0.081               -0.101                -1.845                0.255
                                      (0.092)    (0.608)     (0.144)       (0.082)       (0.538)       (0.088)             (0.400)               (1.240)               (0.715)

      Government Size                -0.124∗∗     0.529       -0.005      -0.188∗∗∗      0.721∗∗      -0.176∗∗∗             -0.304                0.397                 -0.060
                                     (0.061)     (0.405)     (0.096)       (0.055)       (0.359)       (0.059)             (0.266)               (0.827)               (0.477)

      Share of GDP in Military         0.014     -0.258∗∗    -0.067∗∗       -0.023        -0.136       -0.038∗∗             0.003                 0.004                 -0.133
36




                                      (0.018)    (0.117)     (0.028)       (0.016)       (0.104)       (0.017)             (0.077)               (0.239)               (0.138)

      Spillover GDP Per Capita       1.008∗∗∗     -0.492     0.883∗∗∗      0.967∗∗∗       -0.296       0.954∗∗∗            0.999∗∗∗               -1.095                0.677
                                     (0.056)     (0.371)     (0.088)       (0.050)       (0.328)       (0.054)             (0.244)               (0.756)               (0.436)

      Unemployment Rate               0.006∗∗    -0.038∗∗    -0.008∗        0.002         -0.011        -0.003              -0.006               -0.105∗∗∗            -0.065∗∗∗
                                      (0.003)    (0.018)     (0.004)       (0.002)       (0.016)       (0.003)             (0.012)                (0.037)              (0.021)

      Sales Apportionment              0.000     -0.002∗∗     -0.000        0.000        -0.003∗∗∗      -0.000             -0.002∗∗               -0.001                -0.002
                                      (0.000)    (0.001)     (0.000)       (0.000)        (0.001)      (0.000)             (0.001)               (0.002)               (0.001)

      Personal Tax Rate                0.003      0.032       0.007        0.005∗         0.006         0.004              0.030∗∗                -0.005                0.005
                                      (0.003)    (0.022)     (0.005)       (0.003)       (0.019)       (0.003)             (0.014)               (0.045)               (0.026)
      Observations                       84         84          84            84            84            84                 84                     84                   84
      Year x Event Fixed Effects        Yes        Yes         Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes                 Yes                   Yes                   Yes
      State x Event Fixed Effects       Yes        Yes         Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes                 Yes                   Yes                   Yes
      Number of States                   14         14          14            14           14            14                  14                     14                   14
     Notes: Table 6 reports how tax cuts relate to pre-tax income attributable to total individual earnings, capital earnings, and wages. Post X Tax Cut is
     an indicator equal to 1 in years t+1 to t+3 for states that had tax cuts, and 0 otherwise. AGI is the natural log of adjusted gross income. Salary is the
     natural log of pre-tax income attributable to salaries and wages. Capital income is the natural log of pre-tax income attributable to capital. Salary/Capital
     is salary income divided by capital income. ”Bottom” is the total value of the variable for those making below $200,000. ”Top” is the total value of the
     variable for those making above $200,000. ”Total” is the total value of the variable for all income levels. p-values are reporter in parentheses. Standard
     errors are clustered at the state level. All variables are defined in Appendix A.
                        Table 7: Synthetic Control Estimates of the Effects of Corporate Tax Cuts on Income Inequality

                                    Top 10     Top 5   Top 1     Top 05     Top 01     Top 001    Top 10       Top 5       Top 1      Top 05      Top 01      Top 001
      post treat                    0.237∗∗   0.229∗∗ 0.327∗∗∗   0.218∗∗∗   0.180∗∗∗   0.115∗∗∗   0.263∗∗     0.271∗∗∗    0.375∗∗∗    0.259∗∗∗    0.217∗∗∗    0.140∗∗∗
                                    (0.115)   (0.108) (0.094)    (0.084)    (0.068)    (0.043)    (0.113)     (0.103)     (0.087)     (0.077)     (0.062)     (0.038)

      GDP Per Capita                                                                               1.046       1.588       1.881       1.456       1.371       0.911
                                                                                                  (0.770)     (1.113)     (1.179)     (1.065)     (0.918)     (0.599)

      Population Growth                                                                           -8.050∗∗    -11.948∗∗   -14.825∗∗   -12.319∗∗   -11.386∗∗   -7.584∗∗
                                                                                                  (4.035)      (5.831)     (6.176)     (5.582)     (4.809)    (3.137)

      Share of GDP in Finance                                                                      0.020       0.174       0.002       0.007       -0.045      -0.021
                                                                                                  (0.359)     (0.519)     (0.550)     (0.497)     (0.428)     (0.279)

      Log Output Gap                                                                               0.523       0.791       0.812       1.145       0.839       0.497
                                                                                                  (1.152)     (1.664)     (1.763)     (1.593)     (1.373)     (0.895)

      Government Size                                                                              0.456       0.480       0.908       0.876       0.831       0.523
                                                                                                  (0.544)     (0.786)     (0.832)     (0.752)     (0.648)     (0.423)
37




      Share of GDP in Military                                                                    -0.190∗      -0.244     -0.354∗∗    -0.351∗∗    -0.312∗∗    -0.197∗∗
                                                                                                  (0.104)     (0.150)     (0.159)     (0.144)     (0.124)     (0.081)

      Spillover GDP Per Capita                                                                    1.883∗∗∗     0.578       -0.775      -0.699      -0.935     -0.710∗
                                                                                                  (0.493)     (0.712)     (0.754)     (0.681)     (0.587)     (0.383)

      Unemployment Rate                                                                           -0.061∗∗∗   -0.108∗∗∗   -0.122∗∗∗   -0.100∗∗∗   -0.088∗∗∗   -0.060∗∗∗
                                                                                                   (0.021)     (0.030)     (0.032)     (0.029)     (0.025)     (0.016)

      Sales Apportionment                                                                          -0.004      -0.006     -0.007∗     -0.006∗     -0.005∗     -0.003∗
                                                                                                  (0.003)     (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.003)     (0.002)

      Personal Tax Rate                                                                            -0.010      -0.020      -0.015      -0.012      -0.010      -0.007
                                                                                                  (0.018)     (0.026)     (0.028)     (0.025)     (0.022)     (0.014)
      Observations                    300      300       300       300        300        300        300         300         300         300         300         300
      Year x Event Fixed Effects      Yes      Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
      State x Event Fixed Effects     Yes      Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
      Number of States                32       32        32        32         32         32          32          32          32          32          32          32
     Notes: Table 7 reports the results of implementing Equation 4 using a synthetic controls approach. Post X Tax Cut is an indicator equal to 1 in years
     t+1 to t+3 for states that had tax cuts, and 0 otherwise. Top X is the percent of income received by the top X%, where X is 10, 5, 1, 0.5, 0.1, or 0.01.
     p-values are reporter in parentheses. Standard errors are clustered at the state level. All variables are defined in Appendix A
     Table 8: Matching Estimates of the Effects of Corporate Tax Cuts on Income Inequality: Robustness to Alternative Measures of
     Income Inequality

                                                Theil     Gini   Root Mean Dev       Atkinson      Theil       Gini      Root Mean Dev     Atkinson
                Post X Tax Cut                  0.008    0.004∗∗     0.005∗∗           0.001       0.006     0.004∗∗∗       0.004∗∗∗         0.001
                                               (0.005)   (0.002)     (0.002)          (0.001)     (0.004)    (0.001)         (0.001)        (0.001)

                GDP Per Capita                                                                    0.581∗∗∗   0.245∗∗∗       0.292∗∗∗       0.086∗∗∗
                                                                                                  (0.063)    (0.021)        (0.025)        (0.010)

                Population Growth                                                                  0.248      0.007          -0.039          0.030
                                                                                                  (0.381)    (0.126)        (0.153)         (0.063)

                Share of GDP in Finance                                                            0.007      -0.012         -0.014          0.002
                                                                                                  (0.026)    (0.008)        (0.010)         (0.004)

                Log Output Gap                                                                   -0.579∗∗∗   -0.201∗∗∗      -0.242∗∗∗      -0.091∗∗∗
                                                                                                  (0.103)     (0.034)        (0.041)        (0.017)
38




                Government Size                                                                    0.073      0.016          0.023           0.011
                                                                                                  (0.051)    (0.017)        (0.021)         (0.008)

                Share of GDP in Military                                                           -0.004     -0.001         0.000           -0.000
                                                                                                  (0.009)    (0.003)        (0.004)         (0.001)

                Spillover GDP Per Capita                                                         -0.428∗∗∗   -0.143∗∗∗      -0.163∗∗∗      -0.052∗∗∗
                                                                                                  (0.038)     (0.012)        (0.015)        (0.006)

                Unemployment Rate                                                                  -0.002     -0.001         -0.001          -0.000
                                                                                                  (0.002)    (0.001)        (0.001)         (0.000)

                Sales Apportionment                                                                -0.000     -0.000         -0.000          -0.000
                                                                                                  (0.000)    (0.000)        (0.000)         (0.000)

                Personal Tax Rate                                                                 -0.005∗∗   -0.002∗∗∗      -0.003∗∗∗      -0.001∗∗
                                                                                                  (0.002)     (0.001)        (0.001)       (0.000)
                Observations                     300       300           300            300         300         300            300           300
                Year x Event Fixed Effects       Yes       Yes           Yes            Yes         Yes         Yes            Yes           Yes
                State x Event Fixed Effects      Yes       Yes           Yes            Yes         Yes         Yes            Yes           Yes
                Number of States                  32       32            32              32          32          32             32            32
     Notes: The results reported in Table 8 use seemingly unrelated regressions to examine how tax cuts impact alternative measures of income inequality.
     Post X Tax Cut is an indicator equal to 1 in years t+1 to t+3 for states that had tax cuts, and 0 otherwise. p-values are reporter in parentheses. Standard
     errors are clustered at the state level. All variables are defined in Appendix A
Appendices

A       Variable definitions
Variable name          Definition
                       Income inequality variables
Top 10                 Share of income held by the top 10% of the population
Top 5                  Share of income held by the top 5% of the population
Top 1                  Share of income held by the top 1% of the population
Top 0.5                Share of income held by the top 0.5% of the population
Top 0.1                Share of income held by the top 0.1% of the population
Top 0.01               Share of income held by the top 0.01% of the population
Theil                  The Theil Entropy Index (Frank, 2014)
Gini                   The Gini coefficient, defined as the average distance between all pairs of propor-
                       tional income in the state (Frank, 2014)
Relative Mean Dev      The average absolute distance between each individual’s income and the mean
                       income of the state (Frank, 2014)
Atkinson               The Atkinson Index (Frank, 2014)
                       Additional variables of interest
Corporate Rate         The state-level top corporate tax rate
Government Size        The natural log of the portion of GDP attributable to government scaled by total
                       population
Labor Force Partici-   The percentage of the working-age population that is employed
pation
AGI Bottom             Pre-tax aggregate gross income reported to the IRS by those earning less than
                       $200,000
AGI Top                Pre-tax aggregate gross income reported to the IRS by those earning more than
                       $200,000
AGI Total              Pre-tax aggregate gross income reported to the IRS by all tax filers
Salary Bottom          Salary and wage income reported to the IRS by those earning less than $200,000
Salary Top             Salary and wage income reported to the IRS by those earning more than
                       $200,000
Salary Total           Salary and wage income reported to the IRS by all tax filers



                                                 39
Variable name         Definition
Capital Income Bot-   Dividend, interest, rent, royalties, and entrepreneurial income reported to
tom                   the IRS by those earning less than $200,000
Capital Income Top    Dividend, interest, rent, royalties, and entrepreneurial income reported to
                      the IRS by those earning more than $200,000
Capital Income To-    Dividend, interest, rent, royalties, and entrepreneurial income reported to
tal                   the IRS by all tax filers
Investment            The natural log of total investment, measured at the industry-state level,
                      where industries correspond to 3-digit NAICS
                      Control variables
GDP Per Capita        The natural log of gross domestic product scaled by total population
Population Growth     The year-over-year percent change in population
Share of GDP in       The natural log of the portion of GDP attributable to the finance industry
Finance               scaled by total population
Log Output Gap        The natural log of the relative distance of GDP per capita to its filtered
                      value, calculated following Aghion et al. (2015) using an HP filter of λ equal
                      to 6.25
Share of GDP in       The natural log of the portion of GDP attributable to the military scaled by
Military              total population
Spillover GDP Per     The weighted value of the natural log of other states’ GDP Per Capita in
Capita                the prior year
Unemployment Rate     The percent of the working-age population that is unemployed and actively
                      seeking work
Sales Apportion-      The percent of taxes due on apportioned profit based on sales, as calculated
ment                  by Suárez Serrato and Zidar (2016)
Personal Tax Rate     The state personal income tax rate




                                             40
B                         Graph Appendix

                                 Figure A.1: Effects of Tax Cuts on Alternative Measures of Income Inequality


                                                      A. Atkin                                                                                               B. Gini
             .005




                                                                                                                   .015
                                                                                                                   .01
             .003




                                                                                                                         .005
   Effect of Tax Cut




                                                                                                           Effect of Tax Cut
               .001




                                                                                                                   0
     -.001




                                                                                                         -.005
             -.003




                                                                                                                   -.01
             -.005




                                                                                                                   -.015
                          -2                -1           0            1           2             3                               -2                -1           0            1           2             3
                                                               Year                                                                                                  Year

                               Specification:    Without Controls         95% Confidence Interval                                    Specification:    Without Controls         95% Confidence Interval
                                                 With Controls            95% Confidence Interval                                                      With Controls            95% Confidence Interval



                                     C. Relative Mean Deviation                                                                                             D. Theil
             .015




                                                                                                                   .03
             .01




                                                                                                                   .02
                   .005
     Effect of Tax Cut




                                                                                                          Effect of Tax Cut
                                                                                                                        .01
             0




                                                                                                                  0
   -.005




                                                                                                         -.01
             -.01




                                                                                                                   -.02
             -.015




                                                                                                                   -.03




                          -2                -1           0            1           2             3                               -2                -1           0            1           2             3
                                                               Year                                                                                                  Year

                               Specification:    Without Controls         95% Confidence Interval                                    Specification:    Without Controls         95% Confidence Interval
                                                 With Controls            95% Confidence Interval                                                      With Controls            95% Confidence Interval


Notes: Figure A.1 shows how tax cuts impact income inequality over time for alternative measures of income

inequality. Year 0 represents the year in which the treated state cuts its corporate tax rate.




                                                                                                    41
                                 Figure A.2: Effects of Tax Increases on Alternative Measures of Income Inequality


                                                             A. Atkin                                                                                                 B. Gini
                 .005




                                                                                                                           .01
                     .003




                                                                                                                                  .005
   Effect of Tax Cut




                                                                                                                Effect of Tax Cut
              .001




                                                                                                                             0
    -.001




                                                                                                                 -.005
                 -.003




                                                                                                                           -.01
                 -.005




                                                                                                                           -.015



                                 -2                -1           0            1           2             3                                 -2                -1           0            1           2             3
                                                                      Year                                                                                                    Year

                                      Specification:    Without Controls         95% Confidence Interval                                      Specification:    Without Controls         95% Confidence Interval
                                                        With Controls            95% Confidence Interval                                                        With Controls            95% Confidence Interval



                                            C. Relative Mean Deviation                                                                                               D. Theil
                 .01




                                                                                                                           .03
                                                                                                                           .02
                          .005




                                                                                                                               .01
        Effect of Tax Cut




                                                                                                                 Effect of Tax Cut
                0




                                                                                                                -.01     0
   -.005




                                                                                                                           -.02
                 -.01




                                                                                                                           -.03




                                 -2                -1           0            1           2             3                                 -2                -1           0            1           2             3
                                                                      Year                                                                                                    Year

                                      Specification:    Without Controls         95% Confidence Interval                                      Specification:    Without Controls         95% Confidence Interval
                                                        With Controls            95% Confidence Interval                                                        With Controls            95% Confidence Interval


Notes: Figure A.2 shows how tax increases impact income inequality over time for alternative measures of

income inequality. Year 0 represents the year in which the treated state cuts its corporate tax rate.




                                                                                                           42
                  Figure A.3: Probability Density Function of Coefficients in Placebo Test for Tax Cuts

                                                    A. Top 0.01                                                                                                  B. Top 0.1
                                                                                           Actual Estimate
            10




                                                                                                                        8
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Actual Estimate
            8




                                                                                                                        6
   Empirical Density




                                                                                                               Empirical Density
               6




                                                                                                                      4
     4




                                                                                                                        2
            2
            0




                                                                                                                        0
                        -.2                  -.1                  0                   .1                  .2                       -.33          -.23       -.13       -.03       .07             .17                .27           .37
                                                     Estimated Placebo Estimate                                                                                Estimated Placebo Estimate
                        kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 0.0106                                                                  kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 0.0137



                                                      C. Top 0.5                           Actual Estimate                                                         D. Top 1                              Actual Estimate




                                                                                                                        6
            6
    Empirical Density




                                                                                                               Empirical Density
                                                                                                                             4
                  4




                                                                                                               2
   2        0




                                                                                                                        0




                        -.42     -.32       -.22      -.12     -.02    .08      .18        .28      .38                            -.56   -.46     -.36   -.26    -.16 -.06 .04      .14    .24         .34         .44     .54
                                                     Estimated Placebo Estimate                                                                                  Estimated Placebo Estimate
                        kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 0.0151                                                                  kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 0.0147



                                                        E. Top 5                                                                                                  F. Top 10
                                                                                           Actual Estimate                                                                                                Actual Estimate
            6




                                                                                                                        6
   Empirical Density




                                                                                                               Empirical Density
                   4




                                                                                                                               4
   2




                                                                                                               2
            0




                                                                                                                        0




                        -.47    -.37     -.27      -.17    -.07    .03     .13    .23       .33     .43                            -.65 -.55 -.45 -.35 -.25 -.15 -.05 .05 .15 .25                 .35         .45     .55    .65
                                                     Estimated Placebo Estimate                                                                           Estimated Placebo Estimate
                        kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 0.0163                                                                  kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 0.0170




Notes: Figure A.3 reports the probability density function of the coefficient on Post X Tax Cut for placebo tests
for all measures of income inequality. The placebo tests consist of assigning a random non-tax-cut year to each
treated state and treating that year as if it were the actual year in which the state had its first tax cut. This
state-year is matched with a control state using the methodology described in Section 5.1. Next, we run Equation
3.2 using the as-if tax cut year. This simulation is run 43
                                                          1,000 times for each coefficient, and the PDF is reported
here. The vertical line identifies where the actual coefficient values from Table 3 (Columns (7) - (12)) fall within
  Figure A.4: Probability Density Function of Coefficients in Placebo Test for Tax Increases
                 A.
                  ActualTop    0.01
                        Estimate                             Actual Estimate B. Top 0.1
           25




                                                                                                                          15
           20




                                                                                                                               10
  Empirical Density




                                                                                                                 Empirical Density
    10        15




                                                                                                                 5
           5
           0




                                                                                                                          0
                                                        -.03                           .07                                                         -.14              -.04            .06             .16
                                                   Estimated Placebo Estimate                                                                                    Estimated Placebo Estimate
                      kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 0.0043                                                                      kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 0.0069



                                                    C. Top 0.5                                                                       Actual Estimate                 D. Top 1
           15




                                                                                                                          10
                      Actual Estimate

                                                                                                                          8
                 10
  Empirical Density




                                                                                                                 Empirical Density
                                                                                                                   4        6
  5




                                                                                                                          2
           0




                                                                                                                          0




                      -.33        -.23           -.13       -.03       .07       .17           .27         .37                       -.5     -.4      -.3      -.2    -.1     0     .1     .2   .3         .4   .5
                                                    Estimated Placebo Estimate                                                                                   Estimated Placebo Estimate
                      kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 0.0087                                                                      kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 0.0097



                      Actual Estimate                 E. Top 5                                                                                                      F. Top 10
                                                                                                                                     Actual Estimate
                                                                                                                          10
           10




                                                                                                                          8
           8
  Empirical Density




                                                                                                                 Empirical Density
                                                                                                                             6
              6




                                                                                                                   4
    4




                                                                                                                          2
           2
           0




                                                                                                                          0




                      -.41     -.31       -.21      -.11     -.01    .09      .19        .29         .39                             -.76 -.66 -.56 -.46 -.36 -.26 -.16 -.06 .04 .14 .24 .34 .44 .54 .64 .74
                                                   Estimated Placebo Estimate                                                                                  Estimated Placebo Estimate
                      kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 0.0101                                                                      kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 0.0111



Notes: Figure A.4 reports the probability density function of the coefficient on Post X Tax Increase
for placebo tests for all measures of income inequality. The placebo tests consist of assigning a random
non-tax-cut year to each treated state and treating that year as if it were the actual year in which
the state had its first tax cut. This state-year is matched with a control state using the methodology
described in Section 5.1. Next, we run Equation 3.2 using the as-if tax cut year. This simulation is
run 1,000 times for each coefficient, and the CDF is reported here. The vertical line identifies where
                                                    44
the actual coefficient values from Table 4 (Columns (7) - (12)) fall within the distributions.
C   Table Appendix




                     45
       Table A.1: Difference-in-Differences Estimates of the Effects of Corporate Taxes on Alternative Measures of Income Inequality

                                               Theil       Gini    Root Mean Dev    Atkinson      Theil       Gini      Root Mean Dev Atkinson
                Corporate Rate               -0.017∗∗∗    -0.000      -0.002∗∗∗     -0.003∗∗∗   -0.016∗∗∗    -0.001        -0.003∗∗∗  -0.003∗∗∗
                                              (0.002)    (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.000)     (0.002)    (0.001)         (0.001)    (0.000)

                GDP Per Capita                                                                  0.043∗∗∗     -0.001         0.004         0.008∗∗∗
                                                                                                (0.015)     (0.004)        (0.005)        (0.003)

                Population Growth                                                                0.303∗∗    -0.096∗∗∗      -0.125∗∗∗      0.042∗
                                                                                                 (0.121)     (0.030)        (0.041)       (0.023)

                Share of GDP in Finance                                                           -0.003     0.000          -0.000         -0.001
                                                                                                 (0.008)    (0.002)        (0.003)        (0.002)

                Log Output Gap                                                                    -0.005     -0.007         -0.013         -0.003
                                                                                                 (0.042)    (0.011)        (0.014)        (0.008)

                Government Size                                                                   -0.018    0.014∗∗∗       0.018∗∗∗        -0.001
46




                                                                                                 (0.015)    (0.004)        (0.005)        (0.003)

                Share of GDP in Military                                                          0.003      0.000          0.001          0.001
                                                                                                 (0.003)    (0.001)        (0.001)        (0.001)

                Spillover GDP Per Capita                                                        0.026∗∗∗     0.068         0.042∗∗∗        0.024
                                                                                                (0.010)     (0.106)        (0.003)        (0.027)

                Unemployment Rate                                                               -0.003∗∗∗   0.001∗∗∗       0.001∗∗∗       -0.000∗∗
                                                                                                 (0.001)    (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.000)

                Sales Apportionment                                                              -0.000∗    0.000∗∗∗       0.000∗∗∗        -0.000
                                                                                                 (0.000)    (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.000)

                Personal Tax Rate                                                                 0.001     0.000∗         0.001∗∗         0.000
                                                                                                 (0.001)    (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.000)
                Observations                   1250       1250         1250            1250       1250       1250           1250           1250
                Year Fixed Effects             Yes        Yes          Yes             Yes         Yes        Yes            Yes            Yes
                State Fixed Effects            Yes        Yes          Yes             Yes         Yes        Yes            Yes            Yes
                Number of States                50         50           50              50          50         50             50             50
     Notes: Table A.1 documents the relation between tax changes and alternative measures of income inequality for the full sample of state-years estimated
     using the specification in Equation 3. Corporate Rate is the top marginal corporate tax rate in the state. p-values are reporter in parentheses. Standard
     errors are clustered at the state level. All variables are defined in Appendix A
 Table A.2: Differences in means for the treatment and control groups for the tax cut sample


                                                   Control   Treatment      Difference/SE
                   Top 10                           39.40      40.10             -0.701
                                                                                (0.647)
                   Top 5                            28.05       28.66            -0.615
                                                                                (0.674)
                   Top 1                            14.16       14.49            -0.327
                                                                                (0.559)
                   Top 0.5                          10.72       10.97            -0.252
                                                                                (0.495)
                   Top 0.1                          5.833       5.986            -0.153
                                                                                (0.351)
                   Top 0.01                         2.393       2.455           -0.0621
                                                                                (0.193)
                   GDP Per Capita                   10.21       10.22          -0.00513
                                                                               (0.0581)
                   Population Growth               0.00608     0.00643        -0.000354
                                                                              (0.00147)
                   Share of GDP in Finance          8.433       8.448           -0.0146
                                                                               (0.0790)
                   Log Output Gap                  0.00160    0.000902        0.000703
                                                                              (0.00283)
                   Government Size                  8.260       8.226            0.0334
                                                                               (0.0830)
                   Share of GDP in Military         5.831       5.740            0.0911
                                                                                (0.134)
                   Spillover GDP Per Capita         14.11       14.11        0.0000857
                                                                               (0.0437)
                   Unemployment Rate                5.627       5.877            -0.251
                                                                                (0.268)
Notes: Table A.2 describes the differences in means for all variables of interest for the treatment and control
groups for years t-3 to t-1, where treatment is having a tax cut.




                                                      47
Table A.3: Differences in means for the treatment and control groups for the tax increase sam-
ple


                                                   Control   Treatment      Difference/SE
                   Top 10                           40.36      41.20             -0.840
                                                                                (0.876)
                   Top 5                            28.66       29.66            -1.002
                                                                                (0.932)
                   Top 1                            14.75       15.55            -0.805
                                                                                (0.775)
                   Top 0.5                          11.16       11.82            -0.661
                                                                                (0.678)
                   Top 0.1                          6.239       6.610            -0.371
                                                                                (0.480)
                   Top 0.01                         2.596       2.755            -0.158
                                                                                (0.259)
                   GDP Per Capita                   10.15       10.24           -0.0863
                                                                               (0.0678)
                   Population Growth               0.00618     0.00634        -0.000155
                                                                              (0.00147)
                   Share of GDP in Finance          8.309       8.416            -0.107
                                                                               (0.1000)
                   Log Output Gap                  0.00870     0.00732         0.00138
                                                                              (0.00265)
                   Government Size                  8.108       8.241            -0.133
                                                                               (0.0792)
                   Share of GDP in Military         5.574       5.753            -0.179
                                                                                (0.135)
                   Spillover GDP Per Capita         14.13       14.13          0.00227
                                                                               (0.0510)
                   Unemployment Rate                5.176       4.862             0.314
                                                                                (0.262)
Notes: Table A.3 describes the differences in means for all variables of interest for the treatment and control
groups for years t-3 to t-1, where treatment is having a tax increase.




                                                      48
       Table A.4: Dynamic analysis of the relation between tax cuts and income inequality



                               Top 10      Top 5     Top 1    Top 05    Top 01 Top 001      Top 10        Top 5       Top 1       Top 0.5     Top 0.1     Top 0.01
 Year -2                        0.037      -0.022    -0.047    -0.154    -0.164  -0.107      0.088        0.034       0.017        -0.085      -0.115       -0.081
                               (0.303)    (0.281)   (0.264)   (0.256)   (0.196) (0.118)     (0.238)      (0.212)     (0.199)      (0.188)     (0.149)      (0.094)

 Year -1                        -0.296     -0.244    -0.202    -0.200    -0.174    -0.094    -0.319       -0.264      -0.213       -0.217      -0.185      -0.100
                               (0.303)    (0.281)   (0.264)   (0.256)   (0.196)   (0.118)   (0.237)      (0.211)     (0.198)      (0.188)     (0.149)     (0.094)

 Year +1                        -0.137     -0.207    0.004     -0.094    -0.087    -0.061    -0.258       -0.333      -0.091       -0.220      -0.171      -0.106
                               (0.303)    (0.281)   (0.264)   (0.256)   (0.196)   (0.118)   (0.238)      (0.213)     (0.200)      (0.189)     (0.150)     (0.094)

 Year +2                       0.663∗∗    0.502∗    0.523∗∗   0.440∗     0.245     0.127    0.652∗∗∗     0.479∗∗     0.517∗∗∗     0.416∗∗      0.231       0.120
                               (0.303)    (0.281)   (0.264)   (0.256)   (0.196)   (0.118)   (0.238)      (0.212)     (0.199)      (0.189)     (0.150)     (0.094)

 Year +3                       0.861∗∗∗   0.674∗∗   0.665∗∗   0.449∗    0.399∗∗   0.251∗∗   0.973∗∗∗    0.765∗∗∗     0.751∗∗∗    0.538∗∗∗     0.462∗∗∗    0.286∗∗∗
                               (0.303)    (0.281)   (0.264)   (0.256)   (0.196)   (0.118)   (0.241)     (0.216)      (0.203)     (0.192)      (0.152)     (0.095)

 GDP Per Capita                                                                             7.358∗∗∗    9.388∗∗∗     9.374∗∗∗    8.548∗∗∗     6.605∗∗∗    3.704∗∗∗
                                                                                            (2.206)     (2.080)      (1.929)     (1.899)      (1.398)     (0.790)

 Population Growth                                                                            4.623       1.078        5.713       7.107       4.868       2.638
                                                                                            (13.071)    (12.324)     (11.430)    (11.248)     (8.282)     (4.679)

 Share of GDP in Finance                                                                    3.196∗∗∗    2.614∗∗∗     1.849∗∗     2.187∗∗∗     1.505∗∗∗    0.849∗∗∗
                                                                                            (0.899)     (0.848)      (0.786)     (0.774)      (0.570)     (0.322)

 Log Output Gap                                                                             -9.979∗∗∗   -10.669∗∗∗   -9.885∗∗∗   -8.531∗∗∗    -6.734∗∗∗   -3.853∗∗∗
                                                                                             (3.579)      (3.375)     (3.130)     (3.080)      (2.268)     (1.281)

 Government Size                                                                            4.756∗∗∗     4.464∗∗     4.530∗∗∗    4.910∗∗∗     3.446∗∗∗    1.891∗∗∗
                                                                                            (1.843)      (1.738)     (1.611)     (1.586)      (1.168)     (0.660)

 Share of GDP in Military                                                                    0.163        0.190       -0.046       0.264       0.111       0.049
                                                                                            (0.307)      (0.289)     (0.268)      (0.264)     (0.194)     (0.110)

 Spillover GDP Per Capita                                                                   -7.786∗∗∗   -9.558∗∗∗    -9.919∗∗∗   -10.186∗∗∗   -7.608∗∗∗   -4.280∗∗∗
                                                                                             (1.285)     (1.211)      (1.124)      (1.106)     (0.814)     (0.460)

 Unemployment Rate                                                                           -0.066       -0.033      -0.032       0.002       -0.009      -0.008
                                                                                            (0.068)      (0.064)     (0.059)      (0.058)     (0.043)     (0.024)

 Sales Apportionment                                                                         -0.005       -0.006      -0.005       -0.004      -0.003      -0.002
                                                                                            (0.007)      (0.007)     (0.006)      (0.006)     (0.005)     (0.003)

 Personal Tax Rate                                                                          -0.207∗∗∗   -0.196∗∗∗    -0.163∗∗∗   -0.176∗∗∗    -0.124∗∗∗   -0.069∗∗∗
                                                                                             (0.072)     (0.068)      (0.063)     (0.062)      (0.046)     (0.026)
 Observations                    300       300       300       300       300       300         300         300          300         300          300         300
 Year x Event Fixed Effects      Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes
 State x Event Fixed Effects     Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes.
 Number of States                32        32        32        32        32        32           32          32           32          32           32          32

Notes: Table A.4 reports how tax cuts impact income inequality over time by examining year-by-year changes
in income inequality around tax cuts using the matched sample. To estimate the overtime effects of tax cuts on
income inequality, we create indicator variables for each year around a tax cut. These variables are equal to 1 for
the treated state and 0 for the control state. Top X is the percent of income received by the top X%, where X is
10, 5, 1, 0.5, 0.1, or 0.01. p-values are reporter in parentheses. Standard errors are clustered at the state level.
All variables are defined in Appendix A




                                                                           49
   Table A.5: Dynamic analysis of the relation between tax increases and income inequality



                               Top 10      Top 5     Top 1    Top 05    Top 01 Top 001      Top 10      Top 5      Top 1 Top 0.5      Top 0.1   Top 0.01
 Year -2                        0.295      0.254     0.374     0.315     0.195   0.091       0.271      0.228      0.345   0.289       0.185      0.086
                               (0.246)    (0.241)   (0.237)   (0.203)   (0.164) (0.107)     (0.238)    (0.227)    (0.225) (0.191)     (0.157)    (0.102)

 Year -1                       0.493∗∗     0.358    0.447∗     0.330     0.229     0.120    0.481∗∗     0.337     0.439∗    0.323∗     0.226     0.118
                               (0.246)    (0.241)   (0.237)   (0.203)   (0.164)   (0.107)   (0.237)    (0.227)    (0.224)   (0.191)   (0.157)   (0.102)

 Year +1                       -0.524∗∗    -0.368   -0.399∗    -0.315    -0.203    -0.117   -0.517∗∗    -0.367    -0.381∗    -0.294    -0.197    -0.116
                               (0.246)    (0.241)   (0.237)   (0.203)   (0.164)   (0.107)   (0.238)    (0.228)    (0.226)   (0.192)   (0.158)   (0.103)

 Year +2                        -0.238     -0.013    -0.015    0.062     0.171     0.155     -0.232     -0.022     0.013     0.094     0.182     0.157
                               (0.246)    (0.241)   (0.237)   (0.203)   (0.164)   (0.107)   (0.239)    (0.229)    (0.227)   (0.193)   (0.159)   (0.103)

 Year +3                       -0.450∗     -0.137    -0.122    -0.013    0.080     0.077    -0.435∗     -0.142     -0.079    0.031     0.099     0.083
                               (0.246)    (0.241)   (0.237)   (0.203)   (0.164)   (0.107)   (0.239)    (0.229)    (0.226)   (0.193)   (0.158)   (0.103)

 GDP Per Capita                                                                             -1.957∗∗   -2.606∗∗    -1.413    -0.961    -0.243    -0.117
                                                                                            (0.994)    (1.194)    (1.178)   (1.022)   (0.752)   (0.480)

 Population Growth                                                                           2.093      0.205      4.559     4.164     1.895     0.873
                                                                                            (4.917)    (5.908)    (5.829)   (5.059)   (3.720)   (2.377)

 Share of GDP in Finance                                                                    0.889∗     1.260∗∗    1.094∗    0.967∗     0.523     0.278
                                                                                            (0.513)    (0.617)    (0.609)   (0.528)   (0.388)   (0.248)

 Log Output Gap                                                                             3.396∗     3.900∗     3.532∗     2.907     1.506     0.827
                                                                                            (1.773)    (2.130)    (2.102)   (1.824)   (1.341)   (0.857)

 Government Size                                                                             -0.317     -0.847     0.102     0.074     -0.030    -0.134
                                                                                            (0.603)    (0.725)    (0.715)   (0.620)   (0.456)   (0.292)

 Share of GDP in Military                                                                    -0.037     0.057      -0.102    -0.058    -0.003    0.017
                                                                                            (0.124)    (0.149)    (0.147)   (0.128)   (0.094)   (0.060)

 Spillover GDP Per Capita                                                                   4.021∗∗∗   3.760∗∗∗   1.452∗     0.955     0.363     0.191
                                                                                            (0.693)    (0.833)    (0.822)   (0.713)   (0.524)   (0.335)

 Unemployment Rate                                                                           -0.000     0.006      -0.003    -0.005    0.002     0.003
                                                                                            (0.036)    (0.044)    (0.043)   (0.037)   (0.027)   (0.018)

 Sales Apportionment                                                                         -0.001     -0.003     0.001     0.001     0.000     -0.000
                                                                                            (0.002)    (0.003)    (0.003)   (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.001)

 Personal Tax Rate                                                                           0.014      0.034      -0.013    -0.025    -0.012    -0.003
                                                                                            (0.030)    (0.036)    (0.035)   (0.031)   (0.023)   (0.014)
 Observations                    264       264       264       264       264       264        264        264        264       264       264       264
 Year x Event Fixed Effects      Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes
 State x Event Fixed Effects     Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes.
 Number of States                34        34        34        34        34        34          34         34         34        34        34        34

Notes: Table A.5 reports how tax increases impact income inequality over time by examining year-by-year
changes in income inequality around tax increases using the matched sample. To estimate the overtime effects
of tax increases on income inequality, we create indicator variables for each year around a tax increase. These
variables are equal to 1 for the treated state and 0 for the control state. Top X is the percent of income received
by the top X%, where X is 10, 5, 1, 0.5, 0.1, or 0.01. p-values are reporter in parentheses. Standard errors are
clustered at the state level. All variables are defined in Appendix A




                                                                        50
Table A.6: Dynamic analysis of the relation between tax cuts and alternative measures of in-
come inequality



                                Theil     Gini   Root Mean Dev   Atkinson    Theil       Gini       Root Mean Dev   Atkinson
 Year -2                        -0.008    0.001       -0.002       -0.001    -0.005      0.002           -0.001       -0.001
                               (0.009)   (0.003)     (0.004)      (0.002)   (0.007)     (0.002)         (0.002)      (0.001)

 Year -1                        -0.009    -0.002     -0.004       -0.002     -0.009      -0.002        -0.004∗      -0.002∗
                               (0.009)   (0.003)    (0.004)      (0.002)    (0.007)     (0.002)        (0.002)      (0.001)

 Year +1                        -0.007    0.002      -0.000       -0.002     -0.009      0.001          -0.002      -0.002∗
                               (0.009)   (0.003)    (0.004)      (0.002)    (0.007)     (0.002)        (0.002)      (0.001)

 Year +2                        0.001     0.005      0.003        0.000      0.000      0.004∗∗         0.003        0.000
                               (0.009)   (0.003)    (0.004)      (0.002)    (0.007)     (0.002)        (0.002)      (0.001)

 Year +3                        0.012    0.005∗      0.005        0.002     0.014∗∗     0.005∗∗∗       0.006∗∗      0.002∗
                               (0.009)   (0.003)    (0.004)      (0.002)    (0.007)     (0.002)        (0.002)      (0.001)

 GDP Per Capita                                                             0.550∗∗∗    0.236∗∗∗       0.279∗∗∗     0.081∗∗∗
                                                                            (0.065)     (0.021)        (0.026)      (0.011)

 Population Growth                                                           0.207       -0.001         -0.052       0.023
                                                                            (0.386)     (0.126)        (0.153)      (0.064)

 Share of GDP in Finance                                                     0.032       -0.007         -0.005       0.006
                                                                            (0.027)     (0.009)        (0.011)      (0.004)

 Log Output Gap                                                             -0.557∗∗∗   -0.191∗∗∗      -0.231∗∗∗    -0.088∗∗∗
                                                                             (0.106)     (0.034)        (0.042)      (0.018)

 Government Size                                                            0.126∗∗     0.030∗         0.042∗∗      0.020∗∗
                                                                            (0.054)     (0.018)        (0.022)      (0.009)

 Share of GDP in Military                                                    -0.003      -0.001         0.000        -0.000
                                                                            (0.009)     (0.003)        (0.004)      (0.002)

 Spillover GDP Per Capita                                                   -0.453∗∗∗   -0.148∗∗∗      -0.171∗∗∗    -0.056∗∗∗
                                                                             (0.038)     (0.012)        (0.015)      (0.006)

 Unemployment Rate                                                           -0.002      -0.001         -0.001       -0.000
                                                                            (0.002)     (0.001)        (0.001)      (0.000)

 Sales Apportionment                                                         -0.000      -0.000         -0.000       -0.000
                                                                            (0.000)     (0.000)        (0.000)      (0.000)

 Personal Tax Rate                                                          -0.006∗∗∗   -0.002∗∗∗      -0.003∗∗∗    -0.001∗∗
                                                                             (0.002)     (0.001)        (0.001)     (0.000)
 Observations                   300       300        300           300         300         300            300         300
 Year x Event Fixed Effects     Yes       Yes        Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes            Yes         Yes
 State x Event Fixed Effects    Yes       Yes        Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes            Yes         Yes
 Number of States               32        32         32            32           32          32             32          32
Notes: Table A.6 reports how tax cuts impact alternative measures of income inequality over time by examining
year-by-year changes in income inequality around tax cuts using the matched sample and seemingly unrelated
regressions. To estimate the overtime effects of tax cuts on income inequality, we create indicator variables for
each year around a tax cut. These variables are equal to 1 for the treated state and 0 for the control state.
p-values are reporter in parentheses. Standard errors are clustered at the state level. All variables are defined in
Appendix A

                                                           51
                                    Table A.7: Tax increase robustness check with seemingly unrelated regressions

                                                 Theil   Gini         Root Mean Dev       Atkinson     Theil      Gini      Root Mean Dev      Atkinson
                Post X Tax Increase              0.001 -0.008∗∗∗         -0.003∗∗           -0.001     0.001    -0.008∗∗∗      -0.003∗∗          -0.001
                                                (0.005) (0.002)           (0.001)          (0.001)    (0.004)    (0.002)        (0.001)         (0.001)

                GDP Per Capita                                                                         0.020      0.003          -0.017          -0.002
                                                                                                      (0.042)    (0.019)        (0.011)         (0.007)

                Population Growth                                                                      -0.136    0.197∗∗         -0.045          -0.032
                                                                                                      (0.206)    (0.092)        (0.056)         (0.033)

                Share of GDP in Finance                                                                0.031      -0.005         -0.006          0.004
                                                                                                      (0.022)    (0.010)        (0.006)         (0.003)

                Log Output Gap                                                                         0.037      0.003          0.025           0.011
                                                                                                      (0.075)    (0.033)        (0.020)         (0.012)

                Government Size                                                                        -0.026   0.032∗∗∗         -0.009          -0.005
52




                                                                                                      (0.026)   (0.011)         (0.007)         (0.004)

                Share of GDP in Military                                                              0.009∗ -0.007∗∗∗           0.000          0.001∗
                                                                                                      (0.005) (0.002)           (0.001)         (0.001)

                Spillover GDP Per Capita                                                               0.026     0.026∗∗        0.076∗∗∗        0.020∗∗∗
                                                                                                      (0.029)    (0.013)        (0.008)         (0.005)

                Unemployment Rate                                                                      -0.000     0.001          0.000           -0.000
                                                                                                      (0.002)    (0.001)        (0.000)         (0.000)

                Sales Apportionment                                                                    -0.000     0.000          0.000           -0.000
                                                                                                      (0.000)    (0.000)        (0.000)         (0.000)

                Personal Tax Rate                                                                      -0.000     0.001          0.000           -0.000
                                                                                                      (0.001)    (0.001)        (0.000)         (0.000)
                Observations                      264        264             264             264        264        264            264             264
                Year x Event Fixed Effects        Yes        Yes             Yes             Yes        Yes        Yes            Yes             Yes
                State x Event Fixed Effects       Yes        Yes             Yes             Yes        Yes        Yes            Yes             Yes
                Number of States                   34         34             34               34         34         34             34              34
     Notes: Table A.7 reports how tax increases impact alternative measures of income inequality over time by examining year-by-year changes in income
     inequality around tax increases using the matched sample and seemingly unrelated regressions. To estimate the overtime effects of tax increases on income
     inequality, we create indicator variables for each year around a tax increase. These variables are equal to 1 for the treated state and 0 for the control state.
     p-values are reporter in parentheses. Standard errors are clustered at the state level. All variables are defined in Appendix A
