                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             DEATH OF THE SALESMAN, BUT NOT THE SALES FORCE:
           HOW INTERESTED PROMOTION SKEWS SCIENTIFIC VALUATION

                                        Pierre Azoulay
                                      J. Michael Wahlen
                                   Ezra W. Zuckerman Sivan

                                      Working Paper 24591
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24591


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                           May 2018, Revised September 2019




Previously circulated as “Death of the Salesman, but not the Sales Force: Reputational
Entrepreneurship and the Valuation of Scientific Achievement.” All authors contributed equally.
Azoulay acknowledges the financial support of the National Science Foundation through its
SciSIP Program (Award SBE-1735413). The results presented in the article leverage data
provided by the Association of American Medical Colleges (“AAMC”). The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the position or policy of the AAMC.
The National Institutes of Health partially supports the AAMC Faculty Roster under contract
75N94019C00007, and the authors express their appreciation to Dr. Hershel Alexander (AAMC
Director of Data Operations and Services) for his support in providing access to the AAMC
Faculty Roster data. We thank Angela Lu, Freda Lynn, Cat Turco, and Arnout van de Rijt, as
well as seminar audiences at MIT, Columbia University, University of Pennsylvania, and USC
Marshall for useful discussions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Pierre Azoulay, J. Michael Wahlen, and Ezra W. Zuckerman Sivan. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Death of the Salesman, But Not the Sales Force: How Interested Promotion Skews Scientific
Valuation
Pierre Azoulay, J. Michael Wahlen, and Ezra W. Zuckerman Sivan
NBER Working Paper No. 24591
May 2018, Revised September 2019
JEL No. I23,O31

                                            ABSTRACT

Whereas recent research has demonstrated how disinterested social validation may skew
valuation in meritocratic domains, interested promotion may be at least as important a factor. As
suggested by research on reputational entrepreneurship, a producer's death shifts promotion
opportunities in two respects. First, it prevents the producer (or “salesman”) from engaging in
promotional activity. Second, it also mobilizes others (the “sales force”) to step up their
promotional activity on behalf of the deceased. Analysis of the impact made by the premature
death of 720 elite life scientists on the citation trajectories of their articles indicates that death
results in a long-lasting, positive increase in citation rates, relative to the trajectories for
equivalent articles by counterfactual, still-living scientists. This effect seems due largely to the
memorialization efforts made by the sales force as compared to recognition efforts on behalf of
the still-living scientists, and is strongest for articles that had received relatively little attention
prior to the death, as well as those authored by stars who died at a relatively young age. The
upshot is clear evidence of informational inefficiency, which derives from the challenges of
absorbing the massive volume of scientific knowledge produced. Scientists' identities thus play
an important role in determining scientific valuations, despite ostensible norms that enjoin the
scientific community to divorce the researcher's identity from her work.

Pierre Azoulay                                     Ezra W. Zuckerman Sivan
MIT Sloan School of Management                     Massachusetts Institute of Technology
100 Main Street, E62-487                           ewzucker@mit.edu
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
pazoulay@mit.edu

J. Michael Wahlen
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-365
Cambridge, MA 02142
jmwahlen@mit.edu
                                                                             You have no control:
                                                                                        Who lives
                                                                                         Who dies
                                                                             Who tells your story?
                                                                          Lin-Manuel Miranda
                                                            Hamilton: An American Musical (2015)




1     Introduction
    While it may seem obvious that buyers should not “judge a book by its cover,” sellers’
promotional efforts continue apace, in the apparently reasonable expectation that buyers will
struggle and often fail to discount the seller’s biases. This struggle is especially salient in
meritocratic domains, those governed and justified by strong norms enjoining participants
to ignore social and physical cues and instead to assess products and producers purely on
the basis of underlying quality. Consider science as the quintessential meritocratic domain,
marked by widespread deference to the norms of “universalism” and “disinterestedness”
(Merton 1979). Consider too that an important way of judging the health of a scientific
field is whether it is informationally efficient: when scientific advances are made (according
to the criteria of the field’s dominant paradigm, however imperfect it may be), are they
recognized as such and does this recognition diffuse quickly? If some scientific papers owe
their recognition not to the underlying quality of the work but to the fact that they benefited
from more effective promotion, this would defy meritocratic norms and hinder informational
efficiency. At the limit, if science were just about who had access to the biggest promotional
platform and/or used it most cleverly, public confidence in science would be misplaced.

    The question of whether such interested promotion of science limits the efficiency of
scientific valuation can be better appreciated in the context of recent research on disinterested
validation in meritocratic domains (see especially Azoulay et al. 2014; Salganik et al. 2006;
Simcoe and Waguespack 2011; van de Rijt 2019). Common to research on this type of social
cue are three insights. First, given the widespread challenge of distinguishing higher quality
products and producers as well as the common need to coordinate on the basis of quality
(Correll et al. 2017), third-parties naturally emerge in meritocratic domains to aggregate
and publicize informed assessments of quality (Zuckerman 1999; Espeland and Sauder 2007).
Second, even when these assessments are produced in a disinterested manner—e.g., by expert
panels (Azoulay et al. 2014; Simcoe and Waguespack 2011) or by anonymous peers (Salganik


                                               1
et al. 2006; van de Rijt 2019), they can skew valuations to produce informational inefficiency.
In particular, when recognition is bestowed on one product/producer before it is bestowed
on an equivalent one, the former may benefit from a “Matthew Effect,” whereby the initial
validation skews subsequent sampling, evaluation, and investment patterns. Finally, such
advantages can be empirically identified via counterfactuals derived from situations where
the same evaluative standards are used but disinterested validation of some products is higher
for reasons that are unrelated to quality. This can occur either because (i) an experimenter
has subdivided a population into sub-populations, and public quality assessments of the
very same products happen in a different sequence in each sub-population (Salganik et al.
2006; van de Rijt 2019); or (ii) an agent can only validate the quality of a limited number
of products, thus entailing that a subset of equivalent products will have the bad fortune
of not being validated (Azoulay et al. 2014; Bol et al. 2018). Overall, these studies have
produced clear evidence of informational inefficiency, though it is hardly overwhelming in its
magnitude.

   But insofar as disinterested validation of these varieties are distinct from the types of
efforts at interested promotion mentioned above, it is unclear whether the latter type of
social cue might also skew valuation and produce unfair advantage. On the one hand, the
norm of “disinterestedness” enjoins scientists and scientific institutions to sanction scientists
for attempting to boost the value of their work for personal gain (Merton 1942: 124). Ac-
cordingly, self-citations are often eliminated when assessing scientific contributions as they
are thought to be biased. Yet given the overwhelming volume of scientific research that is
produced and the career stakes involved in gaining recognition, it is hardly surprising that
scientists may be seen promoting their work in a wide variety of ways—on their vitae, on
their web sites, at academic conferences, in the introductions to their papers, etc.

   Moreover, there is reason to think that such efforts at interested promotion can influence
the reception of science despite widespread fealty to the norm of disinterestedness and efforts
to enforce it. In short, it is often difficult and even undesirable for scientists to treat interested
promotion as biased. In particular, those with the most interest in a given line of work are
often regarded as the most knowledgeable, and as having the greatest incentive to accurately
assess its quality (Li 2017; Teplitskiy et al. 2018). After all, it is generally a worrying
sign if a producer is not willing to stand by their work. A related consideration is that
scientific movements often require a critical mass of contributors to make progress; as such,
it is quite natural for scientists to promote work as a way of enlisting additional hands on


                                                  2
deck (Botelho 2018). Finally, even if it is reasonable to dismiss a scientist’s efforts at self-
promotion as irremediably biased, it is more questionable whether one should dismiss efforts
by the scientist’s colleagues on his behalf. The upshot is that interested promotion generally
falls into a normative gray area, making it difficult and often inadvisable to discount for its
influence.

   One implication of these considerations is to provide another basis for the Matthew Effect,
whereby effectiveness in the promotion of scientific work is increasing in a scientist’s status.
But it also suggests that we can gain distinctive insight into the efficiency of the scientific
valuation process by identifying contingencies that affect the manner and degree to which
scientific work is actively promoted. In particular, research on reputational entrepreneurship
in political and cultural contexts suggests that the death of a “producer”—i.e., an artist,
politician, or scientist—provides a unique window into how shifts in the opportunity structure
for interested promotion can have a significant impact on how the producer’s work is valued.

   This literature identifies two countervailing effects of a producer’s death on such opportu-
nities: on the one hand, death prevents the producer from playing the role of “salesman” in
publicizing and promoting himself and his products; but on the other hand, the producer’s
death can influence how other parties play the role of a “sales force” in publicizing and pro-
moting the producer’s work (Bromberg and Fine 2002: 1139). In some cases, the death of
the producer appears to have a negative effect on his legacy by eliminating the salesman. For
example, in accounting for why U.S. President Warren Harding is the “worst president of all
time” (Holmes and Elder 1989), Fine (1996) notes that Harding was a reasonably popular
and effective president during his lifetime; however, his early death in 1923 prevented him
from defending his reputation in the wake of the Teapot Dome scandal while his erstwhile
supporters had every incentive to let him take the blame. Yet while the death of the producer
can have a negative impact on his legacy, it can paradoxically have a positive effect insofar as
it mobilizes a sales force composed of people who were positively influenced by the producer
during her lifetime. Thus, Lang and Lang (1988) document how the sudden death of young
etchers mobilized friends and family to commemorate the œuvre of the deceased, thereby
making it less likely that the artist would be forgotten by the next generation. Fine (1996)
too contrasts Harding’s death with John F. Kennedy’s, showing that Kennedy’s supporters
commemorated his life and work to such an extent that he became one of America’s most
popular presidents after his death, despite a rather brief and controversial term as president.




                                               3
    What then is the impact of scientists’ deaths, especially the premature deaths of young
scientists, on the valuation of those scientists’ work? If the scientific valuation process is
highly efficient (in discounting any bias in efforts to promote science) then the death of a
scientist should have no impact on the valuation of her work. But if indeed a given scientific
community is hard pressed to absorb the work produced by its members and to discount
any bias in promotional activities, contingent shifts in promotional opportunities can make
a difference either by reducing recognition for the scientist’s work (if what matters most is
the scientist’s self-promotion efforts) or increasing recognition for her work (if promotional
efforts by supporters make the bigger difference).

    To preview our findings, our analysis of elite academic life scientists shows that a scien-
tist’s death tends to provide a boost to their papers’ citation trajectories, and it does so by
mobilizing scholars seeking to memorialize the deceased, thereby promoting her work and
reputation posthumously. As a result, these scholars’ research enjoys greater recognition
than that of still-living scientists. We also find that these effects appear to be long-lasting;
for up to ten years after their deaths (a relatively long time relative to the citation half-life
of articles in this field), the authors’ work continues to be cited more than comparable work
by scientists who had not yet died. The effect is not uniformly distributed. It is more pro-
nounced for those who are most memorialized; and consistent with Lang and Lang (1988),
such memorialization is disproportionate when the death occurs at a relatively young age.
Additionally, it is the scientist’s least-cited papers at the time of death which see the largest
boost in posthumous citations. Taken together, these findings suggest that the promotional
efforts of the sales force are effective in shifting valuations, and that the effect occurs due to
an attention shift in the context of limited capacity for attending to the massive amount of
scientific output.



2     Theory
    Our paper examines the impact of contingent shifts in the opportunity structure for
promotion on the informational efficiency of scientific valuation. To clarify the theoretical
issues at stake, it is useful to consider what has been accomplished by recent research that
examines the effect of contingent shifts in social cues on meritocratic valuation. In short,
this research, which has largely been described as testing the Matthew Effect (Azoulay et
al. 2014; Simcoe and Waguespack 2011) or cumulative advantage (Salganik et al. 2006;


                                                4
Salganik and Watts 2008), has demonstrated that disinterested validation can shape which
products/producers are more highly valued (as measured by citations or downloads, in the
cases above). However, it is unclear whether interested promotion can have a substantial
impact and what specific mechanisms might be responsible. To the extent that the Mertonian
norms of universalism and disinterestedness govern science, one would expect scientists and
scientific institutions to discount such efforts (Merton 1942). Yet scientific communities may
find it difficult and even inadvisable to completely dismiss such promotional efforts given that
they may be reliable signals of quality. This ambivalence may make interested promotion
an effective means of boosting valuations, both by the focal scientist, and by his or her
supporters.


2.1    Disinterested Validation

   A key contribution of recent research is methodological, in that it has shown that the
clearest way to demonstrate that social signals shape valuation is through the use of coun-
terfactuals that are identical or observationally equivalent to the focal products/services but
do not enjoy the same degree of social validation. For example, the Columbia MusicLab
experiment induces alternative popularity trajectories for the very same song depending on
whether it is evaluated in one of several different “social” worlds (in which popularity infor-
mation is visible, such that songs’ initial popularity influences their later popularity) or in an
“asocial” world in which popularity information is not given (Salganik et al. 2006; Salganik
and Watts 2008); Similarly, Azoulay and colleagues (2014) study of how the conferral of
status on life scientists by a prestigious foundation (the Howard Hughes Medical Institute
or HHMI) affects the citation trajectories of the scientists’ previously-published papers is
based on the premise that near-equivalent scientists (not anointed by HHMI) and papers (as
discussed below) may serve as counterfactuals.

   It is important to appreciate what this literature has demonstrated to date, and what
its limitations are. First, this research is focused on informational efficiency rather than al-
locative efficiency (Sethi 2010; Stout 1995; Zuckerman 2012b). Put differently, this research
focuses on whether a particular community assigns valuations in a consistent manner as
specified by its dominant paradigm, but does not address whether the dominant paradigm is
in an objective sense “correct.” This is most obvious in the case of the MusicLab, as the key
question is the extent to which exposure to popularity information alters users’ perceptions
of what would meet their personal taste (Salganik et al. 2006: 854). The same question


                                                5
is also implicitly operative in Azoulay et al. (2014) and Simcoe and Waguespack (2011):
although it is possible that the work of both the award winners and the counterfactual scien-
tists will eventually be dismissed as having little value (thus implying allocative inefficiency),
this is a separate matter from the informational inefficiency implied when the work of the
award-winner is valued more highly than equivalent work by lower-status peers. Note that
this focus on informational efficiency is consistent with the thrust of science studies since the
1970s (Bloor 1973; Ziman 1983; Latour and Woolgar 1979; Shapin 1982), which has assailed
the epistemological premise that scientific valuations can achieve objectivity. Scientific val-
uation necessarily reflects contingent communal standards; and insofar as those standards
are necessarily limited, allocative efficiency is unattainable. But this begs the question of
whether a community applies its standards (however limited) in a consistent way. That is
the question of informational efficiency.

       Second, each of these studies focuses on disinterested validation. In the case of the Mu-
sicLab, the implicit premise is that music fans are limited in their ability to sample the
vast universe of songs and so they look to their peers—who are presumed to have similar
tastes—to guide them.1 This guidance is disinterested because it comes as a byproduct of
these peers’ consumption behavior and because the anonymity of the setting ensures that
no one has an interest in promoting one song or another. Note also that this guidance is
meritocratic in that it is ostensibly based on “the satisfaction of quality standards that can
be articulated independently of the options available”(Correll et al. 2017: 299). Research
on the Matthew Effect in science is similar in both these respects. For example, the HHMI
is presumed to be both disinterested and meritocratic due to its institutional mandate to
support high-quality research and from the review process’s adherence to the norm of uni-
versalism.

       Third, it is important to note how research on the Matthew Effect in science adds to
research on cumulative advantage in cultural markets, at least as examined in experimental
conditions where participants are anonymous and thus indifferent to how their valuations
appear to others. There are two notable and potentially countervailing differences between
these contexts (cf. Zuckerman 2012a): (i) the prospect of tangible rewards for scientific
advances that are independent of the valuation of the academic community and (ii) career-
based social pressures in science that make scientists sensitive to their colleagues’ opinions.
   1
    Notably, if they discover that their peers have very different tastes than they do, they tend to reject
their guidance, and the social influence effect wanes (Salganik and Watts 2008; van de Rijt 2019).




                                                    6
The first point derives from the premise that science is not purely a matter of taste; as
such, there are significant rewards available to the scientist who challenges the dominant
paradigm and successfully develops or inspires a piece of technology whose value becomes
undeniable even to initial skeptics (e.g., polymerase chain reaction, CRISPR gene editing,
or angiogenesis inhibitors). The second point derives from the premise that scientists’ career
outcomes are determined by their fellow scientists, and this can induce significant pressure
to conform to the dominant paradigm (it can also induce pressure to differentiate from their
colleagues as competitors; ibid.). Given these two countervailing effects, one which rewards
scientists for challenging convention and the other for adhering to convention, it is unclear ex
ante whether the effect of social signals on valuation should be stronger or weaker in science
relative to cultural markets. It is instructive then that while the results of recent studies
demonstrate that the Matthew Effect is real, its magnitude seems relatively small (Azoulay
et al. 2014), thus implying a relatively low level of informational inefficiency.


2.2       Interested Promotion

       Yet while this research has made important progress in assessing how social signals affect
valuation, its focus on disinterested validation is necessarily limiting. After all, many social
signals are conveyed by interested parties, and they too may have a significant impact on
valuation. In cultural markets, such efforts are so commonplace as to be obvious: though
Billboard may rank songs by market share (the equivalent of the disinterested validation
provided in the MusicLab), this in no way deters artists and music labels from promoting
their work through the use of advertisements, radio and playlist spots, television appearances,
etc.2 The prevalence of such promotional efforts is important for present purposes because it
implies that market participants do not think that the market is informationally efficient(cf.
Zuckerman 1999: 1430-1431). Rather, given the vast number of options available and the
search costs associated with sampling them, efforts to gain the attention of consumers seem
necessary.3 And as documented by marketing scholars (Van den Bulte and Lillien 2001),
these efforts can pay off, by raising consumer awareness of the focal product or producer
along with consumers’ perceptions of quality. Although consumers are typically aware that
   2
     It is possible—if unlikely—that some of MusicLab participants had an interest in promoting the bands
they favored. To the extent that this was the case, then the social cues would be a mix of disinterested
validation and interested promotion. The specific contribution of interested promotion efforts would remain
unknown, however.
   3
     Tucker and Zhang (2011) show that disinterested validation is more influential when there is less infor-
mation available ex ante about consumption options.



                                                     7
such efforts are biased attempts to sway their consumption behavior, they may be quite
effective nonetheless.

   But it is an open question whether and to what extent interested promotion may shape
social valuation in science, affecting the informational efficiency of a given domain and thus
potentially allocative efficiency as well. Insofar as scientific communities are governed by
the norm of disinterestedness (Merton 1942), we might expect promotional efforts to be
limited. Yet the same conditions that provide an impetus for promotional efforts in other
settings—very large number of options and significant search costs—apply in science as well.
As such, and given competition for scarce jobs and resources, scientists have good reason
to fear that their work will not be noticed, thereby leading them to act as “salesmen”
in promoting their work. Such promotion does not stop with the focal scientist herself;
scientists often promote the work of others whom they know and respect. Although such
promotional efforts are often presented as being disinterested and they may be less self-
interested than those of the salesmen, efforts by friends and colleagues—whom we term
“the sales force”—to promote another’s work are not disinterested to the same degree as
an anonymous ranking system (such as the MusicLab) or a third-party award (such as the
HHMI). In particular, there is no comparable mandate or commitment by the promoter to
assess a range of potentially meritorious candidates. In addition, the promoter may benefit
either from reciprocal arrangements or the increased status of a shared field (Reschke et al.
2018).

   But does (interested) promotion of scientific work significantly shape scientific valuation;
and if so, how? Note in this regard Merton’s claim regarding the norm of disinterestedness
was not that scientists are more moral and therefore less likely to attempt to boost scientific
efforts for personal gain; rather, he argued that the institutions of science would be able to
check such actions and prevent them from being effective (Merton 1942). Thus, one reason
to doubt that interested promotion has a substantial impact is that scientific communities
employ various practices—from removing self-citations from citation counts to avoiding ad-
visors and coauthors when requesting journal referees and tenure letters—that are meant to
counteract bias.

   Yet as noted above, this is just one side of the coin. As with conflicts of interest in other
domains, a scientist’s investment in a subfield or a particular line of work (their own, or that




                                               8
of a colleague) actually has ambiguous implications.4 In particular, someone who is interested
in a particular domain may favor that domain but she may also be more knowledgeable about
it and more concerned about vetting the quality in it. Thus as Li (2017) shows in her study of
scientists assessing grants at the National Institutes of Health (NIH), while scientists may be
biased in their valuations of quality in a manner that disproportionately benefits themselves
and their colleagues, these (interested) scientists are also most accurate in their assessments
as they know more about their own domain and are most concerned about its trajectory.
Moreover, given that scientific movements often require the mobilization of many colleagues
to embark on complementary research, a natural consequence is that scientists will advertise
their work so as to facilitate such mobilization. Indeed, the failure to promote one’s work in
this fashion could even be interpreted as a negative signal.

       The larger implication is that it is ultimately unclear whether and how scientists should
discount one another’s promotional efforts as they may be unsure whether such efforts are
poor signals of quality due to bias, or strong signals of quality due to aligned incentives. As
such, there is good reason to expect that interested promotion has a substantial impact on
the informational efficiency of scientific communities. In particular, the general implication
is that scientific work that benefits from more effective promotional efforts is more highly
valued than equivalent work that does not benefit from the same level and type of promotion.
A further implication is that if for whatever reason, a work of science benefits from extra
promotion that is ostensibly unbiased, it should have an even greater impact than work that
receives the same level of promotion but is perceived as biased.


2.3       Scientist’s Death as a Window into the Importance of Promo-
          tion

       In order to assess these implications, we examine contingent shifts in opportunities for
promoting science occasioned by the premature death of scientists. Past research has demon-
strated that a scientist’s death can be effectively used to study a given scientist’s impact on
the production of science (Azoulay et al. 2010; Azoulay et al. 2019; Oettl 2012). And as
discussed above, research on reputational entrepreneurship in cultural and political domains
   4
    This debate is common in many other domains outside of science. For instance, there is a long-standing
legal precedent for the common-law requirement of “legal standing,” meaning that a party must have been
adversely affected themselves before they can bring a law-suit forward (see for example Lujan v. Defenders
of Wildlife, 504 U.S. 555 [1992]).




                                                    9
suggests that we can make progress on the larger question of the impact of interested promo-
tion on the efficiency of scientific valuation by examining how appreciation for a scientist’s
published work changes as a result of his death. Since the quality of such work (which was
published in the past) is obviously unaffected by the death of its author, it should have no
impact on how it is valued, as measured by the trajectory of citations to that paper.5 More
specifically, to the extent that promotional efforts are biased and the scientific community
successfully discounts for such biases, any effect of changes in promotional efforts due to the
death should be negligible.

       We have noted, however, why it is unlikely that such biases are fully discounted. And
the literature on reputational entrepreneurship in cultural and political domains implies two
pathways by which the death of a producer can impact how his work is valued based on how
the death affects promotional activity. One possibility, as reflected in Fine’s (1996) study of
Warren Harding discussed above, is that the valuation of scientific works will fall after the
author’s death. Scientists who believe their research is undervalued by the community may
seek to raise awareness of it through press releases, teaching graduate courses, presenting at
conferences, etc. This implies that at any given point in time, the level of citations a paper
receives is a function of the quality of the paper (according to the dominant paradigm)
and the amount of “salesmanship” it has received. Thus, since the death of the scientist
eliminates the latter factor, the number of citations should decline.

       Second, as in the case of JFK above, insofar as the death of a scientist leads scientists
supporters to “memorialize” their deaths, it may generate an increase in the valuation of
her work. Lang and Lang’s study of etchers provides intriguing evidence for how death
can spur supporters to initiate celebrations of the artist’s life and work via “recognition
events”—biographies, news articles, and exhibits of their life and oeuvre (Lang and Lang
1988: 94). To be sure, recognitions of a producer’s entire œuvre often occur while she is still
alive—a festschrift is a common form of such recognition for scholars—but recognition events
seem more common in the aftermath of the producers death. In Lang and Lang’s research,
such events directed the etching field’s attention to the work of the deceased, thereby raising
its perceived value to such an extent that memorialized etchers were remembered vastly
   5
    Citations are necessarily a measure of attention (Merton 1988) but an imperfect measure of communal
valuation given that some citations are negative. However, recent research (Catalini et al. 2015) on a subfield
(immunology) within the larger domain studied here finds that only 2.4% of the total have a negative valence.
A more subtle issue is that citations may not reflect the citer’s personal assessment of quality, but rather
the assessment of quality she thinks will coordinates well with journal referees and readers (see Correll et al.
2017). We will return to this issue in the discussion.


                                                      10
beyond their living counterparts, even those who did superior work (Lang and Lang 1988:
97).

   Importantly, Lang and Lang report that such memorialization was most impactful when
the artist died at a young age. Lang and Lang’s (1988) example of Elizabeth Fyfe is em-
blematic:

       Fyfe, who died in Switzerland in 1933, just after her thirty-fourth birthday after a long
       bout with tuberculosis, had been hailed by British critics as “one of the most original
       and accomplished young etchers.” That her name and her work, which amounted to
       just over 1,600 impressions, somehow survive, whereas those of others once equally
       or better known do not, has much to do with her premature death. Her teachers,
       her friends, her collectors, and other etchers rallied, while she was in the hospital, to
       organize an exhibition of her work, complete with catalog, and then used the proceeds
       from sales to help pay for the care she needed. Her dealer saw to it that her plates were
       printed when she could no longer do so herself and gave a full set of her prints to Fyfe’s
       sister. In this way, the many persons mobilized by the tragedy helped to preserve the
       work and, thereby, to sustain the memory of the artist.

   An important factor noted here—the preservation of the artist’s otherwise perishable
work—seems to apply to art but not to science. At the same time, science seems comparable
to art and politics in that recognition events will be relative rare for the young if they
remain alive. Note further that young producers in a given domain tend to have more living
supporters than those who die at an advanced age. Moreover, the deaths of those in the prime
of their career are surprising and more likely to be experienced as tragic; as such, they may
be more likely to mobilize a community that is keen to ensure that the scientist’s work not
be forgotten. However well intentioned, such collective efforts at interested promotion have
the potential to provide an ironic benefit to the dead scientist’s work via a boost in positive
attention as compared with equivalent scientists who have the good fortune to remain alive.


2.4     Empirical Implications

   Thus the death of a scientist implies a contingent shift in opportunities for interested
promotion. As such, it provides a lens through which we can examine how the informa-
tional efficiency of a scientific field is affected by interested promotion. If a given scientific
field quickly and fully incorporates new advances (according to the criteria of its dominant
paradigm), this would imply that the timing of the deaths of authors should not matter for
how their research is valued, as measured by citation trajectories. But if such incorporation


                                                  11
is incomplete and the field is not able to discount for any bias produced by interested pro-
motion, such promotion—as elicited by a scientist—can shift the level of appreciation for
their work in one or both of two ways.

   In particular, there are four possible ways that the valuation of a scientist’s work may be
affected by her death. One possibility is that any shift in interested promotion has no impact
and scientific valuation is informationally efficient in this respect. The three other scenarios
reflect some degree of informational inefficiency, whereby efforts at interested promotion are
not fully discounted. Thus a second possibility is that scientific valuations are significantly
sustained by the efforts of the scientist himself; this would imply that the death of the
“salesman” causes a decrease in citations to the scientist‘s papers. A third possibility is
that scientific valuations are significantly sustained by the efforts of a scientist‘s supporters;
and if the death of a scientist catalyzes the mobilization of this “sales force,” a boost in
citations will ensue. Finally, it is possible that both channels have significant impact, but
cancel each other out. As long as either the underlying “salesman” or “sales force” effect
can be identified, such an indeterminant outcome might still imply a significant degree of
informational inefficiency in the field.

   There is no strong theoretical basis for predicting which of these scenarios is most likely.
At the same time, the first possibility seems unlikely. In general, informational efficiency in
a domain requires effective tools for arbitrage (or “valuation opportunism”; see Zuckerman
2012b) whereby someone who recognizes a gap between quality and social valuation can
profit from this gap even when others do not recognize it. But while such mechanisms do
exist in various scientific fields (e.g., scientific contributions can be turned into technologies
whose value is so apparent they cannot be denied), they tend to be relatively weak. More
specifically, and as reviewed above, it seems unlikely that scientific fields are able fully
discount for biases that might be incorporated in efforts at interested promotion.

   At the same time, it is not clear whether the mobilization of the sales force should
overcome the absence of the salesman. On the one hand, the salesman has the most incentive
to promote his own work, and, therefore, is likely to do the most promoting. On the other
hand, the efficacy of such efforts may be limited by the fact that the scientist is only one
person and his motives are transparently self-interested. As noted above, a key implication
of our theoretical framework is that interested promotion should be more effective when
those interests do not connote bias. Moreover, conditional on mobilization, the number of



                                               12
individuals in the sales force can potentially be much larger than a single scientist, and, as
noted above, their efforts are unlikely to be viewed as entirely self-interested. These factors
may be responsible for the evidence of the importance of posthumous “sales force” activity
documented in the literature on reputational entrepreneurship (Lang and Lang 1988; Fine
2003). And yet we have noted that an important factor in such studies but absent from
science is the role of the sales force in preserving a producer’s work. As such, we make no
prediction as to which of the three other scenarios is most likely. Rather, our goal is to
leverage our analysis to make progress in understanding whether interested promotion skews
valuations and which channel is most important in doing so.

   Our goal of learning about the relative importance of different channels for interested
promotion is furthered by two more specific goals: (i) to assess the importance of key con-
tingency factors that might alter the balance of the salesman and sales force effects; and (ii)
to examine whether the sales force effect indeed works via a spike in recognition events for
dead vs. still-living scientists.

   With respect to the first of these goals, four contextual factors seem especially important.
First, as reviewed above, there is reason to think that the sales force effect will be especially
strong for the young, with the key reason being that these scientists would have received
much less recognition had they remained alive. Second, variation in the “engagement style”
of the scientist may have an important impact on either the salesman or sales force effects.
For example, scientists who tend to work with large research teams (coauthors, trainees)
may be expected to have larger (posthumous) sales forces. Also of interest is whether a
scientist was highly self-promotional while they were alive. On the one hand, they may be
dynamic personalities whose death catalyzes their colleagues to promote her work in her
stead. On the other hand, such scientists may be regarded as self-serving and be relatively
ineffective at eliciting a posthumous sales force. Third, it will be instructive to examine
how the shift in interested promotion impacts a scientist’s papers based on their baseline
citation level before their death. If a scientist’s most-cited papers earn the biggest citation
boost from a scientist’s death, this will imply a version of the Matthew Effect is at work
whereby interested promotion is most effective in combination with other forms of validation.
But if a scientist’s least-cited papers gain the most, this will imply a more narrow form of
inefficiency, whereby papers compete with another for scarce attention with some losing out
simply because of such scarcity. A spotlight on a scientist’s work will then increase the
likelihood that overlooked work will now get its due (Tucker and Zhang 2011). Finally, we


                                               13
will not only examine changes in the number of citations to papers of the deceased vs. still-
living, but also changes in who the citers are (collaborators vs. non-collaborators; in the
same field vs. outsiders; whether they work for the same institution or not, etc.),

        With respect to the second goal, it will be important not only to examine the effect of
death on citations to a scientist’s work but also the causes and effects of recognition events.
Insofar as a scientist’s death indeed elicits a positive boost in the valuation of his papers, it
may not be due to promotion by the sales force. For instance, it is possible that competitors
of the scientist who were stingy in their citations before now become more generous.6 As
such, it will be important to examine (i) whether indeed the death of a scientist elicits more
recognition events than if he had remained alive; and (ii) whether such recognition activity
is responsible for any observed sales force effect on citations.



3         Data and Empirical Design
        The design of our empirical analysis unfolds in three separate steps. The first step is a
causal analysis: we examine how the premature death of an eminent biomedical academic
researcher changes the rate of citations to her work, compared to the work of other eminent re-
searchers who do not die prematurely. The level of analysis for this step is an article/scientist
pair, and the main challenge to be overcome is the building of a control group of articles
that plausibly pin down the citation trajectories of the deceased scientists’ articles had they
remained alive. In the second step, we examine whether recognition activity is greater for
deceased scientists, controlling for a host of important correlates of individual recognition;
the level of analysis is the individual scientist and the key challenge is the measurement of
the recognition process, which is highly variegated and would, at first blush, appear to defy
efforts at quantitative reduction. The third and final step ties the earlier analyses together.
We ask whether the recognition process is a plausible mechanism through which scientific
work gets remembered in the long run. The main challenge is one of prediction: for each
article, we must be able to forecast the citation trajectory that would have been observed if
the scientist had remained alive, so as to isolate a net citation premium (or deficit) for this
article. With these forecasts in hand, we can then examine whether variation in recognition
intensity mediates the relationship between death and posthumous citations.
    6
    Conversely, it is possible that evidence for the salesman effect is in fact evidence for diminished motivation
to engage in strategic citation of the now-deceased scientist.



                                                       14
   Below, we provide a detailed description of the process through which we assembled
the dataset used in the statistical analysis. We begin by describing the criteria used to
select the sample of elite academics, with a particular focus on the timing and the manner
of their deaths. The focus then shifts to the publications that deceased and still-living
scientists authored during their lifetimes, and how one might build a matched sample of
publication/scientist pairs where the citations received by articles authored by still-living
scientists offer a plausible counterfactual to the citations that articles authored by deceased
scientists would have received had they not died prematurely. Finally, we document how we
measured the recognition process for each individual scientist. Throughout this description
of the data, we outline how the construction of the sample addresses the empirical design
challenges enumerated above.


3.1    Institutional Context

   Our empirical setting is the academic life sciences. We focus on this domain for three
reasons. The first is its sheer size: U.S. Medical Schools employ over 150,000 faculty members
and this figure underestimates the size of the labor market since it does not take into account
scientists and engineers working at NIH, in non-profit research organizations (such as the
Salk Institute), for independent hospitals (such as the Cleveland Clinic), or within Schools
of Arts and Sciences (such as MIT, UC Berkeley, or Rockefeller University). Academic
biomedical research also garners over 70% of all non-defense Federal R&D dollars. The large
size of the labor market is important for reasons of statistical power: our key source of
variation is generated by the premature death of eminent scientists, and these events are
relatively rare. Importantly, the members of this labor market share broadly similar norms,
career goals, incentives, and operate within comparable institutional structures.

   Second, scientific discoveries over the past half-century have greatly expanded the knowl-
edge frontier in the life sciences, and these advances have resulted in more specialization, as
well as an increase in the size of collaborative teams (Wuchty et al. 2007). These trends help
ensure that career shocks affect only relatively narrow swathes of the intellectual landscape.
Were our research domain less balkanized across narrow subfields, it would be challenging
for us to identify control articles or control scientists (Azoulay et al. 2019).

   Third, and perhaps more pragmatically, our setting is blessed by an abundance of data
sources. The careers of eminent, still-living life scientists are extensively described in cur-


                                               15
riculum vitæ, Who’s Who profiles, or laboratory web sites. We combine these data with the
free and publicly-available bibliographic database PubMed, citation information from the
Web of Science, and administrative records from the Faculty Roster of the Association of
American Medical Colleges (AAMC) and NIH’s Compound Grant Applicant File (CGAF).
Together, these sources of information allow us to create an accurate longitudinal record of
publications, citations, and funding for each scientist in the sample.

   Our focus on the scientific elite is substantively justified in light of our goals. One would
expect the articles of eminent scientists to be identified and evaluated immediately after
their publication, relative to the articles authored by scientists of lesser repute. This should
in turn lessen the relevance of interested promotion in influencing how science is valued. To
some extent, this is testable since our metrics of eminence exhibit substantial heterogeneity
even within our sample of eminent scientists. That said, this approach has limitations as
well, which we discuss after presenting our findings.


3.2    Sample of Elite Academic Life Scientists

   Following Azoulay et al. (2010) and Azoulay et al. (2019), we begin by demarcating
a set of 12,426 “elite” life scientists (roughly 5% of the entire relevant labor market) who
are so classified if they satisfy at least one of the following criteria for cumulative scientific
achievement: (i) highly funded scientists; (ii) highly cited scientists; (iii) top patenters; or
(iv) members of the National Academy of Science and the National Academy of Medicine.
Because these four measures rely on achievements over the course of a scientist’s career,
they will tend to select older scientists. To create more demographic balance, we add three
additional measures that capture individuals with promise at the early and middle stages
of their scientific careers (regardless of whether that success endures): (v) NIH MERIT
awardees; (vi) Howard Hughes Medical Investigators; and (vii) early career prize winners.
Appendix A provides additional details regarding these seven metrics of “stardom.”

   We trace back these scientists’ careers from the time they obtained their first position
as independent investigators (typically after a postdoctoral fellowship) until 2006. We do
so through a combination of curriculum vitae, NIH biosketches, Who’s Who profiles, acco-
lades/obituaries in medical journals, National Academy of Sciences biographical memoirs,
and Google searches. For each one of these individuals, we record employment history, degree



                                               16
held, date of degree, gender, department affiliations, as well as complete list of publications,
patents, and NIH funding obtained in each year.7

       The next step in the sample construction process is to select a subset of scientists from
this overall pool whose premature death will “treat” their past output. First, we select
scientists whose death intervenes between 1969 and 2003.8 Second, we need to ensure that
these scientists had not entered a pre-retirement phase of their career. This is trickier,
because the timing of retirement is endogenous, and scientists who do not wish to retire
can show great initiative in subverting rules surrounding mandatory retirement (which was
legal in the United States until 1986). To overcome this challenge, we make full use of the
narrative data contained in the dossiers we compiled for each scientist (deceased or not);
we also examine publication output as well as funding received to remove from the sample
those who either “meaningfully” retired or whose output shows sign of abating prior to their
death or the end of the observation period.9

       As a result of these steps, we identify 720 “treated” scientists (see Table 1). The mean
and median age at death is approximately 64, with the youngest scientist dying at age 33 and
the oldest dying at age 91.10 We then investigate the cause of death in this sample to classify
their deaths as being either “sudden” or “anticipated.” The main motivation here is to better
identify when the “sales force” of those motivated to memorialize the scientist and his work
would have become mobilized; insofar as the death is anticipated, this mobilization could
begin prior to death. Distinguishing anticipated from sudden deaths is less difficult than it
appears, since most obituaries typically are quite specific in this respect.11 To distinguish
sudden from anticipated deaths, we use an arbitrary distinction between deaths that likely
occurred with six months notice or less, versus those that likely occurred with more than six
   7
      Appendix B details the steps taken to ensure that the list of publications is complete and accurate, even
in the case of stars with frequent last names.
    8
      An implication of this design choice is that even for the scientists who die “late” (e.g., in 2003), we will
have at least three years of citation data to pin down how their passing changes the recognition of their
work.
    9
      In previous work, one of us has verified that it is essentially impossible to predict death in a related
sample using measures of lagged publication output (Azoulay et al. 2010)
   10
      How can one die at a very advanced age, yet one’s passing still be deemed “premature?” Easily, as it
turns out. Aubrey Gorbman (1914-2003), described in academic obituaries as the “father” of the field of
comparative endocrinology (Bern and Sower 2003), succumbed to Parkinson’s disease but still published two
first-authored articles in the last year of his life.
   11
      In some instances, where the cause of death could not be ascertained from the obituaries, we contacted
former collaborators individually to clarify the circumstances of the superstar’s passing. We were unable to
ascertain the cause of death for 38 (5.28%) of the 720 deceased scientists. Some of these cases may have
been suicides given the cultural taboo on publicizing suicide over much of this period.


                                                       17
months notice. In practice, this “sudden” category mostly comprises fatalities due to heart
attacks, car accidents, and sudden onset illnesses. Conversely, most “anticipated” deaths are
from various forms of cancer, or other long-term illnesses. In the deceased scientist sample,
330 (46%) scientists died suddenly, while 352 (49%) died from an anticipated illness.

       Table 1 provides descriptive statistics for this sample (see Appendix F for a complete
list of these individuals, along with basic demographic information, institutional affiliation,
and a brief description of their scientific domain). The overwhelming majority (91%) are
men.12 Of note is the fact that even within this sample, substantial variation in status exists:
whether one measures eminence through publications, NIH funding, or citations (excluding
those citations that accrue after the scientist has passed), the mean is always much higher
than the median.


3.3       Difference-in-Differences Estimation Framework

       The death shock that provides the essential lever for our research design occurs at the
level of the individual scientist. Similarly, recognition and memorialization efforts typically
focus not on particular articles but on the overall body of work of a scientist. And yet, our
research design focuses on studying changes in citations to discrete academic publications in
the wake of their authors’ passing, rather than changes in the flow of citations aggregated
up to the scientist level of analysis.

       We justify this crucial design choice as follows. Substantively, the norm of universalism
emphasized by Merton as a hallmark of the scientific incentive system assumes that the iden-
tity of a scientific producer can be unbundled from her published works, at least in principle.
The level of analysis in the first part of our study takes this distinction seriously. From
an empirical standpoint, the scientist level of analysis is not well-suited to the challenge of
identifying the causal effect of death on the reception of an academic’s work. The content
of every scientific contribution remains fixed after it is published, and only the way it is un-
derstood, celebrated, or denigrated can change over time. In contrast, the dynamics of the
flow of citations received by an individual scientist reflects both increments of recognition
accruing to past work as well as additional recognition enabled by new resources (e.g., fund-
  12
    Per our tabulations of AAMC Faculty Roster data, the patterns of entry into this labor market have
only recently equalized across genders, and our sample reflects the extreme gender imbalance that prevailed
for most of the time period we study.



                                                    18
ing, disciples, etc.) secured as a byproduct of the reception of past work. The article level
of analysis enables us to filter out the effect of the second source of variation, by anchoring
the design around a very natural datum that determines unambiguously a “before” and an
“after” period for each article: the timing of its author’s death.13

       However, a simple difference between citations that accrue to a paper after, rather than
before, the time of its author’s death is not enough to yield estimates with a plausibly causal
interpretation of the effect of a scientist’s passing. This is because the memory of any article
(or scientist) must eventually fade. Examine (in Panel A of Figure 1) the mean number of
annual citations received by the 720 deceased scientists, both before and after the death.
The curve has an inverted U -shape with a peak in the year before death, followed by an
inexorable and steep decline, though it will take close to 40 years for the memory of any
work by a deceased scientist to disappear from the scientific literature. Panel B of Figure 1
produces a similar graph for the subset of still-living scientists who contribute articles to our
control group (in a manner made precise below). In this case, we use their calendar birth age
to display graphically the citation life cycle. The vertical dotted line age at 64 corresponds
to the mean age at death in the deceased sample. There too, the flow of citations declines
inexorably starting in a scientist’s late fifties, but that decline is much more gradual than
what is observed for scientists who died prematurely. Therefore, the question for our study is
not whether the recognition given to the work of deceased scientists will decrease after they
die, as it surely will. Rather, the challenge is to assess this decline relative to the citation
trajectory of articles whose recognition potential was similar at the time of the scientist’s
passing. To do so, we need to construct a control group of articles that can plausibly capture
this counterfactual.


3.3.1      Matched Sample of Articles

       As in Azoulay et al. (2019), our approach is to identify control articles from the vast
set of articles authored by elite scientists who did not die prematurely. For each article by
a deceased scientist, we attempt to find at least one article by still-living scientists to pair
it with. Although this step necessarily entails some degree of judgment, in order to yield
  13
    This approach is not new (Farys and Wolbring 2017). For instance, Murray and Stern (2007) ask how
citations to articles shift once the underlying results appear in a patent; Azoulay et al. (2014) ask how
the receipt of an accolade changes the citation trajectories of articles that appeared before the accolade was
received; Azoulay et al. (2012) investigate how the mix of local to non-local citations changes after a scientist
moves to a geographically distant institution.



                                                       19
valid comparisons, the matching procedure must meet a number of requirements. Notably,
to contrast citation flows after the death shock, relative to before, we must be able to assign
a counterfactual date of death to each control article as well as a counterfactual eminent
scientist who could have died, but did not. Pairing treated and control articles appropriately
is therefore essential, since the control article will inherit certain characteristics from its
matched treated article.

       In particular, we require that each control article (i) be published contemporaneously
with (and have a similar number of authors as) the article by a deceased scientist with which
it is paired; (ii) be unrelated (in both an intellectual and a social sense) to the treated article
with which it is paired; and (iii) have an author in last authorship position who is a still-
living elite scientist of approximately the same age as that of the deceased scientist on the
article with which it is paired. The focus on the last authorship position is a solution to the
problem that modern science is a team sport, with steadily increasing rates of coauthorship
over the past 40 years (Wuchty et al. 2007). Here, we are helped by a strong norm in
biomedical research which invariably puts the principal investigator on a research project in
last authorship position on any paper that results from the funding s/he was able to mobilize
(Nagaoka and Owan 2014).14

       In addition, it is important that the control group of articles as a whole be broadly
similar to the treated group of articles, where similarity should be understood as reflecting
average balance across key covariates at baseline. Although it is impossible to identify
for each treated article a “fraternal twin” that matches it exactly on an exhaustive list of
author and article characteristics, it is possible to select article controls in a way that will
make the control group as a whole similar to the treated group in terms of expected impact
and scientific “fruitfulness” at the time of the scientist’s death. Pragmatically, we specify a
handful of covariates along which matched treated/control articles must resemble each other,
and we implement a blocking procedure—described in detail in Appendix C—to identify all
the articles among those published by still-alive scientists that satisfy these criteria (so that
each treated article can and typically does have more than one associated control article).
Since judgment is required to choose the list of “blocking” covariates, Appendix C also
  14
    To be sure, a scientist can have a deep imprint on a research project and yet occupy authorship position
other than last. In the case of inter-lab collaboration, for instance, it is not unusual to observe one of the
PIs occupy the first authorship position, or the next-to-last position. What is important for our purposes is
that it is difficult to imagine circumstances where an author does occupy the last author position and s/he
is not closely identified with the work.




                                                     20
provides two alternative matching schemes and probes the robustness of the core results
when selecting one of these alternatives. Reassuringly, the main conclusions are robust to
these variations. Our chosen approach yields a higher proportion of articles by deceased
scientists with at least one match within the set of articles by still-living scientists. This
has two benefits. First, the external validity of our findings is enhanced. Second, the larger
sample size gives us more statistical power to detect heterogeneous effects by type of scientist
or article.


3.3.2    Treated/Control Article Pair: An Example

   Consider the paper “Isolation of ORC6. . . ” published in the journal Science in 1993
originating from the laboratory of Ira Herskowitz, an eminent UCSF geneticist who died in
2003 from pancreatic cancer. Using the procedure described in detail in Appendix C, we
match 34 publications to this article, also published in Science in 1993, and on which a still-
living star scientist occupies the last authorship position. Figure 2 illustrates the matching
with one of these articles, “Controlling Signal Transduction with Synthetic Ligands,” which
came out of the laboratory of Gerald Crabtree, a Stanford Pathologist who studied the role of
chromatin in development and disease. By the end of 2002; the Crabtree paper had garnered
214 citations, relatively close to the 218 citations that had accrued to the Li and Herskowitz
paper—both articles belong to the top percentile of the 2002 citation distribution for the
universe of papers published in 1993. Notice as well that Crabtree and Herskowitz were born
in the same year (1946), and received their highest degree in the same year (1971). This is
not happenstance, as the matching procedure requires that the career age (years since the
highest degree was earned) of the treated and control elite scientists be no more than two
years apart.

   Yet there are still observable differences between this pair of articles and their authors.
The two PIs do not match particularly closely on all metrics of cumulative achievement,
for example. This is less of a concern than might appear at first blush, since as will be
described below, we have found that imposing balance on article-level characteristics yields,
as a fortunate byproduct, approximate balance on scientist-level characteristics as well.

   Two additional facts about this pair of articles are worth mentioning, since they hold true
more generally in the sample. Crabtree and Herskowitz never collaborated. Furthermore,




                                              21
these two papers belong to very different subfields of the life sciences.15 This is important
insofar as a desirable feature of the control group is to be unaffected by the treatment event.
By eliminating articles by collaborators as well as topically-related articles from the list
of eligible controls, we bolster the claim that the control articles can pin down a credible
counterfactual citation trajectory.


3.3.3      Descriptive Statistics

       The procedure described above yields a total of 454,599 papers authored by 8,326 control
scientists, as well as 27,147 treated papers authored by the 720 deceased scientists.16 On
average, there are 17.7 control articles for each treated article, highlighting the “one-to-many”
feature of the matching procedure.17 Table 2 presents descriptive statistics for control and
treated publications in the baseline year, i.e., the year that immediately precedes the year of
death for the deceased scientist. A number of the covariates are balanced between treated
and control publications solely by virtue of the matching procedure—for instance, the year
the article was written and the number of authors. However, covariate balance in the level
of eminence at the time of (actual or counterfactual) death for treated and control scientists
(measured through NIH funding, number of articles published, or cumulative number of
citations) was not guaranteed by the matching procedure.

       Figure 3 examines differences in the shape of the distribution for citations received by
treated and control articles, respectively, up to the baseline year. The two distributions
exhibit very similar shape, including the far left and the far right tails. As highlighted
below, balance in the stock of citations at baseline in the cross-sectional dimension of the
data is not required for the validity of the empirical exercise. More important is the absence
of differential trends in the flow of citations up until the time of treatment between the
treated and control groups. An important step of the empirical analysis will be to verify, ex
post, the absence of such trends prior to the death event.
  15
     Formally, the PubMed Related Citation Algorithm (which will be described in more detail below) does
not list one as being topically related to the other.
  16
     These 27,147 articles represent approximately 60% of the set of articles by treated scientists for which we
attempted to find matches (i.e., original articles in journals indexed by PubMed and the Web of Science, in
which the prematurely-departed scientist occupies the last position on the authorship roster, and published
no later than the year before the year of death).
  17
     Appendix C provides much more detail on the matching procedure, as well as two alternative matching
schemes. Our main substantive conclusions are shown to be robust across these alternatives.




                                                      22
3.3.4      Statistical Considerations

       Our estimating equation relates the effect of a scientist’s death on citations in the fol-
lowing way:
                          h
   E [citesit |Xit ] = exp β0 + β1 AF T ER DEAT Hit
                                                                                                       i    (1)
                                + β2 AF T ER DEAT Hit × T REATi + f (AGEit ) + δt + γi
where citesit is the number of citations paper i receives in year t (purged of self-citations),
AF T ER DEAT H denotes an indicator variable that switches to one in the year after the
star scientist (treated or control) associated with i passes away, T REAT is an indicator
variable set to one if the scientist dies during the period, f (AGEit ) corresponds to a set of
indicator variables for the age of article i at time t (measured as the number of years since
the year of publication), the δt ’s stand for a full set of calendar year indicator variables, and
the γi ’s correspond to article fixed effects, consistent with our approach to analyze changes
in the flow of citations within each article following the passing of an elite scientist.18

       We follow Jaravel at al. (2018) in including in our specification an indicator for the timing
of death that is common to treated and control articles (whose effect will be identified by the
coefficient β1 ) in addition to the effect of interest, an interaction between AF T ER DEAT H
and T REAT (whose effect will be identified by the coefficient β2 ). The effects of these two
variables are separately identified because (i) deaths are staggered across our observation
period, and (ii) control publications inherit a counterfactual date of death since they are
uniquely associated with a treated publication through the matching procedure described
earlier and in Appendix C. The inclusion of the common term addresses the concern that
age and calendar year fixed effects may not fully account for shifts in citation activity around
the time of the scientist’s passing. If this is the case, AF T ER DEAT H will capture the cor-
responding transitory dynamics, while AF T ER DEAT H × T REAT will isolate the causal
effect of interest. Empirically, we find that in some specifications, the common term has
substantial explanatory power, though its inclusion does not radically alter the magnitude
of the treatment effect.


Estimation. The dependent variable of interest, citations accrued in each year (net of self-
citations), is skewed and non-negative. Specifically, 49.20% of the articles receive no citations
  18
     To avoid confusion, we have suppressed any subscript for the scientist. This is without loss of generality,
since each article is uniquely associated with a single scientist (i.e., there can only be one individual in
last-authorship position for each article).


                                                      23
in a given year while 0.04% accumulate over one hundred. Following a long-standing tradi-
tion in the study of scientific and technical change, we present conditional quasi-maximum
likelihood estimates based on the fixed-effect Poisson model developed by Hausman et al.
(1984). Because the Poisson model is in the linear exponential family, the coefficient esti-
mates remain consistent as long as the mean of the dependent variable is correctly specified
(Gourieroux et al. 1984). We cluster the standard errors at the scientist level in the results
presented below.


       As discussed above, we pursue two empirical goals beyond testing for the overall effect
of death on citation levels. One goal involves exploring four contextual factors. In addition
to examining how the net effect varies depending on the relative youth of the scientist, we
will examine variables associated with three broad factors: (i) a paper’s impact history; (ii)
a scientist’s engagement style; and (iii) the identity of citers.

Paper impact history. The key consideration here is that papers may vary in their
susceptibility to interested promotion based on how much impact they have made up to the
time of death (or counterfactual death). To get at this, we assign each article the percentile
of the citation distribution to which it belongs, given its vintage. When computing these
empirical distributions, we take into account both the year of death (citations that accrue
after the year of death, or counterfactual death are excluded) and the year of publication.
This allows us to compare the citation impact of each article in the sample, regardless of the
year in which it appeared and regardless of the time of treatment, relative to the article’s
age.19 Using this information, for each scientist we create five distinct article subsamples:
(1) the set of articles in the top 10% of impact at time of death; (2) the set of articles in the
bottom 10% of impact at time of death; (3) the set of articles in the second and third quartile
of the impact distribution at time of death; (4) the set of articles in the top 1% of impact
at time of death in the PubMed universe; and (5) the set of articles published in a narrow
window of three years before the time of death. Note that subsamples one through three use
a relative benchmark to delineate a set of articles (every scientist in the data has a top 10%
and a bottom 10%, for instance). The fourth subsample uses a universal benchmark, and it
is possible for scientists in the data to contribute no articles to this subsample.
  19
    For example, revisiting the example presented on Figure 2, Ira Herskowitz’s Science publication belongs
to the top percentile of the cumulative citation distribution for all articles published in 1993 and indexed
jointly by PubMed and the Web of Science (only citations up to 2003, the year of death, are included in the
computation); It is also ranked 10th among the 117 original articles he published before his death.




                                                    24
Engagement Style. The basic premise here is that the manner by which a scientist en-
gages with the scientific community (prior to death) may shape how their work is recognized
(posthumously). We measure two aspects of such engagement style. The first reflects the
“gregariousness” of the scientist, as reflected in the number of coauthors or trainees with
whom he has worked. Arguably, we may expect such scientists to experience a more pro-
nounced posthumous citation upsurge. The second reflects the scientist’s predilection for
self-promotion. One view might be that self-promotional activities while alive “prime the
pump” for the posthumous mobilization of his supporters. Conversely, it might be that
the activities of the salesman and the sales force are substitutes, for example because self-
promoters are deemed unworthy of further glorification upon passing. Our proxy for self-
promotion is a scientist’s rate of “gratuitous” self-citation, which we define as the proportion
of all citations that are self-citations where the cited paper is in a different subfield as the
citing paper (with subfields corresponding to those defined by PMRA), in the entire portfolio
of publications for a scientist in the pre-death period.20

Citer identity. In order to better understand the activities of the “sales force,” character-
izing the relationship between the citing authors and the cited is of interest. Specifically, are
posthumous citations more likely to come from former collaborators or trainees? Are they
more likely to originate from within the narrow subfield of the cited article, or from outside
that narrow subfield? Or are they more likely to be circumscribed in geographic space, for
example emerging from authors employed by the same institution as that of the deceased
scientist? We parse all the citing-to-cited article pairs to distinguish between such relation-
ships in social space, intellectual space, and geographic space.21 We then aggregate these
data up to the article-year level to compute citation counts from related versus unrelated
authors.
   20
      We experimented with several variants of this measure, including defining self-promotion as the pro-
portion of gratuitous self-cites, as opposed to the proportion of all cites. The results presented below were
qualitatively unchanged.
   21
      Briefly, matching each author on citing and cited articles with the Faculty Roster of the Association of
American Medical Colleges (AAMC) allows us to distinguish between publications with and without former
collaborators or trainees, and with or without authors colocated with the focal elite scientist. Similarly, the
use of the PubMed Related Citation Algorithm (PMRA) helps us distinguish between citations coming from
within the same subfield, as opposed to outside the subfield. Importantly, this parsing can be implemented
for the articles authored by both the treated and the placebo scientists, in a rigorously symmetric fashion.
Finally, we distinguish between geographically proximate vs. distant citers using authors’ institutional
affiliation obtained from the AAMC Faculty Roster and NIH’s CGAF database.




                                                      25
3.4     Measuring Individual Recognition in Science

    To recall, the second step of our empirical analysis involves comparing recognition activity
for deceased versus still-living scientists. Our approach leverages the observation that there
exist institutionalized occasions, over the course of a scientist’s career, whereby her body of
work is recognized in a positive way. Perhaps most prominent among these include memorial
events and obituaries written after death, and festschrifts or career awards (such as induction
into the National Academy of Science or receipt of the Nobel Prize or Lasker Award) prior to
death. In addition, professional journals routinely interview scholars to provide a perspective
on the evolution of their fields, or publish retrospective articles. The common thread across
these “recognition events” is that they celebrate the scholar as an individual producer rather
than narrowly shine a light on individual articles.22 Importantly, the rate of arrival of these
events (if they occur at all) is not exogenous, but rather reflects an investment on the part of
fellow scientists. A cynic could be forgiven for thinking (probably not out loud) that many
such events would go unrecorded unless they served the memorializers’ interest, in addition
to the lofty and well-intentioned goal of enhancing or preserving the legacy or career of the
individual being recognized.

    Accordingly, we undertake a large-scale effort to collect articles recorded in academic
journals that celebrate, recognize, or memorialize the scientists in our sample, whether they
are deceased or still-living. The challenge is to do so in a manner this consistent over time
and does not entail a built-in bias in favor of the deceased. To do so, we rely on PubMed, a
publicly available bibliometric database curated by the Library of Medicine, which contains,
as of the end of 2018, 29 million records for the biomedical research literature, life science
journals, and online books. Helpfully, every publication indexed by PubMed is tagged by
one or more of 80 distinct publication types, ten among which could potentially denote
a personal recognition event. Sifting through these articles in a systematic way, we build
a dataset of 5,850 distinct articles that pertain to one of the scientists in our database,
deceased or still-living control.23 While there are more events overall in the control sample,
  22
     Consider, for example, “Studying the visual system in awake monkeys: two classic papers by Robert H.
Wurtz,” which appeared in the Journal of Neurophysiology in 2007. While the article highlights the impact
of two articles in a specific subfield, it does so with a clear focus on the context that lead the investigator
to develop a novel experimental paradigm to study visual perception in primates, and features his picture
prominently.
  23
     Appendix E provides additional detail on the identification of these events which involved a manual
handcoding effort to weed out false positives due to homonyms.




                                                      26
the average number of events per scientist is much higher for the deceased than for the still
living scientists (1.74 vs. 0.52 on average).

       In order to compare the intensity of recognition between prematurely deceased and still-
living scientists, we leverage our research design. Recall that a byproduct of the matching
procedure at the article level (cf. Appendix C) is to generate a counterfactual year of death
for each elite scientist whose articles match those of treated scientists. This counterfactual
year of death provides a temporal anchor to compare recognition for the deceased as well as
the living. A slight complication arises since the same scientist can serve as control multiple
times, for different treated scientists who passed away in different years between 1969 and
2003. As a result, there is typically more than one counterfactual year of death for each
control scientist. To get around this problem, we simply select at random one of the possible
counterfactual years of death for each living scientist. We then use a window of one year
before until four years after the year of death (or counterfactual death) symmetrically for
deceased and control scientists, and sum the number of recognition events for each scientist
within that window.

       Figure 5, Panel A displays the histogram for the distribution of events, broken down
by treatment status. The distribution of recognition is extremely skewed for deceased and
still-living scientists, but recognition is a relatively rare event for the 8,326 control scientists:
Only 6% are recognized at least once, whereas 49% of the deceased are the subject of a
recognition event. This simple comparison of means provides important validation for a key
premise of our argument, which is that death is an exogenous shock that shifts opportunities
for interested promotion.24


3.5       Predicting Long-Run Posthumous Citations

       The third and last step of our analysis examines whether recognition efforts plausibly lie
on the causal pathway linking the premature death of a scientist with her citation “afterlife.”
To do so, we face the challenge that posthumous citations could be mechanically related to
  24
    Given the sparsity of the recognition data—a vanishingly small number of still-living controls receive
more than one event during the window—our empirical analysis at the scientist level will focus on the
probability of being recognized (modeled with a logit specification), rather than the intensity of recognition.
In Appendix E, we present additional analyses of memorialization specifically for the sample of 720 scientists.
In this smaller sample, there are enough events (especially after bringing in additional types of memorial
events beyond those appearing in professional journals) to model the intensity of memorialization using count
data models.


                                                      27
memorialization activities (e.g., the publication of a special volume dedicated to the work
of the deceased, which necessarily includes citations to his work), and more broadly to
the activities of the deceased’s “sales force.” To avoid the reflection problem entailed by
correlating two variables driven by the same underlying process—the mobilization of the
sales force—we must predict posthumous citation using information available before the
death event exclusively.

       A natural starting point might be to use the estimates from the causal model to generate
predictions. However, the difference-in-differences modeling strategy described in section
3.3.4, while well-suited to the challenge of estimating the causal effect of premature death on
citation trajectories, is not adapted to the task of predicting, at the article level, the future
time path of citations.25 To generate article-level predictions, we begin by collapsing the
data in the longitudinal dimension, such that for each article (treated or control) there are
exactly two observations, one before the year of death or counterfactual death, and one from
the year of death onwards.

       We then construct a list of 728 predictive features, including the number of citations that
accrued to the article in the pre-death (or pre-counterfactual death) period (log transformed);
a female scientist indicator variable; year of publication effects; type of degree effects; a
full suite of indicator variables for the scientists’ year of (possibly counterfactual) death; a
series of indicator variables for scientists’ highest degree graduation years; and 472 indicator
variables for each journal in which each article appeared. Using these features, we perform
a penalized Poisson regression with Lasso regularization to generate predicted post-death
citation rates without overfitting the data.26

       For each article, we compute the number of “excess” citations, that is, the difference
between actual posthumous citations received and the predicted score. Panel B of Figure D1
in Appendix D displays the histogram for the distribution of this measure, which is skewed
and takes on negative values (the median of the distribution is -4.6). In the article-level
  25
     In fact, the conditional fixed effects Poisson estimator only allows us to characterize how scientist death
shifts the conditional mean of the flow of citation over time. It would be invalid to use the resulting estimates
to compute a prediction for each article in the sample. Yet, it is the appropriate estimator for the causal
analysis because it will generate consistent estimates under mild regularity assumptions (Wooldridge 1997).
  26
     Appendix D provides more details, as well as sensitivity analyses, using a much more parsimonious
negative binomial model estimated by maximum likelihood, as well as a high-dimensional fixed effects Poisson
estimation routine (Correia et al. 2019). The variant we selected, based on the plugin formula for the Lasso
(Belloni et al. 2016), generate by far the best out-of sample predictions (as ascertained by the deviance
residuals), but interestingly exhibits the smallest correlation with actual posthumous citations.



                                                       28
sample of extinct scientists, we can run simple OLS specifications where excess citations are
regressed on an indicator variable for having a deceased last author, a non-linear function of
the intensity of recognition activities for each scientist, as well as a large vector X of control
variables (such as year of publication effects for each article, gender, highest degree, cause
of death, age at death, and year of death indicators):

                   N egLog(excess citesi ) = β0 + β1 DECEASEDi
                                                X3                       0
                                                                                                              (2)
                                             +        γk 1#eventsi =k + β Xi + εi
                                                            k=1

where N egLog(x) = log(x) if x > 0 and −log(−x) if x < 0 (Yeo and Johnson 2000). We are
primarily interested in examining whether the correlation between death and posthumous
citations is mediated by recognition efforts. If this were the case, the coefficient β1 should
decrease in magnitude, or even vanish once the intensity of recognition is controlled for in
the specification (by including the series of indicator variables γk , corresponding to three
different levels of recognition intensity, as right hand side covariates).



4        Results
4.1       The Effect of Premature Death on Citation Rates

       Table 3 presents the main results for the first step of our analysis, and Figure 4 pro-
vides corresponding event study graphs. These are created by estimating a specification in
which the treatment effect is interacted with a set of indicator variables corresponding to a
particular year relative to the scientist’s death, and then graphing the effects and the 95%
confidence interval around them (for example, panels A, B, and C of Figure 4 correspond to
the first, second, and third column in Table 3).27 The estimate in the first column of Table 3
implies that the papers by deceased scientists receive a boost in citations after the scientist
passes away, relative to the papers of still-living scientists, with an estimated magnitude of
7.4%. Panel A in Figure 4 shows that this effect is long-lasting. After a pronounced upsurge
in citation rates in the three to four years that immediately follow the death event, the
magnitude of the effect tends to attenuate, and is less precisely estimated, though only in
Panel C (corresponding to older stars) is there clear evidence of reversion to the pre-event
mean of zero effect. Overall, it seems that however important a scientist is as the “salesman”
  27
     In these specifications, the AF T ER DEAT H term which is common to treated and control publications
is also interacted with a complete series of lags and leads relative to the year of death or counterfactual death.


                                                       29
for promoting his work, this pales in comparison to the promotional effect of the third-party
“sales force.” More generally, we have clear evidence of a distortion in the informational
efficiency of the scientific valuation process, whereby the death of a scientist seems to raise
the valuation of a scientific paper by dint of the contingency of its lead author’s untimely
demise.

       The additional results in Table 3 and Figure 4 shed light on two issues discussed above:
(i) whether the death was anticipated, and how such anticipation might alter the strength
of our conclusions; and (ii) whether the effect is more pronounced when the death occurred
at a young age.

       With regard to the first issue, it seems clear from Panels A, B, C, and E of Figure 4 that
there is no discernible evidence of an effect in the years leading up to the death. The absence
of differential citation trends between treated and control articles provide an important ex
post validation of our identification strategy. In Panel D (corresponding to the subsample of
articles by treated scientists who died from an anticipated illness and their associated control
articles), one can observe a positive and marginally significant increase in citations in the
year before death. It seems that for anticipated deaths, news of the scientist’s terminal illness
increases attention to the scientist’s work prior to their passing, especially if the news of the
eminent scientist’s illness spreads in the “invisible college” in which s/he participates.28

       With regard to the second issue, we find that the citation boost that a scientist receives
as a result of premature death is greater when the death occurs at a relatively young age.
The overall difference can be seen most clearly from the comparison of Panels B and C, given
the stronger tendency towards reversion in later years among scientists who were older at
the time of death. The overall difference is relatively slight, however, and is only statistically
significant when the comparison is within scientists who die suddenly (whereas the difference
is reversed when the comparison is within scientists whose deaths were anticipated). This
could be because such deaths are experienced by the community as especially tragic (with
particular sensitivity to the work the scientist might have produced had she lived), thereby
triggering an especially strong mobilization on the part of the sales force.

       We now explore the underlying mechanisms through the three contextual factors dis-
cussed above: article impact at baseline, scientist engagement style, and citer identity.
  28
    Note however that anticipated deaths do not exhibit elevated rates of “recognition events” in the year
of their death—or the two years that precede it—relative to scientists whose death was likely sudden.



                                                   30
   Table 4 splits the sample over article-level characteristics that should correlate with the
salience of discrete academic works within a larger portfolio of published articles for each
scientist. The average effect (reproduced in the first column) conceals striking heterogeneity
in the magnitude that apply to articles of different initial impact, assessed by cumulative
citations received up the year of death (or counterfactual death). For the articles that had
already attracted the most notice at the time of death, either in a local (Own Top 10%)
or global (Universe Top 1%) sense, the posthumous increase in citations is more than 17%
(fourth and fifth columns), while for the least well-cited articles at the time of death (Own
Bottom 10%), the boost is an even more remarkable 91% (second column). The papers
that lie between the 25% and 75% percentile of citation impact at the time of death (third
column) do not experience a posthumous citation boost. Finally, recently published articles,
who are presumably salient in citers’ minds, experience a somewhat greater increase (10.1%)
than articles published earlier. These analyses imply that the increased attention received
by the articles of deceased scientists after their passing is not uniformly distributed across
their portfolio: the broad middle of the impact distribution receives no citation boost, while
articles in the tail, and particularly the bottom tail, experience an upward shift in their
citation trajectory. These contributions would have remained relatively obscure had their
last author not prematurely died.

   Table 5 reports the results with regard to engagement style. The first two columns report
estimates for the sample split across the median of the “size of the sales force” distribution,
and shows that the post-death effect is driven by the sample of stars who cultivated a larger
number of coauthors while alive. The next two columns correspond to a sample split across
the median of our proxy for self-promotional behavior. We find that the post-death citation
boost is twice as large in magnitude for the subsample of articles of more “humble” stars,
consistent with the view that the salesman’s promotional activities are discounted by the
audience. However, we caution that the standard errors around the estimates are sufficiently
large that we cannot reject the hypothesis that the two coefficients are in fact equal.

   The results with regard to citer identity are presented in Table 6. Note that the different
columns do not correspond to splits of the sample; rather, it is only the dependent variable
that changes across specifications. For instance, the first column models the effect of the
scientist’s passing on the number of citations solely coming from articles that do not include
a former collaborator of the deceased (or of the still-living control scientist). Overall, there
is only modest evidence that post-death citations are bestowed on the work of deceased


                                              31
scientists disproportionately by more proximate citers. While the magnitudes are higher
for proximate citations (especially in the intellectual and spatial dimensions), the difference
between the effect on proximate vs. non-proximate citations is not itself statistically signifi-
cant. We tentatively conclude that the citation boost documented in Tables 3 and 4 (as well
as Figure 4) reflects a diffuse and increased interest in the deceased’s contributions.


4.2       The Determinants of Individual Academic Recognition

       In clear violation of informational inefficiency, the results above demonstrate that the
reception of scientists’ work does change after their death, with articles by the deceased
being shifted to a steeper citation trajectory, relative to the articles of the living. This
posthumous boost is particularly large for articles that had not attracted wide recognition,
and for young scientists who die suddenly. As a whole, the evidence suggests that death
elicits a surge in interest in the deceased scientist’s work relative to comparable work by
still-living scientists.

       What these results do not explain, however, is why this mobilization occurred. In the
second and third steps of our analysis, we examine the possibility that supporters of the
deceased scientist promote her work via recognition events whereas such interested promotion
does not occur, or occurs with less intensity, for still-living scientists.

       To measure the determinants of academic recognition at the scientist level, we model
the probability of being memorialized (for the deceased) or recognized (for the still-living
controls) at least once in an academic journal within a window of one year before to four
years after the year of death (or counterfactual death). In the sample of 9;046 scientists,
our minimal list of covariates to explain recognition includes an indicator variable for the
deceased, the scientist’s gender, his age in the year of death (captured with six indicator
variables corresponding to different brackets, e.g., less than 45 years old, between 45 and 55
years old, etc.), indicator variables for the cause of death (anticipated death is the omitted
category), and a full suite of indicator variables for the calendar year of death.29

       Table 7 reports marginal effects from logit models. Consistent with Figure 5, Panel A,
the estimates in column 1 demonstrate that the deceased are more than 18% more likely to
  29
    Recall that still-living scientists inherit both the year of death and the cause of death of the deceased
scientist with whom they are matched in our research design.



                                                     32
be recognized (at the means of the other covariates). Conversely, there does not seem to
be much difference between the likelihood of recognition for scientists of different genders
(with the caveat that the gender composition of the sample skews heavily male). We do
not report the coefficients for the included age effects, but the age gradient is relatively flat,
except at very old ages—the “forces of nature” who die past the age of 75 while still leading
an active scientific career get memorialized more intensely than scientists whose death can
more legitimately be deemed “premature.”

       Columns 2, 3, and 4 examine the role of eminence in shaping the intensity of recognition.
All columns include an indicator variable for members of the National Academy of Science,
which can be thought of as an “elite within the elite.” The effect of NAS membership is
always large and precisely estimated.30 Column 2 uses cumulative citations at death as an
additional measure of eminence. Column 3 (respectively column 4) uses cumulative publica-
tions instead (respectively cumulative NIH funding). The results indicate that eminence is,
perhaps unsurprisingly, correlated positively with recognition. Column 5 includes all three
measures in the specification, but the high correlation between them makes it difficult to
interpret the results (although the cumulative citation measure is the one that appears to
keep its sign and magnitude).

       The next two columns retain eminence as a covariate (using NAS membership and ci-
tations at death), but also add two measures that aim to capture the size of the cohort
of scientists who are probably most affected by the premature death of a scientist: former
trainees and collaborators of the deceased.31 The results in columns 6 and 7 do not seem to
indicate that the sheer quantity of trainees and former collaborators (which we might think
of as constituting the deceased’s “visible college”) correlate strongly with memorialization
activities. Column 8 presents the results for the most saturated model, which adds our
index of self-promotional behavior as a covariate. We find that self-promotion is positively
correlated with recognition. At the very least, it does not appear that humility makes it
easier for the sales force to coalesce around the memory of the deceased.

       Since the post-death citation boost was especially startling for younger scientists, we also
explore whether the age-recognition gradient differs for deceased and still-living scientists.
  30
      Table E5 in Appendix E reproduces this effect while omitting the NAS Biographical Memoirs in the count
of academic memory events, since this could mechanically lead to a correlation between NAS membership
and memorialization. The results are largely unchanged.
   31
      Trainees are identified as the subset of coauthors who appear in first authorship position when the star
is in last authorship position, in a window of five years around the time they earned their highest degree.


                                                     33
We do so by including age at death×treatment status interactions in the memorialization
regression model, and displaying the marginal effects in Figure 5, Panel B. Older scientists
may be more memorialized than younger ones on average (cf. Figure E2 in Appendix E),
but at every age, and especially younger ones, scientists who die get memorialized more than
those who remain alive. Thus, consistent with Lang and Lang (1988), and consistent with
the findings of the difference-in-differences model, the type of recognition events that accrue
to very senior scientists in the twilight of their careers (or in retirement) are bestowed onto
younger scientists only if they die prematurely.

   Appendix E, Table E3 examines the authors of academic memory events in the subsam-
ple of 720 deceased scientists, and demonstrates that the memorializers are either socially
connected (coauthor or former trainee), intellectually connected (same subfield), or spatially
connected (same institution) with the individual they recognize. The evidence is therefore
consistent with a particular sequence unfolding after the death event whereby close associates
take on the burden of memorializing the deceased, and in certain conditions this triggers a
much wider and diffuse response that expresses itself in the form of an elevated propensity
to cite the work of the deceased. The next section attempts to substantiate empirically the
last step of this sequence.


4.3    Long-run Citation Afterlife and its Relationship to Recogni-
       tion Efforts

   For the final step of our analysis, we test whether recognition events in a limited window
around the time of death (or counterfactual death) mediate the effect of a scientist’s passing
on the rate of long-run posthumous citations for articles that were published before the death
occurred. To do so, we regress “excess” cumulative citations (computed in Section 3.5 and
Appendix D) on an indicator variable for the deceased, the intensity of recognition activity,
along with the following covariates as controls: year of publication effects, gender, degree
type, an indicator variable for sudden deaths and unknown causes of death, as well as a full
set of indicator variables for the scientist’s age at the time of death and for his/her calendar
year of death. Because recognition efforts might have a non-linear relationship with long-run
citations, we break out the overall count of academic recognition events: zero event (89.2%
of the articles, the omitted category); exactly one recognition event (6.9% of the articles);
exactly two recognition events (2.1% of the articles); and three or more recognition events
(1.8% of the articles).


                                              34
       Table 8 reports OLS estimates. Because the distribution of excess citations is skewed
and takes on negative values (see Figure D1, Panel B in Appendix D), we model it using
a NegLog transformation (Yeo and Johnson 2000). In columns 1a, 1b, and 1c, we use all
possible citations to build a predicted count for the “surprise” in citations for each article
published by a scientist in the post-death period. In columns 2a, 2b, and 2c, we use the
same predictive model but omit citations that accrue in the five years that immediately
follow the death (as well as citations from articles written by coauthors or memorializers) to
compute the prediction. The reason to exclude citations that accrue to the scientists’ articles
in the immediate aftermath of his/her death (or counterfactual death) is that these citations
could reflect, at least in part, recognition efforts (it is not uncommon for obituaries and
reminiscences published in scientific journals to have a list of references, for example). By
excluding from the count of excess citations those that accrue in the period of bereavement (or
counterfactual bereavement), we can be more confident that our measure of excess citations
does not reflect the mechanical impact of memorialization efforts.

       In column 1a, we confirm the effect found in the difference-in-differences analysis: the
articles of deceased scientists receive 11.2% more posthumous citations on average, relative
to those of still-living scientists. Results in column 1b are consistent with our argument
that assigns a key role to recognition events: recognized scientists exhibit elevated rates of
posthumous citations, relative to unrecognized ones. Column 1c simultaneously enters the
deceased effect and the effects for the recognition events in the model. The magnitude of the
deceased effect is halved, and becomes imprecisely estimated. In contrast, the magnitudes of
the recognition effects remain largely unchanged. From this analysis, it would appear that
recognition processes largely mediate the effect of death on the allocation of the scientific
community’s attention towards scientific works that appeared before the death.32

       The models in columns 2a, 2b, and 2c paint a similar qualitative picture, with the caveat
that the attenuation of the coefficient estimate for the effect of death itself is less stark in
these models, which omit the short-run citation response.33 In spite of this, the correlation
between recognition intensity and posthumous citations does not appear to merely reflect
  32
      Using a more parsimonious model with a single dichotomous mediator (recognized at least once versus
not), we perform a Sobel (Sobel 1982) test and find that 41.1% of the effect of death is mediated by the
recognition effect.
   33
      The Sobel Test implies that only 37.3% of the treatment effect of death is mediated by the recognition
effect in this case.




                                                    35
awareness by the “visible college” during the turbulent years that immediately follow the
passing of these scientists.

       A necessary caveat is that the validity of a mediation analysis of this type requires (i)
the absence of unmeasured treatment-outcome confounders, conditional on control covari-
ates; and (ii) the absence of unmeasured mediator-outcome confounders, also conditional
on covariates (Shaver 2005). The first assumption might be valid in our application, if we
assume death to be an exogenous event.34 The second assumption strikes us as being less
tenable, since more recognized scientists might differ from less recognized ones in myriad
other ways that also correlate with unobserved determinants of posthumous citation rates.
In the absence of exogenous variation in memorialization intensity, the evidence of partial
mediation presented in Table 8 must therefore be considered as merely suggestive: individ-
ual recognition plausibly contributes to the triggering of a vibrant “citation afterlife” for
deceased scientists.

       When considered in the context of the results presented in Tables 3 through 7, the
evidence points to the following chain of events: the death of eminent scientists activates a
narrow vanguard of colleagues who were proximate to the deceased.35 It is this vanguard
who engages in memorialization efforts, and these efforts in turn bring to the attention of
the scientific community at large the work of the deceased—in particular, work that may
have been overlooked while s/he was alive.



5        Conclusion and Discussion
5.1       Limitations

       Before concluding, it is useful to consider our findings in light of the two principal lim-
itations of our study: that our sample is limited to elite academic life scientists, and that
our method for identifying the effect of interested promotion focuses on the shock of a sci-
entist’s premature death. To recall, the main advantage of our sample is that the wealth of
  34
     But even the exogenous character of death is open to challenge in our setting: in the case of anticipated
events, elite scientists might have the opportunity to actively shape their legacy, including the identity of
their future memorializers.
  35
     Proximity is multidimensional, corresponding to relationships that unfolded in geographic space (such
as the case of department or university colleagues), in social space (such as between mentor and trainee, or
between coauthors), and in intellectual space (such as shared topics, research questions, and methodologies).



                                                     36
information on elite life scientists allows us to create precise and meaningful counterfactuals.
And the main advantage of focusing on the effects of death is that the death of a scientist
occasions a shift in promotional activity without any change in the underlying quality of
what was produced. But to what extent do our findings generalize beyond what we can
observe with this sample and method?

   Regarding the limitations of focusing on elite scientists, some light may be shed by ex-
amining the variation in status within our sample. To see if higher status scientists receive
a larger boost in citations after their death, we reprise the difference-in-differences empirical
framework presented in Section 3.3 and split the sample at the median by cumulative pub-
lications, citations, and funding at the time of death. No clear pattern emerges from these
analyses—displayed in Table 9—except that the effect of death remains positive across all
sample splits. The articles of more eminent scientists may experience a larger boost than
those of the less eminent (when eminence is measured by cumulative publications at death)
or a smaller boost (when eminence is measure by cumulative citations or funding at death).
Moreover, in all cases the difference between the above median and below median coefficients
is not itself statistically significant. Therefore, the data at our disposal do not support the
idea that the efficacy of interested promotion varies with a scientist’s status.

   Yet there remain reasons to doubt that we can generalize from an elite sample to the
general population of scientists. On the one hand, it is possible that interested promotion is
more efficacious for lower-status scientists. This possibility is foreshadowed by the literature
on the Matthew Effect in that it highlights how the work of high-status scientists is more
widely read (Merton 1968; Azoulay et al. 2014; Simcoe and Waguespack 2011; Cole 1970;
Allison et al. 1982). Insofar as this is the case, it may be that the work of elite scientists
is relatively insensitive to promotional efforts in general and posthumous memorialization
in particular. Put differently, while we find that even the highest-status scientists have
some work that has been overlooked by the community and is thus sensitive to interested
promotion, this should a fortiori be true for low-status scientists. But while the efficacy of
equivalent promotional activity may be greater for lower-status scientists, it may be more
difficult to mobilize such (posthumous) activity for such scientists. Our results regarding
the correlates of individual academic recognition (Table 7 and Table E4 in Appendix E)
demonstrate significant responsiveness to status differences. Since such efforts partly mediate
the effect of death on posthumous citations (Table 8), it follows that one might expect the
death of lower-status scientists to be less effective in mobilizing a sales force, and for this


                                               37
smaller sales force to be less effective in activating the community at large to pay homage
to the work of the deceased.36 Finally, it is also possible that interested promotion would be
less valuable for lower-status scientists because audiences will find efforts to promote their
work less credible.

       Putting aside how the rate and effect of interested promotion might vary with the status
of the scientist, promotional activities may vary with other contextual factors that are held
constant in our study. In particular, it may be that the death of a scientist is an unusually
good context for promoting her work because the norm of disinterestedness is suspended.
The occasion of a death may also lend unusual credibility to assessments of a scientist’s
work because they occur sometime after publication and thus are not a snap judgment but
can be made in light of subsequent work. Finally, since we identified the salesman effect
indirectly, via the absence of a drop in citations due to death, there is reason to wonder
whether scientists can sometimes be more effective as salesmen than our study suggests.

       The upshot is that the current study is hardly the last word on how interested promotion
skews scientific valuation or social valuation more generally. Our results provide evidence
for informational inefficiency in a highly developed and broad scientific domain, but they
are particular to that domain and a particular select group within it, a particular social cue,
and a particular opportunity for viewing the effects of that social cue. Our discussion here
provides some guidance for how our results may generalize along those dimensions, but we
must await future research before drawing firmer conclusions.


5.2       Implications

       The foregoing caveats notwithstanding, our study has significant implications for under-
standing the informational (in)efficiency of meritocratic systems, how science as a vocation
shapes recognition and the allocation of credit, and for reputational entrepreneurship more
generally. We conclude by discussing each of these implications in turn.
  36
    The literature on the Matthew Effect would also suggest that lower-status scientists attract smaller
numbers of coauthors, research assistants, doctoral students, and admirers (see Zuckerman 1967; Dey et al.
1997; Goldstone 1979; Stewart 1983; Rossiter 1993; Allison and Stewart 1974), in other words, a less vibrant
sales force.




                                                    38
5.2.1      The Informational Efficiency of Meritocratic Systems

       An important contribution of our paper is to open up a new direction for the study of
how social cues impact the informational efficiency of meritocratic systems. As reviewed
above, recent research has made significant strides on this question. However, this literature
is also limited because of the narrow range of social cues and situations it has examined. In
short, it is potentially quite problematic to reduce all social cues to disinterested validation.
One important limitation of this restricted focus has been stressed by some scholars (see
Zuckerman 2012a: 227-230; Turco and Zuckerman 2017: 1287) but not fully appreciated in
the literature—i.e., that anonymous evaluators (as in Salganik et al. 2006 or van de Rijt
2019) are unusually impervious to social influence. In many social settings, actors are highly
sensitive to the popularity of a practice or product, sometimes conforming and sometimes
differentiating from others based purely on the prevalence and identity of others who have
adopted it (e.g., Catalini and Tucker 2017; Lieberson and Lynn 2003; Obukhova et al. 2014).
As such, whereas some scholars have concluded from studies of anonymous evaluators that
social cues have limited impact in skewing valuations in meritocratic settings (see Salganik
and Watts 2008; Bol et al. 2017), this conclusion is premature.

       To be sure, some studies have indeed examined disinterested validation in settings where
valuations are not anonymous. For example, studies based on natural experiments in sci-
entific domains are focused on environments where the evaluators may be quite sensitive
to the impressions their evaluations make on others. In particular, scientists may often be
reluctant to cite work that is rarely cited by others (or perhaps by lower-status scientists).
Given that, it is notable progress to find that disinterested validation is responsible for a
significant if modest degree of informational inefficiency (Azoulay et al. 2014; Simcoe and
Waguespack 2011).37

       Yet without broadening the social cues examined, from disinterested validation to inter-
ested promotion, our knowledge of how social cues impact informational efficiency is quite
limited. It is unclear why (with the exception of the literature on reputational entrepreneur-
ship), scholars have focused on disinterested validation rather than interested promotion.38
  37
     Note, however, that when evaluators are highly sensitive to making unusual valuations, this provides
another reason why a system can be allocationally inefficient even while achieving informational efficiency.
At the limit, if everyone conforms to established views, reactions to new work will be consistent but progress
will never be recognized.
  38
     As Arnout van de Rijt helpfully pointed out to us, an additional dimension along which social cues
vary is the extent to which they occur via relationships. Thus the mode of social influence found in book



                                                     39
One possibility is that it is challenging to study promotional activity in the laboratory, at
least in a manner that would be generalizable. A second possibility is that scholars tend to
assume that scientific fields, and meritocratic systems more generally, are governed by the
Mertonian norms of disinterestedness and universalism. We have given ample reason not to
rely on such an assumption, however. In light of the information frictions documented here
and prior research, scientific communities may find it difficult and undesirable to dismiss
promotional efforts as they may have useful information in them. This ambiguity may make
interested promotion an effective means of boosting valuations, both by the focal scientist,
and by her supporters.

    If either the avowed norms of science were fully operative or the mechanisms underlying
the scientific marketplace worked to distinguish better from worse work (given established
paradigms), it would not matter whether the author of a scientific paper is dead or alive.
But we find that it does matter, thus indicating the weakness of such norms and the limits
to informational efficiency. In particular, the random event of an untimely death elicits
commemoration activity, and such activity seems to raise the valuation of elite scientists’
lesser known work. As noted, these findings are hardly definitive. But insofar as we have
identified a class of important social cues that shape valuations in meritocratic systems,
future work will help flesh out our understanding of such effects given a wider range of social
cues and social contexts.


5.2.2    How Science as a Vocation Shapes Recognition and the Allocation of
         Credit

    A second contribution of our paper is to shed light on how careers within science shape the
allocation of credit. Misvaluations arise in part because science struggles to divorce research
from the identity of its author. The norms of disinterestedness and universalism belie the
fact that science is a profession through which many individuals seek employment, status,
and remuneration (Merton 1968; Polanyi 1966; Gieryn 1983).While scientific communities
may seek to evaluate contributions in a manner that is blind to the identity of contributors,
members can hardly be blind to identity when they recruit individuals to teach and to
manage laboratories. Similarly, while citations and various awards may be conferred on
clubs (Rawlings and Childress 2019) is distinct from either that which occurs via the canonical studies of
disinterested validation or the kind of interested promotion we have presented studied in this article—both
of which operate largely outside direct relationships. A full account of how social cues skew valuations should
also consider this additional dimension.



                                                      40
papers, grants and other awards are given to individuals for broad research agendas. The
paradox is that the scientific community is committed to assessing work independently of
their producers even while evaluating producers on the basis of their work. This tension
between universalism and science as an employment system is most observable in the debate
over the “blinding” of the review process; though double-blinded reviews are most common
in science, there is significant controversy over the practice precisely because some explicitly
wish to use the author’s identity as a signal of quality (Blank 1991; Ceci and Peters 1984).
While the salience of identity to the valuation of scientific work is not new in the context
of this debate, we demonstrate that even outside of it (or more specifically, after it), the
identity of the author materially affects the valuation of scientific work.

   This struggle shows science to be nearer to art in its evaluation of work than would
at first appear. There is little debate that the value of a work of art is greatly affected
by the identity of the artist. The salience of the artist’s identity arises from the fact that
art is assessed through the lens of the artist’s style (Sgourev and Althuizen 2014; Wohl
Forthcoming). For this reason, art exhibitions are typically organized by artist (within
genre) and reviews are most often done by well-known critics where the identity of both
parties is plainly visible. Science at first blush seems to be organized in stark contrast, all in
accordance to the norm of universalism (Merton 1979). But our findings demonstrate that
these institutional arrangements are insufficient to overcome the incentives created by the
employment and status system of science. Just as in the case of Lang and Lang’s (1988)
etchers, the valuation of scientific works is affected by the identity of the author via efforts
at interested promotion. Discussions of a scientist’s oeuvre at a retirement festschrift or a
memorial event bear many of the hallmarks of parallel events in the art world.


5.2.3   The Logic of Interested Promotion

   Finally, our analysis advances our understanding of how interested promotion shapes
producer legacies. Past research in this area (labelled “reputational entrepreneurship”) has
focused on politics and art (Fine 1996; Jansen 2007; Lang and Lang 1988; Bromberg and
Fine 2002; Kahl et al. 2010; McCormick 2015). This study used the context of science to
analyze how a scientist’s death affects the amount of interested promotion that her work
receives, thus boosting positive recognition for her papers. This represents an advance both
because this is a setting with especially strong meritocratic norms and because it allows for
more careful identification. A key challenge in verifying any causal claim is to measure the


                                               41
impact relative to a counterfactual situation in which the event had not occurred (Lewis
1973). In politics, this is daunting because the number of observations is quite small and
events are historically and contextually dependent. And identifying counterfactuals in art is
challenging due to the absence of consensual criteria for judging pieces of art to be equivalent.
In science, however, over 2.5 million articles are published annually after having completed
peer review based on relatively consensual evaluation guidelines. As a result, we have been
able to synthesize counterfactual cases in which death and/or interested promotion did not
occur by comparing articles with similar characteristics.

      This approach yields striking results: interested promotion can permanently shift the
valuation of prior work by up to 7.3% on average, and upwards of 90% in some cases. This
research design also allows us to shed light on which actors are the most effective in promoting
legacy. Prior work tended to focus on either the sales force (Lang and Lang 1988) or the
salesman (e.g., Fine 1996) but tended not to directly compare the two. Our research design
allows for this through the juxtaposition of living scientists and the memorializers of deceased
ones. This comparison reveals the memorializers (“sales force”) to be more effective in
changing valuations than is the scientist herself. This may reflect a very general pattern. It is
intriguing to note how major religious movements (e.g., Christianity, Mormonism, Hasidism,
Islam, and Buddhism) seem to get a boost from the founder’s death, as it mobilizes efforts by
disciples to ensure that the founder’s life and vision are remembered and institutionalized.39
But why might the sales force be more effective than the salesman? Two likely (but as yet
untested) reasons are size and credibility. Individuals promoting their own work may be
limited in that they can only be in one place at a time; by contrast, the sales force can
have a much larger presence. Additionally, while communities may discount the efforts of
the salesman as being self-interested, the motives of the sales force may be more difficult
to impugn. As such, the larger community may be more receptive to their message, and
therefore, likely to pay more attention.


5.2.4      The Impact of Superstar Scientist Deaths

      Our paper also sheds some initial light on how interested promotion works. Prior research
on reputational entrepreneurship does not distinguish between shifts in attention and in
valuation. By contrast, our results—in particular, that it is the least-cited papers that are
most sensitive to reputational entrepreneurship—suggest that attentional processes may be
 39
      We are grateful to Angela Lu for pointing this out to us.



                                                      42
especially important. Our study is not definitive in this regard, nor is it clear to what extent
they would generalize to domains beyond science, but they call into question a tendency to
assume that reputational entrepreneurship operates by changing the valuations of existing
audiences. In bringing overlooked work to the fore, the sales force is able to increase its
valuation by changing the sample of work with which the community engages (Denrell and
Le Mens 2016). That this mechanism is so effective in science, and especially in the work
of elite scientists, is testimony to the extent to which search costs inhibit the scientific
community’s ability to digest new work.

   We close by reflecting on how our findings at once resonate and are in tension with broader
observations concerning the role of a prominent scientist’s death in shaping her legacy. On
the one hand, we have seen evidence of a general pattern by which death mobilizes (a large,
credible cadre) of supporters to promote the scientist’s legacy. On the other hand, recent
research (Azoulay et al. 2019) provides systematic evidence for Max Planck’s quip that
“science advances one funeral at a time.” The idea is that prominent scientists are often
conservative forces due to their control of resources and opportunities, such that their removal
from the scene gives innovative outsiders (identified as scientists who did not collaborate with
the dead scientist) the space they need to flourish. But then is a scientist’s death a positive
or a negative force from the standpoint of preserving a scientist’s legacy?

   A tentative answer is that there are two countervailing effects. On the one hand, the
death of a scientist gives her supporters a temporary platform for calling attention to her
work, thus helping her work gain recognition relative to other work. But on the other hand,
unless these supporters have effective control of their field, their temporary platform does not
block the arrival of outsiders who might wish to challenge the existing paradigm with new
contributions—work that soon becomes more impactful as it facilitates a paradigm shift. A
possible paradox then is that while the death of elite scientists provides a glimpse into the
informational inefficiency of science, it also increases the allocational efficiency of science in
the long run.




                                               43
References

Allison, Paul D., J. Scott Long, and Tad K. Krauze. 1982. “Cumulative Advantage and Inequality
        in Science.” American Sociological Review 47(5): 615-25.
Allison, Paul D., and John A. Stewart. 1974. “Productivity Differences Among Scientists: Evidence
        for Accumulative Advantage.” American Sociological Review 39(4): 596-606.
Azoulay, Pierre, Christian Fons-Rosen, and Joshua S. Graff Zivin. 2019. “Does Science Advance
      One Funeral at a Time?” American Economic Review 109(8): 2889-920.
Azoulay, Pierre, Joshua S. Graff Zivin, and Bhaven N. Sampat. 2012. “The Diffusion of Scientific
      Knowledge Across Time and Space: Evidence from Professional Transitions for the
      Superstars of Medicine.” Pp. 107-55 in The Rate and Direction of Inventive Activity
      Revisited, edited by Scott Stern and Joshua Lerner: University of Chicago Press.
Azoulay, Pierre, Toby E. Stuart, and Yanbo Wang. 2014. “Matthew: Effect or Fable?”
      Management Science 60(1): 92-109.
Azoulay, Pierre, Joshua S. Graff Zivin, and Jialan Wang. 2010. “Superstar Extinction.” Quarterly
      Journal of Economics 125(2): 549-89.
Belloni, Alexandre, Victor Chernozhukov, and Ying Wei. 2016. “Post-Selection Inference for
        Generalized Linear Models with Many Controls.” Journal of Business & Economic
        Statistics 34(4): 606-19.
Blank, Rebecca M. 1991. “The Effects of Double-Blind Versus Single-Blind Reviewing:
       Experimental Evidence from The American Economic Review.” American Economic
       Review 81(5): 1041-67.
Bloor, David. 1973. “Wittgenstein and Mannheim on the Sociology of Mathematics.” Studies in
       History and Philosophy of Science 4(2): 173-91.
Bol, Thijs, Mathijs de Vaan, and Arnout van de Rijt. 2018. “The Matthew Effect in Science
       Funding.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 115(19): 4887-90.
Botelho, Tristan L. 2018. “Here’s an Opportunity: Knowledge Sharing Among Competitors as a
       Response to Buy-in Uncertainty.” Organization Science 29(6):1033-55.
Bromberg, Minna, and Gary Alan Fine. 2002. “Resurrecting the Red: Pete Seeger and the
      Purification of Difficult Reputations.” Social Forces 80(4): 1135-55.
Catalini, Christian, Nicola Lacetera, and Alexander Oettl. 2015. “The Incidence and Role of
       Negative Citations in Science.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 112(45):
       13823-26.
Catalini, Christian, and Catherine Tucker. 2017. “When Early Adopters Don’t Adopt.” Science
       357(6347): 135-36.
Ceci, Stephen J., and Douglas Peters. 1984. “How Blind is Blind Review?” American Psychologist
        39(12): 1491-94.
Cole, Stephen. 1970. “Professional Standing and the Reception of Scientific Discoveries.” American
        Journal of Sociology 76(2): 286-306.
Correia, Sergio, Paulo Guimarães, and Tom Zylkin. 2019. “PPMLHDFE: Fast Poisson Estimation
       with High-Dimensional Fixed Effects.” arXiv:1903.01690 [econ.EM].



                                               44
Correll, Shelley J., Cecilia L. Ridgeway, Ezra W. Zuckerman, Sharon Jank, Sara Jordan-Bloch,
        and Sandra Nakagawa. 2017. “It’s the Conventional Thought That Counts.” American
        Sociological Review 82(2): 297-327.
Denrell, Jerker, and Gaël Le Mens. 2016. “Information Sampling, Belief Synchronization, and
       Collective Illusions.” Management Science 63(2): 528-47.
Dey, Eric L., Jeffrey F. Milem, and Joseph B. Berger. 1997. “Changing Patterns of Publication
      Productivity: Accumulative Advantage or Institutional Isomorphism?” Sociology of
      Education 70(4): 308-23.
Espeland, Wendy, and Michael Sauder. 2007. “Rankings and Reactivity.” American Journal of
       Sociology 113(1): 1-40.
Farys, Rudolf, and Tobias Wolbring. 2017. “Matched Control Groups for Modeling Events in
       Citation Data: An Illustration of Nobel Prize Effects in Citation Networks.” Journal of the
       Association for Information Science and Technology 68(9): 2201-10.
Fine, Gary Alan. 1996. “Reputational Entrepreneurs and the Memory of Incompetence: Melting
       Supporters, Partisan Warriors, and Images of President Harding.” American Journal of
       Sociology 101(5): 1159-59.
———————. 2003. “Crafting Authenticity: The Validation of Identity in Self-Taught Art.”
   Theory and Society 32(2): 153-80.
Gieryn, Thomas F. 1983. “Boundary-Work and the Demarcation of Science from Non-Science:
       Strains and Interests in Professional Ideologies of Scientists.” American Sociological
       Review 48(6): 781-95.
Goldstone, Jack A. 1979. “A Deductive Explanation of the Matthew Effect in Science.” Social
       Studies of Science 9(3): 385-91.
Gouriéroux, Christian, Alain Monfort, and Alain Trognon. 1984. “Pseudo Maximum Likelihood
       Methods: Applications to Poisson Models.” Econometrica 53(3): 701-07.
Hausman, Jerry, Bronwyn H. Hall, and Zvi Griliches. 1984. “Econometric Models for Count Data
     with an Application to the Patents-R&D Relationship.” Econometrica 52(4): 909-38.
Holmes, Jack E., and Robert Elder Jr. 1989. “Our Best and Worst Presidents: Some Possible
      Reasons for Perceived Performance.” Presidential Studies Quarterly 19(3): 529-57.
Jansen, Robert S. 2007. “Resurrection and Appropriation: Reputational Trajectories, Memory
       Work, and the Political Use of Historical Figures.” American Journal of Sociology 112(4):
       953-1007.
Jaravel, Xavier, Neviana Petkova, and Alex Bell. 2018. “Team-Specific Capital and Innovation.”
       American Economic Review 108(4-5): 1034-73.
Kahl, Steven, Yong-Kyu Kim, and Damon J. Philips. 2010. “Identity Sequences and the Early
       Adoption Pattern of a Jazz Canon, 1920-1929.” Pp. 81-113 in Categories in Markets:
       Origins and Evolution, edited by Greta Hsu, Giacomo Negro, and Özgecan Koçak. Bingley,
       UK: Emerald Group Publishing.
Lang, Gladys Engel, and Kurt Lang. 1988. “Recognition and Renown: The Survival of Artistic
       Reputation.” American Journal of Sociology 94(1): 79-109.
Latour, Bruno, and Steve Woolgar. 1979. Laboratory Life: The Construction of Scientific Facts.
       Beverly Hills, CA: Sage Publications.
Lewis, David. 1973. “Causation.” The Journal of Philosophy 70(17): 556-67.


                                               45
Li, Danielle. 2017. “Expertise vs. Bias in Evaluation: Evidence from the NIH.” American Economic
       Journal: Applied Economics 9(2): 60-92.
Lieberson, Stanley, and Freda B. Lynn. 2003. “Popularity as Taste: An Application to the Naming
       Process.” Onoma 38: 235-76.
McCormick, Lisa. 2015. “The Agency of Dead Musicians.” Contemporary Social Science 10(3):
     323-35.
Merton, Robert K. 1968. “The Matthew Effect in Science.” Science 159(3819):56-63.
————————. 1988. “The Matthew Effect in Science, II: Cumulative Advantage and the
   Symbolism of Intellectual Property.” Isis 79(4): 606-23.
————————. 1942. “A Note on Science and Democracy.” Legal and Political Science 1: 115-
   26.
————————. 1979. The Sociology of Science. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Murray, Fiona, and Scott Stern. 2007. “Do Formal Intellectual Property Rights Hinder the Free
      Flow of Scientific Knowledge? An Empirical Test of the Anti-Commons Hypothesis.”
      Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 63(4): 648-87.
Nagaoka, Sadao, and Hideo Owan. 2014. “Author Ordering in Scientific Research: Evidence from
      Scientists Survey in the US and Japan.” IIR Working Paper No. 13-23, Hitotsubashi
      University, Institute of Innovation Research.
Obukhova, Elena, Ezra W. Zuckerman, and Jiayin Zhang. 2014. “When Politics Froze Fashion:
      The Effect of the Cultural Revolution on Naming in Beijing.” American Journal of
      Sociology 120(2): 555-83.
Oettl, Alexander. 2012. “Reconceptualizing Stars: Scientist Helpfulness and Peer Performance.”
       Management Science 58(6): 1122-40.
Polanyi, Michael. 1966. The Tacit Dimension: University of Chicago Press.
Rawlings, Craig M., and Clayton Childress. 2019. “Emergent Meanings: Reconciling Dispositional
      and Situational Accounts of Meaning-Making from Cultural Objects.” American Journal
      of Sociology 124(6): 1763-809.
Reschke, Brian P., Pierre Azoulay, and Toby E. Stuart. 2018. “Status Spillovers: The Effect of
      Status-conferring Prizes on the Allocation of Attention.” Administrative Science Quarterly
      63(4): 819-47.
Rossiter, Margaret W. 1993. “The Matthew Matilda Effect in Science.” Social Studies of Science
       23(2): 325-41.
Salganik, Matthew J., Peter Sheridan Dodds, and Duncan J. Watts. 2006. “Experimental Study
       of Inequality and Unpredictability in an Artificial Cultural Market.” Science 311(5762):
       854-56.
Salganik, Matthew J., and Duncan J. Watts. 2008. “Leading the Herd Astray: An Experimental
       Study of Self-fulfilling Prophecies in an Artificial Cultural Market.” Social Psychology
       Quarterly 71(4): 338-55.
Sethi, Rajiv. 2010. “The Invicible Markets Hypothesis.” Rajiv Sethi Thoughts on Economics,
       Finance, Crime, and Identity. https://rajivsethi.blogspot.com/2010/02/ invincible-
       markets-hypothesis.html.
Sgourev, Stoyan V., and Niek Althuizen. 2014. “‘Notable’ or ‘Not Able’: When Are Acts of
       Inconsistency Rewarded?” American Sociological Review 79(2): 282-302.

                                              46
Shapin, Steven. 1982. “History of Science and Its Sociological Reconstructions.” History of Science
       20(3): 157-211.
Shaver, J. Myles. 2005. “Testing for Mediating Variables in Management Research: Concerns,
       Implications, and Alternative Strategies.” Journal of Management 31(3): 330-53.
Simcoe, Timothy S., and Dave M. Waguespack. 2011. “Status, Quality, and Attention: What’s in
       a (Missing) Name?” Management Science 57(2): 274-90.
Sobel, Michael E. 1982. “Asymptotic Confidence Intervals for Indirect Effects in Structural
       Equation Models.” Sociological Methodology 13: 290-312.
Stewart, John A. 1983. “Achievement and Ascriptive Processes in the Recognition of Scientific
       Articles.” Social Forces 62(1): 166-89.
Stout, Lynn A. 1995. “Are Stock Markets Costly Casinos? Disagreement, Market Failure, and
       Securities Regulation.” Virginia Law Review 81(3): 611-712.
Teplitskiy, Misha, Daniel Acuna, Aïda Elamrani-Raoult, Konrad Körding, and James Evans. 2018.
       “The Sociology of Scientific Validity: How Professional Networks Shape Judgement in Peer
       Review.” Research Policy 47(9): 1825-41.
Tucker, Catherine, and Juanjuan Zhang. 2011. “How Does Popularity Information Affect Choices?
       A Field Experiment.” Management Science 57(5) :828-42.
Turco, Catherine J., and Ezra W. Zuckerman. 2017. “Verstehen for Sociology: Comment on
       Watts.” American Journal of Sociology 122(4): 1272-91.
Van den Bulte, Christophe, and Gary L. Lilien. 2001. “Medical Innovation Revisited: Social
      Contagion Versus Marketing Effort.” American Journal of Sociology 106(5): 1409-35.
van de Rijt, Arnout. 2019. “Self-Correcting Dynamics in Social Influence Processes.” American
       Journal of Sociology 124(5): 1468-95.
Wohl, Hannah. Forthcoming. “Creative Visions: Presenting Aesthetic Trajectories in Artistic
      Careers.” Poetics. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.poetic.2019.03.003.
Wooldridge, Jeffrey M. 1997. “Quasi-Likelihood Methods for Count Data.” Pp. 352-406 in
      Handbook of Applied Econometrics Volume 2: Microeconomics, edited by M. Hashem
      Pesaran and Peter Schmidt. Oxford, UK: Blackwell.
Wuchty, Stefan, Benjamin F. Jones, and Brian Uzzi. 2007. “The Increasing Dominance of Teams
      in Production of Knowledge.” Science 316(5827): 1036-39.
Yeo, In-Kwon, and Richard A. Johnson. 2000. “A New Family of Power Transformations to
       improve Normality or Symmetry.” Biometrika 87(4): 954-59.
Ziman, John Michael. 1983. “The Bernal Lecture, 1983: The Collectivization of Science.”
      Proceedings of the Royal Society of London–Series B 219(1214): 1-19.
Zuckerman, Ezra W. 1999. “The Categorical Imperative: Securities Analysts and the Illegitimacy
      Discount.” American Journal of Sociology 104(5): 1398-438.
————————–. 2012. “Construction, Concentration, and (Dis)Continuities in Social
   Valuations.” Annual Review of Sociology 38: 223-45.
————————–. 2012. “Market Efficiency: A Sociological Perspective.” Pp. 239-49 in The
   Oxford Handbook of the Sociology of Finance, edited by Karen Knorr Cetina and Alex
   Preda: Oxford University Press.
Zuckerman, Harriet. 1967. “Nobel Laureates in Science: Patterns of Productivity, Collaboration,
      and Authorship.” American Sociological Review 32(3): 391-403.

                                                47
                                                       Figure 1
                                      The Citation Life Cycle for Elite Scientists

          A. In Relation to the Year of Death                                                         B. In Relation to Age
                     (Deceased Stars)                                                                      (Control Stars)




Note: In Panel A, we compute the total number of citations accrued per year by each of the 720 deceased scientists in the sample, within a window of
      ∓40 years around their death. In Panel B, we calculate the number of citations accrued by each of the 8,326 still-living scientists who contribute
      at least one publication to the sample of control articles. The dashed vertical line indicates the average age at death for the treated sample,
      approximately 64 years old.




                                                                           48
                                                 Figure 2
                       Matching Procedure to Identify Treatment and Control Articles




Note: The two articles above help illustrate the matching procedure (Appendix C provides more details). These two articles appeared in the journal Science in
      1988. Note that Ira Herskowitz and Gerald Crabtree are both in last authorship position. They also obtained their highest degree in the same year. This
      procedure led the Li & Herskowitz article to be matched with 34 other articles in addition to the Spencer et al. article. Note that the articles are in very
      different subfields of the life sciences. Formally, the Herskowitz & Li is not in the list of PMRA neighbors for the Spencer et al. article (and vice versa).




                                                                                49
                                     Figure 3
                            Baseline Stock of Citations




Note: We compute the cumulative number of citations up to the baseline year, i.e., the year that immediately
      precedes the year of death (or the counterfactual year of death) for the 27,147 publications by treated
      scientists and the 454,599 publications by control scientists. The histogram excludes articles with 250 or more
      accumulated citations in the year of death (approximately 0.5% of the sample).




                                                   50
                                                  Figure 4
            Effect of a Scientist’s Death on the Reception of their Work – Event Study Graphs

                                                                 A. All Ages, All Causes of Death




                                 All Causes of Death                                                                                   All Ages
      B. < 65 at Time of Death                      C. ≥ 65 at Time of Death                            D. Sudden Deaths                           E. Anticipated Deaths




Note: The dark dots in the above plots correspond to coefficient estimates stemming from conditional (scientist) fixed effects Poisson specifications in which citation flows are
      regressed onto year effects, article age effects, as well as 15 interaction terms between treatment status and the number of years before/after the death of the author
      (the indicator variable for treatment status interacted with the year of death is omitted). The specifications also include a full set of lead and lag terms common to both
      the treated and control articles to fully account for transitory trends around the time of the event. The 95% confidence interval (corresponding to [QML] robust standard
      errors, clustered at the level of the scientist) around these estimates is plotted with light grey bars. Panels A, B, and C correspond to dynamic versions of the specifications
      in the first, second, and third columns of Table 3, respectively.



                                                                                         51
                                                        Figure 5
                                           Academic Memory & Recognition Events

                      A. Distribution of Events                                                       B. Recognition Age Gradient




Note: Panel A provides an histogram of the number of academic memory events for the sample of 720 deceased scientists 8,326 still living scientists, within a
      window of one year before/five years after the year of death (for deceased scientists) or counterfactual year of death (for deceased scientists). In Panel B,
      the dark and light grey dots correspond to coefficient estimates for the marginal effects in logit specifications modeling the probability of an academic
      memory/recognition event for a scientist, as in Table 7. In addition to the list of covariates in column (7), we include age by treatment interaction effects
      whose coefficients are depicted. The vertical bars correspond to 95% confidence intervals (calculated using robust standard errors).




                                                                                52
Table 1: Summary Statistics of Deceased Scientists (N=720)
                                                                          Mean              Median           Std. Dev.             Min.             Max.
 Year of Birth                                                           1926.483             1927             12.273               1893             1960
 Degree year                                                             1953.553             1954             12.940               1920             1988
 Death Year                                                              1990.147             1991              9.304               1969             2003
 Age at Death                                                             63.664                64             10.555                33                91
 Female                                                                    0.087                0               0.283                 0                1
 MD Degree                                                                 0.457                0               0.498                 0                1
 PhD Degree                                                                0.449                0               0.498                 0                1
 MD/PhD Degree                                                             0.094                0               0.293                 0                1
 Death was Sudden                                                          0.458                0               0.499                 0                1
 Death was Anticipated                                                     0.489                0               0.500                 0                1
 Unknown Cause of Death                                                    0.053                0               0.224                 0                1
 Cuml. Nb. of Publications                                                  126                102               105                 10              1,380
 Cuml. Nb. of Citations                                                    7,228              4,624             8,088                77             76,231
 Cuml. Amount of NIH Funding                                            $16,601,680        $10,742,377       $25,919,386             $0          $329,968,960
 Cuml. Nb. of Trainees at Death                                               5                  3                 6                  0                44
 Cuml. Nb. of Coauthors at Death                                             73                 54                70                  0               714
 Cuml. Nb. of Posthumous Predicted Citations                                606                284               841                  2              7,646
 Cuml. Nb. of Posthumous “Excess” Citations                                 -34                -34               443               -2,459            3,582
 Cuml. Nb. of Posthumous “Sleeping Beauty” Publications                     126                102               105                 10              1,380
 Memorialization Events
 Total Nb. Memory Events                                                    4.385                3               4.845               0                 65
 Total Nb. Academic Memory Events                                           2.329                1               3.202               0                 30
 New York Times Obituary                                                    0.329                0               0.479               0                  3
 Wikipedia Page                                                             0.254                0               0.436               0                  1
 Named Award                                                                0.224                0               0.417               0                  1
 Festschrift                                                                0.085                0               0.279               0                 1
Note: The sample consists of 720 elite academic life scientists who died while still actively engaged in research. See Appendix A for more details on the sample
      construction. NIH funding amounts have been deflated by the biomedical R&D Producer Price Index (base year=2007). Forty five (6.25%) of the deceased
      scientists are NIH intramural scientists and therefore not eligible for extramural NIH funding. The funding totals are computed for the 720-45=675
      scientists eligible to receive NIH awards.




                                                                                53
 Table 2: Summary Statistics of Control & Treated Articles at Baseline
                                                                     Control Publications                                      Treated Publications
                                                                        (N=454,599)                                                (N=27,147)
                                                                                  Std.                                                      Std.
                                                          Mean       Median                 Min.      Max.          Mean       Median                 Min.      Max.
                                                                                  Dev.                                                      Dev.
Article Age in Year of Death                               4.482         5         2.574       0         9           4.482         5       2.574       0           9
Article Year of Publication                              1976.641      1977       11.243     1950      2002        1976.641      1977      11.243     1950       2002
Article Nb. of Authors                                     3.190         3         1.576       1         15          3.200         3        1.563       1          13
Article Citations at Baseline                             35.457        16        98.945       0      18,055        33.309        15       65.275      0        3,129
Article Citations by Non-Collaborators at Baseline        33.254        15        95.565       0      17,797        31.247        14       61.968      0        3,082
Article Citations by Collaborators at Baseline             2.203         0         5.781       0        358          2.062         0       5.262       0          191
Article Citations outside of Field at Baseline            31.549        13        96.489       0      18,048        29.518        13       62.193      0        3,102
Article Citations within Field at Baseline                 3.908         2        6.223       0         162          3.791         2       6.112       0          138
Article Citations from Distant Authors at Baseline        34.568        15        96.034       0      17,646        32.463        15       63.474      0        3,085
Article Citations from Co-located Authors at Baseline      0.889         0         3.997       0        410          0.846         0       2.914       0          122
Investigator Year of Birth                               1928.301      1928       10.441     1895      1966        1927.535      1927      10.516     1893       1960
Investigator Degree Year                                 1954.588      1954       10.761     1921      1989        1954.317      1954      10.826     1920       1988
Investigator Death Year                                  1992.353      1994        8.316     1969      2003        1992.353      1994      8.316      1969       2003
Investigator Nb. Publications in Matched Sample           51.738        39        48.575       1        355         86.642        69       72.278      1          414
Investigator Cuml. Nb. of Publications                      199         160         145        1       1,124          219         169        188       10        1,380
Investigator Cuml. Nb. of Citations                       13,586      9,359       14,318      17     188,430        13,799      9,895      12,264      77       76,231
Investigator Cuml. Amount of Funding (×$1,000)            24,196      15,678      28,322       0     408,427        27,435      14,949     47,940      0       329,969
Investigator Nb. of Trainees                                 9           7           10        0         87            10          7          9         0          44
Investigator Nb. of Collaborators                           112         85           93        0      1,052           117         95         103        0         714
Note: The sample consists of all of the publications for treated and control scientists that the matching procedure described in Appendix C has culled from the
      universe of last-authored original publications by deceased and still-alive scientists. The matching procedure is “one-to-many”: each treated article is matched
      with zero, one, or more control articles. The procedure matches 62% of eligible treated articles. The average number of control articles per treated article in
      the matched sample is 16.75 (median=6; std. dev.=28.6; min.=1; max.=281). The descriptive statistics above are weighted by the inverse number of controls
      in a matching strata. All time-varying covariates are measured in the year of the scientist’s death (or counterfactual year of death for the control scientist).
      The article-level citation counts correspond to the accumulated stock of citations up to the year of death. NIH funding amounts have been deflated by the
      biomedical R&D Producer Price Index (base year=2007).




                                                                                 54
Table 3: Effect of Scientist’s Death on Citation Rates, by Age & Cause of Death
                                            All Causes                    All Causes                           Sudden                         Anticipated
                                             of Death                      of Death                            Deaths                           Deaths
                                                                      < 65 at          ≥ 65 at           < 65 at        ≥ 65 at            < 65 at        ≥ 65 at
                                                All Ages
                                                                      Death            Death             Death          Death              Death          Death
                                                  0.071*               0.078*           0.068              0.103*         0.028              0.061          0.128†
 After Death
                                                 (0.032)              (0.032)          (0.056)            (0.043)        (0.078)            (0.042)        (0.075)
 Nb. of Investigators                             9,038                8,567            4,500              7,524          3,533              6,749          3,568
 Nb. of Source Articles                          481,337              309,154         172,183            138,545         70,012            161,651         93,625
 Nb. of Source Article-Year Obs.                10,947,398           6,243,544       4,703,854          2,696,929      1,857,319          3,361,745      2,611,750
 Log Likelihood                                -17,010,037          -10,262,936      -6,741,759         -4,421,808     -2,684,950         -5,563,598     -3,754,028
Note: Estimates stem from fixed effects Poisson specifications. For each article, one observation per year is included in the sample in the window between the
      year of publication and ten years after the (possibly counterfactual) event or 2006, whichever comes earlier. The dependent variable is the total number
      of citations accrued to a publication in a particular year. All models incorporate a full suite of year effects and nine article age effects, as well as a term
      common to both treated and control articles that switches from zero to one after the death of the scientist, to address the concern that age, year and
      individual fixed effects may not fully account for transitory citation trends after death. Exponentiating the coefficients and differencing from one yield
      numbers interpretable as elasticities. For example, the estimate in the first column implies that the papers of deceased scientists posthumously experience
      a 100×(exp[0.071]-1)=7.36% statistically significant increase in the number of citations relative to papers whose author remained alive. The number of
      observations varies slightly across columns because the conditional fixed effects specification drops observations corresponding to articles for which there
      is no variation in activity across the entire observation period. This is also true for the results reported in Tables 4, 5, and 6.
       Robust (QML) standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the level of the star scientist. †p < 0.10, *p < 0.05,   **p   < 0.01.




                                                                                  55
Table 4: Effect of Scientist’s Death on Citation Rates, by Article Impact at Baseline
                                               All                  Own                  Own                  Own               Universe            3 Years
                                           Publications          Bottom 10%            25%-75%              Top 10%             Top 1%            Before Death

                                               0.071*               0.646**               0.001              0.172**             0.159**               0.096*
 After Death
                                              (0.032)               (0.078)              (0.031)             (0.044)             (0.050)              (0.044)
 Nb. of Investigators                          9,038                 4,333                8,422               6,035               4,346                6,244
 Nb. of Source Articles                       481,337               17,747              264,631              55,558              25,197               51,930
 Nb. of Source Article-Year Obs.             10,947,398             368,091            5,945,660           1,351,435            580,912              610,367
 Log Likelihood                             -17,010,037            -483,644            -9,030,902          -2,427,679          -1,182,256           -1,132,866
Note: Estimates stem from conditional fixed effects Poisson specifications. For each article, one observation per year is included in the sample in the window
      between the year of publication and ten years after the (possibly counterfactual) event or 2006, whichever comes earlier. The dependent variable is the
      total number of citations accrued to a publication in a particular year. All models incorporate a full suite of year effects and nine article age effects, as
      well as a term common to both treated and control articles that switches from zero to one after the death of the scientist, to address the concern that
      age, year and individual fixed effects may not fully account for transitory citation trends after death. The “own top 10%” (resp. the “own bottom
      10%”) column corresponds to an estimation sample comprising solely the top 10% (resp. bottom 10%) of each scientist’s publications, ranked in terms
      cumulative citations at the time of death (or counterfactual time of death for control scientists). “Own 25%-75%” limits the estimation sample to
      publications in the middle two quartiles of the citation distribution at the time of death. The “Universe Top 1%” limits the estimation sample to
      articles that fall above the 99th percentile of the vintage-specific citation distribution at the time of death in the universe of publications indexed by
      PubMed and the Web of Science. Exponentiating the coefficients and differencing from one yield numbers interpretable as elasticities. For example,
      the estimate in the first column implies the papers of deceased scientists posthumously experience a 100×(exp[0.071]-1)=7.36% increase in the number
      of citations relative to papers whose author remained alive. The number of observations varies slightly across columns because the conditional fixed
      effects specification drops observations corresponding to articles for which there is no variation in activity over the entire observation period. This is
      also true for the results reported in Tables 3 through 6. Robust (QML) standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the level of the star scientist. †p <
      0.10, *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01.




                                                                                  56
Table 5: Heterogeneity in the Effect of Scientist’s Death on Citation Rates,
          by Scientist “Engagement Style”
                                                                      Nb. of Coauthors                           Self-Promotion
                                                                     Below               Above                 Below                 Above
                                                                    Median               Median               Median                 Median
                                                                      0.025               0.122**              0.101**                 0.047
                      After Death
                                                                     (0.043)              (0.044)              (0.039)                (0.049)
                      Nb. of Investigators                            7,248                4,298                7,291                  2,848
                      Nb. of Source Articles                        244,293              237,044              240,139                241,198
                      Nb. of Source Article-Year Obs.              5,544,118            5,403,280            5,171,366              5,776,032
                      Log Likelihood                               -8,105,971           -8,883,461           -8,046,445             -8,958,661
Note: Estimates stem from conditional fixed effects Poisson specifications. For each article, one observation per year is included in the sample in the window
      between the year of publication and ten years after the (possibly counterfactual) event or 2006, whichever comes earlier. The dependent variable is the
      total number of citations accrued to a publication in a particular year. The estimation samples in each column corresponds to sample splits across the
      median of two individual characteristics of the scientists in the sample, assessed in the year of death: accumulated number of distinct collaborators, and
      self-promotion behavior. All models incorporate a full suite of year effects and nine article age effects, as well as a term common to both treated and
      control articles that switches from zero to one after the death of the scientist, to address the concern that age, year and individual fixed effects may not
      fully account for transitory citation trends after death. Exponentiating the coefficients and differencing from one yield numbers interpretable as elasticities.
      For example, the estimate in the second column implies that the papers of scientists of deceased scientists with above the median number of coauthors at
      the time of their death posthumously experience a 100×(exp[0.122]-1)=12.98% increase in the number of citations relative to papers whose author remained
      alive (and are also below the median number of coauthors at the time of their counterfactual death). The number of observations varies slightly across
      columns because the conditional fixed effects specification drops observations corresponding to articles for which there is no variation in activity over the
      entire observation period. This is also true for the results reported in Tables 3 through 6.
       Robust (QML) standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the level of the star scientist. †p < 0.10, *p < 0.05,   **p   < 0.01.




                                                                                  57
Table 6: Effect of Scientist’s Death on Citation Rates, by Citer Identity
                                                  Social Space                         Intellectual Space                          Geographic Space
                                         Non-Coauth.             Coauth.           Out-of-Field           In-Field               Non-Coloc.       Coloc.
                                             Cites                 Cites               Cites                Cites                    Cites         Cites
                                             0.059                 0.073               0.070*              0.166**                   0.057        0.183**
After Death
                                            (0.037)               (0.056)             (0.035)              (0.037)                  (0.042)       (0.062)
Nb. of Investigators                         7,916                 7,916               8,709                8,709                    7,175         7,175
Nb. of Source Articles                      300,821               300,821             408,730              408,730                  189,881      189,881
Nb. of Source Article-Year Obs.            6,701,406             6,701,406           9,101,153            9,101,153                4,246,421    4,246,421
Log Likelihood                            -12,247,248           -3,030,973          -14,364,645          -4,802,682               -8,940,616    -1,322,822
Note: Estimates stem from fixed effects Poisson specifications. For each article, one observation per year is included in the sample in the window between
      the year of publication and ten years after the (possibly counterfactual) event or 2006, whichever comes earlier. The dependent variable is the total
      number of citations of a particular type accrued to a publication in a particular year. The type of citations considered include (i) citations from
      coauthors vs. non-coauthors; (ii) citations from the same narrow subfield vs. those from other subfields (the PubMed Related Citations Algorithm
      [PMRA] is used to distinguish between in-field vs. out-of-field citations); and (iii) citations from co-located authors vs. distant authors. All models
      incorporate a full suite of year effects and nine article age effects, as well as a term common to both treated and control articles that switches from
      zero to one after the death of the scientist, to address the concern that age, year and individual fixed effects may not fully account for transitory
      citation trends after death. Exponentiating the coefficients and differencing from one yield numbers interpretable as elasticities. For example, the
      estimate in the sixth column implies that the papers of deceased scientists experience a posthumous 100×(exp[0.183]-1)=20.08% increase in the number
      of citations from co-located scientists. The number of observations varies slightly across columns because the conditional fixed effects specification
      drops observations corresponding to articles for which there is no variation in activity over the entire observation period. This is also true for the
      results reported in Tables 3 through 5.
      Robust (QML) standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the level of the star scientist. †p < 0.10, *p < 0.05,   **p   < 0.01.




                                                                             58
 Table 7: Correlates of Academic Recognition/Memorialization
                                                      (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)          (5)           (6)           (7)           (8)
                                                            **            **            **            **           **            **            **
                                                    0.186         0.180         0.179        0.185         0.180         0.180         0.180        0.206**
 Deceased
                                                    (0.008)       (0.007)       (0.007)      (0.007)       (0.007)       (0.007)       (0.007)      (0.007)
                                                                  0.042**                                  0.036**       0.043**       0.043**      0.031**
 Ln(cmltv. citations)
                                                                  (0.004)                                  (0.005)       (0.004)       (0.005)      (0.005)
                                                                                0.049**                     0.011
 Ln(cmltv. publications)
                                                                                (0.005)                    (0.007)
                                                                                             0.010**        0.002
 Ln(cmltv. funding)
                                                                                             (0.003)       (0.003)
                                                                  0.068**       0.091**      0.102**       0.070**       0.068**       0.068**      0.093**
 Member of the NAS
                                                                  (0.008)       (0.008)      (0.008)       (0.008)       (0.008)       (0.008)      (0.008)
                                                                                                                          0.001                      -0.005
 Ln(Nb. of trainees)
                                                                                                                         (0.004)                    (0.004)
                                                                                                                                        -0.001        0.001
 Ln(Nb. of coauthors)
                                                                                                                                       (0.005)      (0.005)
                                                                                                                                                    0.026**
 Self-Promoter
                                                                                                                                                    (0.006)
                                                     0.008         0.023*        0.023*        0.011        0.025*        0.023*        0.024*        0.003
 Death is Sudden
                                                    (0.010)       (0.010)       (0.010)      (0.010)       (0.010)       (0.010)       (0.010)      (0.010)
                                                     0.002         -0.001        -0.002       -0.001        -0.001        -0.000        -0.001       -0.003
 Female
                                                    (0.006)       (0.006)       (0.006)      (0.006)       (0.006)       (0.006)       (0.006)      (0.006)
 Nb. of Scientists                                   9,046         9,046         9,046        9,046         9,046         9,046         9,046        9,046
 Pseudo-R2                                           0.177          0.235         0.228       0.211         0.236         0.236         0.235        0.204
Note: Estimates are marginal effects from logit specifications. The sample consists of a cross-section of the 720 deceased scientists and 8,326 still living
      scientists. The response variable is the existence of at least one academic memory/recognition event created for a scientist in a window of one year
      before/five years after the death for the deceased (or counterfactual death for the still-living scientists). All models include—but do not report—
      controls for degree type (PhD and MD/PhD, MD is the omitted category), a suite of indicator variables for each death year, six indicator variables
      for age categories at the time of death (less than 45 years old; between 45 and 55 years old; between 55 and 60 years old; between 60 and 65 old;
      between 65 and 70 years old; between 70 and 75 years old; and between 75 and 80 years old. Above 80 years old is the omitted category), and an
      indicator variable for unknown cause of death. The number of coauthors measure exclude the number of trainees, so that there is no double counting
      of coauthors (trainees are only identified conditional on coauthorship). Self-Promoter is an indicator variable equals to one for investigators above
      the median in term of self-promotional behavior (as assessed by the number of unrelated—i.e., out-of-subfield—self-citations as a proportion of all
      citations in a deceased scientist’s entire body of work). Robust standard errors in parentheses. †p < 0.10, *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01.




                                                                                59
Table 8: Long-run Citation Afterlife and its Relationship to Recognition Efforts
                                                                                                        Excess Citations
                                                                                                                                Excl. citations in a window of
                                                                                All Citations                                5 years post-death and citations
                                                                                                                               from memorializers/coauthors
                                                                      (1a)            (1b)            (1c)                     (2a)            (2b)         (2c)
                                                                    0.112**                          0.064                  0.103**                       0.075*
 Deceased
                                                                    (0.039)                        (0.040)                  (0.034)                      (0.035)
                                                                                   0.178**         0.175**                                  0.108**      0.105**
 Scientists w/ 1 Academic Memory/Recognition
                                                                                   (0.043)         (0.043)                                  (0.031)      (0.031)
                                                                                   0.207**         0.202**                                  0.127**      0.120**
 Scientists w/ 2 Academic Memories/Recognitions
                                                                                   (0.048)         (0.048)                                  (0.038)      (0.038)
                                                                                   0.206**         0.201**                                  0.120**       0.114*
 Scientists w/ 3+ Academic Memories/Recognitions
                                                                                   (0.055)         (0.056)                                  (0.046)      (0.046)
 Mean of Dependent Variable                                          -0.884         -0.884          -0.884                   -0.444          -0.444       -0.444
 Nb. of Source Articles                                             481,746        481,746         481,746                  481,746         481,746      481,746
 Nb. of Investigators                                                 9,046         9,046           9,046                    9,046           9,046        9,046
 Adjusted R2                                                          0.045          0.047           0.047                    0.157           0.158        0.158
Note: Estimates stem from OLS specifications. The dependent variable is the number of “excess” citations, which is simply the number of actual posthumous
      citations minus the number of predicted posthumous citations, based on the prediction model presented in Section 3.5 and Appendix D. In columns 1a, 1b,
      and 1c, all post-death/post-counterfactual death citations are used to compute the prediction, whereas in columns 2a, 2b, and 2c, citations that accrue in
      the first five years after death are excluded, as well as citations given by collaborators and memorializers of the deceased. Because the distribution of excess
      citations is both skewed and takes on negative values, a NegLog transformation of the dependent variable (Yeo and Johnson 2000) is performed before
      estimation. All models include (but do not report coefficients for) a full suite of indicator variables for age at death, year of death, year of the article’s
      publication, degree type, and cause of death. Robust standard errors, clustered at the level of the scientist in parentheses. †p < 0.10, *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01.




                                                                                 60
Table 9: Heterogeneity in the Effect of Scientist’s Death on Citation Rates,
         by Scientist Status
                                                    Publications                               Citations                                 Funding
                                                Below              Above                Below               Above                Below               Above
                                               Median              Median              Median               Median              Median               Median
                                                 0.035               0.108*             0.092**               0.055               0.085†               0.055
 After Death
                                                (0.032)             (0.053)             (0.031)              (0.049)             (0.047)              (0.049)
 Nb. of Investigators                            8,253               2,859               7,759                3,052               7,703                3,277
 Nb. of Source Articles                        241,403             239,934             239,165              242,172             240,863              221,903
 Nb. of Source Artcl.-Year Obs.               5,253,983           5,693,415           5,393,368            5,554,030           5,176,767            5,358,076
 Log Likelihood                               -7,982,519          -9,020,775          -7,062,688           -9,934,474          -7,966,382           -8,359,278
Note: Estimates stem from conditional fixed effects Poisson specifications. For each article, one observation per year is included in the sample in the window
      between the year of publication and ten years after the (possibly counterfactual) event or 2006, whichever comes earlier. The dependent variable is the
      total number of citations accrued to a publication in a particular year. The estimation samples in each column correspond to sample splits across the
      median of three individual scientist characteristics assessed in the year of death: cumulative publications, cumulative citations, and cumulative NIH
      funding. All models incorporate a full suite of year effects and nine article age effects, as well as a term common to both treated and control articles that
      switches from zero to one after the death of the scientist, to address the concern that age, year and individual fixed effects may not fully account for
      transitory citation trends after death. Exponentiating the coefficients and differencing from one yield numbers interpretable as elasticities. For example,
      the estimate in the second column implies that the papers of scientists of deceased scientists with above the median number of publications at the time of
      their death posthumously experience a 100×(exp[0.108]-1)=11.40% increase in the number of citations relative to papers whose author remained alive (and
      are also below the median number of publications at the time of their counterfactual death). The number of observations varies slightly across columns
      because the conditional fixed effects specification drops observations corresponding to articles for which there is no variation in activity over the entire
      observation period. The last two columns drop from the sample articles written by 318 scientists (273 treated scientists and 45 control scientists) who are
      “intramural employees” of the NIH, and therefore not eligible to receive extramural NIH funds. Robust (QML) standard errors in parentheses, clustered
      at the level of the star scientist. †p < 0.10, *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01.




                                                                                61
                            Supplementary Online Material

                                Appendix A:
         Criteria for Delineating the Set of 13,426 Elite Scientists
Scientists enter the elite sample if they meet at least one of the following seven criteria:
Highly Funded Scientists. Our first data source is the Consolidated Grant/Applicant File (CGAF)
from the U.S. National Institutes of Health (NIH). This dataset records information about grants awarded
to extramural researchers funded by the NIH since 1938. Using the CGAF and focusing only on direct
costs associated with research grants, we compute individual cumulative totals for the decades 1977-1986,
1987-1996, and 1997-2006, deflating the corresponding amounts with the Biomedical Research Producer Price
Index. We also recompute these totals excluding large center grants that usually fund groups of investigators
(M01 and P01 grants). Scientists whose totals lie above the 95th percentile of either distribution constitute
our first group of superstars. In this group, the least well-funded investigator garnered $10.5 million in career
NIH funding and the most well-funded $462.6 million.i
Highly Cited Scientists. Despite the preeminent role of the NIH in the funding of public biomedical
research, the above indicator of “superstardom” biases the sample towards scientists conducting relatively
expensive research. We complement this first group with a second composed of highly cited scientists
identified by the Institute for Scientific Information. A Highly Cited listing means that an individual was
among the 250 most cited researchers for their published articles between 1981 and 1999, within a broad
scientific field.ii
Top Patenters. We add to these groups academic life scientists who belong in the top percentile of the
patent distribution among academics—those who were granted 17 patents or more between 1976 and 2004.
Members of the National Academy of Science and of the Institute of Medicine. We add to
these groups academic life scientists who were elected to the National Academy of Science or the Institute
of Medicine between 1970 and 2013.
MERIT Awardees of the NIH. Initiated in the mid-1980s, the MERIT Award program extends fund-
ing for up to 5 years (but typically 3 years) to a select number of NIH-funded investigators “who have
demonstrated superior competence, outstanding productivity during their previous research endeavors and
are leaders in their field with paradigm-shifting ideas.” The specific details governing selection vary across
the component institutes of the NIH, but the essential feature of the program is that only researchers holding
an R01 grant in its second or later cycle are eligible. Further, the application must be scored in the top
percentile in a given funding cycle.
Former and current Howard Hughes Medical Investigators (HHMIs). Every three years, the
Howard Hughes Medical Institute selects a small cohort of mid-career biomedical scientists with the potential
to revolutionize their respective subfields. Once selected, HHMIs continue to be based at their institutions,
typically leading a research group of 10 to 25 students, postdoctoral associates and technicians. Their
appointment is reviewed every five years, based solely on their most important contributions during the
cycle.iii
Early career prize winners. We also included winners of the Pew, Searle, Beckman, Rita Allen, and
Packard scholarships for the years 1981 through 2000. Every year, these charitable foundations provide seed
    i
       We perform a similar exercise for scientists employed by the intramural campus of the NIH. These scientists are not eligible
to receive extramural funds, but the NIH keeps records of the number of “internal projects” each intramural scientist leads. We
include in the elite sample the top five percentiles of intramural scientists according to this metric.
    ii
       The relevant scientific fields in the life sciences are microbiology, biochemistry, psychiatry/psychology, neuroscience, molec-
ular biology & genetics, immunology, pharmacology, and clinical medicine.
   iii
       See Azoulay et al. (2011) for more details and an evaluation of this program.



                                                                  i
funding to between 20 and 40 young academic life scientists. These scholarships are the most prestigious
accolades that young researchers can receive in the first two years of their careers as independent investigators.




       Appendix B: Linking Scientists with their Journal Articles

The source of our publication data is PubMed, a bibliographic database maintained by the U.S. National
Library of Medicine that is searchable on the web at no cost.iv PubMed contains over 29 million citations
from 4,800 journals published in the United States and more than 70 other countries from 1950 to the present.
The subject scope of this database is biomedicine and health, broadly defined to encompass those areas of
the life sciences, behavioral sciences, chemical sciences, and bioengineering that inform research in health-
related fields. In order to effectively mine this publicly-available data source, we designed PubHarvester,
an open-source software tool that automates the process of gathering publication information for individual
life scientists (see Azoulay et al. 2006 for a complete description of the software). PubHarvester is fast,
simple to use, and reliable. Its output consists of a series of reports that can be easily imported by statistical
software packages.
This software tool does not obviate the two challenges faced by empirical researchers when attempting
to accurately link individual scientists with their published output. The first relates to what one might
term “Type I Error,” whereby we mistakenly attribute to a scientist a journal article actually authored by
a namesake; The second relates to “Type II error,” whereby we conservatively exclude from a scientist’s
publication roster legitimate articles:
Namesakes and popular names. PubMed does not assign unique identifiers to the authors of the
publications they index. They identify authors simply by their last name, up to two initials, and an optional
suffix. This makes it difficult to unambiguously assign publication output to individual scientists, especially
when their last name is relatively common.
Inconsistent publication names. The opposite danger, that of recording too few publications, also looms
large, since scientists are often inconsistent in the choice of names they choose to publish under. By far the
most common source of error is the haphazard use of a middle initial. Other errors stem from inconsistent
use of suffixes (Jr., Sr., 2nd, etc.), or from multiple patronyms due to changes in spousal status.
To deal with these serious measurement problems, we opted for a labor-intensive approach: the design of
individual search queries that relies on relevant scientific keywords, the names of frequent collaborators,
journal names, as well as institutional affiliations. We are aided in the time-consuming process of query
design by the availability of a reliable archival data source, namely, these scientists’ CVs and biosketches.
PubHarvester provides the option to use such custom queries in lieu of a completely generic query (e.g,
"azoulay p"[au] or "graff zivin js"[au]). As an example, one can examine the publications of Scott A.
Waldman, an eminent pharmacologist located in Philadelphia, PA at Thomas Jefferson University. Waldman
is a relatively frequent name in the United States (with 208 researchers with an identical patronym in the
AAMC faculty roster); the combination "waldman s" is common to 3 researchers in the same database.
A simple search query for "waldman sa"[au] OR "waldman s"[au] returns 377 publications at the time
of this writing. However, a more refined query, based on Professor Waldman’s biosketch returns only 256
publications.v
  iv
    http://www.pubmed.gov/
   v
    (((("waldman sa"[au] NOT (ether OR anesthesia)) OR ("waldman s"[au] AND (murad OR philadelphia[ad] OR west
point[ad] OR wong p[au] OR lasseter kc[au] OR colorectal))) AND 1980:2013[dp])




                                                        ii
The above example also makes clear how we deal with the issue of inconsistent publication names. Pub-
Harvester gives the end-user the option to choose up to four PubMed-formatted names under which
publications can be found for a given researcher. For example, Louis J. Tobian, Jr. publishes under "tobian
l", "tobian l jr", and "tobian lj", and all three names need to be provided as inputs to generate a
complete publication listing. Furthermore, even though Tobian is a relatively rare name, the search query
needs to be modified to account for these name variations, as in ("tobian l"[au] OR "tobian lj"[au]).




                 Appendix C: Construction of the Control Group

We detail the procedure implemented to identify the control publications that help pin down the life-cycle
and secular time effects in our difference-in-differences (DD) specification. Happenstance might yield a
sample of publications from aging scientists, or in out-of-fashion fields. More plausibly, article-level citation
trends might be subject to idiosyncratic life-cycle patterns, reflecting the article’s vintage, the age of its
lead author, the vitality of its subfield, or the recency of its methods. Relying solely on publications treated
earlier or later as an implicit control group raises the worry that these time-varying omitted variables will
not be fully captured by publication age controls.
To address this concern, we create an additional level of difference by selecting control publications. Recall
that we can accurately identify the complete publication history of all the elite scientists in the superstar
sample (deceased, retired, or still living, cf. Appendix B). Therefore, we can potentially identify articles
written by still-alive scientists who are “similar” to those written by the deceased scientists. But what are
the characteristics of a satisfactory article control, and what are the characteristics of satisfactory control
group? The distinction between the two is subtle and important. Our difference-in-differences empirical
analysis relies on a counterfactual date of death for a control article, and a counterfactual eminent scientist
who could have died, but did not, to produce various sample splits. It is therefore important that a control
article might be paired appropriately, since it will inherit certain characteristics from its associated treated
article.
Judgement is required to decide the list of covariates for which balance between control and treated units
is required to generate internally valid comparisons. The analyst faces a sharp trade-off between internal
and external validity, since an exhaustive list of covariates on which to guarantee balance ex ante would
result in very few (and maybe even no) matches. Therefore, the principle that guides the selection of control
articles is to choose the least restrictive set of covariates that results, ex post, in a control group that we
can regard as comparable enough to not jeopardize the internal validity of the empirical analysis. Below, we
make the modeling choices explicit in the spirit of giving the reader a view on the process through which
our understanding of the setting translated into very practical considerations regarding matching.
In practice, we would like each control article to:
    1. be published contemporaneously with, and to have a similar number of authors as, the article by a
       treated (i.e., deceased) scientist with which it is paired;
    2. be unrelated (in both an intellectual and a social sense) to the article by a treated scientist with which
       it is paired;
    3. have an author in last-author position who is a still-living elite scientist of approximately the same
       age as that of the deceased scientist on the article with which it is paired.vi
   vi
      “Still living” means not only that the scientist is alive at the time of the counterfactual death, but that s/he will remain
alive over the five years that follow.



                                                               iii
We think of these “pair-level” requirements as a necessary baseline. Clearly, if control and treated articles
are of vastly different vintage, or with a vastly different number of authors, it makes little sense to compare
their citation trajectories. If they are related intellectually or socially (e.g., the elite scientist on one is a
collaborator of the elite scientist on the other, or the PubMed Related Citation Algorithm lists one as an
intellectual neighbor for the other), then the “control” could well be treated by the event as well. The last
requirement is sensible once it is understood that there is a publication and citation life cycle for scientists
in general (see Figure 1B), and that there is wide variation in the age at death in the sample of 720 deceased
scientists.
In addition, we would like the control group of articles as a whole to be broadly similar to the treated
group of articles, where similarity should be understood as reflecting average balance across key covariates
at baseline—shortly before the death event.vii
As a result, we impose the following additional requirement to select control articles:
    4. that they be of similar expected impact, relative to the article from the treated scientist;
To match on expected impact at baseline, we experimented with the following covariates: (i) the journal in
which the treated article was published (so that the control will be recruited from the set of articles published
in the same journal); (ii) the journal impact factor of the journal in which the treated article was published
(when not imposing same-journal match); and (iii) the number of citations that cumulatively accrued to the
treated article up to the baseline year (i.e. the year of death).
Because we found that the balance between the treated and control groups was compromised when we did
not impose same-journal match, below we provide descriptive evidence with three alternative approaches.
The least restrictive imposes same-journal match with no additional restriction on the number of citations
received by treated and control articles at baseline; the intermediate version imposes same-journal match
with relatively coarse restrictions on the number of citations received by treated and control articles at
baseline; and the most restrictive imposes same-journal match with relatively fine restrictions on the number
of citations received by treated and control articles at baseline.
Finally, since the combined treated and control article dataset will be analyzed in a difference-in-differences
framework, rather than in the cross-sectional dimension of the data, the appropriateness of the control group
must eventually be assessed on its ability to exhibit parallel citation trends (our outcome of interest) before
the event of interest with those of the treated group of articles. In this respect, the work presented here is
similar in flavor to recent studies that also rely on blocking techniques as a device to select a control group
in the cross-sectional dimension of the data, before combining treated and control units in a panel dataset
(e.g., Jaravel et al. 2018; Azoulay et al. 2019).
One can also ask how the step of selecting a control group might impact statistical inference in the second
step of the analysis. Recent work by Abadie and Spiess (2019) suggests that clustering the standard errors
at the level of the strata used to pair control and treated units results in conservative inference. Since we
cluster our standard errors at the level of the scientist, a level that nests the matching strata, we can ignore
the influence of the matching step in the difference-in-differences results we present.
Article-level or scientist-level covariates? An important design choice is whether to privilege balance
on article-level characteristics or scientist-level characteristics. A case can be made that both are important:
our difference-in-differences specification uses the article as the level of analysis, but the treatment corre-
sponds to a scientist-level event, namely death. In practice, we found that imposing balance on article-level
characteristics yielded approximate balance on scientist-level characteristics as well, as a fortunate byprod-
uct, whereas the reverse was not true. As a consequence, we will focus on variants where we tweak the list
of article-level characteristics that must match between treated and control articles.
Blocking on covariates. To meet these goals, we implement a blocking procedure in the spirit of coarsened
exact matching (Blackwell et al. 2009). The first step is to select a relatively small set of covariates on which
  vii
        Of course, balance on other moments of the distribution of these covariates would be desirable as well.



                                                                 iv
we need to guarantee balance ex ante, guided by the set of criteria listed above. The second step is to create
a large number of strata to cover the entire support of the joint distribution of the covariates selected in the
previous step. In a third step, each observation is allocated to a unique stratum, and for each observation
in the treated group, control observations are selected from the same stratum. This procedure is “coarse”
in the sense that we do not attempt to precisely match on covariate values; rather, we coarsen the support
of the joint distribution of the covariates into a finite number of strata, and we match a treated observation
if and only if a control observation can be recruited from this strata. The procedure is also “exact” in the
sense that one either finds one control or more in a stratum, or one finds none, in which case the treated
article is eliminated from the analytic sample. As a result, the more fine-grained the partition of the support
for the joint distribution (i.e., the higher the number of strata), the larger the number of unmatched treated
observations.viii
Implementation. We identify controls based on the following set of covariates: scientist career age; number
of authors; position of the star author on the authorship roster (only last authorship position is considered);
journal; and year of publication. The first two covariates only need to match within relatively coarse bins.
For instance, we require that the career ages (years since the highest degree was earned) of the treated
and control elite scientists be no more than two years apart. We coarsen the distribution of the number of
authors by collapsing it onto four separate bins: solo-authored publications; publications with two, three, or
four authors; publications with between five and eight authors; and publications with nine authors or more
(the maximum is fifteen authors). In contrast, we impose an exact match on journal, publication year, and
the star’s authorship position.
To explore the sensitivity of our results to the choice of covariate blocking scheme, we propose three variants
that make use of an additional covariate, the distribution of accumulated citations up to the baseline year
(i.e., t − 1 if t denotes the year of death). Under the most restrictive scheme, we coarsen the distribution of
citations into the following bins: bottom ten percentiles; between the 10th and the 25th percentiles; second
quartile; third quartile; between the 75th and the 95th percentiles; between the 95th and the 99th percentiles;
and above the 99th percentile.ix
The second variant coarsens the distribution of accumulated citations in t − 1 slightly: bottom quartile;
middle two quartiles; between the 75th and the 95th percentile; between the 95th and the 99th percentiles;
and above the 99th percentile. The third and final variant ignores the number of citations received at baseline
altogether when selecting controls. It is therefore the least restrictive.
Regardless of the variant, we drop from the data any control article whose last author collaborated with the
deceased scientist, as well as any control article who is a PMRA “intellectual neighbor” with its associated
treated article. After these tweaks (which drop only a very small number of articles), we further drop from
the sample any “orphan” article (i.e., a treated unpaired with any control, or a set of controls that has lost
its treated source).
Figure D1 displays the distribution of the number of control articles per treated article under each scheme.
Unsurprisingly, the size of the samples corresponding to each variant differ. The most restrictive and inter-
mediate versions are quite similar in size, matching approximately 50% of the eligible treated articles. In
contrast, the least restrictive variant matches 60% of the eligible treated articles, and can recruit many more
controls in each strata (eighteen on average, versus approximately seven under the more restrictive schemes).
Regardless of the variant, Panels D, E, and F of Figure D1 show that baseline citations are well balanced, not
only on average, but for every quantile of the distribution. Table C1—with a structure identical to Table 2
 viii
       Note that Iacus et al. (2011) pioneered coarsened exact matching (CEM) as an alternative to the propensity score, in the
context of estimating valid causal effects in cross-sectional regressions, under the assumption of unconfoundedness. In contrast,
we are merely using it as a sensible blocking technique to delineate a control group which we will then combine with our group
of treated article in a longitudinal, article-level panel dataset. In particular, any fixed difference across articles (or their authors)
would be swept out by the article fixed effect in our estimation framework.
    ix
       The distributions of citation at the article-level are vintage-specific, i.e., for each possible year of publication, we compute
quantiles of the citation distribution after one year, after two years,. . . , after n years, only limited by the coverage of the Web
of Science data at our disposal (1950-2015).



                                                                   v
in the main body of the manuscript—provides descriptive statistics for the analytic samples corresponding
to each scheme. While balance on these covariates is, for most of them, guaranteed by the blocking proce-
dure, note that the investigator’s overall citation count at baseline, which was not used in matching, is also
remarkably similar for in the treated and control samples, regardless of the variant considered.
Table C2 and Figure C2 are analogs of Table 3 and Panel A of Figure 4 in the main body of the manuscript,
and speak to the causal effect of death on the citation trajectories of treated articles, relative to control
articles, after death, relative to before. The results are closely similar across variants, buttressing the claim
that our core set of results is not an artefact of the idiosyncrasies of the matching scheme selected. In
particular, in all of these variants, one cannot detect meaningful differential citation trends for treated and
control articles, in the years preceding the death. Only in the few years after the year of death can one
observe a meaningful increase in the rate of citations, which appears not to be sustained after the fourth or
fifth year, depending on the variant. In our view, all three variants therefore result in a control group with
desirable properties from the standpoint of a difference-in-differences analysis.
In light of the above, the main body of the manuscript carries out the analysis under the least restrictive
blocking scheme, with its higher fraction of eligible treated articles matched, and a lower ratio of treated to
control articles (' 1 : 17).




                                                       vi
                                                 Figure C1
                        Three Alternative Blocking Schemes to Select a Control Group
                                           Distribution of Nb. of Controls per Treated Article
                A. Most Restrictive                                         B. Intermediate                                      C. Least Restrictive




                                                            Stock of Citations at Baseline
                D. Most Restrictive                                         E. Intermediate                                      F. Least Restrictive




Note: The top three figures display the histogram for the distribution of the number of control articles matched for each treated article. Panel A corresponds to
      the most restrictive scheme, where 62% of the eligible treated articles are dropped because we find no controls with a matching characteristic profile (treated
      and control article in a ratio of 1:7 on average). Panel B corresponds to the matching scheme with an intermediate level of restrictiveness, which drops 59%
      of the eligible treated articles for want of a match (treated and control article in a ratio of 1:8 approximately). Finally, the least restrictive scheme (and the
      one used in the main body of the manuscript) drops 38% of the eligible articles by deceased scientists (treated and control article in a ratio of 1:17
      approximately). Panels D, E, and, F display the distribution of the cumulative number of citations up to the baseline year for the treated and control articles
      respectively, under each of the three proposed matching schemes.

                                                                                  vii
                                            Figure C2
      Effect of a Scientist’s Death on the Reception of their Work – Event Study Graphs


               A. Most Restrictive                                         B. Intermediate                                      C. Least Restrictive




Note: The dark dots in the above plots correspond to coefficient estimates stemming from conditional (scientist) fixed effects Poisson specifications in which citation
      flows are regressed onto year effects, article age effects, as well as 15 interaction terms between treatment status and the number of years before/after the
      death of the author (the indicator variable for treatment status interacted with the year of death is omitted). The specifications also include a full set of lead
      and lag terms common to both the treated and control articles to fully account for transitory trends around the time of the event. The 95% confidence
      interval (corresponding to [QML] robust standard errors, clustered at the level of the scientist) around these estimates is plotted with light grey bars. Panels
      A, B, and C correspond to dynamic versions of the specifications in the first column of Table C2.




                                                                                  viii
 Table C1: Baseline Summary Statistics for Control & Treated Articles
                                                                                    Std.                                                        Std.
                                                           Mean       Median                  Min.      Max.           Mean        Median                 Min.      Max.
                                                                                    Dev.                                                        Dev.
                                                                         Control Publications                                       Treated Publications
    A. Most Restrictive
                                                                            (N=143,511)                                                 (N=19,111)
Article Age in Year of Death                                4.402          4        2.522        0         9            4.402          4        2.522       0          9
Article Year of Publication                               1977.180      1977       10.928      1950      2002         1977.180       1977       10.929     1950      2002
Article Nb. of Authors                                      3.197          3        1.499        1        15            3.206          3         1.483       1        13
Article Citations at Baseline                              34.652         18       68.708        0      11,505         34.183         18        63.011      0       3,138
Investigator Year of Birth                                1929.125      1929       10.176      1896      1966         1928.326       1928       10.264     1897      1959
Investigator Degree Year                                  1955.444      1955       10.492      1923      1989         1955.191       1955       10.533     1920      1986
Investigator Death Year                                   1992.511      1994        8.103      1969      2003         1992.511       1994       8.103      1969      2003
Investigator Cuml. Nb. of Citations                        14,128       9,771      14,558       91     188,430         14,125       10,139      12,141      77      76,231
                                                                         Control Publications                                       Treated Publications
    B. Intermediate
                                                                            (N=161,748)                                                 (N=20,970)
Article Age in Year of Death                                4.404          4        2.532        0         9            4.404         4         2.532       0          9
Article Year of Publication                               1977.151      1977       10.986      1950      2002         1977.151      1977        10.986     1950      2002
Article Nb. of Authors                                      3.184          3        1.505        1        15            3.193         3          1.491       1        13
Article Citations at Baseline                              32.058         16       66.129        0      11,505         31.624        16         60.725      0       3,138
Investigator Year of Birth                                1929.009      1929       10.229      1896      1966         1928.228      1928        10.298     1897      1959
Investigator Degree Year                                  1955.328      1955       10.530      1923      1989         1955.077      1955        10.570     1920      1986
Investigator Death Year                                   1992.503      1994        8.152      1969      2003         1992.503      1994        8.152      1969      2003
Investigator Cuml. Nb. of Citations                        13,877       9,512      14,465       53     188,430         13,864       9,961       12,086      77      76,231
                                                                         Control Publications                                       Treated Publications
    C. Least Restrictive
                                                                            (N=454,599)                                                 (N=27,147)
Article Age in Year of Death                                4.482          5        2.574        0         9            4.482         5         2.574       0          9
Article Year of Publication                               1976.641      1977       11.243      1950      2002         1976.641      1977        11.243     1950      2002
Article Nb. of Authors                                      3.190          3        1.576        1        15            3.200         3          1.563       1        13
Article Citations at Baseline                              35.457         16       98.945        0      18,055         33.309        15         65.275      0       3,129
Investigator Year of Birth                                1928.301      1928       10.441      1895      1966         1927.535      1927        10.516     1893      1960
Investigator Degree Year                                  1954.588      1954       10.761      1921      1989         1954.317      1954        10.826     1920      1988
Investigator Death Year                                   1992.353      1994        8.316      1969      2003         1992.353      1994        8.316      1969      2003
Investigator Cuml. Nb. of Citations                        13,586       9,359      14,318       17     188,430         13,799       9,895       12,264      77      76,231
Note: For each matching scheme, the sample consists of all of the publications for treated and control scientists that the procedure described in Appendix C has culled
       from the universe of last-authored original publications by deceased and still-alive scientists. The matching procedure is “one-to-many”: each treated article is
       matched with zero, one, or more control articles. The descriptive statistics above are weighted by the inverse number of controls in a matching strata. All time-
       varying covariates are measured in the year of the scientist’s death (or counterfactual year of death for the control scientist). The article-level citation counts
       correspond to the accumulated stock of citations up to the year of death.



                                                                                    ix
Table C2: Effect of Scientist’s Death on Citation Rates
                                             All Causes                   All Causes                            Sudden                         Anticipated
                                              of Death                     of Death                             Deaths                           Deaths
                                                                       < 65 at          ≥ 65 at           < 65 at        ≥ 65 at            < 65 at         ≥ 65 at
                                                All Ages
                                                                       Death            Death             Death          Death              Death           Death
      A. Most Restrictive
                                                  0.081**               0.087**           0.073             0.099*         -0.003            0.075†           0.156†
 After Death
                                                  (0.030)               (0.032)          (0.060)           (0.048)        (0.076)           (0.042)          (0.087)
 Nb. of Investigators                              7,649                 7,103            3,604             5,942          2,714             5,418            2,689
 Nb. of Source Articles                          162,572               104,821           57,751            47,736         22,833            54,537           32,015
 Nb. of Source Article-Year Obs.                3,674,958             2,097,337        1,577,621          915,806        607,318          1,127,331         890,721
 Log Likelihood                                 -5,424,468            -3,316,672       -2,105,942        -1,454,206      -802,541         -1,797,041       -1,210,704
     B. Intermediate
                                                  0.082**               0.088**           0.074             0.100*         -0.003            0.077†           0.158†
 After Death
                                                  (0.030)               (0.032)          (0.060)           (0.048)        (0.075)           (0.042)          (0.085)
 Nb. of Investigators                              7,929                 7,387            3,750             6,227          2,879             5,673            2,798
 Nb. of Source Articles                          182,640               117,237           65,403            53,212         26,275            60,899           35,763
 Nb. of Source Article-Year Obs.                4,135,623             2,350,441        1,785,182         1,023,983       698,937          1,260,766         993,601
 Log Likelihood                                 -5,703,920            -3,484,001       -2,217,996        -1,527,749      -852,248         -1,883,884       -1,266,354
     C. Least Restrictive
                                                  0.071*                0.078*            0.068             0.103*         0.028             0.061            0.128†
 After Death
                                                 (0.032)               (0.032)           (0.056)           (0.043)        (0.078)           (0.042)          (0.075)
 Nb. of Investigators                             9,038                 8,567             4,500             7,524          3,533             6,749            3,568
 Nb. of Source Articles                          481,337               309,154          172,183           138,545         70,012           161,651           93,625
 Nb. of Source Article-Year Obs.                10,947,398            6,243,544        4,703,854         2,696,929      1,857,319         3,361,745        2,611,750
 Log Likelihood                                -17,010,037           -10,262,936       -6,741,759        -4,421,808     -2,684,950        -5,563,598       -3,754,028
Note: Estimates stem from fixed effects Poisson specifications. For each article, one observation per year is included in the sample in the window between the
      year of publication and ten years after the (possibly counterfactual) event or 2006, whichever comes earlier. The dependent variable is the total number of
      citations accrued to a publication in a particular year. All models incorporate a full suite of year effects and nine article age effects, as well as a term
      common to both treated and control articles that switches from zero to one after the death of the scientist, to address the concern that age, year and
      individual fixed effects may not fully account for transitory citation trends after death. The number of observations varies slightly across columns because
      the conditional fixed effects specification drops observations corresponding to articles for which there is no variation in activity across the entire observation
      period. Robust (QML) standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the level of the star scientist. †p < 0.10, *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01.




                                                                                   x
                  Appendix D: Predicting Posthumous Citations

The difference-in-differences specification (eqn. (1), page 22) is the basis for the estimation of the causal
effect of a scientist’s premature passing on the flow of recognition at the article level. The model allows one
to estimate the conditional expectation of the citation response, and does not rely on the specific features
of the Poisson distribution (cf. Santos Silva and Tenreyro 2006, Wooldridge 1997).
Another goal of our study is to establish the plausibility of memorialization as a mechanism that contributes
to explaining our core finding, that of a relative increase in recognition after a superstar scientist passes
away. In order to do so, we must generate a measure of predicted posthumous citation for each article by a
deceased scientist. To do so, we collapse the article-level panel data for both treated and control scientists
onto a cross-section where the outcome of interest in the actual number of total posthumous citations, and
two separate sets of covariates (also denoted by the term “predictive features” or simply “features”). The
first set comprises only a parsimonious list of 140 features. The second set adds an additional 588 features.
To be more precise, the restricted set includes the number of citations that accrued to the article in the pre-
death (or pre-counterfactual death) period (log transformed, with an indicator variable absorbing the zero
citation cases—19,185 articles or 4% of the sample), a female scientist indicator variable, year of publication
effects, indicator variables for type of degree (MD, PhD, and MD/PhD), a full suite of indicator variables
for the scientists’ year of (possibly counterfactual) death, a series of indicator variables for scientists’ highest
degree graduation years, and a series of 30 indicator variables corresponding to the article age at time of
death. The expanded set of features include all the covariates in the restricted set plus (i) 472 indicator
variables for each journal (427 journals who contribute less than 10 article observations to the dataset are
collapsed onto a single indicator variable), (ii) 14 indicator variables for the number of authors on the paper
(the top category include all authorship lists including 15 or more authors, approximately 0.15% of the
sample), (iii) 20 indicator variables for each ventile of the number of trainees distribution (at the time of
death), (iv) 20 indicator variables for each ventile of the number of coauthors distribution (at the time
of death), (v) a dummy for intramural scientists as well as 20 indicator variables for each ventile of the
cumulative NIH funding distribution (at the time of death), and (vi) 20 indicator variables for each ventile
of the “self-promotion” distribution (at the time of death). Importantly, the list of features does not include
an indicator for deceased scientists.
Using these features, we then perform a variety of predictive exercises using a mix of classic and more novel
techniques:
  (a) A negative binomial maximum likelihood procedure where posthumous citations are regressed on the
      restricted set of covariates;
  (b) A high-dimensional fixed effects quasi-maximum likelihood Poisson routine (Correia et al. 2019) where
      posthumous citations are regressed on the expanded set of covariates;
  (c) A penalized Poisson procedure using Lasso regularization and the expanded set of covariates. Specif-
      ically, we use the “plugin formula” (Belloni et al. 2016) to minimize the Lasso objective function.
      In this framework, the penalization parameters are chosen to guarantee consistent prediction and
      parameter estimation.

Table D1 provides a correlation table for the actual and predicted posthumous citations using these three
approaches. The three prediction methods yield predicted values that are highly correlated with one another,
although the correlation between actual and predicted citations is lowest using the penalized Poisson pro-
cedure. To choose among these alternatives, we compare their out-of-sample predictive power, using model
deviance as the prediction metric.x Specifically, each model is trained on an 80% subsample of articles (clus-
tering on investigator) and tested on the remaining 20%. The Lasso-penalized Poisson procedure exhibits
   x
     The deviance is a classic goodness-of-fit measure for count data models (Cameron and Windmeijer 1996) and its use here
mirrors the role of the root-mean-square error (RMSE) for prediction in the context of linear models.



                                                            xi
by far the best out-of-sample performance, with the lowest deviance overall and very similar deviances on
both the training and the testing sample. Table D2 provides the full set of diagnostics for this procedure
using four different response variables: posthumous citations, posthumous citations, excluding citations from
memorializers and coauthors, posthumous citations outside of the window of five years that begins with the
year of death, and posthumous citations outside of the window of five years that begins with the year of
death, excluding citations from memorializers and coauthors.xi
In the main body of the manuscript, we therefore make use of the predictions generated by the penalized
Poisson procedure. We sum the article-level predictions to generate an individual-level measure of predicted
citation “afterlife” for each deceased scientist. Panel A of Figure D1 displays the histogram for the distribu-
tion of this measure. Panel B of Figure D1 displays the histogram for the distribution of “excess citations,”
i.e., the difference between actual posthumous citations received and the predicted score.




   xi
     In contrast, the negative binomial procedure exhibits a deviance ratio that is an order of magnitude higher for the testing
sample, relative to the training sample. This comparison is not available for the HDFE Poisson procedure because it cannot
project out-of-sample for the fixed effects that are not estimated when performing the routine on the training subsample.



                                                              xii
Table D1: Correlations Between Predicted Posthumous Citations Measures
                                                                               Predicted
                                     Actual
                                                                                                       Negative
                                                          LASSO             HDFE Poisson
                                                                                                       Binomial
              Actual                    1
              LASSO                   0.424                   1
  Predicted




              HDFE Poisson            0.629                 0.783                   1
              Negative Binomial       0.989                 0.808                 0.877                    1
Note: We contrast three approaches to predict citations at the article level in the years after the death on the basis
      of covariates known at the time of death. The first approach stems from a penalized lasso Poisson procedure
      using the plugin method of Belloni, Chernozhukov, and Wei (2016) using an extensive set of more than 700
      covariates, including a comprehensive set of journal fixed effects. The second stems from a high-dimensional
      fixed effects Poisson estimation routine recently proposed by Correia, Guimarães, and Zylkin (2019) using a
      similarly extensive of covariates, but without a penalty term to prevent overfitting. The third and final set of
      predictions stem from a negative binomial model estimated by maximum likelihood using a more parsimonious
      set of “only” 140 predictors. All the correlation coefficients reported above precisely estimated (p<0.001).




                                                                                 xiii
Table D2: Prediction Diagnostics, Lasso

                                                                                                                           All citations,
                                                                                 All post-death
                                                                                                                            post-year of
                                                                                citations, excl.       All citations,
                                                            All post-death                                                death+5, excl.
 Response:                           Subsample                                   citations from        post-year of
                                                               citations                                                   citations from
                                                                                memorializers &          death+5
                                                                                                                          memorializers &
                                                                                    coauthors
                                                                                                                              coauthors

                                     Training                   381,138               381,138             381,138              381,138
 Nb. of Source Articles
                                     Testing                     96,705                96,367             96,705               96,367
                                     Training                    7,237                 7,237               7,237                7,237
 Nb. of Investigators
                                     Testing                     1,774                 1,774               1,774                1,774
                                     Training                    23.908                22.847              16.572              15.950
 Deviance
                                     Testing                     25.762                24.610             17.328               16.691
                                     Training                    0.530                 0.526               0.453                0.447
 Deviance Ratio
                                     Testing                     0.521                 0.517               0.456                0.449
 Nb. of Non-zero Predictors                                       210                  209                  212                  210
 Nb. of Potential Predictors                                      728                  728                  728                  728
Note: The lasso prediction model is trained on 80% of the sample of 481,746 articles (clustering at the investigator level), and tested on the
      remaining 20%. The deviance ratios are nearly identical across the training and testing subsample, indicating high out-of-sample
      predictive power.




                                                                                xiv
                                                              Figure D1
                                                   Predicted and “Excess” Citations
                        A. Predicted Citations                                                               B. “Excess” Citations




Note: Panel A (in dark grey) displays the distribution of posthumous predicted citations for the sample of 720 treated scientists. The predictions were obtained
      using a Lasso Poisson procedure, using 728 covariates. Panel B (in light grey) displays the distribution of posthumous “excess” citations for the 720 treated
      scientists. “Excess” citations are defined by the difference, for each scientist, between the actual of citations garnered posthumously with the number of
      citations from our predictive model. Note that rather than an “excess,” for many deceased scientists one can observe a “shortfall” of citations as they receive
      fewer posthumous citations than our model predicted. Sixty seven outliers with more than 1,500 predicted cumulative posthumous citations are omitted in
      the pictures above, solely to help its legibility (they are included in the statistical analysis).




                                                                                 xv
           Appendix E: Collecting Data on Recognition Events

Identifying recognition events for the deceased and the still-living. We collect events recorded
in academic journals that celebrate, recognize, or memorialize the scientists in our sample, whether they
are deceased or still-living. The challenge is to do so in a manner this consistent over time and does not
entail a built-in recognition bias in favor of the deceased. To do so, we rely on PubMed, a publicly available
bibliometric database curated by the Library of Medicine, which contains, as of 2019, 29 million records for
the biomedical research literature, life science journals, and online books. The coverage of this database is
extensive, both in its depth (with more than 5,000 journals indexed) and its longitudinal dimension (with
comprehensive coverage of the english-language research literature since the early 1950s).
Helpfully, every publication in PubMed is tagged by one or more of 80 distinct publication types (“Letters,”
“Journal Articles,” “Meta-Analysis,” “Randomized Controlled Trial”. . . ). Ten of these publication types
could potentially denote a recognition event: Autobiography, Bibliography, Biography, Collected Works,
Festschrift, Interview, Introductory Journal Article, Lectures, Personal Narrative, and Portrait. Focusing
on the 413,611 articles tagged by one of these publication type contained in the 2019 version of PubMed, we
extract 22,912 articles whose title include the last name of one of the scientist, and either his/her first name
or middle name. We then handcode each of these records to filter out those that do not pertain to one of the
9,046 scientists in the sample, but rather to an homonym. The resulting dataset contains 5,850 individual
articles.
We then classify each of these articles into five mutually exclusive categories: obituaries, festschrifts, in-
terviews, awards and medals, and a residual category which include events such as a republished “classic”
articles with a commentary, reminiscences about the role of a scientist in the history of his/her field, auto-
biographical notes, etc. The first two rows of Table E1 provide a breakdown of the number of articles by
category, separately for deceased and still-living scientists. While there are more events overall in the control
sample, this reflects that the ratio of deceased to control scientists is roughly 1 : 12. Per scientist, there are
many more events for the deceased than for the still living (1.74 vs. 0.52 on average).
An oddity is that 9% of the control scientists have an obituary written about them. Recall that in order to
contribute an article to the control sample, an elite scientist must be alive five years after the year of death
for the deceased scientist with whom s/he is matched. Yet, they might have died in the ensuing years. More
typically, many of the other types of recognition events for the still-living scientists arrive in the twilight of
their careers, or after they have retired.
In order to compare the intensity of recognition between the prematurely deceased and still-alive scientists,
we leverage our research design. Recall that a byproduct of the matching procedure at the article level (cf.
Appendix C) is to generate a counterfactual year of death for each elite scientist whose articles match those
of treated scientists. This counterfactual year of death provides a temporal anchor to compare recognition
for the deceased as well as the living. A slight complication arises since the same scientist can serve as
control multiple times, for different treated scientists who passed away in different years between 1969 and
2003. As a result, there is typically more than one counterfactual year of death for each control scientist.
To get around this problem, we simply select one of the possible counterfactual years of death for each
living scientist at random. We then use a window of one year before until four years after the year of death
(or counterfactual death) symmetrically for deceased and control scientists, and simply sum the number of
recognition events for each scientist within that window.
The third and fourth rows of Table E1 break down the recognition events after filtering out events that fall
outside of this design-inspired window. By construction, every control scientist is alive during that time
period, which implies that the number of obituaries for these scientists is exactly zero. In fact, only 6% of
the control scientists are recognized at all during the window, versus 49% of the deceased scientists.
Figure E1, Panels A and B display the corresponding histograms for the total number of recognition events,
broken down by treatment status. Two facts should be emphasized. First, the distribution of recognition is



                                                       xvi
extremely skewed for deceased and still-living scientists. Second, per scientist the deceased are recognized
much more intensely than the living.

A finer-grained look at memorialization for the deceased. The focus on academic memory events
was justified in light of the fact that they are recorded consistently over time, and that the set of criteria used
to collect them does not entail a bias that mechanically produces more events for deceased scientists. At the
same time, it is clear that deceased scientists are memorialized through more diverse channels than simply
by publications in the biomedical literature. The second part of this appendix attends to this diversity by
systematically collecting memory events for deceased scientists, regardless of source.
To get a broader view of memorialization, we add to the academic literature search systematic internet
Google searches. Specifically, we searched for the scientists name, degree, and death year (e.g, John Gibbon,
MD 1973). We categorized the valid search results as university web posts, New York Times and other
newspaper obituaries, Wikipedia pages, and miscellaneous online obituaries. We labeled these memories
“popular memories,” and we found an average of just over two per scientist. Table E2 reports basic statistics
on the classification of memory events by type.
Below we report additional results that seek to provide more context and some nuance for understanding
the results reported in Section 4.2.1. “Estimating the Determinants of Recognition.” In particular, the data
on recognition events including still living scientists was sparse, precluding an analysis of its intensity, and
the key outcome of interest was simply the presence of at least one event in the design window of [−1; 5]
years around the year of death/counterfactual death. Figure E2 displays the histogram for the distribution
of total memory events (i.e., “academic”+“popular”) in the sample of 720 deceased scientists only. Twenty
one (2.9%) scientists in the sample are never memorialized, which means that their passing was ascertained
from the social security administration death index, or a mention in a publication that appeared after their
death.
Figure E3 displays the memorialization-age gradient in the raw data. Older scientists do tend to get memo-
rialized more intensely, but the difference is especially stark for the relatively small number of scientists who
die at a very advanced age (75 years old and up), but before retiring from research activities. One way to
interpret these findings is that scientists who remain productive and “at the top of their game” very late in
life are “forces of nature” whose very longevity invites a vigorous memorialization effort.xii

Who are the memorializers? For the 720 deceased scientists, we examine the authors of academic memory
events and identify 1,332 unique memorializer/deceased pairs for the 1,256 academic memory events in the
dataset for which we can obtain a PubMed article identifier (74.89% of the 1,677 total academic memories).
For 1,025 (76.95%) of these pairs, the full text is available from PubMed and we can determine the type
of relationship that exist between memorializing and memorialized individuals. We consider three types of
relationships. The first category is social, as in the case of a former collaborator, mentor, or trainee. The
second type corresponds to intellectual linkages, as in the case of a colleague or editor of a journal in the
same field. The third basis for relationships is purely organizational, as in the case of department colleagues
within the same institution. This leaves a small residual category of memory events written by historians
and journalists with no obvious relationship with the deceased.xiii The proportion of relationships that fall
in each category are reported in Table E3.
Almost 60% of these relationships are social in nature, and only 15% of the memorializers appear to not
have been proximate with the deceased in either the social, intellectual, or spatial dimension. The vanguard
of the salesforce is therefore drawn from a fairly narrow set of “satellites” that gravitated around the star
   xii
       Note that this does not contradict the results presented in Panel B of Figure 5, which demonstrated that at every age, but
particularly for the young, deceased elite scientists tend to get recognized more than still-living elite scientists.
  xiii
       We code these relationships to make the categories mutually exclusive: social relationships that are also intellectual
or geographic are classified as social; intellectual relationships that are also organizational (but not social) are classified as
intellectual; and only purely organizational relationships are classified as such. The residual category comprises all relationships
for which we could exclude a social, intellectual, and organizational connection.



                                                               xvii
while s/he was alive. In contrast, in Table 6, we reported that the death event appeared to mobilize citers
of all stripes; in particular, we observed no difference between the effect on the citing behavior of former
collaborators versus those who had never collaborated with the departed scientist.
The evidence is therefore consistent with a particular sequence unfolding after the death event where close
associates take on the burden of memorializing the deceased, and in certain conditions this triggers a much
wider and diffuse response that expresses itself in the form of an elevated propensity to cite the work of the
deceased.
Determinants of memorialization. Table E4 reproduces the analysis presented in Table 7, with two
important modifications. First the sample is limited to the set of 720 deceased scientists. Second, we use
Poisson specifications (with robust, quasi-maximum likelihood standard errors) rather than logit specifica-
tions since there is enough variation in this more limited sample to model the intensive memorialization
margin together with the extensive memorialization margin. The results are qualitatively similar, except for
the Self-Promoter indicator variable, which appears to correlate positively with the intensity of memorial-
ization. Table E5 reproduces Table E4, with the small twist that NAS Biographical memoirs are omitted
from the count of academic memory events—one might be concerned that the correlation between NAS
membership and memorialization intensity reflects the built-in memorialization channel that the National
Academy of Sciences has created to celebrate the career accomplishments of its deceased members. However,
compared with Table E4, this results only in a slight attenuation of the coefficient for NAS Membership. All
other coefficients remain substantively unchanged.
For the purposes of probing the robustness of these results, we also ran identical analyses to that presented
in Table E4, but using the number of “popular” memory events, as well as the overall number of memory
events (i.e., the sum of academic and “popular” events) as an outcome. The results suggest a broadly similar
pattern, but with attenuated magnitudes and noisier estimates for some of the coefficients of interest. These
results are reported in Tables E6 and E7.




                                                    xviii
                                                     Figure E1
                                    Distribution of Academic Recognition Events

                              A. As of 2019                                                    B. Within the Design Window




Note: These histograms depict the distribution of the number of academic “recognition events” in the sample of 720 deceased scientists and 8,326
     still living scientists. An academic recognition event corresponds to an article indexed by PubMed that references the name of a scientist and
     is of the following types: obituary; festschrift; biography/autobiography; ceremony after an award/medal; interview; as well as a miscellaneous
     category (see the text of the appendix for more details). In Panel A, the cumulative stock of such events is tabulated over the entire career
     until April 2019. In contrast, Panel B leverages our research design, by anchoring the analysis around the time window between one year
     before death and five years after death (or counterfactual death for the matched control scientists).




                                                                        xix
                           Figure E2
    Distribution of Memory Events for the Deceased Scientists




Note: Histogram for the total number of memory events (“academic” and “popular”) in the sample of 720 deceased
      scientists. A memory event can be academic (e.g., an obituary published in a journal, an award or a lecture
      named after the scientist, a symposium organized in his/her memory, or a NAS biographical memoir) or popular
      (e.g., a Wikipedia page, an obituary published in a newspaper or magazine, a web posting, etc.). Nineteen
      scientists (2.6%) in the sample are never memorialized, which means that their passing was ascertained from
      the death index from the social security administration, or a mention in a publication that appeared after the
      death. The figure omits thirteen (1.8%) scientists with more than 20 memory events. The five most memorialized
      scientists in the sample are: Henry Kunkel (known for his discoveries in basic immunology, 25 events); Sidney
      Farber (who pioneered modern chemotherapy, 26 events); Peter Safar (who pioneered cardiopulmonary
      resuscitation, 27 events); John H. Gibbon, Jr., (inventor of the heart-lung machine, 35 events); and Jonas Salk
      (discoverer of the polio vaccine, 65 events).




                                                        xx
                         Figure E3
 Age and Memorialization Intensity for the Deceased Scientists




Note: Number of academic memory events per deceased scientist, by age bracket. The numbers at the top of each
      bar indicate the number of scientists in the sample who died in the corresponding age bracket.




                                                    xxi
Table E1: Summary Statistics for Academic Recognition Events (N=9,046 Scientists)
                                                                                                      Award/                  At least
                                                          Obituary      Festschrift    Interview                   Misc.                    Total
                                                                                                      Medal                  one event
                                  Total Nb. of Events        847           198            737           776        1,766       1,944        4,324
                   Still Living
                                  Average per scientist     0.102         0.024          0.089         0.093       0.212       0.233        0.519
 As of 2019
                                  Total Nb. of Events        511            58             17            54         616         399         1,256
                    Deceased
                                  Average per scientist     0.710         0.081          0.024         0.075       0.856       0.554        1.744
                                  Total Nb. of Events         0             55            146           153         300         479          654
                   Still Living
 Within the                       Average per scientist     0.000         0.007          0.018         0.018       0.036       0.058        0.079
 design window                    Total Nb. of Events        464            35             4             9          265         354          777
                    Deceased
                                  Average per scientist     0.644         0.049          0.006         0.013       0.368       0.492        1.079
Note: The cross-tabulations above breakdown the number of academic “recognition events” in the sample of 720 deceased scientists and 8,326 still
      living scientists, by type of event: Obituary, Festschrift, Interview, Award/Medal, and a miscellaneous category (see the text of the appendix
      for more details). In the first two rows, the cumulative stock of such events is tabulated over the entire career until June 2019. In contrast,
      the third and fourth rows leverage our research design, by anchoring the analysis around the time window between one year before death and
      five years after death (or counterfactual death for the matched control scientists).




                                                                        xxii
Table E2: Summary Statistics for Memory Events, Deceased Scientists Only (N=720)
                                                                                        Count        Mean       Median      Std. Dev.      Min.      Max.
                   Festschrift/Memorial Symposium                                          66        0.092         0           0.312         0          2
                   Obituary in an Academic journal                                       1,518       2.108         1           2.997         0         24
 Academic          NAS Biographical Memoir                                                 93        0.129         0           0.393         0          6
                   Total Nb. Memory Events in Academic Publications                      1,677       2.329         1           3.202         0         30

                   New York Times Obituary                                                237        0.329          0          0.479          0        3
                   Other Newspaper Obituary                                               327        0.454          0          0.941          0        17
                   University Web Post                                                    351        0.487          0          0.713          0        5
 Popular
                   Misc. Web Post                                                         382        0.531          0          1.680          0        34
                   Wikipedia page                                                         183        0.254          0          0.436          0        1
                   Total Nb. of “Popular” Memory Events                                  1,480       2.056         1           2.742         0         54
 Total             Total Nb. of Memory Events                                            3,157       4.385         3           4.845         0         65

Note: The number of academic memories listed in this table is considerably higher than that in Table E1 (1,677 versus 1,256), as this table includes academic
     memories which were not recorded by PubMed.




                                                                             xxiii
Table E3: Memorializers’ Relationships to Deceased Elite Scientists
Type of Relationship                           Specific Connection                                  Percentage of Sample
                                               Trainee                                                     36.97%
                                               Collaborator                                                20.49%
Social
                                               Family                                                      0.39%
                                               Trained together                                             0.58%
                                                                                                          58.43%

                                               Colleague in same field                                        17.07%
Intellectual
                                               Journal editor                                                  1.37%
                                                                                                              18.44%

Organizational                                 Shared employer                                                 8.10%
                                                                                                               8.10%

                                               No social relation                                              9.46%
None                                           Historian                                                       2.54%
                                               Journalist                                                      3.02%
                                                                                                              15.02%

Note: The percentages correspond to the fraction of 1,025 memorializer-deceased pairs that have a particular characteristic (e.g.,
      the deceased and the memorializer are in the same institution) and for which information was available from PubMed. The
      different categories have been defined to be mutually exclusive, i.e., social relationships that are also intellectual or
      geographic are classified as social; intellectual relationships that are also organizational (but not social) are classified as
      intellectual; and only purely organizational relationships are classified as such. The residual category comprises all
      relationships for which we could exclude a social, intellectual, and spatial connection.




                                                                               xxiv
Table E4: Estimating the Determinants of Academic Memories
                                                       (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)               (5)                (6)       (7)        (8)
                                                                   0.245**                                         0.053             0.245**   0.202**    0.158*
 Ln(cmltv. citations at death)
                                                                   (0.042)                                        (0.067)            (0.049)   (0.061)   (0.065)
                                                                                 0.449**                          0.385**
 Ln(cmltv. publications at death)
                                                                                 (0.054)                          (0.087)
                                                                                                 0.074†            0.007
 Ln(cmltv. funding at death)
                                                                                                (0.041)           (0.037)
                                                                   0.595**       0.675**        0.757**           0.644**            0.595**   0.625**   0.628**
 Member of the NAS
                                                                   (0.101)       (0.091)        (0.092)           (0.096)            (0.101)   (0.105)   (0.108)
                                                                                                                                      -0.004              -0.006
 Ln(Nb. of past trainees)
                                                                                                                                     (0.053)             (0.054)
                                                                                                                                                0.078      0.098
 Ln(Nb. of past coauthors [non-trainees])
                                                                                                                                               (0.070)   (0.071)
                                                                                                                                                          0.192*
 Self-Promoter
                                                                                                                                                         (0.089)
                                                      -0.173        -0.062        0.007          -0.155            0.001              -0.062    -0.065    -0.082
 Female
                                                     (0.183)       (0.167)       (0.163)        (0.165)           (0.162)            (0.169)   (0.168)   (0.173)
                                                      0.125         0.141         0.145†          0.118            0.152†              0.141     0.142     0.142
 Death is Sudden
                                                     (0.092)       (0.087)       (0.088)        (0.089)           (0.087)            (0.088)   (0.087)   (0.087)
 Nb. of Scientists                                     720            720          720             720              720                 720       720       720
 Pseudo-R2                                            0.157          0.227        0.238          0.207             0.239              0.227     0.228     0.231
Note: Estimates stem from Poisson specifications. The sample consists of a cross-section of the 720 deceased scientists. The dependent variable is the total
      number of academic memory events created for a scientist posthumously. All models include—but do not report—controls for degree type (PhD and
      MD/PhD, MD is the omitted category), a suite of indicator variables for each death year, six indicator variables for age categories at the time of death
      (less than 45 years old; between 45 and 55 years old; between 55 and 60 years old; between 60 and 65 old; between 65 and 70 years old; between 70 and
      75 years old; above 75 years old is the omitted category), and an indicator variable for unknown cause of death. Self-Promoter is an indicator variable
      equals to one for investigators above the median in term of self-promotional behavior (as assessed by the number of unrelated—i.e., out-of-subfield—
      self-citations as a proportion of all citations in a deceased scientist’s entire body of work).
      Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the level of the star scientist. *p < 0.10,   **p   < 0.05,   ***p   < 0.01.




                                                                                  xxv
Table E5: Estimating the Determinants of Non-NAS Academic Memories
                                                       (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)               (5)                (6)       (7)       (8)
                                                                   0.267**                                         0.072             0.269**   0.226**   0.181**
 Ln(cmltv. citations at death)
                                                                   (0.045)                                        (0.071)            (0.052)   (0.064)   (0.069)
                                                                                 0.474**                          0.388**
 Ln(cmltv. publications at death)
                                                                                 (0.058)                          (0.092)
                                                                                                 0.079†            0.006
 Ln(cmltv. funding at death)
                                                                                                (0.043)           (0.039)
                                                                   0.400**       0.490**        0.579**           0.451**            0.402**   0.429**   0.434**
 Member of the NAS
                                                                   (0.107)       (0.099)        (0.101)           (0.102)            (0.107)   (0.111)   (0.114)
                                                                                                                                      -0.008              -0.011
 Ln(Nb. of past trainees)
                                                                                                                                     (0.056)             (0.057)
                                                                                                                                                0.075     0.096
 Ln(Nb. of past coauthors [non-trainees])
                                                                                                                                               (0.074)   (0.076)
                                                                                                                                                          0.203*
 Self-Promoter
                                                                                                                                                         (0.092)
                                                      -0.192        -0.068        -0.001         -0.172            -0.007             -0.069    -0.072    -0.089
 Female
                                                     (0.184)       (0.173)       (0.169)        (0.171)           (0.168)            (0.174)   (0.173)   (0.179)
                                                      0.114         0.138         0.137          0.112             0.146              0.137     0.138     0.138
 Death is Sudden
                                                     (0.095)       (0.091)       (0.091)        (0.092)           (0.091)            (0.092)   (0.091)   (0.091)
 Nb. of Scientists                                     720            720          720            720               720                720       720       720
 Pseudo-R2                                            0.150          0.204        0.214          0.181             0.216              0.204     0.205     0.208
Note: Estimates stem from Poisson specifications. The sample consists of a cross-section of the 720 deceased scientists. The dependent variable is the total
      number of academic memory events created for a scientist posthumously, but in contrast to the results reported in Table E4, the count has been
      modified to exclude NAS Biographical Memoirs. All models include—but do not report—controls for degree type (PhD and MD/PhD, MD is the omitted
      category), a suite of indicator variables for each death year, six indicator variables for age categories at the time of death (less than 45 years old;
      between 45 and 55 years old; between 55 and 60 years old; between 60 and 65 old; between 65 and 70 years old; between 70 and 75 years old; above 75
      years old is the omitted category), and an indicator variable for unknown cause of death. Self-Promoter is an indicator variable equals to one for
      investigators above the median in term of self-promotional behavior (as assessed by the number of unrelated—i.e., out-of-subfield—self-citations as a
      proportion of all citations in a deceased scientist’s entire body of work).
      Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the level of the star scientist. *p < 0.10,   **p   < 0.05,   ***p   < 0.01.




                                                                                  xxvi
 Table E6: Estimating the Determinants of Memorialization – Popular Memories
                                                       (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)               (5)                  (6)     (7)       (8)
                                                                    0.049                                          0.006              0.064     0.042     0.039
 Ln(cmltv. citations at death)
                                                                   (0.032)                                        (0.062)            (0.045)   (0.056)   (0.069)
                                                                                  0.109*                           0.154†
 Ln(cmltv. publications at death)
                                                                                 (0.043)                          (0.088)
                                                                                                 -0.083            -0.103
 Ln(cmltv. funding at death)
                                                                                                (0.103)           (0.103)
                                                                   0.509**       0.516**        0.602**           0.559**            0.499**   0.511**   0.493**
 Member of the NAS
                                                                   (0.146)       (0.146)        (0.103)           (0.114)            (0.128)   (0.168)   (0.152)
                                                                                                                                      0.068               0.069†
 Ln(Nb. of past trainees)
                                                                                                                                     (0.042)             (0.041)
                                                                                                                                                0.011     0.013
 Ln(Nb. of past coauthors [non-trainees])
                                                                                                                                               (0.085)   (0.077)
                                                                                                                                                          0.113
 Self-Promoter
                                                                                                                                                         (0.086)
                                                      0.108         0.110         0.133           0.069            0.137              0.091     0.108     0.085
 Female
                                                     (0.125)       (0.118)       (0.117)        (0.119)           (0.120)            (0.115)   (0.118)   (0.114)
                                                      0.020         0.015         0.016          -0.008            -0.002             0.015     0.013     0.011
 Death is Sudden
                                                     (0.099)       (0.106)       (0.106)        (0.087)           (0.086)            (0.099)   (0.106)   (0.099)
 Nb. of Scientists                                     720           720           720             720              720                720       720       720
 Pseudo-R2                                            0.107         0.130         0.131           0.134            0.139              0.137     0.131     0.139
Note: Estimates stem from Poisson specifications. The sample consists of a cross-section of the 720 deceased scientists. The dependent variable is the total
      number of “popular” memory events created for a scientist posthumously. A popular memory is a university web post, New York Times obituary, other
      newspaper obituary, Wikipedia page, or miscellaneous online obituary. All models include—but do not report—controls for degree type (PhD and
      MD/PhD, MD is the omitted category), a suite of indicator variables for each death year, six indicator variables for age categories at the time of death
      (less than 45 years old; between 45 and 55 years old; between 55 and 60 years old; between 60 and 65 old; between 65 and 70 years old; between 70 and
      75 years old; above 75 years old is the omitted category), and an indicator variable for unknown cause of death. Self-Promoter is an indicator variable
      equals to one for investigators above the median in term of self-promotional behavior (as assessed by the number of unrelated—i.e., out-of-subfield—
      self-citations as a proportion of all citations in a deceased scientist’s entire body of work).
      Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the level of the star scientist. *p < 0.10,   **p   < 0.05,   ***p   < 0.01.




                                                                                 xxvii
Table E7: Estimating the Determinants of Memorialization – Total Memories
                                                        (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)               (5)               (6)        (7)      (8)
                                                                    0.148**                                        0.025             0.157**    0.119*    0.099†
 Ln(cmltv. citations at death)
                                                                    (0.031)                                       (0.053)            (0.038)   (0.047)   (0.054)
                                                                                  0.284**                         0.281**
 Ln(cmltv. publications at death)
                                                                                  (0.039)                         (0.070)
                                                                                                 -0.000            -0.043
 Ln(cmltv. funding at death)
                                                                                                (0.071)           (0.068)
                                                                    0.560**       0.602**       0.685**           0.605**            0.557**   0.578**   0.572**
 Member of the NAS
                                                                    (0.098)       (0.095)       (0.081)           (0.087)            (0.093)   (0.109)   (0.105)
                                                                                                                                      0.022               0.021
 Ln(Nb. of past trainees)
                                                                                                                                     (0.038)             (0.038)
                                                                                                                                                0.051     0.061
 Ln(Nb. of past coauthors [non-trainees])
                                                                                                                                               (0.063)   (0.060)
                                                                                                                                                          0.154*
 Self-Promoter
                                                                                                                                                         (0.072)
                                                       -0.008        0.050         0.098         -0.024            0.095              0.043     0.046     0.029
 Female
                                                      (0.120)       (0.105)       (0.103)       (0.106)           (0.104)            (0.105)   (0.106)   (0.106)
                                                       0.077         0.082         0.082         0.061             0.078              0.083     0.080     0.080
 Death is Sudden
                                                      (0.076)       (0.077)       (0.077)       (0.072)           (0.070)            (0.076)   (0.077)   (0.075)
 Nb. of Scientists                                      720           720           720            720              720                720       720       720
 Pseudo-R2                                             0.142         0.206         0.214          0.192            0.217              0.208     0.207     0.211
Note: Estimates stem from Poisson specifications. The sample consists of a cross-section of the 720 deceased scientists. The dependent variable is the total
      number of memory events created for a scientist posthumously. Total memories is the sum of both popular and academic memories. All models include—
      but do not report—controls for degree type (PhD and MD/PhD, MD is the omitted category), a suite of indicator variables for each death year, six
      indicator variables for age categories at the time of death (less than 45 years old; between 45 and 55 years old; between 55 and 60 years old; between
      60 and 65 old; between 65 and 70 years old; between 70 and 75 years old; above 75 years old is the omitted category), and an indicator variable for
      unknown cause of death. Self-Promoter is an indicator variable equals to one for investigators above the median in term of self-promotional behavior
      (as assessed by the number of unrelated—i.e., out-of-subfield—self-citations as a proportion of all citations in a deceased scientist’s entire body of work).
      Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the level of the star scientist. *p < 0.10,   **p   < 0.05,   ***p   < 0.01.




                                                                                 xxviii
Appendix F: List of 720 Deceased Elite Scientists
Investigator Name                                         Cause of death   Institution at the time of death                                Scientific domain
Lester R. Dragstedt          [1893-1975]   MD/PhD, 1921   sudden           University of Chicago School of Medicine                        Pathogenesis of Peptic and Gastric Ulcer
Jerzy Neyman                 [1894-1981]   PhD, 1924      sudden           University of California — Berkeley                             founder of modern theoretical statistics
Ralph D. Lillie              [1896-1979]   MD, 1926       sudden           Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center New Orleans   Histochemistry of Pigments and Carcinoid Tumors
Robert K.-S. Lim             [1897-1969]   PhD, 1920      anticipated      Miles Medical Science Research Laboratories                     neurophysiology of pain
Ernst Simonson               [1898-1974]   MD, 1924       sudden           University of Minnesota School of Medicine                      cardiology and physiology
Owen H. Wangensteen          [1898-1981]   MD/PhD, 1925   sudden           University of Minnesota School of Medicine                      Origin and Nature of Acid Peptic Ulcer
Fritz A. Lipmann             [1899-1986]   MD/PhD, 1928   anticipated      Rockefeller University                                          Glucose Transport in Normal and Malignant Cells
Leo T. Samuels               [1899-1978]   PhD, 1930      unknown          University of Utah School of Medicine                           Steroid Transfer in Normal and Malignant Endocrine Cells
Thomas Francis, Jr.          [1900-1969]   MD, 1925       sudden           University of Michigan School of Medicine                       physician, virologist, and epidemiologist
Harold P. Morris             [1900-1982]   PhD, 1930      sudden           Howard University College of Medicine                           Induction-Continuation-Genetics of Experimental Tumors
J. Murray Steele             [1900-1969]   MD, 1925       sudden           New York University School of Medicine                          Bidirectional Movement of Ions Across the Intestines
Gottfried S. Fraenkel        [1901-1984]   PhD, 1925      sudden           University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign                      insect physiology and behavior
Ernest Witebsky              [1901-1969]   MD, 1926       sudden           SUNY at Buffalo School of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences      Serological Specificity of Normal and Cancer Tissues
Alexander B. Gutman          [1902-1973]   MD/PhD, 1928   sudden           Mount Sinai School of Medicine                                  Purine Metabolism and Gouty Arthritis
John E. Howard               [1902-1985]   MD, 1928       sudden           Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine                     Calcium Metabolism and Skeletal Physiology
Sidney Farber                [1903-1973]   MD, 1927       sudden           Harvard Medical School                                          Chemotherapy of Cancer and Related Biological Studies
John H. Gibbon, Jr.          [1903-1973]   MD, 1927       sudden           University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine                   inventor of heart-lung machine
Hans Popper                  [1903-1988]   MD/PhD, 1944   anticipated      Mount Sinai School of Medicine                                  correlation of structure and function in liver disease
J. Herbert Conway            [1904-1969]   MD, 1930       sudden           Weill Medical College — Cornell University                      Studies on the Homotransplantation of Tissues
Grace A. Goldsmith           [1904-1975]   MD, 1932       anticipated      Tulane School of Public Health and Tropical Medicine            B Group of Vitamins in Human Nutrition
James D. Hardy               [1904-1985]   PhD, 1930      anticipated      University of Mississippi Medical Center                        Temperature Regulation and Brain Stem Neuronal Activity
John H. Lawrence             [1904-1991]   MD, 1930       sudden           University of California — Berkeley                             Erythropoietin and Marrow By Positron Scanning
Jack Schultz                 [1904-1971]   PhD, 1929      sudden           University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine                   Cytochemical Studies of the Nature and Function of Genes
Wendell M. Stanley           [1904-1971]   PhD, 1929      sudden           University of California — Berkeley                             Mechanism of Antibody Specificity
Cesare G. Tedeschi           [1904-1974]   MD, 1928       unknown          Metrowest Medical Center                                        Thymus, Lymphoid Tissue and Adipose Tissue
S. Bernard Wortis            [1904-1969]   MD, 1927       sudden           New York University School of Medicine                          Sympathetic Activity and Addiction
Jacob Yerushalmy             [1904-1973]   PhD, 1930      unknown          University of California — Berkeley                             Biologic & Environmental Factors in Child Development
Morris B. Bender             [1905-1983]   MD, 1930       sudden           Mount Sinai School of Medicine                                  Neurophysiologic Aspects of Visual Discrimination
Chandler McC. Brooks         [1905-1989]   PhD, 1931      sudden           SUNY Downstate Medical Center                                   Neurophysiological Study of Neuroendocrine Activity
Charles K. Friedberg         [1905-1972]   MD, 1929       sudden           Mount Sinai School of Medicine                                  Effects of Exercise and Drugs in Heart Block
Thomas F. Gallagher          [1905-1975]   PhD, 1931      unknown          Montefiore Medical Center                                       steroid hormone production and metabolism in cancer
Per F. Scholander            [1905-1980]   MD/PhD, 1934   sudden           UCSD School of Medicine                                         Secretion of Gases in the Swimbladder of Fishes
Tracy M. Sonneborn           [1905-1981]   PhD, 1928      sudden           Indiana University at Bloomington                               Normal and Abnormal Cell Growth and Heredity
Lyman C. Craig               [1906-1974]   PhD, 1931      unknown          Rockefeller University                                          Purification and Structure of Active Principles
Max Delbrück                 [1906-1981]   PhD, 1930      anticipated      California Institute of Technology                              replication mechanism and the genetic structure of viruses
Karl A. Folkers              [1906-1997]   PhD, 1931      sudden           University of Texas at Austin                                   peptide antagonists of LHRH as gonadotropin inhibitors
Frank L. Horsfall, Jr.       [1906-1971]   MD, 1932       anticipated      Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center                          Immunological Studies of Atypical Pneumonia
William Pomerance            [1906-1978]   MD, 1929       anticipated      NIH/NCI                                                         Gynecologic Oncology
Berta V. Scharrer            [1906-1995]   PhD, 1930      anticipated      Albert Einstein College of Medicine                             Immunocytochemical Study of Invertebrate Nervous System
Henry A. Schroeder           [1906-1975]   MD, 1933       unknown          Dartmouth Medical School                                        Abnormal Trace Metals in Cardiovascular Diseases
Nathan W. Shock              [1906-1989]   PhD, 1930      anticipated      NIH/NIA                                                         Physiological Studies of Aging in the Heart, Kidneys, and Lungs
S. Smith Stevens             [1906-1973]   PhD, 1933      sudden           Harvard University                                              Psychophysics and Hearing
Georges Ungar                [1906-1977]   MD, 1939       unknown          University of Tennessee Health Sciences Center                  Chemical Transfer of Drug Tolerance and Learned Behavior
Dan H. Campbell              [1907-1974]   PhD, 1935      sudden           California Institute of Technology                              Researches on Blood and Immunochemistry
Morton J. Hamburger          [1907-1970]   MD, 1934       sudden           University of Cincinnati College of Medicine                    Studies in Staphylococcal Infection
Michael J. Hogan             [1907-1976]   MD, 1930       anticipated      UCSF School of Medicine                                         Studies on Ocular Dystrophies and Extraocular Muscles
Leslie A. Stauber            [1907-1973]   PhD, 1937      sudden           Rutgers University                                              Visceral Leishmaniasis in Experimental Animals
Alexander S. Wiener          [1907-1976]   MD, 1930       anticipated      New York University School of Medicine                          Blood Groups in Non-Human Primates
Harland G. Wood              [1907-1991]   PhD, 1935      anticipated      Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine              heterotrophic carbon dioxide fixation
Benjamin Alexander           [1908-1978]   MD, 1934       unknown          New York Blood Center                                           Coagulation, Hemorrhage, and Thrombosis
William F. Caveness          [1908-1981]   MD, 1943       anticipated      NIH                                                             authority on head injuries
David G. Cogan               [1908-1993]   MD, 1932       sudden           NIH/NEI                                                         Metabolism of the Normal and Abnormal Ocular Lens
John P. Fox                  [1908-1987]   MD/PhD, 1936   unknown          University of Washington School of Medicine                     Rhinovirus Immunology and Epidemiology
Herman M. Kalckar            [1908-1991]   MD/PhD, 1939   sudden           Boston University Medical Center                                Genes, Enzymes, Nucleotides, and Carbohydrate Patterns
Maurice Lev                  [1908-1994]   MD, 1934       anticipated      Rush-Presbyterian-St Luke's Medical Center                      Studies of Congenital Heart Disease
Carl V. Moore                [1908-1972]   MD, 1932       sudden           Washington University in St. Louis School of Medicine           Erythropoiesis and Iron Metabolism
Alvin M. Pappenheimer, Jr.   [1908-1995]   PhD, 1932      sudden           Harvard University                                              Biology of Diphtheria
George K. Smelser            [1908-1973]   PhD, 1932      sudden           Columbia University College of Physicians & Surgeons            Electron Microscopy of the Eye
Abraham White                [1908-1980]   PhD, 1931      sudden           Stanford University School of Medicine                          Biochemical Studies of Lymphoid Tissue
Geoffrey H. Bourne           [1909-1988]   PhD, 1943      sudden           Emory University School of Medicine                             Ultrastructural Changes in Scorbutic Tissues
Jacob W. Dubnoff             [1909-1972]   PhD, 1945      anticipated      USC Keck School of Medicine                                     Active Forms of Vitamin B12 and Sulfhydryl Groups
R. Gordon Gould              [1909-1978]   PhD, 1933      anticipated      Stanford University School of Medicine                          Cholesterol Metabolism and Hypocholesterolemic Drugs
Thomas D. Kinney             [1909-1977]   MD, 1936       anticipated      Duke University School of Medicine                              Subcellular Pathology of Ferritin Transport
V. Everett Kinsey            [1909-1978]   PhD, 1937      sudden           Oakland University                                              Intraocular Fluid Dynamics
Koloman Laki                 [1909-1983]   PhD, 1936      sudden           NIH/NIADDK                                                      Discovery of blood-clotting Factor XIII
Carl L. Larson               [1909-1978]   MD, 1939       anticipated      University of Montana at Missoula                               Nonspecific Resistance To Viral-Induced Tumors
Francis C. Lowell            [1909-1979]   MD, 1936       sudden           Harvard Medical School/Massachusetts General Hospital           Allergy of the respiratory tract
Walsh McDermott              [1909-1981]   MD, 1934       sudden           Weill Medical College — Cornell University                      Latent and Dormant Microbial Infections
Erwin Neter                  [1909-1983]   MD, 1934       sudden           Children's Hospital of Buffalo                                  Study of Bacterial Toxins and Hemagglutination
David D. Rutstein            [1909-1986]   MD, 1934       sudden           Harvard Medical School                                          Preventive Medicine
Robert H. Williams           [1909-1979]   MD, 1934       sudden           University of Washington School of Medicine                     Diabetes Etiology, Pathogenesis, and Management
Ernest Bueding               [1910-1986]   MD, 1936       anticipated      Johns Hopkins School of Hygiene and Public Health               Comparative Biochemistry of Parasitic Helminths
Albert S. Gordon             [1910-1992]   PhD, 1934      sudden           New York University School of Medicine                          Humoral Control of Blood Cell Formation and Release
David E. Green               [1910-1983]   PhD, 1934      anticipated      University of Wisconsin School of Medicine                      molecular biology of membrane systems
Werner Henle                 [1910-1987]   MD, 1934       anticipated      University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine                   serologic response to epstein-barr virus infection
Alexander D. Langmuir        [1910-1993]   MD, 1935       anticipated      Johns Hopkins School of Hygiene and Public Health               Infectious diseases surveillance
George V. Taplin             [1910-1979]   MD, 1936       anticipated      UCLA School of Medicine                                         radioactive albumin macroaggregates for the detection of pulmonary embolism
Paul M. Aggeler              [1911-1969]   MD, 1937       anticipated      UCSF School of Medicine                                         discovery of the plasma thromboplastin component
Frank A. Beach               [1911-1988]   PhD, 1940      sudden           University of California — Berkeley                             Hormonal Control Over Social Interactions
Ernest Borek                 [1911-1986]   PhD, 1938      unknown          AMD Cancer Research Center                                      molecular biology of ethionine carcinogenesis




                                                                                                                    xxix
Investigator Name                                          Cause of death   Institution at the time of death                                   Scientific domain
William J. Bowen             [1911-1970]   PhD, 1936       sudden           NIH/NIAMD                                                          Studies of enzymes involved in the release of chemical energy
Edward W. Dempsey            [1911-1975]   PhD, 1937       sudden           Columbia University College of Physicians & Surgeons               Mechanisms of Formation and Destruction of Myelin
Michael Doudoroff            [1911-1975]   PhD, 1939       anticipated      University of California — Berkeley                                bacteriology and immunology
Jordi Folch-Pi               [1911-1979]   MD, 1932        sudden           Harvard Medical School/Massachusetts General Hospital              Biochemistry of the Mucolipids of the Nervous System
William T. Niemer            [1911-1971]   PhD, 1946       sudden           Creighton University School of Medicine                            Influence of Telencephalon nn the Hypothalamus
Charles H. Rammelkamp, Jr.   [1911-1981]   MD, 1937        sudden           Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine                 early studies on the clinical application & mechanism of action of antimicrobials
Yoshio Sato                  [1911-1972]   PhD, 1946       anticipated      NIH/NIAMD                                                          Studies of Steroidal Alkaloids
Reidar F.A. Sognnaes         [1911-1984]   DDS/PhD, 1941   sudden           UCLA School of Dentistry                                           Studies on Forensic Dental Records
Fred H. Allen, Jr.           [1912-1987]   MD, 1938        sudden           New York Blood Center                                              blood grouping
Raymond T. Carhart           [1912-1975]   PhD, 1936       sudden           Northwestern University School of Medicine                         audiology and otolaryngology
Albert H. Coons              [1912-1978]   MD, 1937        sudden           Harvard Medical School                                             bacteriology and immunology
William Likoff               [1912-1987]   MD, 1938        unknown          Hahnemann Medical College                                          diagnosis and prognosis of pulmonary hypertension
Daniel Mazia                 [1912-1996]   PhD, 1937       anticipated      Stanford University School of Medicine                             isolation of the mitotic apparatus
Hermann Rahn                 [1912-1990]   PhD, 1938       anticipated      SUNY at Buffalo School of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences         Interaction of Gas Phase Diffusion and Blood Flow
Arnold M. Seligman           [1912-1976]   MD, 1937        anticipated      Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine                        Experimental and Clinical Studies in Cancer Chemotherapy
Harry A. Waisman             [1912-1971]   MD/PhD, 1947    sudden           University of Wisconsin School of Medicine                         Developmental Biochemistry and Mental Retardation
Arthur Cherkin               [1913-1987]   PhD, 1953       anticipated      Sepulveda VA Medical Center                                        neurobiology of memory
William S. Johnson           [1913-1995]   PhD, 1940       sudden           Stanford University School of Medicine                             synthetic organic chemistry
Stephen W. Kuffler           [1913-1980]   MD, 1937        sudden           Harvard Medical School                                             Microphysiology of Synaptic Transmission
Maurice Landy                [1913-1993]   PhD, 1940       anticipated      NIH                                                                genetic control of immune responsiveness
Choh Hao Li                  [1913-1987]   PhD, 1938       anticipated      UCSF School of Medicine                                            isolation and synthesis the human pituitary growth hormone
Werner K. Noell              [1913-1992]   MD, 1938        unknown          University of Kansas Medical Center                                Translation of Visual Cell mRNA in Model Systems
Alex B. Novikoff             [1913-1987]   PhD, 1938       anticipated      Albert Einstein College of Medicine                                histochemical studies of the Golgi apparatus
Efraim Racker                [1913-1991]   MD, 1938        sudden           Weill Medical College — Cornell University                         identifying and purifying Factor 1, the first part of the ATP synthase enzyme
Mindel C. Sheps              [1913-1973]   MD, 1936        anticipated      University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill School of Medicine     biostatistics and demography
Jerome R. Vinograd           [1913-1976]   PhD, 1940       sudden           California Institute of Technology                                 Studies of the DNA from Oncogenic Viruses
Edgar Zwilling               [1913-1971]   PhD, 1940       sudden           Brandeis University                                                morphogenesis of limb development in coelenterates
Frederic C. Bartter          [1914-1983]   MD, 1940        sudden           University of Texas Health Sciences Center at San Antonio          interaction between the kidney and various endocrine systems
J. Werner Braun              [1914-1972]   PhD, 1936       sudden           Rutgers University                                                 DNA-Associated Antigens and Cancer Therapy
Paul A. Bunn                 [1914-1970]   MD, 1941        sudden           University of Michigan School of Medicine                          evaluation of streptomycin as a therapeutic agent for tuberculosis
Eugene P. Cronkite           [1914-2001]   MD, 1940        anticipated      Brookhaven National Laboratory                                     hematopoiesis and radiation injury
Thaddeus S. Danowski         [1914-1987]   MD, 1940        sudden           University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine                        Serum Electrolyte Changes in Carbohydrate Metabolism
Harry A. Feldman             [1914-1985]   MD, 1939        anticipated      SUNY Upstate Medical University at Syracuse                        Streptococcal Infections in a Population of Families
Aubrey Gorbman               [1914-2003]   PhD, 1940       anticipated      University of Washington School of Medicine                        Hormonal Action on Central Nervous Function
Marie R. Haug                [1914-2001]   PhD, 1968       sudden           Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine                 Stresses Strains and Elderly Physical Health
Fred Karush                  [1914-1994]   PhD, 1938       anticipated      University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine                      Interactions of Immunoglobulins
Arnost Kleinzeller           [1914-1997]   MD/PhD, 1941    anticipated      University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine                      Active Sugar Transport in Renal Cells
Herschel L. Roman            [1914-1989]   PhD, 1942       sudden           University of Washington School of Medicine                        Genetic Investigations in Yeast
Jonas E. Salk                [1914-1995]   MD, 1939        sudden           Salk Institute for Biological Studies                              effective vaccine for polio
Klaus Schwarz                [1914-1978]   MD, 1939        sudden           UCLA School of Medicine                                            Selenium and Unidentified Essential Trace Elements
Sol Spiegelman               [1914-1983]   PhD, 1944       anticipated      Columbia University College of Physicians & Surgeons               nucleic acid hybridization
Edward A. Steinhaus          [1914-1969]   PhD, 1939       sudden           University of California — Irvine                                  The Diseases of Invertebrate Animals
Marshall R. Urist            [1914-2001]   MD, 1941        anticipated      UCLA School of Medicine                                            inductive substrates of tooth and bone formation
George N. Wise               [1914-1974]   MD, 1938        sudden           Albert Einstein College of Medicine                                Investigation into the vascular diseases of the retina
Isadore Zipkin               [1914-1973]   PhD, 1942       anticipated      UCSF School of Medicine                                            Role of Fluoride in Experimental Periodontal Disease
Bernard R. Baker             [1915-1971]   PhD, 1940       sudden           University of California — Santa Barbara                           Synthesis of Nucleosides for Cancer Chemotherapy
Daniel A. Brody              [1915-1975]   MD, 1940        sudden           University of Tennessee Health Sciences Center                     Generator Properties of Isolated Mammalian Hearts
Marian W. Kies               [1915-1988]   PhD, 1944       sudden           NIH/NIMH                                                           Studies of experimental allergic encephalomyelitis
Harvey C. Knowles, Jr.       [1915-1984]   MD, 1942        anticipated      University of Cincinnati College of Medicine/Children's Hospital   clinical studies of gestational diabetes
Hamish N. Munro              [1915-1994]   MD/PhD, 1956    anticipated      Tufts University School of Medicine                                Nutritional Regulation of Protein Metabolism
Joseph H. Ogura              [1915-1983]   MD, 1941        sudden           Washington University in St. Louis School of Medicine              Physiology of Deglutition and Voice in Larynx Analog
John W. Porter               [1915-1984]   PhD, 1942       unknown          University of Wisconsin School of Medicine                         regulation of lipogenesis by insulin and glucagon
Maurice S. Raben             [1915-1977]   MD, 1939        sudden           Tufts University School of Medicine                                Humoral & Metabolic Aspects of Cardiac Function
Paul J. Scheuer              [1915-2003]   PhD, 1950       anticipated      University of Hawaii School of Medicine                            The Molecular Structure of Ciguatoxin and Palytoxin
Irving J. Selikoff           [1915-1992]   MD, 1941        anticipated      Mount Sinai School of Medicine                                     asbestos and cancer
Elizabeth Stern              [1915-1980]   MD, 1940        anticipated      UCLA School of Medicine                                            effects of steroid contraception on the ovary
Earl W. Sutherland, Jr.      [1915-1974]   MD, 1942        sudden           Vanderbilt University School of Medicine                           action of sympathomimetic amines and 3 5-AMP
Benjamin E. Volcani          [1915-1999]   PhD, 1941       anticipated      UCSD School of Medicine                                            Biochemical Studies on Siliceous Skeletal Formation
David F. Waugh               [1915-1984]   PhD, 1940       sudden           MIT                                                                Protein Interactions and Physicochemical Properties
Christian B. Anfinsen, Jr.   [1916-1995]   PhD, 1943       sudden           Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine                        protein structure and protein folding
Frederik B. Bang             [1916-1981]   MD, 1939        sudden           Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine                        Upper Respiratory Antiviral Defense in Malnutrition
Joseph Cochin                [1916-1985]   MD/PhD, 1955    anticipated      Boston University Medical Center                                   Factors in Tolerance to the Narcotic Analgesics
Sidney P. Colowick           [1916-1985]   PhD, 1942       unknown          Vanderbilt University School of Medicine                           enzymatic oxidation and phosphorylation
Norman R. Davidson           [1916-2002]   PhD, 1939       sudden           California Institute of Technology                                 physical chemistry of nucleic acids
Bernard D. Davis             [1916-1994]   MD, 1940        anticipated      Harvard Medical School                                             Membrane-Associated Ribosomes and Protein Secretion
Albert Dorfman               [1916-1982]   MD/PhD, 1944    anticipated      University of Chicago School of Medicine                           biochemistry of connective tissues
Herman K. Hellerstein        [1916-1993]   MD, 1941        anticipated      Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine                 Rehabilitation of cardiac patients
Henry G. Kunkel              [1916-1983]   MD, 1942        sudden           Rockefeller University                                             identification of MHC Class II molecules
Arnold Lazarow               [1916-1975]   MD/PhD, 1941    sudden           University of Minnesota School of Medicine                         Fetal Endocrinology and Study of Diabetes and Pregnancy
Arthur E. Martell            [1916-2003]   PhD, 1941       anticipated      Texas A&M University                                               Reactions of Metal Chelate Compounds
Manfred M. Mayer             [1916-1984]   PhD, 1946       sudden           Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine                        immunochemistry of the complement system
Frederick S. Philips         [1916-1984]   PhD, 1940       anticipated      Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center                             pharmacological properties of chemotherapeutic agents and chemical carcinogenesis
David Pressman               [1916-1980]   PhD, 1940       sudden           Roswell Park Cancer Institute                                      membrane antigens from normal and leukemic lymphocytes
Samuel Schwartz              [1916-1997]   MD, 1943        anticipated      University of Minnesota School of Medicine                         Biological and Biochemical Effects of Porphyrins
Hans-Lukas Teuber            [1916-1977]   PhD, 1947       sudden           MIT                                                                Behavioral Effects of Brain Injury
Robert Traub                 [1916-1996]   PhD, 1947       anticipated      University of Maryland School of Medicine                          Studies of Certain Important Genera of Siphonaptera
Monroe E. Wall               [1916-2002]   PhD, 1941       sudden           Research Triangle Institute                                        isolation and chemistry of plant antitumor agents
Gregorio Weber               [1916-1997]   MD/PhD, 1947    anticipated      University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign                         application of fluorescence spectroscopy to the biological sciences
Richard J. Winzler           [1916-1972]   PhD, 1938       sudden           Florida State University                                           Chemistry and Metabolism of Serum Glycoproteins
Herman A. Witkin             [1916-1979]   PhD, 1939       sudden           Princeton University                                               Studies of Men With XYY and XXY Chromosome Complements
Murray B. Bornstein          [1917-1995]   MD, 1952        sudden           Albert Einstein College of Medicine                                copolymer as a protective treatment for the exacerbation of multiple sclerosis
Abraham I. Braude            [1917-1984]   MD/PhD, 1950    sudden           UCSD School of Medicine                                            pathogenesis and treatment of life-threatening septic shock
James A. Campbell            [1917-1983]   MD, 1943        sudden           Rush-Presbyterian-St Luke's Medical Center                         cardiac catheterization laboratory
Thomas C. Chalmers           [1917-1995]   MD, 1943        anticipated      Mount Sinai School of Medicine                                     Studies in Chronic Liver Disease
Ephraim Donoso               [1917-1988]   MD, 1941        anticipated      Mount Sinai School of Medicine                                     Cooperative Study of Drugs and Coronary Heart Disease
Alfred S. Evans              [1917-1996]   MD, 1943        anticipated      Yale Medical School                                                Epidemiological Studies of EB virus in Hodgkin's Disease




                                                                                                                                xxx
Investigator Name                                         Cause of death   Institution at the time of death                        Scientific domain
Eugene M. Farber            [1917-2000]   MD, 1943        sudden           Stanford University School of Medicine                  Biologic Effects of Photochemotherapy in Psoriasis
Michelangelo G.F. Fuortes   [1917-1977]   MD, 1941        sudden           NIH/NINDS                                               Neurophysiological studies of motoneurons and electrical activity
Max Halperin                [1917-1988]   PhD, 1950       anticipated      Georgetown University Medical Center                    Statistical Methods for Clinical Trials in Chronic Diseases
Philip Handler              [1917-1981]   PhD, 1939       anticipated      Duke University School of Medicine                      Sulfite Oxidation in Biological Systems
T. C. [Tao-Chiuh] Hsu       [1917-2003]   PhD, 1951       anticipated      University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center           Cytogenetic Assays of Human Genetic Instability
Nathan O. Kaplan            [1917-1986]   PhD, 1943       sudden           UCSD School of Medicine                                 isolation and structure determination of coenzyme A
Albert S. Kaplan            [1917-1989]   PhD, 1952       anticipated      Vanderbilt University School of Medicine                Metabolism of Cells Infected With Nuclear DNA Viruses
Edward H. Kass              [1917-1990]   MD/PhD, 1947    anticipated      Harvard Medical School/Brigham & Women's Hospital       mechanism of toxic shock syndrome
Tsoo E. King                [1917-1990]   PhD, 1949       unknown          University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine           bioenergetic apparatus in heart mitochondria
Albert L. Lehninger         [1917-1986]   PhD, 1942       anticipated      Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine             Structure and function of mitochondria
Jessica H. Lewis            [1917-2003]   MD, 1942        sudden           University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine             Blood Coagulation and Hemorrhagic Disease
John P. Merrill             [1917-1984]   MD, 1942        sudden           Harvard Medical School/Brigham & Women's Hospital       role of the immune system in kidney transplantation
Jack Metcoff                [1917-1994]   MD, 1942        unknown          Chicago Medical School                                  Maternal Malnutrition and Fetal Development
Edwin D. Murphy             [1917-1984]   MD, 1943        unknown          NIH/NCI                                                 Stages of Carcinogenesis of the Cervix Uteri in Mice
Albert Segaloff             [1917-1985]   MD, 1942        sudden           Tulane University School of Medicine                    hormonal treatment of advanced breast cancer
Merton F. Utter             [1917-1980]   PhD, 1942       sudden           Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine      structure and function of pep carboxykinase isozymes
Robert B. Woodward          [1917-1979]   PhD, 1936       sudden           Harvard University                                      studies in the chemistry of natural products
Elijah Adams                [1918-1979]   MD, 1942        unknown          University of Maryland School of Medicine               Metabolism of Tyrosinases and Tyrosine Hydroxylases
Solomon A. Berson           [1918-1972]   MD, 1945        sudden           Mount Sinai School of Medicine                          Studies of the use of radioisotopes in clinical investigation and diagnosis
Walter E. Brown             [1918-1993]   PhD, 1949       anticipated      American Dental Association Health Foundation           chemistry of calcium phosphates
Frederick H. Carpenter      [1918-1982]   PhD, 1944       anticipated      University of California — Berkeley                     mechanism of leucine aminopeptidase
George C. Cotzias           [1918-1977]   MD, 1944        anticipated      Weill Medical College — Cornell University              Chemical Dissection and Therapy of Brain Disorders
Joseph F. Foster            [1918-1975]   PhD, 1943       sudden           Purdue University                                       Physicochemical Basis of Biological Stability
Dexter French               [1918-1981]   PhD, 1942       anticipated      Iowa State University                                   Mechanism of Amylase Action
Henry S. Kaplan             [1918-1984]   MD, 1940        anticipated      Stanford University School of Medicine                  radiation-induced leukemia in the C57BL mouse
George E. Murphy            [1918-1987]   MD, 1943        anticipated      Weill Medical College — Cornell University              Rheumatic Disease and Glomerulonephritis
Harvey M. Patt              [1918-1982]   PhD, 1942       anticipated      UCSF School of Medicine                                 ultra-high dose rates in experimental radiotherapy
Henry Rapoport              [1918-2002]   PhD, 1943       sudden           University of California — Berkeley                     total synthesis of heterocyclic drugs
Ruth Sager                  [1918-1997]   PhD, 1948       anticipated      Harvard Medical School/Dana Farber Cancer Institute     role of tumor suppressor genes in breast cancer
Cornelius A. Tobias         [1918-2000]   PhD, 1942       anticipated      University of California — Berkeley                     biological effects of cosmic rays and other ionizing radiation
Charles W. Todd             [1918-1987]   PhD, 1943       anticipated      City of Hope Medical Center                             Immunology and Immunochemistry of Tumor Antigens
E. Jack Wylie               [1918-1982]   MD, 1943        sudden           UCSF School of Medicine                                 development of techniques for the treatment and management of chronic visceral ischemia
William G. Dauben           [1919-1997]   PhD, 1944       sudden           University of California — Berkeley                     ultraviolet irradiation of natural products
Lloyd J. Filer, Jr.         [1919-1997]   MD/PhD, 1952    sudden           University of Iowa College of Medicine                  Growth Patterns and Body Composition of Pigs
Thomas B. Fitzpatrick       [1919-2003]   MD/PhD, 1952    anticipated      Harvard Medical School/Massachusetts General Hospital   dynamics of epidermal pigmentation
Bernard G. Greenberg        [1919-1985]   PhD, 1949       anticipated      University of North Carolina School of Public Health    biostatistics related to health services
Morton I. Grossman          [1919-1981]   MD/PhD, 1944    anticipated      UCLA School of Medicine                                 studies on the etiology of peptic ulcer
Daniel S. Lehrman           [1919-1972]   PhD, 1954       sudden           Rutgers University                                      Psychobiological Studies of Behavior
Alvin Nason                 [1919-1978]   PhD, 1952       unknown          Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine             Enzymology of Nitrate Respiration and Assimilation
Carl M. Pearson             [1919-1981]   MD, 1946        anticipated      UCLA School of Medicine                                 studies in adjuvant-induced arthritis
Judith G. Pool              [1919-1975]   PhD, 1946       anticipated      Stanford University School of Medicine                  Pathophysiology of Hemophilia
Cyril S. Stulberg           [1919-1977]   PhD, 1947       anticipated      Wayne State University School of Medicine               Bacterial and Viral Agents in the Diarrheas of Infancy
Donovan J. Thompson         [1919-1991]   PhD, 1951       sudden           University of Washington School of Medicine             Biostatistics: Sampling Designs for Field Studies
Russell J. Barrnett         [1920-1989]   MD, 1948        sudden           Yale Medical School                                     Relation of Fine Structure To Biochemical Function
Mones Berman                [1920-1982]   PhD, 1957       anticipated      NIH/NCI                                                 mathematical modeling of biological systems
Leo K. Bustad               [1920-1998]   DVM/PhD, 1960   anticipated      Washington State University                             Veterinary Physiology
Ernest Cotlove              [1920-1970]   MD, 1943        sudden           NIH/NHI                                                 Studies of Kidney and Electrolyte Metabolism
Harriet P. Dustan           [1920-1999]   MD, 1944        anticipated      University of Vermont College of Medicine               Mechanisms of Hypertension
Fred I. Gilbert, Jr.        [1920-1995]   MD, 1945        unknown          University of Hawaii School of Medicine                 clinical studied of hyper- and hypothyroidism
William F. Harrington       [1920-1992]   PhD, 1952       sudden           Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine             myosin thick filament structure and assembly
Charles D. Heidelberger     [1920-1983]   PhD, 1946       anticipated      USC Keck School of Medicine                             effects of fluorinated pyrimidines on tumors
Henry Kamin                 [1920-1988]   PhD, 1948       anticipated      Duke University School of Medicine                      Biological Oxidations in Mitochondria and Microsomes
Peter Kellaway              [1920-2003]   PhD, 1947       anticipated      Baylor College of Medicine                              clinical investigations of childhood epilepsy
Teruzo Konishi              [1920-1984]   MD/PhD, 1955    anticipated      NIH/NIEHS                                               physiological and biophysical functions of the inner ear
Toichiro Kuwabara           [1920-1991]   MD/PhD, 1952    sudden           Harvard Medical School                                  Ultrastructure of Retina and Retinal Disease
Abraham M. Lilienfeld       [1920-1984]   MD, 1944        sudden           Johns Hopkins School of Hygiene and Public Health       epidemiological methods for the study of chronic diseases
Ardie Lubin                 [1920-1976]   PhD, 1951       anticipated      Naval Health Research Center                            Repeated Measurement Design in Psychopharmacology
Philip R.A. May             [1920-1986]   MD, 1944        anticipated      UCLA School of Medicine                                 controlled clinical studies of schizophrenia
Jean Mayer                  [1920-1993]   PhD, 1948       sudden           Tufts University School of Medicine                     Metabolic Aspects of Obesity
Elizabeth C. Miller         [1920-1987]   PhD, 1945       anticipated      University of Wisconsin School of Medicine              carcinogenesis and reactive electrophilic metabolites
Edgar E. Ribi               [1920-1986]   PhD, 1948       sudden           NIH/NIAID/Rocky Mountain Laboratory                     Identification of microbial adjuvants for cancer immunotherapy
Marion I. Barnhart          [1921-1985]   PhD, 1950       sudden           Wayne State University School of Medicine               blood disorders
Lawrence Bogorad            [1921-2003]   PhD, 1949       sudden           Harvard University                                      Organelle Genes and Gene Regulation
John C. Cassel              [1921-1976]   MD, 1946        anticipated      University of North Carolina School of Public Health    cultural change, blood pressure, and heart disease
C. Clark Cockerham          [1921-1996]   PhD, 1952       anticipated      North Carolina State University                         The Statistics of Genetic Systems
Allen S. Fox                [1921-1977]   PhD, 1948       unknown          University of Wisconsin School of Medicine              Immunogenetic studies of drosophila melanogaster
Charlotte Friend            [1921-1987]   PhD, 1950       anticipated      Mount Sinai School of Medicine                          tissue studies of murine virus-induced leukemia
Donald B. Hackel            [1921-1994]   MD, 1946        anticipated      Duke University School of Medicine                      Diabetes Mellitus in Psammomys Obesus
Harold Koenig               [1921-1992]   MD/PhD, 1949    unknown          Northwestern University School of Medicine              Molecular Pathology of Blood-Brain Barrier Breakdown
Marian E. Koshland          [1921-1997]   PhD, 1949       anticipated      University of California — Berkeley                     biochemical methods to examine the immune response
Grant W. Liddle             [1921-1989]   MD, 1948        sudden           Vanderbilt University School of Medicine                Pituitary-Adrenal Physiology and Pharmacology
Mortimer B. Lipsett         [1921-1985]   MD, 1951        anticipated      NIH                                                     steroid metabolic conversions in human subjects
Peter N. Magee              [1921-2000]   MD, 1945        anticipated      Thomas Jefferson University                             genetic basis of carconogenesis
Henry R. Mahler             [1921-1983]   PhD, 1948       anticipated      Indiana University at Bloomington                       Studies of the Structure, Function, and Biosynthesis of Respiratory Enzymes
Jack Orloff                 [1921-1988]   MD, 1943        anticipated      NIH/NHLBI                                               cyclic AMP and the cellular response to antidiuretic hormone
Andrew C. Peacock           [1921-1985]   PhD, 1949       anticipated      NIH/NCI                                                 Invention of of the polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis process
Seymour Perry               [1921-2000]   MD, 1947        anticipated      Georgetown University Medical Center                    evaluation of medical technology
Sidney Riegelman            [1921-1981]   PhD, 1948       sudden           UCSF School of Medicine                                 intersubject variation in first pass effect of drugs
Griff T. Ross               [1921-1985]   MD/PhD, 1945    anticipated      NIH/NICHD                                               radioimmunoassay for human chtionic gonadotropin
Belding H. Scribner         [1921-2003]   MD, 1945        sudden           University of Washington School of Medicine             dialysis in the treatment of chronic uremia
David Spiro                 [1921-1974]   MD/PhD, 1956    sudden           New York Medical College                                Ultrastructure and Contractile Mechanisms of Mammalian Cardiac Muscle
David H.P. Streeten         [1921-2000]   MD/PhD, 1951    sudden           SUNY Upstate Medical University at Syracuse             thyroid and parathyroid hormones in hypertension
Samuel Sutton               [1921-1986]   PhD, 1955       sudden           University of Chicago School of Medicine                Drug Effects on Psychophysiological Functions
Jack E. White               [1921-1988]   MD, 1944        anticipated      Howard University School of Medicine                    epidemiology and treatment of cancer among african-americans
David Zeaman                [1921-1984]   PhD, 1950       unknown          University of Connecticut Storrs                        Retardate Discrimination Learning and Attention




                                                                                                                    xxxi
Investigator Name                                      Cause of death   Institution at the time of death                                              Scientific domain
Harold Edelhoch           [1922-1986]   PhD, 1947      anticipated      NIH/NIDDK                                                                   physical chemistry of thyroglobulin
Mortimer M. Elkind        [1922-2000]   PhD, 1953      anticipated      Colorado State University                                                   cell radiation response of cultured mammalian cells
Seymour Fisher            [1922-1996]   PhD, 1948      sudden           SUNY Upstate Medical University at Syracuse                                 The Role of Body Attitudes in Behavior
Robert A. Good            [1922-2003]   MD/PhD, 1947   anticipated      University of South Florida College of Medicine                             role of the thymus in immune system development
Carl W. Gottschalk        [1922-1997]   MD, 1945       sudden           University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill School of Medicine              micropuncture studies of mammallian renal system
Susumu Hagiwara           [1922-1989]   PhD, 1951      sudden           UCLA School of Medicine                                                     evolutionary and developmental properties of calcium channels in cell membranes
Lucille S. Hurley         [1922-1988]   PhD, 1950      sudden           University of California — Davis                                            genetic and nutritional interactions in development
David T. Imagawa          [1922-1991]   PhD, 1950      sudden           Harbor-UCLA Medical Center                                                  morphological conversion with leukemia viruses
Shirley A. Johnson        [1922-1970]   PhD, 1949      unknown          George Washingron University School of Medicine/VA Hiospital of Washington, hemophilia B and the differentiation of prothrombin activation
C. Henry Kempe            [1922-1984]   MD, 1945       unknown          University of Colorado Health Sciences Center                               immunological problems of smallpox
S. Morris Kupchan         [1922-1976]   PhD, 1945      anticipated      University of Virginia School of Medicine                                   Chemistry of Tumor-Inhibitory Natural Products
Herbert G. Langford       [1922-1991]   MD, 1945       sudden           University of Mississippi Medical Center                                    electrolyte intake and blood pressure in hypertension
Sidney Leskowitz          [1922-1991]   PhD, 1950      anticipated      Tufts University School of Medicine                                         Cellular Aspects of Tolerance and Delayed Sensitivity
Sol Levine                [1922-1996]   PhD, 1953      sudden           Harvard School of Public Health                                             targets for worksite prevention of alcohol problems
Cyrus Levinthal           [1922-1990]   PhD, 1951      anticipated      Columbia University College of Physicians & Surgeons                        colinearity of genes and proteins, and the nature of messenger RNA
David M. Maurice          [1922-2002]   PhD, 1951      anticipated      Columbia University College of Physicians & Surgeons                        interference theory of corneal transparency
Alton Meister             [1922-1995]   MD, 1945       anticipated      Weill Medical College — Cornell University                                  amino acid and glutathione biochemistry
James Olds                [1922-1976]   PhD, 1952      sudden           California Institute of Technology                                          Pharmacology of Motivational Mechanisms
J. David Robertson        [1922-1995]   MD/PhD, 1952   anticipated      Duke University School of Medicine                                          electron microscopy of cell membranes
Bertram Sacktor           [1922-1988]   PhD, 1949      sudden           NIH/NIA                                                                     Mechanisms of hormonal regulation of cellular pH
Mearl F. Stanton          [1922-1980]   MD, 1948       anticipated      NIH/NCI                                                                     Carcinogenecity of Fibers
Kwan C. Tsou              [1922-1985]   PhD, 1950      sudden           University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine                               Cytochemical Substrates and Anticancer Agents
Charles A. Waldron        [1922-1995]   DDS, 1945      sudden           Emory University School of Medicine                                         Oral Pathology
Ernst L. Wynder           [1922-1999]   MD, 1950       anticipated      American Health Foundation                                                  epidemiologic studies of tobacco control
William S. Beck           [1923-2003]   MD, 1946       anticipated      Harvard Medical School                                                      biochemistry of blood cell formation
Arnold F. Brodie          [1923-1981]   PhD, 1952      unknown          USC Keck School of Medicine                                                 Mechanisms of Oxidative Energy Generation in Bacteria
Josiah Brown              [1923-1985]   MD, 1947       sudden           UCLA School of Medicine                                                     biochemical studies of lipid and carbohydrate metabolism
James M. Felts            [1923-1988]   PhD, 1955      sudden           UCSF School of Medicine                                                     synthesis and processing of plasma lipoproteins
Samuel B. Guze            [1923-2000]   MD, 1945       anticipated      Washington University in St. Louis School of Medicine                       neurobiology, genetics, and epidemiology of alcoholism
Eugene C. Jorgensen       [1923-1981]   PhD, 1953      sudden           UCSF School of Medicine                                                     structure/activity relationships of compounds related to thyroxin
Norman Kretchmer          [1923-1995]   MD/PhD, 1952   anticipated      University of California — Berkeley                                         Metabolism Regulation During Development
M. Powell Lawton          [1923-2001]   PhD, 1952      anticipated      Philadelphia Geriatric Center                                               studies of mental health, quality of life, and caregiving of the elderly
Paul Margolin             [1923-1989]   PhD, 1956      sudden           Public Health Research Institute of the City of New York                    Mutation and Suppressor Studies of a Bacterial Gene
Kehl Markley, 3rd         [1923-1979]   MD, 1947       sudden           NIH/NIAMDD                                                                  burn treatment specialist
William W. Montgomery     [1923-2003]   MD, 1947       anticipated      Harvard Medical School                                                      Methods of Correcting Dysfunctions of the Human Larynx
Andrew G. Morrow          [1923-1982]   MD, 1946       sudden           NIH/NHLBI                                                                   surgical correction of idiopathic hypertrophic subaortic stenosis
Peter W. Neurath          [1923-1977]   PhD, 1950      sudden           Tufts University School of Medicine                                         Chromosomal Variants of Cells Converted By Viruses
John Rankin               [1923-1981]   MD, 1947       unknown          University of Wisconsin School of Medicine                                  development of a pragmatic stroke outcome scale
Herbert J. Rapp           [1923-1981]   PhD, 1955      sudden           NIH/NCI                                                                     Immunology and immunotherapy of annimal cancers
Lewis W. Wannamaker       [1923-1983]   MD, 1948       sudden           University of Minnesota School of Medicine                                  clinical and epidemiologic aspects of streptococcal infections
Alfred P. Wolf            [1923-1998]   PhD, 1953      anticipated      Brookhaven National Laboratory                                              synthesis of simple molecules in pure form and high specific activity for PET
Constantine S. Anast      [1924-1987]   MD, 1947       unknown          Harvard Medical School/Children's Hospital                                  hormonal regulation of mineral metabolism
C. Andrew L. Bassett      [1924-1994]   MD/PhD, 1955   anticipated      Columbia University College of Physicians & Surgeons                        Bioelectric Phenomena Controlling Bone Growth
Myron L. Bender           [1924-1988]   PhD, 1948      sudden           Northwestern University School of Medicine                                  Mechanism of Action of Proteases
David H. Blankenhorn      [1924-1993]   MD, 1947       anticipated      USC Keck School of Medicine                                                 control of risk factors in atherosclerosis
Eli Chernin               [1924-1990]   PhD, 1951      sudden           Harvard School of Public Health                                             Biology and Biological Control of Schistosomiasis
Wallace H. Clark, Jr.     [1924-1997]   MD, 1947       sudden           Harvard Medical School                                                      Biology of Human Cutaneous Malignant Melanoma
Adolph I. Cohen           [1924-1996]   PhD, 1954      anticipated      Washington University in St. Louis School of Medicine                       Cytology and Physiology of the Retina
Donald S. Fredrickson     [1924-2002]   MD, 1949       sudden           NIH/NHI                                                                     structure and metabolism of plasma lipoproteins and their role in lipid transport
Clarence J. Gibbs, Jr.    [1924-2001]   PhD, 1962      sudden           NIH/NINDS                                                                   infectuous diseases of the nervous system
Victor A. Gilbertsen      [1924-1990]   MD, 1953       anticipated      University of Minnesota School of Medicine                                  Development of cost-effective methods to diagnose presymptomatic cancers
Menek Goldstein           [1924-1997]   PhD, 1955      sudden           New York University School of Medicine                                      purification of enzymes in the catecholamine synthetic pathway
Herbert F. Hasenclever    [1924-1978]   PhD, 1953      anticipated      NIH/NIAID                                                                   Polysaccharides of pathogenic fungi
Edward W. Hook, Jr.       [1924-1998]   MD, 1949       sudden           University of Virginia School of Medicine                                   Host Resistance Unrelated To Specific Immunity
Thomas R. Johns, 2nd      [1924-1988]   MD, 1948       sudden           University of Virginia School of Medicine                                   physiological studies of myasthenia gravis
William B. Reed           [1924-1976]   MD, 1952       sudden           USC Keck School of Medicine                                                 Clinical studies of epidermolysis bullosa
Timothy J. Regan          [1924-2001]   MD, 1952       anticipated      University Hospital of Newark, NJ                                           myocardial function and metabolism in chronic disease
Lucien J. Rubinstein      [1924-1990]   MD, 1948       sudden           University of Virginia School of Medicine                                   differentiation and stroma-induction in neural tumors
Peter Safar               [1924-2003]   MD, 1948       anticipated      University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine                                 clinical studies of brain resuscitation
Joseph Stokes, 3rd        [1924-1989]   MD, 1949       anticipated      Boston University Medical Center                                            epidemiological studies of coronary heart disease
Robert J. Stoller         [1924-1991]   MD, 1948       sudden           UCLA School of Medicine                                                     clinical studies of gender identity
W. Dean Warren            [1924-1989]   MD, 1950       anticipated      Emory University School of Medicine                                         Cirrhosis, Shunt Surgery, and Nitrogen Metabolism
Emanuel M. Bogdanove      [1925-1979]   PhD, 1953      sudden           Medical College of Virginia                                                 Endocrine-Influencing Centers in the Hypothalamus
Arend Bouhuys             [1925-1979]   MD/PhD, 1956   sudden           Yale Medical School                                                         Physiological Studies on Air Pollution and Bysinosis
Margaret O. Dayhoff       [1925-1983]   PhD, 1948      sudden           Georgetown University Medical Center                                        computer study of sequences of amino acids in proteins
Ernst Freese              [1925-1990]   PhD, 1954      sudden           NIH/NINDS                                                                   mutations, membrane transport, and cell differentiation
Sidney H. Ingbar          [1925-1988]   MD, 1947       anticipated      Harvard Medical School/Beth Israel Medical Center                           physiology of the thyroid gland and its clinical diseases
Milton Kern               [1925-1987]   PhD, 1954      anticipated      NIH/NIADDK                                                                  Ribonucleic Acids of Specifically Isolated Ribosomes
Philip R. Kimbel          [1925-1990]   MD, 1954       anticipated      University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine                               causes of emphysema and other pulmonary diseases
Werner H. Kirsten         [1925-1992]   MD, 1953       sudden           NIH/NCI                                                                     Pathogenesis of Induced Leukemia and Tumors in Rats
Ariel G. Loewy            [1925-2001]   PhD, 1951      sudden           Haverford College                                                           Distribution and Function of the Isopeptide Bond
William H. Oldendorf      [1925-1992]   MD, 1947       sudden           UCLA School of Medicine                                                     x-ray shadow radiography and cerebral angiography
N. Raphael Shulman        [1925-1996]   MD, 1947       anticipated      NIH/NIDDK                                                                   Physiology and biochemistry of platelets
Paul A. Srere             [1925-1999]   PhD, 1951      sudden           University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas                   cell metabolism and the krebs tca cycle
Michel M. Ter-Pogossian   [1925-1996]   PhD, 1950      sudden           Washington University in St. Louis School of Medicine                       multislice PET scanning technology
William H. Tooley         [1925-1992]   MD, 1949       anticipated      UCSF School of Medicine                                                     prevention and treatment of respiratory distress in neonates
Kelly M. West             [1925-1980]   MD, 1948       sudden           University of Oklahoma School of Medicine                                   Causes of Diabetes and Obesity in Oklahoma Indians
George Winokur            [1925-1996]   MD, 1947       anticipated      University of Iowa College of Medicine                                      genetics of bipolar disease, mania, alcoholism and other psychiatric diseases
Robert H. Abeles          [1926-2000]   PhD, 1955      anticipated      Brandeis University                                                         rational design of small-molecule inhibitors of enzymes
J. Weldon Bellville       [1926-1983]   MD, 1952       anticipated      UCLA School of Medicine                                                     dynamic isolation studies of control of respiration
Nemat O. Borhani          [1926-1996]   MD, 1949       anticipated      University of Nevada at Reno                                                multicenter clinical studies of hypertension and cardiovascular disease
Zanvil A. Cohn            [1926-1993]   MD, 1953       sudden           Rockefeller University                                                      macrophage in cell biology and resistance to infectious disease
Russell L. De Valois      [1926-2003]   PhD, 1952      sudden           University of California — Berkeley                                         brain mechanisms underlying color vision
Giovanni Di Chiro         [1926-1997]   MD, 1949       anticipated      NIH                                                                         interventional neuroradiology
Nicholas R. DiLuzio       [1926-1986]   PhD, 1954      anticipated      Tulane University School of Medicine                                        Role Recognition Factors and Macrophages in Neoplasia
Fritz E. Dreifuss         [1926-1997]   MD, 1950       anticipated      University of Virginia School of Medicine                                   clinical investigations of childhood epilepsy
Edward V. Evarts          [1926-1985]   MD, 1948       sudden           NIH                                                                         electrophysiological activity of in vivo neurons in waking and sleeping states




                                                                                                                          xxxii
Investigator Name                                         Cause of death   Institution at the time of death                             Scientific domain
Norbert Freinkel            [1926-1989]   MD, 1949        sudden           Northwestern University School of Medicine                   metabolic regulation in normal and diabetic pregnancies
Norman Geschwind            [1926-1984]   MD, 1951        sudden           Harvard Medical School/Beth Israel Medical Center            relationship between the anatomy of the brain and behavior
Richard Gorlin              [1926-1997]   MD, 1948        anticipated      Mount Sinai School of Medicine                               studies of coronary blood flow and myocardial metabolism
Edward C. Heath             [1926-1984]   PhD, 1955       anticipated      University of Iowa College of Medicine                       chemistry and metabolism of polysaccharides
Edward Herbert              [1926-1987]   PhD, 1953       anticipated      Oregon Health & Science University                           regulation of expression of opioid peptides and receptors
Roger T. Kelleher           [1926-1994]   PhD, 1955       anticipated      Harvard Medical School                                       drug effects on behavior controlled by aversive stimuli
William B. Kinter           [1926-1978]   PhD, 1955       unknown          Mount Desert Island Biological Lab                           Physiology and Morphology of Cell Transport
John A. Kirkpatrick, Jr.    [1926-1994]   MD, 1949        anticipated      Harvard Medical School/Children's Hospital                   studies of esophageal atresia
Julius Marmur               [1926-1996]   PhD, 1951       anticipated      Albert Einstein College of Medicine                          genetics and biochemistry of cellular regulation
Vincent Massey              [1926-2002]   PhD, 1953       sudden           University of Michigan School of Medicine                    biological oxidation mechanisms of proteins that contain riboflavin
Brigitte A. Prusoff         [1926-1991]   PhD, 1978       unknown          Yale Medical School                                          follow-up of maintenance treatment for depression
Wallace P. Rowe             [1926-1983]   MD, 1948        anticipated      NIH                                                          genetic basis of disease in murine leukemia viruses
Kiichi Sagawa               [1926-1989]   MD/PhD, 1958    anticipated      Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine                  modelling the mechanics of cardiac chamber contraction
Norman P. Salzman           [1926-1997]   PhD, 1953       anticipated      Georgetown University Medical Center                         Role in the Immune Response of the Glycosylation of SIV Gp120
Frederick Stohlman, Jr.     [1926-1974]   MD, 1947        sudden           Tufts University School of Medicine                          Dissociation Curve and Erythropoietin Production
Gordon M. Tomkins           [1926-1975]   PhD, 1953       anticipated      UCSF School of Medicine                                      post-transcriptional control of gene expression
Irwin M. Weinstein          [1926-2002]   MD, 1949        sudden           UCLA/Cedars-Sinai Medical Center                             Influence of the Pancreas on Iron Absorption
Robert D. Allen             [1927-1986]   PhD, 1953       anticipated      Dartmouth Medical School                                     cytoplasmic rheology of motile cells
Gerald D. Aurbach           [1927-1991]   MD, 1954        sudden           NIH                                                          bone metabolism and calcium homeostasis
Leonard R. Axelrod          [1927-1975]   PhD, 1952       unknown          Environmental Protection Agency                              Studies in Steroid Intermediate Metabolism
Sarah H. Broman             [1927-1999]   PhD, 1965       sudden           NIH/NINDS                                                    Interventions for Verbal and Motor Deficits in Children
Gustavo Cudkowicz           [1927-1982]   MD, 1952        sudden           SUNY at Buffalo School of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences   controls of proliferation specific for leukemias
Donnell D. Etzwiler         [1927-2003]   MD, 1953        anticipated      University of Minnesota School of Medicine                   Influence of Diabetes Control on Vascular Complications
Pierre M. Galletti          [1927-1996]   MD/PhD, 1954    sudden           Brown Medical School                                         Synthesis of artificial lung and kidney systems
Paul M. Gallop              [1927-1996]   PhD, 1953       anticipated      Harvard Medical School/Children's Hospital                   Protein structure and collagen maturation
George G. Glenner           [1927-1995]   MD, 1953        anticipated      UCSD School of Medicine                                      molecular structure of the amyloid protein
Lauran D. Harris            [1927-1987]   MD, 1951        anticipated      Boston University Medical Center                             Control of Sphincter Strength
Victor D. Herbert           [1927-2002]   MD, 1952        anticipated      Veterans Administration Hospital, Bronx, NY                  Vitamin B12 and Folic Acid Metabolism
William H. Hildemann        [1927-1983]   PhD, 1956       anticipated      UCLA School of Medicine                                      mechanisms of immunoblocking versus tumor immunity
Peter D. Klein              [1927-2001]   PhD, 1954       sudden           Baylor College of Medicine                                   Metabolism of 13C Compounds in Digestive Diseases
Dorothy T. Krieger          [1927-1985]   MD, 1949        anticipated      Mount Sinai School of Medicine                               CNS-pituitary-adrenal interactions
Richard C. Lillehei         [1927-1981]   MD/PhD, 1960    sudden           University of Minnesota School of Medicine                   Cardiac Dynamics in Experimental Cardiogenic Shock
Richard L. Lyman            [1927-1975]   PhD, 1957       anticipated      University of California — Berkeley                          Characterization and Isolation of Lecithins
Charles G. Moertel          [1927-1994]   MD, 1953        anticipated      Mayo Clinic                                                  clinical treatments of gastrointestinal cancer
Hans J. Müller-Eberhard     [1927-1998]   MD, 1953        anticipated      Scripps Research Institute                                   identification of proteins and reaction mechanisms of the complement system
Murray Rabinowitz           [1927-1983]   MD, 1950        anticipated      University of Chicago School of Medicine                     mitochondrial assembly and replication
Frank Restle                [1927-1980]   PhD, 1954       sudden           Indiana University at Bloomington                            Experiments on Multi-Stage Models of Learning
Gerald P. Rodnan            [1927-1983]   MD, 1949        sudden           University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine                  renal transport if uric acid and protein
Daniel Rudman               [1927-1994]   MD, 1949        sudden           Medical College of Wisconsin                                 adipokinetic substances of the pituitary gland
Dante G. Scarpelli          [1927-1998]   MD/PhD, 1960    anticipated      Northwestern University School of Medicine                   metabolism of pancreatic carcinogens
George Streisinger          [1927-1984]   PhD, 1953       sudden           University of Oregon                                         genetic mutations and the nervous system development in lower vertebrates
Robert Thompson             [1927-1989]   PhD, 1955       anticipated      University of California — Irvine                            neural systems subserving learning and memory
Nina S. Braunwald           [1928-1992]   MD, 1952        anticipated      Harvard Medical School/Brigham & Women's Hospital            development of prosthetic heart valves for children
Alberto DiMascio            [1928-1978]   PhD, 1966       sudden           Tufts University School of Medicine                          Evaluation of Psychotherapy in Treating Depression
John L. Doppman             [1928-2000]   MD, 1953        anticipated      NIH/CC                                                       Flow Dynamics in Anterior Spinal Artery
Edward C. Franklin          [1928-1982]   MD, 1950        anticipated      New York University School of Medicine                       structure and properties of rheumatoid antibodies
Erhard Gross                [1928-1981]   PhD, 1958       sudden           NIH/NICHD                                                    Structure determinations of the peptide antibiotics
Lucien B. Guze              [1928-1985]   MD, 1951        sudden           UCLA School of Medicine                                      pathogenesis of experimental pyelonephritis
Thomas P. Hackett, Jr.      [1928-1988]   MD, 1952        sudden           Harvard Medical School/Massachusetts General Hospital        Denial and Mortality/Morbidity in Myocardial Infarction
Gerald L. Klerman           [1928-1992]   MD, 1954        anticipated      Weill Medical College — Cornell University                   phsychological studies of depression, schizophrenia and panic and other anxiety disorders
Robert S. Krooth            [1928-1979]   MD/PhD, 1957    sudden           Columbia University College of Physicians & Surgeons         gene action in cultured human and other mammalian cells
Carl C. Levy                [1928-1981]   PhD, 1957       anticipated      NIH/NCI                                                      Studies of the regulation of intracellular mRNA
Christopher L. Longcope     [1928-2003]   MD, 1953        anticipated      Umass Medical School                                         reproductive function and gonadal steroid dynamics
William J. Mellman          [1928-1980]   MD, 1952        anticipated      University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine                Biochemical Genetics of Cultured Human Cells
Carl Monder                 [1928-1995]   PhD, 1956       sudden           The Population Council                                       corticosteroid metabolism in juvenile hypertension
Leo J. Neuringer            [1928-1993]   PhD, 1957       anticipated      MIT                                                          NMR studies of normal and transformed cell membranes
Edward W. Purnell           [1928-1993]   MD, 1957        anticipated      Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine           Study of Eye Physiology and Disease by Ultrasound
Jay P. Sanford              [1928-1996]   MD, 1952        anticipated      University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas    Host Factors in Chronic Pyelonephritis
Alfred A. Smith             [1928-1980]   MD, 1956        unknown          New York Medical College                                     Autonomic Activity and Addiction
D. Eugene Strandness, Jr.   [1928-2002]   MD, 1954        sudden           University of Washington School of Medicine                  ultrasonic duplex scanner for noninvasive vascular disease diagnosis
Howard E. Freeman           [1929-1992]   PhD, 1956       sudden           UCLA School of Medicine                                      Studies on the Social Organization of Medical Care
Sidney Futterman            [1929-1979]   PhD, 1954       anticipated      University of Washington School of Medicine                  biochemistry of the retina and pigment epithelium
Edgar C. Henshaw            [1929-1992]   MD, 1956        sudden           University of Rochester School of Medicine & Dentistry       intermediary metabolism in animals and in man
Lubomir S. Hnilica          [1929-1986]   PhD, 1952       sudden           Vanderbilt University School of Medicine                     nuclear antigens in human colorectal cancer
Charles E. Huggins          [1929-1990]   MD, 1952        anticipated      Harvard Medical School/Massachusetts General Hospital        human blood storage procedures
Peter W. Lampert            [1929-1986]   MD, 1955        anticipated      UCSD School of Medicine                                      pathogenesis of virus-induced brain disease
David J.L. Luck             [1929-1998]   MD/PhD, 1962    anticipated      Rockefeller University                                       microtubular systems in human cells
James W. Maas               [1929-1995]   MD, 1954        sudden           University of Texas Health Sciences Center at San Antonio    MHPG Excretion, Catecholamine Metabolism, and Depression
A. Louis McGarry            [1929-1985]   MD, 1955        anticipated      Nassau County Department of Mental Health                    Competency To Stand Trial and Mental Illness
Kenneth M. Moser            [1929-1997]   MD, 1954        anticipated      UCSD School of Medicine                                      clinical outcomes after pulmonary thromboendarterectomy
Milton Orkin                [1929-1999]   MD, 1954        anticipated      University of Minnesota School of Medicine                   ttreatment of skin infestations and scabies
J. Kiffin Penry             [1929-1996]   MD, 1955        anticipated      Bowman Gray School of Medicine at Wake Forest University     Studies of the control of epileptoc seizures
John J. Pisano              [1929-1985]   PhD, 1955       sudden           NIH/NHLBI                                                    Isolation of active peptides
Felix T. Rapaport           [1929-2001]   MD, 1954        sudden           SUNY Health Sciences Center at Stony Brook                   induction of unresponsiveness to allografts
Russell Ross                [1929-1999]   DDS/PhD, 1962   anticipated      University of Washington School of Medicine                  response-to-injury origins of atherosclerosis
Miriam M. Salpeter          [1929-2000]   PhD, 1953       anticipated      Weill Medical College — Cornell University                   neurobiology of myasthenia gravis
Laurence M. Sandler         [1929-1987]   PhD, 1956       sudden           University of Washington School of Medicine                  cytogenetics of meiosis and development in drosophila
Robert C. Schlant           [1929-2002]   MD, 1951        anticipated      Emory University School of Medicine                          Hepatic Venography
G. Jeanette Thorbecke       [1929-2001]   MD/PhD, 1954    sudden           New York University School of Medicine                       histologic and functional aspects of lymphoid tissue development
Lester Baker                [1930-2000]   MD, 1959        anticipated      University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine/CHOP           clinical studies of type I diabetes control and complications
Edwin L. Bierman            [1930-1995]   MD, 1955        anticipated      University of Washington School of Medicine                  Metabolism of particulate fat in diabetes and atherosclerosis
Amico Bignami               [1930-1994]   MD, 1954        anticipated      Harvard Medical School                                       brain specific protein in astrocytes
Barbara H. Bowman           [1930-1996]   PhD, 1959       anticipated      University of Texas Health Sciences Center at San Antonio    genetic control of the structure of human proteins




                                                                                                        xxxiii
Investigator Name                                        Cause of death   Institution at the time of death                                 Scientific domain
L. Rao Chervu               [1930-1988]   PhD, 1962      sudden           Albert Einstein College of Medicine                              Improved Radiopharmaceuticals For Nephrology and Urology
Gerald Cohen                [1930-2001]   PhD, 1955      anticipated      Mount Sinai School of Medicine                                   Catecholamine-Derived Alkaloids in Alcoholism
Joseph E. Coleman           [1930-1999]   MD/PhD, 1963   anticipated      Yale Medical School                                              structure and function of metalloenzyme synthesis
George B. Craig, Jr.        [1930-1995]   PhD, 1956      sudden           University of Notre Dame                                         genetics and reproductive biology of aedes mosquitoes
David Garfinkel             [1930-1990]   PhD, 1955      anticipated      University of Pennsylvania                                       computer modeling of complex biological systems
J. Calvin Giddings          [1930-1996]   PhD, 1955      anticipated      University of Utah School of Medicine                            Biomedical Separations--Field Flow Fractionation
Michael J. Goldstein        [1930-1997]   PhD, 1957      anticipated      UCLA School of Medicine                                          contributing factors to the onset of schizophrenia
DeWitt S. Goodman           [1930-1991]   MD, 1955       sudden           Columbia University College of Physicians & Surgeons             lipid metabolism and its role in the development of heart and artery disease
Richard J. Herrnstein       [1930-1994]   PhD, 1955      sudden           Harvard University                                               Quantification and Control of Smoking
Aaron Janoff                [1930-1988]   PhD, 1959      anticipated      SUNY Health Sciences Center at Stony Brook                       pathology of smoking and emphysema
Frank Lilly                 [1930-1995]   PhD, 1965      anticipated      Albert Einstein College of Medicine                              role of hereditary factors in governing susceptibility to cancer-causing agents
Gilda H. Loew               [1930-2001]   PhD, 1957      anticipated      Molecular Research Institute                                     computational investigation of the structural and functional aspects of heme proteins and enzymes
Leah M. Lowenstein          [1930-1984]   MD/PhD, 1958   unknown          Jefferson Medical College                                        Regulation of Renal Compensatory Adaptation
Paul C. MacDonald           [1930-1997]   MD, 1955       anticipated      University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas        origin and interconversion of gonadal and adrenal streoid hormones
Charles W. Mays             [1930-1989]   PhD, 1958      anticipated      NIH/NCI                                                          Reducing Cancer Risk By Radionuclide Chelation
William M. McKinney         [1930-2003]   MD, 1959       anticipated      Bowman Gray School of Medicine at Wake Forest University         application of ultrasonic energy to study the nervous system
Edward W. Moore             [1930-1999]   MD, 1955       anticipated      Medical College of Virginia                                      Pathophysiology of the billiary tract and gallbladder
Gisela Mosig                [1930-2003]   PhD, 1959      anticipated      Vanderbilt University School of Medicine                         DNA Replication and Recombination in Bacteriophage
Jerry D. Niswander          [1930-1984]   DDS, 1955      anticipated      NIH/NIDR                                                         genetics of oral and facial disorders
Hymie L. Nossel             [1930-1983]   MD/PhD, 1962   sudden           Columbia University College of Physicians & Surgeons             causes of thrombosis and the nature of hemostasis
Donald A. Pious             [1930-1998]   MD, 1956       anticipated      University of Washington School of Medicine                      somatic cell genetic analysis of human immune response genes
F. Brantley Scott, Jr.      [1930-1991]   MD, 1955       sudden           Baylor College of Medicine                                       inflatable penile prosthesis
F. Blair Simmons            [1930-1998]   MD, 1956       sudden           Stanford University School of Medicine                           development of a cochlear prothesis system for hearing loss
Dennis Slone                [1930-1982]   MD, 1956       anticipated      Boston University Medical Center                                 Comprehensive Surveillance of Marketed Drugs
Andrew P. Somlyo            [1930-2003]   MD, 1956       sudden           University of Virginia School of Medicine                        vasomotor function of smooth muscle and their relation to heart disease
Muriel R. Steele            [1930-1979]   MD, 1957       anticipated      UCSF School of Medicine                                          Management of splenic injuries
Thoralf M. Sundt, Jr.       [1930-1992]   MD, 1959       anticipated      Mayo Clinic                                                      surgical techniques for intracranial aneurysms
Charles L. Wittenberger     [1930-1987]   PhD, 1959      sudden           NIH/NIDR                                                         Regulation of enzymes involved in transport and netabolism of sugars
Sheldon M. Wolff            [1930-1994]   MD, 1957       anticipated      Tufts University School of Medicine                              treatment of fevers from infectious diseases like wegener's granulomatosis
Janine André-Schwartz       [1931-1995]   MD, 1959       anticipated      Tufts University School of Medicine                              Studies of the proliferative response of lymphocytes to allografts
Louis V. Avioli             [1931-1999]   MD, 1957       anticipated      Washington University in St. Louis School of Medicine            mineral and skeletal metabolism in diabetes, kidney, and gastrointestinal disorders
Harold A. Baltaxe           [1931-1985]   MD, 1960       sudden           University of California — Davis                                 development of new coronary angiographic techniques
Paul P. Carbone             [1931-2002]   MD, 1956       sudden           University of Wisconsin School of Medicine                       treatment and prevention of hodgkin's disease and early breast cancer
Richard A. Carleton         [1931-2001]   MD, 1955       anticipated      Brown Medical School                                             clinical studies of diet and smoking as cardiovascular disease risk factors
Sidney R. Cooperband        [1931-1979]   MD, 1956       unknown          Boston University Medical Center                                 Lymphocyte Proliferation Inhibitory Factor
Julian M. Davidson          [1931-2001]   PhD, 1959      anticipated      Stanford University School of Medicine                           physiological bases of human sexuality
Gareth M. Green             [1931-1998]   MD/PhD, 1957   anticipated      Harvard University School of Public Health                       role of alveolar macrophages in pulmonary defense mechanisms
John A. Gronvall            [1931-1990]   MD, 1956       sudden           University of Michigan School of Medicine                        Pathology
James K. McDougall          [1931-2003]   PhD, 1971      anticipated      University of Washington/FHCRC                                   role of DNA viruses in cancer
Ernst A. Noltmann           [1931-1986]   MD, 1956       anticipated      University of California — Riverside                             biochemical and physical characterization of phosphoglucose isomerase
Paul A. Obrist              [1931-1987]   PhD, 1958      anticipated      University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill School of Medicine   Studies of Heart Rate Conditioning
Guillermo H. Pacheco        [1931-1974]   PhD, 1961      anticipated      NIH/NIAID                                                        Studies of Filariasis
James W. Prahl              [1931-1979]   MD/PhD, 1964   sudden           University of Utah School of Medicine                            structural basis of the functions of human complement
Frank J. Rauscher, Jr.      [1931-1992]   PhD, 1957      sudden           NIH/NCI                                                          Discovery of the Rauscher Murine Leukemia Virus
Donald J. Reis              [1931-2000]   MD, 1956       anticipated      Weill Medical College — Cornell University                       neural control of blood circulation
Kenneth W. Sell             [1931-1996]   MD/PhD, 1968   anticipated      Emory University School of Medicine                              Blood and Tissue Banking
Thomas G. Smith, Jr.        [1931-1998]   MD, 1960       sudden           NIH/NINDS                                                        Studies of glial cell morphology in vivo and in vitro
Edward A. Smuckler          [1931-1986]   MD/PhD, 1963   anticipated      UCSF School of Medicine                                          cytochemical studies in liver injury
George F. Solomon           [1931-2001]   MD, 1955       sudden           UCLA School of Medicine                                          psychiatry and biobehavioural sciences
W. Alden Spencer            [1931-1977]   MD, 1956       anticipated      Columbia University College of Physicians & Surgeons             Plasticity of the Simplest Neuronal Pathways
Joseph W. St. Geme, Jr.     [1931-1986]   MD, 1956       anticipated      University of Colorado Health Sciences Center                    pediatric infectious diseases
Wigbert C. Wiederholt       [1931-2000]   MD, 1955       anticipated      UCSD School of Medicine                                          age related neurodegenerative diseases in micronesia
Henryk M. Wisniewski        [1931-1999]   MD/PhD, 1960   sudden           SUNY Downstate Medical Center                                    pathogenesis of inflammatory demyelinating diseases
Richard P. Bunge            [1932-1996]   MD, 1960       anticipated      University of Miami School of Medicine                           schwann cell biology and human spinal cord injury
Ralph R. Cavalieri          [1932-2001]   MD, 1956       sudden           UCSF School of Medicine                                          utilization of tyrosine by the thyroid gland
Robert A. Cooper, Jr.       [1932-1992]   MD, 1958       sudden           University of Rochester School of Medicine & Dentistry           radiation studies of the mouse distal lung
Ramzi S. Cotran             [1932-2000]   MD, 1956       anticipated      Harvard Medical School/Brigham & Women's Hospital                mechanisms of immune, infectious, and vascular renal injury
Dominick E. Gentile         [1932-1997]   MD, 1957       sudden           St Joseph Hospital–Orange, CA                                    Studies of hemo- and peritoneal dialysis
Richard K. Gershon          [1932-1983]   MD, 1959       anticipated      Yale Medical School                                              immunologic responses to tumor grafts
John P. Glynn               [1932-1971]   PhD, 1960      sudden           NIH/NCI                                                          Immunosupression and the course of viral-induced Neoplasms
Edgar Haber                 [1932-1997]   MD, 1956       anticipated      Harvard University School of Public Health                       biological regulation of the renin-angiotensin system
Frank A. Oski               [1932-1996]   MD, 1958       anticipated      Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine                      Erythrocyte Metabolism in the Premature Infant
Lawrence H. Piette          [1932-1992]   PhD, 1957      anticipated      Utah State University                                            electron spin resonance spectroscopy
George J. Schroepfer, Jr.   [1932-1998]   MD/PhD, 1961   sudden           Rice University                                                  regulation of the formation and metabolism of cholesterol
Jurgen Steinke              [1932-1973]   MD, 1956       sudden           USC Keck School of Medicine/Rancho Los Amigos Hospital           Dynamics of Rat Fetal Insulin Secretion
Robert L. Summitt           [1932-1998]   MD, 1955       unknown          University of Tennessee Health Scences Center                    clinical and chromosomal variation in children
Richard M. Asofsky          [1933-2000]   MD, 1958       anticipated      NIH/NIAID                                                        T-cells in graft-versus-host disease
Marilyn Bergner             [1933-1992]   PhD, 1970      anticipated      Johns Hopkins School of Hygiene and Public Health                Cost and Efficacy of Home Care For COPD Patients
Vincent L. DeQuattro        [1933-2001]   MD, 1960       sudden           USC Keck School of Medicine                                      Role of Catecholamines in Hypertension
G. Harrison Echols, Jr.     [1933-1993]   PhD, 1959      anticipated      University of California — Berkeley                              Genetic and chemical studies of phage lambda development
Julio H. Garcia             [1933-1998]   MD, 1958       sudden           Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine               Reperfusion in Experimental Brain Infarct
Gordon Guroff               [1933-1999]   PhD, 1959      sudden           NIH/NICHD                                                        molecular mechanism of amino-acid conversion to neurotransmitters
E. Carwile LeRoy            [1933-2002]   MD, 1960       sudden           University of South Carolina School of Medicine                  Structure and Immunology of Basement Membrane
Richard N. Lolley           [1933-2000]   PhD, 1961      sudden           USC Keck School of Medicine                                      Maturation of Metabolism in Normal and Dystrophic Retina
William J. Meyers           [1933-1970]   PhD, 1960      anticipated      University of Louisville School of Medicine                      Autonomic Correlates of Attention in Infants
Sheldon D. Murphy           [1933-1990]   PhD, 1958      anticipated      University of Washington School of Medicine                      Biochemical and Physiologic Response to Toxic Stress
Thomas F. Necheles          [1933-1984]   MD/PhD, 1961   sudden           NIH/NCI                                                          Computer Assisted Classification of Acute Leukemia
Jerome T. Pearlman          [1933-1979]   MD, 1957       anticipated      UCLA School of Medicine                                          laboratory studies of retinal degenerations
Edward J. Sachar            [1933-1984]   MD, 1956       anticipated      Columbia University College of Physicians & Surgeons             chemicals in mental illness
John E. Salvaggio           [1933-1999]   MD, 1957       sudden           Tulane University School of Medicine                             Mechanisms of immediate and delayed sensitivity in pulmonary disease
John C. Seidel              [1933-1988]   PhD, 1961      sudden           Boston Biomedical Research Institute                             actin-myosin interaction in pulmonary smooth muscle
Donald C. Shreffler         [1933-1994]   PhD, 1961      sudden           Washington University in St. Louis School of Medicine            organization and functions of H-2 gene complex
Mehdi Tavassoli             [1933-1993]   MD, 1961       anticipated      University of Mississippi Medical Center                         hematopoietic stem cell purification and biology
John R. Williamson          [1933-2000]   PhD, 1960      anticipated      University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine                    molecular mechanisms of hormonal signal transduction




                                                                                                                      xxxiv
Investigator Name                                            Cause of death   Institution at the time of death                             Scientific domain
Ronald S. Wilson               [1933-1986]   PhD, 1959       sudden           University of Louisville School of Medicine                  Heritability and Mental Development
Issa Yaghmai                   [1933-1992]   MD, 1959        sudden           UCLA-Olive View Medical Center                               radiological diagnosis of musculoskeletal disorders
Edwin H. Beachey               [1934-1989]   MD, 1962        anticipated      University of Tennessee Health Sciences Center               chemistry and immunology of streptococcal m proteins
Peggy J. Copple                [1934-1997]   MD, 1959        sudden           University of Arizona College of Medicine                    Pediatrics Neurology
Sandra A. Daugherty            [1934-2000]   MD/PhD, 1966    anticipated      University of Nevada at Reno                                 studies of chronic fatigue syndrome, women's health initiative
Wylie J. Dodds                 [1934-1992]   MD, 1960        anticipated      Medical College of Wisconsin                                 esophageal motor function in health and disease
Roger O. Eckert                [1934-1986]   PhD, 1960       anticipated      UCLA School of Medicine                                      ionic and metabolic mechanisms in neuronal excitability
Philip J. Fialkow              [1934-1996]   MD, 1960        sudden           University of Washington School of Medicine                  origins of myeloid leukemia tumors
John Gibbon                    [1934-2001]   PhD, 1967       anticipated      Columbia University College of Physicians & Surgeons         CNS functions underlying the interval time sense in animals and humans
Joram Heller                   [1934-1980]   MD/PhD, 1965    anticipated      UCLA School of Medicine                                      biochemical and biophysical investigation of rhodopsin
James R. Klinenberg            [1934-1999]   MD, 1959        sudden           UCLA School of Medicine                                      pathophysiology of gout and hyperuricemia
Kenneth L. Melmon              [1934-2002]   MD, 1959        sudden           Stanford University School of Medicine                       autacoids as pharmacologic modifiers of immunity
Gerald P. Murphy               [1934-2000]   MD, 1959        sudden           Roswell Park Cancer Institute                                detection, immunotherapy, and prognostic indicators of prostate cancer
Harold C. Neu                  [1934-1998]   MD, 1960        anticipated      Columbia University College of Physicians & Surgeons         surface enzymes in bacteria
George Némethy                 [1934-1994]   PhD, 1962       anticipated      Mount Sinai School of Medicine                               methods to analyze and predict the structures of protein molecules
John S. O'Brien                [1934-2001]   MD, 1960        anticipated      UCSD School of Medicine                                      discovery of the gene responsible for Tay-Sachs disease
Jiri Palek                     [1934-1998]   MD, 1958        anticipated      Tufts University School of Medicine                          membrane properties of abnormal red cells
Demetrios P. Papahadjopoulos   [1934-1998]   PhD, 1963       sudden           UCSF School of Medicine                                      phospholipid-protein interactions, lipid vesicles, and membrane function
Paul B. Sigler                 [1934-2000]   MD/PhD, 1967    sudden           Yale Medical School                                          structural analysis of biological macromolecules
Donald F. Summers              [1934-2001]   MD, 1959        anticipated      NIH                                                          composition, assembly and replication of RNA viruses
Howard M. Temin                [1934-1994]   PhD, 1959       anticipated      University of Wisconsin School of Medicine                   molecular biology and genetics of tumor viruses
Lois W. Tice                   [1934-1985]   MD, 1959        sudden           NIH/NIADDK                                                   Anatomical and Physiological Structure of Cells and Tissues
Allan C. Wilson                [1934-1991]   PhD, 1961       anticipated      University of California — Berkeley                          use of molecular approaches to understand evolutionary change
Alvito P. Alvares              [1935-2001]   PhD, 1966       sudden           Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences         Biochemical Manifestations of Toxicity in Gold Therapy
John C. Liebeskind             [1935-1997]   PhD, 1962       anticipated      UCLA School of Medicine                                      behavioral and electrophysiological studies of pain
James R. Neely                 [1935-1988]   PhD, 1966       sudden           Pennsylvania State University College of Medicine            effects of diabetes and oxygen deficiency in regulation of metabolism in the heart
Takis S. Papas                 [1935-1999]   PhD, 1970       sudden           Medical University of South Carolina                         characterization of ETS genes and retroviral onc genes
Ora M. Rosen                   [1935-1990]   MD, 1960        anticipated      Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center                       Cloning and characterization of gene for human insulin receptor
Bernard Sass                   [1935-1989]   DVM, 1961       anticipated      NIH/NCI                                                      Veterinary Pathology
James C. Steigerwald           [1935-1988]   MD, 1961        sudden           University of Colorado Health Sciences Center                Basica and clinical studies of scleroderma
Roy H. Steinberg               [1935-1997]   MD/PhD, 1965    anticipated      UCSF School of Medicine                                      pigment epithelium interactions with neural retina
Donald T. Witiak               [1935-1998]   PhD, 1961       sudden           University of Wisconsin School of Medicine                   stereochemical studies of hypocholesterolemic agents
D. Martin Carter               [1936-1993]   MD/PhD, 1971    sudden           Rockefeller University                                       susceptibility of pigment and cutaneous cells to DNA injury by UV
Catherine Cole-Beuglet         [1936-1987]   MD, 1962        anticipated      University of California — Irvine                            ultrasonography of the breast
James N. Gilliam               [1936-1984]   MD, 1964        anticipated      University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas    cutaneous lupus erythematosus pathogenesis mechanisms
Oscar A. Kletzky               [1936-1994]   MD, 1961        anticipated      UCLA School of Medicine                                      ameliorating effects of estrogen replacement therapy on cerebral blood flow and sleep
Loretta L. Leive               [1936-1986]   PhD, 1963       anticipated      NIH/NIADDK                                                   Role of bacterial cell surface in microbial physiology and pathogenesis
Shu-Ren Lin                    [1936-1979]   MD, 1962        sudden           University of Rochester School of Medicine & Dentistry       imaging studies of cerebral blood flow after cardiac arrest
Dale E. McFarlin               [1936-1992]   MD, 1961        sudden           NIH                                                          neuroimmunological studies of multiple sclerosis
Arnold M. Mordkoff             [1936-1971]   PhD, 1963       sudden           New York University School of Medicine                       Physiological Patterns and Performance Efficiency
Sydney E. Salmon               [1936-1999]   MD, 1962        anticipated      University of Arizona College of Medicine                    quantitative method for evaluating changes in myeloma tumor mass
Roy D. Schmickel               [1936-1990]   MD, 1961        sudden           University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine                isolation and characterization of human ribosomal DNA
Thomas W. Smith                [1936-1997]   MD, 1965        anticipated      Harvard Medical School/Brigham & Women's Hospital            Mechanism and reversal studies of digitalis
Joseph B. Warshaw              [1936-2003]   MD, 1961        anticipated      University of Vermont College of Medicine                    developmental neurobiology of respiratory control
Nelson M. Butters              [1937-1995]   PhD, 1964       anticipated      UCSD School of Medicine                                      cognitive deficits related to chronic alcoholism
Thomas P. Dousa                [1937-2000]   MD/PhD, 1968    sudden           Mayo Clinic                                                  cellular action of vasopressin in the kidney
Victor J. Ferrans              [1937-2001]   MD/PhD, 1963    sudden           NIH                                                          myocardial and vascular pathobiology
David W. Fulker                [1937-1998]   PhD, 1967       anticipated      University of Colorado at Boulder                            adoption studies of development in middle childhood
Patricia S. Goldman-Rakic      [1937-2003]   PhD, 1963       sudden           Yale Medical School                                          development and plasticity of the primate frontal lobe
A. Arthur Gottlieb             [1937-1998]   MD, 1961        sudden           Tulane University School of Medicine                         role of macrophage nucleic acid in antibody production
Caroline T. Holloway           [1937-1998]   PhD, 1964       sudden           NIH/NCRR                                                     Unsaturated Fatty Acid Biosynthesis in the Aorta
Jon I. Isenberg                [1937-2003]   MD, 1963        anticipated      UCSD School of Medicine                                      duodenal mucosal bicarbonate secretion in human
Chaviva Isersky                [1937-1986]   PhD, 1967       anticipated      NIH/NIDDK                                                    characterization of mast cell receptors for immunoglobulin E
John J. Jeffrey, Jr.           [1937-2001]   PhD, 1965       sudden           Albany Medical College                                       mechanism of action and the physiologic regulation of mammalian collagenases
Takeo Kakunaga                 [1937-1988]   PhD, 1966       sudden           NIH/NCI                                                      Molecular carcinogenesis
Allastair M. Karmody           [1937-1986]   MD, 1963        anticipated      Albany Medical College                                       In situ vein bypass technique in femorodistal bypass surgery
Sandy C. Marks, Jr.            [1937-2002]   DDS/PhD, 1968   sudden           Umass Medical School                                         bone cell biology
William L. McGuire             [1937-1992]   MD, 1964        sudden           University of Texas Health Sciences Center at San Antonio    mechanisms of hormonal control and growth and regression of mammary carcinoma
Eva J. Neer                    [1937-2000]   MD, 1963        anticipated      Harvard Medical School/Brigham & Women's Hospital            regulation and cellular levels of G protein subunits
Roland L. Phillips             [1937-1987]   MD/PhD, 1971    sudden           Loma Linda University School of Medicine                     role of lifestyle in cancer and cardiovascular disease among Adventists
Mette Strand                   [1937-1997]   PhD, 1964       anticipated      Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine                  parasite immunochemistry and vaccine development
John J. Stuart                 [1937-1986]   MD/PhD, 1971    unknown          Bowman Gray School of Medicine                               cancer clinical trials
Roderich Walter                [1937-1979]   PhD, 1964       anticipated      University of Illinois at Chicago                            Biofunctional Conformation of Peptide Hormones
Theodore S. Zimmerman          [1937-1988]   MD, 1963        anticipated      Scripps Research Institute                                   platelet/plasma protein interaction in blood coagulation
Merton R. Bernfield            [1938-2002]   MD, 1961        anticipated      Harvard Medical School/Children's Hospital                   nature and interactions of cell surface proteoglycans during morphogenesis
Thomas F. Burks, 2nd           [1938-2001]   PhD, 1967       sudden           University of Texas Health Sciences Center at Houston        central and peripheral neuropeptide pharmacology
Cornelia P. Channing           [1938-1985]   PhD, 1966       anticipated      University of Maryland School of Medicine                    Studies of the Mechanism of Luteinization in Vitro and in Vivo
Verne M. Chapman               [1938-1995]   PhD, 1965       sudden           Roswell Park Cancer Institute                                development of cumulative multilocus map of mouse chromosomes
William L. Chick               [1938-1998]   MD, 1963        anticipated      Umass Medical School                                         studies of islet and beta cells in pancreatic transplantation
Bernard N. Fields              [1938-1995]   MD, 1962        anticipated      Harvard Medical School/Brigham & Women's Hospital            genetic and molecular basis of viral injury to the nervous system
J. Christian Gillin            [1938-2003]   MD, 1966        anticipated      UCSD School of Medicine                                      serotenergic mechanisms in sleep and depression
Walter F. Heiligenberg         [1938-1994]   PhD, 1964       sudden           UCSD School of Medicine                                      neuroethological studies of electrolocation
Lawrence D. Jacobs             [1938-2001]   MD, 1965        anticipated      SUNY at Buffalo School of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences   recombinant b interferon as treatment for Multiple Sclerosis
Emil T. Kaiser                 [1938-1988]   PhD, 1959       sudden           Rockefeller University                                       mechanism of carboxypeptidase action
Irving Kupfermann              [1938-2002]   PhD, 1964       anticipated      Columbia University College of Physicians & Surgeons         Behavioral and neural analysis of learning in aplaysia
Samuel A. Latt                 [1938-1988]   MD/PhD, 1971    sudden           Harvard Medical School/Children's Hospital                   genetic and cytogenetic studies of mental retardation
Tai-Shun Lin                   [1938-1994]   PhD, 1970       anticipated      Yale Medical School                                          synthesis and development of nucleoside analogs as antiviral and anticancer compounds
Barbara J. Lowery              [1938-2002]   PhD, 1973       anticipated      University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine                understanding stress responses of people who were physically ill
Harold A. Menkes               [1938-1987]   MD, 1963        sudden           Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine                  occupational and environmental lung disease
Jane Pitt                      [1938-2003]   MD, 1964        anticipated      Columbia University College of Physicians & Surgeons         perinatal transmission of HIV and retroviral infections
Theodore Reich                 [1938-2003]   MD, 1963        anticipated      Washington University in St. Louis School of Medicine        genetic aspects of mental illness
Eleanor M. Saffran             [1938-2002]   PhD, 1968       anticipated      Temple University School of Medicine                         cognitive deficits in brain-damaged patients
Elizabeth M. Smith             [1938-1997]   PhD, 1978       anticipated      Washington University in St. Louis School of Medicine        psychiatric problems among disaster survivors
John H. Walsh                  [1938-2000]   MD, 1963        sudden           UCLA School of Medicine                                      gastrointestinal hormones, gastric acid production and peptic ulcer disease
Abraham Worcel                 [1938-1989]   MD, 1963        sudden           University of Rochester School of Medicine & Dentistry       structure of interphase and metaphase chromosomes




                                                                                                                   xxxv
Investigator Name                                         Cause of death   Institution at the time of death                                 Scientific domain
Dolph O. Adams              [1939-1996]   MD/PhD, 1969    sudden           Duke University School of Medicine                               Development and regulation of macrophage activation
James N. Davis              [1939-2003]   MD, 1965        sudden           SUNY Health Sciences Center at Stony Brook                       mechanisms underlying neuronal injury after brain ischemia
Robert J. Fass              [1939-2002]   MD, 1964        anticipated      Ohio State University                                            In vitro methods to test antimicrobial susceptibility of infectious agents
Marian W. Fischman          [1939-2001]   PhD, 1972       anticipated      Columbia University College of Physicians & Surgeons             behavioral pharmacology of cocaine
Andreas R. Gruentzig        [1939-1985]   MD, 1964        sudden           Emory University School of Medicine                              coronary angioplasty
Eric Holtzman               [1939-1994]   PhD, 1964       sudden           Columbia University College of Physicians & Surgeons             intracellular circulation of photoreceptor membranes
Donald J. Magilligan, Jr.   [1939-1989]   MD, 1965        sudden           Henry Ford Health Sciences Center                                natural history and limitations of porcine heart valves
W. Frederick Sample         [1939-1979]   MD, 1966        unknown          UCLA School of Medicine                                          anatomic correlation of ultrasound
David S. Sigman             [1939-2001]   PhD, 1965       anticipated      UCLA School of Medicine                                          enzymology and gene targeting
C. Richard Taylor           [1939-1995]   PhD, 1963       anticipated      Harvard University                                               Energetics of animal locomotion
Kenneth J.W. Taylor         [1939-2003]   MD/PhD, 1975    anticipated      Yale Medical School                                              diagnostic ultrasound imaging
Richard J. Wyatt            [1939-2002]   MD, 1964        anticipated      NIH                                                              biochemistry of schizophrenia
Nathaniel A. Young          [1939-1979]   MD, 1962        sudden           NIH/NCI                                                          molecular biology of enteroviruses
Marshall H. Becker          [1940-1993]   PhD, 1968       anticipated      University of Michigan School of Medicine                        elaboration of the Health Belief Model
Allan Beigel                [1940-1996]   MD, 1965        anticipated      Arizona State Hospital                                           therapeutic effectiveness of halfway house programs
Priscilla A. Campbell       [1940-1998]   PhD, 1968       anticipated      University of Colorado HSC/Nat. Jewish center                    cell biology of the immune response to bacteria
Donald J. Cohen             [1940-2001]   MD, 1966        anticipated      Yale Medical School                                              Tourette’s syndrome and autism in children
Anthony Dipple              [1940-1999]   PhD, 1964       sudden           NIH                                                              metabolic activation and DNA interactions of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon carcinogens
D. Michael Gill             [1940-1990]   PhD, 1967       sudden           Tufts University School of Medicine                              biochemistry of cholera toxin and other pathogenic toxins
Jeffrey A. Gottlieb         [1940-1975]   MD, 1966        anticipated      MD Anderson Cancer Center                                        combination chemotherapy regimens for treatment of soft tissue sarcomas
Keith Green                 [1940-2001]   PhD, 1964       anticipated      Medical College of Georgia                                       ion and water movement in ocular tissues, ocular response to drugs
James L. Lehr               [1940-1989]   MD, 1968        anticipated      University of Chicago School of Medicine                         Computer-mediated Radiology System
Robert M. Macnab            [1940-2003]   PhD, 1969       sudden           Yale Medical School                                              sequence analysis and function of bacterial flagellar motor
Melvin L. Marcus            [1940-1989]   MD, 1966        anticipated      Umass Medical School                                             cardiology, heart disease, coronary vascular adaptations to myocardial hypertrophy
David G. Marsh              [1940-1998]   PhD, 1964       anticipated      Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine                      genetics of allergy and asthma
John N. Whitaker            [1940-2001]   MD, 1965        sudden           University of Alabama School of Medicine                         Myelin Basic Protein Peptides in Body Fluids
Thomas S. Whitecloud, 3rd   [1940-2003]   MD, 1966        sudden           Tulane University School of Medicine                             navigation techniques for minimal access spine surgery
Roger M. Brown              [1941-2002]   PhD, 1972       sudden           NIH/NIDA                                                         Behavioral Sciences Research
Robert M. Joy               [1941-1995]   PhD, 1969       anticipated      University of California — Davis                                 pesticide induced changes in central nervous function
Robert A. Mendelson, Jr.    [1941-2001]   PhD, 1968       anticipated      UCSF School of Medicine                                          molecular mechanism of muscle contraction
Ethan R. Nadel              [1941-1998]   PhD, 1969       anticipated      Yale Medical School                                              thermoregulation during exercise and heat exposure
Samuel W. Perry, 3rd        [1941-1994]   MD, 1967        anticipated      Weill Medical College — Cornell University                       psychological course of prolonged infection among AIDS patients
Harvey D. Preisler          [1941-2002]   MD, 1965        anticipated      Rush-Presbyterian-St Luke's Medical Center                       clinical and biological studies of myeloid leukemias
Charles E. Putman           [1941-1999]   MD, 1967        sudden           Duke University School of Medicine                               NMR Imaging Studies
Helene S. Smith             [1941-1997]   PhD, 1967       anticipated      UCSF School of Medicine                                          malignant progression of the human breast/predictors of breast cancer prognosis
Ronald G. Thurman           [1941-2001]   PhD, 1967       sudden           University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill School of Medicine   hepatic metabolism, alcoholic liver injury and toxicology
Philip G. Weiler            [1941-1991]   MD, 1965        anticipated      University of California — Davis                                 coronary heart disease & stroke in the elderly
Bruce M. Achauer            [1942-2002]   MD, 1967        sudden           University of California — Irvine                                non-invasive methods to assess the depth of burn wounds
Laird S. Cermak             [1942-1999]   PhD, 1968       anticipated      Boston University Medical Center                                 psychological studies of memory and cognitive deficits related to chronic alcoholism
Christopher A. Dawson       [1942-2003]   PhD, 1969       sudden           Medical College of Wisconsin                                     pulmonary hemodynamics
Howard J. Eisen             [1942-1987]   MD, 1969        sudden           NIH/NICHD                                                        Mechanism of action of glucocorticoid hormones
Bruce W. Erickson           [1942-1998]   PhD, 1970       anticipated      University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill School of Medicine   engineering of nongenetic beta proteins
Ronald D. Fairshter         [1942-1988]   MD, 1968        anticipated      University of California — Irvine                                clinical studies in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Ira M. Goldstein            [1942-1992]   MD, 1966        anticipated      UCSF School of Medicine                                          pancreatitis, complement and lung injury
Richard E. Heikkila         [1942-1991]   PhD, 1969       sudden           UMDNJ Robert Wood Johnson Medical School                         oxidation-reduction reactions and the dopamine receptor system
Pokar M. Kabra              [1942-1990]   PhD, 1972       sudden           UCSF School of Medicine                                          application of liquid chromatography to therapeutic drug monitoring
Michale E. Keeling          [1942-2003]   DVM, 1966       sudden           University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center                    Resocialization of Chimpanzees
Henry C. Krutzsch           [1942-2003]   PhD, 1968       sudden           NIH/NCI                                                          Studies of protein purification and sequencing
Joachim G. Liehr            [1942-2003]   PhD, 1968       anticipated      University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston                  mechanism of estrogen-induced carcinogenesis
Gregory Mooser              [1942-2003]   DDS/PhD, 1972   anticipated      USC Keck School of Medicine                                      characterization of glucosyltranserase enzymes secreted by oral bacteria
Alan S. Morrison            [1942-1992]   PhD, 1972       anticipated      Brown Medical School                                             hormones in the epidemiology of prostatic hyperplasia
Simon J. Pilkis             [1942-1995]   MD/PhD, 1971    sudden           University of Minnesota School of Medicine                       carbohydrate metabolism and diabetes
B. Frank Polk               [1942-1988]   MD, 1967        anticipated      Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine                      epidemiology of HIV infection
Robert M. Pratt, Jr.        [1942-1987]   PhD, 1970       sudden           NIH/NIEHS                                                        Molecular studies of fetal cranofacial development
Julio V. Santiago           [1942-1997]   MD, 1967        sudden           Washington University in St. Louis School of Medicine            role of social factors, lifestyle practices, and medication in the onset of type II diabetes
Bruce S. Schoenberg         [1942-1987]   MD, 1980        anticipated      NIH                                                              prevention and control of neurological disorders
Susan M. Sieber             [1942-2002]   PhD, 1971       anticipated      NIH/NCI                                                          biochemical epidemiology and cancer
Michael Solursh             [1942-1994]   PhD, 1968       anticipated      University of Iowa College of Medicine                           extracellular matrix and cell migration
Matthew I. Suffness         [1942-1995]   PhD, 1970       anticipated      NIH/NCI                                                          Development of Taxol
Arthur T. Winfree           [1942-2002]   PhD, 1970       anticipated      University of Arizona College of Medicine                        Principles of Temporal Organization
Ann L. Brown                [1943-1999]   PhD, 1967       sudden           University of California — Berkeley                              learning and transfer processes in knowledge acquisition
Ahmad I. Bukhari            [1943-1983]   PhD, 1971       sudden           Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory                                    life cycle of mutator phage μ
Roland D. Ciaranello        [1943-1994]   MD, 1970        sudden           Stanford University School of Medicine                           molecular neurobiology and developmental disorders
Fredric S. Fay              [1943-1997]   PhD, 1969       sudden           Umass Medical School                                             generation and regulation of force in smooth muscle
Charles A. Janeway, Jr.     [1943-2003]   MD, 1969        anticipated      Yale Medical School                                              innate immunity and T lymphocyte biology
George Khoury               [1943-1987]   MD, 1970        anticipated      NIH                                                              genetics of simian virus 40, human papovavirus and HIV
Lee A. Lillard              [1943-2000]   PhD, 1972       sudden           University of Michigan School of Medicine                        elderly health and health care utilization
Jonathan M. Mann            [1943-1998]   MD, 1974        sudden           Harvard University School of Public Health                       AIDS prevention
Thomas A. McMahon           [1943-1999]   PhD, 1970       sudden           Harvard University                                               orthopedic biomechanics
William D. Nunn             [1943-1986]   PhD, 1972       sudden           University of California — Irvine                                regulation of fatty acid/acetate metabolism in e. coli
James S. Seidel             [1943-2003]   MD/PhD, 1976    sudden           Harbor-UCLA Medical Center                                       clinical studies in pediatric life support and cardiopulmonary resuscitation
Donald L. Shapiro           [1943-1989]   MD, 1968        unknown          University of Rochester School of Medicine and Dentistry         Isolation and study of human type II pneumocytes
Milton H. Stetson           [1943-2002]   PhD, 1970       anticipated      University of Delaware                                           Comparative Endocrinology
Gerald L. Stoner            [1943-2002]   PhD, 1974       sudden           NIH/NINDS                                                        neuropathology and molecular epidemiology of the human polyomavirus
James E. Bailey             [1944-2001]   PhD, 1969       anticipated      California Institute of Technology                               basic measurements of genetically engineered cells and immobilized enzyme biocatalysts
G. Scott Giebink            [1944-2003]   MD, 1969        sudden           University of Minnesota School of Medicine                       pathogenesis of otitis media and immunizations
Norton B. Gilula            [1944-2000]   PhD, 1971       anticipated      Scripps Research Institute                                       cell junction biosynthesis and biogenesis/cell-cell communication
Michael A. Kirschenbaum     [1944-1997]   MD, 1969        anticipated      University of California — Irvine                                prostaglandins and kidney medicine
Peter A. Kollman            [1944-2001]   PhD, 1970       anticipated      UCSF School of Medicine                                          free energy perturbation calculations and their application to macromolecules
Joel D. Meyers              [1944-1991]   MD, 1970        anticipated      University of Washington/FHCRC                                   infections caused by suppression of the immune system in organ transplant and AIDS patients
Joaquim Puig-Antich         [1944-1989]   MD, 1967        sudden           University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine                      psychobiology and treatment of child depression
Lonnie D. Russell, Jr.      [1944-2001]   PhD, 1974       sudden           Southern Illinois University School of Medicine                  filament regulation of spermatogenesis
Don C. Wiley                [1944-2001]   PhD, 1971       sudden           Harvard University                                               viral membrane and glycoprotein structure
Roger R. Williams           [1944-1998]   MD, 1971        sudden           University of Utah School of Medicine                            genetics and epidemiology of coronary artery diseases
Laurence A. Mack            [1945-1995]   MD, 1971        anticipated      University of Washington School of Medicine                      use of ultrasound, computed tomography, and MRI in medical diagnosis




                                                                                                                       xxxvi
Investigator Name                                        Cause of death   Institution at the time of death                        Scientific domain
John P. Merlie              [1945-1995]   PhD, 1973      sudden           Washington University in St. Louis School of Medicine   molecular genetics of the acetylcholine receptor
Lois K. Miller              [1945-1999]   PhD, 1972      anticipated      University of Georgia                                   genetics and molecular biology of baculoviruses
Peter M. Steinert           [1945-2003]   PhD, 1972      sudden           NIH                                                     structures and interactions of the proteins characteristic of epithelial cells
Howard S. Tager             [1945-1994]   PhD, 1971      sudden           University of Chicago School of Medicine                biochemical structure, action, regulation and degradation of the insulin and glucagon molecules
David Tapper                [1945-2002]   MD, 1970       anticipated      University of Washington School of Medicine             Detection of Ocular Tumors
Harold M. Weintraub         [1945-1995]   MD/PhD, 1973   anticipated      University of Washington/FHCRC                          characterization and function of MyoD gene
Gerald T. Babcock           [1946-2000]   PhD, 1973      anticipated      Michigan State University                               bioenergetic mechanisms in multicenter enzymes
Mary Lou Clements           [1946-1998]   MD, 1972       sudden           Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine             AIDS Vaccine Evaluation
John M. Eisenberg           [1946-2002]   MD, 1972       anticipated      Georgetown University Medical Center                    Derived Thresholds in Medical Decision Making
Ira Herskowitz              [1946-2003]   PhD, 1971      anticipated      UCSF School of Medicine                                 genetics of yeast mating type
Stanley R. Kay              [1946-1990]   PhD, 1980      sudden           Albert Einstein College of Medicine                     symptoms and diagnostic tests of schizophrenia
Sukdeb Mukherjee            [1946-1995]   MD, 1971       sudden           Medical College of Georgia                              Neuroleptic Effects on Regional Cerebral Blood Flow
John J. Wasmuth             [1946-1995]   PhD, 1973      sudden           University of California — Irvine                       human-hamster somatic cell hybrids/localization of Hnyington's disease gene
Elizabeth A. Bates          [1947-2003]   PhD, 1974      anticipated      UCSD School of Medicine                                 cross-linguistic studies of language development, processing and breakdown in aphasia
John G. Gambertoglio        [1947-2001]   PharmD, 1972   anticipated      UCSF School of Medicine                                 pharmacokinetics in healthy volunteers and subjects with renal insufficiency and on hemodialysis
Janis V. Giorgi             [1947-2000]   PhD, 1977      anticipated      UCLA School of Medicine                                 cellular immunology of resistance to HIV
Leonard N. Horowitz         [1947-1992]   MD, 1972       anticipated      University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine           diagnosing and treatment of ventricular arrythmia
Jeffrey M. Isner            [1947-2001]   MD, 1973       sudden           Tufts University School of Medicine                     therapeutic angiogenesis in vascular medicine, cardiovascular laser phototherapy
Markku Linnoila             [1947-1998]   MD/PhD, 1974   anticipated      NIH                                                     studies on the biological bases of impulsivity and aggression
John B. Penney, Jr.         [1947-1999]   MD, 1973       sudden           Harvard Medical School/Massachusetts General Hospital   receptor mechanisms in movement disorder pathophysiology
Lynn M. Wiley               [1947-1999]   PhD, 1975      sudden           University of California — Davis                        morphogenesis in early mammalian embryos
Michael E. Burt             [1948-1997]   MD/PhD, 1981   sudden           Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center                  Isolated lung perfusion for patients with unresectable metastases from sarcoma
Larry C. Clark              [1948-2000]   PhD, 1981      anticipated      University of Arizona College of Medicine               nutritional prevention of cancer
Terry L. Thomas             [1948-2002]   PhD, 1986      anticipated      NIH/NCI                                                 radiation health effects
Trudy L. Bush               [1949-2001]   PhD, 1977      sudden           University of Maryland School of Medicine               postmenopausal estrogen/progestins interventions
Neil S. Jacobson            [1949-1999]   PhD, 1977      sudden           University of Washington School of Medicine             marital therapy, domestic violence, and the treatment of depression
John L. Kemink              [1949-1992]   MD, 1975       sudden           University of Michigan School of Medicine               Clinical studies of cochlear implantations
Richard P. Nordan           [1949-1998]   PhD, 1983      sudden           FDA/CBER                                                discovery of interleukin 6
Eva U.J. Paucha             [1949-1988]   PhD, 1976      anticipated      Harvard Medical School/Dana Farber Cancer Institute     mechanism of transformation by SV40 large T antigen
Tsunao Saitoh               [1949-1996]   PhD, 1977      sudden           UCSD School of Medicine                                 altered protein kinases in alzheimer's disease
Robert F. Spencer           [1949-2001]   PhD, 1974      anticipated      Medical College of Virginia                             neuroanatomy of the oculomotor system
Kiertisin Dharmsathaphorn   [1950-1990]   MD, 1972       anticipated      UCSD School of Medicine                                 intestinal secretory mechanisms and antidiarrheal drugs
JoAnn E. Franck             [1950-1992]   PhD, 1981      anticipated      University of Washington School of Medicine             hippocampal damage as a cause of epilepsy
Gary J. Miller              [1950-2001]   MD/PhD, 1978   sudden           University of Colorado Health Sciences Center           vitamin D receptors in the growth regulation of prostate cancer cells
Elizabeth A. Rich           [1951-1998]   MD, 1977       sudden           Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine      natural history of lymphocytic alveolitis in hiv disease
Nava Sarver                 [1951-2001]   PhD, 1978      anticipated      NIH/NIAID                                               Targeted AIDS Drug Discovery
Jeffrey M. Hoeg             [1952-1998]   MD, 1977       sudden           NIH/NHLBI                                               Studies of familial hypercholesterolemia
Thomas K. Tatemichi         [1952-1995]   MD, 1978       anticipated      Columbia University College of Physicians & Surgeons    mechanisms and syndromes of dementia related to stroke
Roberta D. Shahin           [1953-1997]   PhD, 1985      sudden           FDA/CBER                                                Studies of Protective Immunity in Pertussis
Matthew L. Thomas           [1953-1999]   PhD, 1981      sudden           Washington University in St. Louis School of Medicine   function and regulation of leukocyte surface glycoproteins
Mu-En Lee                   [1954-2000]   MD/PhD, 1984   sudden           Harvard Medical School/Massachusetts General Hospital   characterization of vascular smooth muscle LIM protein
Thomas L. O'Donohue         [1954-1987]   PhD, 1980      sudden           NIH/NIMH                                                discovery of new central peptidergic pathways
Ernest G. Peralta           [1959-1999]   PhD, 1986      anticipated      Harvard University                                      signal transduction mechanisms of muscarinic receptors
Alan P. Wolffe              [1959-2001]   PhD, 1984      sudden           NIH                                                     role of DNA methylation in regulating gene expression in normal and pathological states
Eugenia Spanopoulou         [1960-1998]   PhD, 1988      sudden           Mount Sinai School of Medicine                          Biochemistry and Regulation of V(D)J Recombination




                                                                                                            xxxvii
References

Abadie, Alberto, and Jann Spiess. 2019. “Robust Post-Matching Inference.” Working Paper, Massachusetts Institute
        of Technology.
Azoulay, Pierre, Christian Fons-Rosen, and Joshua S. Graff Zivin. 2019. “Does Science Advance One Funeral at a
        Time?” American Economic Review 109(8):2889-920.
Azoulay, Pierre, Andrew Stellman, and Joshua Graff Zivin. 2006. “PublicationHarvester: An Open-Source Software
         Tool for Science Policy Research.” Research Policy 35(7):970-74.
Azoulay, Pierre, Joshua Graff Zivin, and Manso Gustavo. 2011. “Incentives and Creativity: Evidence from the
         Academic Life Sciences.” RAND Journal of Economics 42(3):527-54.
Belloni, Alexandre, Victor Chernozhukov, and Ying Wei. 2016. “Post-Selection Inference for Generalized Linear
         Models with Many Controls.” Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 34(4):606-19.
Blackwell, Matthew, Stefano Iacus, and Gary King. 2009. “CEM: Coarsened Exact Matching in Stata.” The Stata
        Journal 9(4):524-46.
Cameron, A. Colin, and Frank A.G. Windmeijer. 1996. “R-Squared Measures for Count Data Regression Models with
       Applications to Health-Care Utilization.” Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 14(2):209-220.
Correia, Sergio, Paulo Guimarães, and Tom Zylkin. 2019. “PPMLHDFE: Fast Poisson Estimation with High-Dimensional
         Fixed Effects.” arXiv:1903.01690 [econ.EM].
Iacus, Stefano M., Gary King, and Giuseppe Porro. 2011. “Multivariate Matching Methods that are Monotonic
         Imbalance Bounding.” Journal of the American Statistical Association 106(493):345-61.
Jaravel, Xavier, Neviana Petkova, and Alex Bell. 2018. “Team-Specific Capital and Innovation.” American Economic
         Review 108(4-5):1034-73.
Santos Silva, J.M.C., and Silvana Tenreyro. 2006. “The Log of Gravity.” The Review of Economics and Statistics
         88(4):641-58.
Wooldridge, Jeffrey M. 1997. “Quasi-Likelihood Methods for Count Data.” Pp. 352-406 in Handbook of Applied
        Econometrics Volume 2: Microeconomics, edited by M. Hashem Pesaran and Peter Schmidt. Oxford, UK:
        Blackwell.




                                                      xxxviii
