                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      MISSING NOVELTY IN DRUG DEVELOPMENT

                                        Joshua L. Krieger
                                           Danielle Li
                                      Dimitris Papanikolaou

                                       Working Paper 24595
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w24595


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                            May 2018, Revised January 2019




Previously circulated as “Developing Novel Drugs.” We are grateful to Jason Abaluck, Leila
Agha, Pierre Azoulay, Amitabh Chandra, Iain Cockburn, Leemore Dafny, Carola Frydman,
Shane Greenstein, Tal Gross, Jonathan Gruber, Jennifer Kao, Borja Larrain, Monty Krieger,
Patrick McCarren, Prescott Murphy, Ramana Nanda, Nicholson Price, Fiona Scott-Morton, Amit
Seru, Kelly Shue, Ariel Stern, Michael Weisbach, Heidi Williams, Michael Serrano-Wu,
Motohiro Yogo, Joshua Graff Zivin, and numerous seminar participants for helpful comments
and suggestions. We also thank Descartes Holland, Jiaheng Yu, and Shumiao Ouyang for
outstanding research assistance. We also thank Duncan Gilchrist and Bhaven Sampat for
generously sharing drug patent data, as well as Laurie Jacquet and Léa Toulemon for sharing
their data on Amélioration du Service Medical Rendu scores. Previous versions of this paper
appeared under the titles “Financing Novel Drugs” and “Developing Novel Drugs.” Krieger and
Li acknowledge funding from the National Institute on Aging under Award Number
R24AG048059 to the National Bureau of Economic Research. The content is solely the
responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the National
Institutes of Health or NBER.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Joshua L. Krieger, Danielle Li, and Dimitris Papanikolaou. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Missing Novelty in Drug Development
Joshua L. Krieger, Danielle Li, and Dimitris Papanikolaou
NBER Working Paper No. 24595
May 2018, Revised January 2019
JEL No. G31,I10,O3

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper provides evidence that risk aversion leads pharmaceutical firms to underinvest in
radical innovation. We define a drug candidate as novel if it is molecularly distinct from prior
candidates. Using our measure, we show that firms face a risk-reward tradeoff when investing in
novel drugs: while novel drug candidates are less likely to be approved by the FDA, they are
based on patents with higher indicators of value. We show that–counter to the predictions of
frictionless models–firms respond to a plausibly exogenous positive shock to their net worth by
developing more of these riskier novel candidates. This pattern suggests that financial market
imperfections may lead even large public firms to behave as though they are risk averse, therefore
hindering their willingness to invest in potentially valuable novel drugs.


Joshua L. Krieger                               Dimitris Papanikolaou
Harvard Business School                         Kellogg School of Management
jkrieger@hbs.edu                                Northwestern University
                                                2211 Campus Drive, Office 4319
Danielle Li                                     Evanston, IL 60208
MIT Sloan School of Management                  and NBER
100 Main St, E62-484                            d-papanikolaou@kellogg.northwestern.edu
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
danielle.li@mit.edu
   Understanding the frictions that impede the development of new ideas is critical, especially
in light of recent work documenting an apparent slowdown in innovation and productivity across
a broad array of sectors (Jones, 2009; Gordon, 2016; Bloom, Jones, Reenen, and Webb, 2017).
One possibility is that this slowdown reflects an underlying scarcity of good ideas: as knowledge
advances, it becomes more difficult to discover new ideas. In such a world, slowdowns in innovation
and productivity would be difficult to reverse. Yet other factors may also limit innovation. For
example, good ideas may not be scarce but they may be riskier to develop, and firms may prefer to
focus instead on safer, but more marginal, projects. In this world, by contrast, it would be possible
to increase innovation by encouraging firms to take on more risk.
   Using data from the pharmaceutical industry, we provide evidence that risk-aversion leads firms
to under-invest in radical innovations. To arrive at this conclusion, we first develop a new measure
of the molecular novelty of firms’ new drug candidates. Using this measure, we show that firms
face a risk-reward tradeoff when considering investments in novelty: novel drug candidates are less
likely to be approved by the FDA, but they also appear to be more valuable in the sense that they
are based on more valuable patents, and generate greater private and social returns conditional
on approval. Having established that novel drugs appear to be economically viable investments,
we then examine whether financing frictions impede firms’ willingness to invest. Using variation
based on the expansion of Medicare prescription drug coverage, we find that firms respond to
plausibly exogenous increases in their net worth by developing riskier, more innovative drugs. This
result—which holds even for profitable, publicly-traded firms—stands in contrast to the neoclassical
frictionless benchmark in which a firm’s willingness to take risks should depend only on the potential
of its ideas, and not its net worth. Our results suggest, instead, that pharmaceutical firms both
large and small behave as though they are risk averse, and that this behavior leads them to develop
fewer novel drug candidates.
   We begin by developing a new way to assess the novelty of drug candidates. To construct our
measure, we compute a drug’s pair-wise chemical similarity to prior drug candidates using a metric
known as a “Tanimoto score” or “Jaccard coefficient.” Tanimoto scores are designed to measure
overlap in chemical substructures between two molecules, and are commonly used by pharmaceutical
chemists to identify drugs with similar function (Wawer et al., 2014; Bickerton et al., 2012). We
compute a drug’s maximum Tanimoto similarity to prior candidates and define a drug to be novel if
it is molecularly distinct from all prior drug candidates. Because our metric is based on properties
observable when a drug candidate enters development, it can be defined for all candidates, and
provides a measure of a firm’s ex-ante willingness to invest in innovative drugs. By contrast, existing
measures of pharmaceutical innovation count either the number of new drug candidates (which
ignores substantial variation in the novelty of drugs),1 particularly promising candidates (which
credits firms with innovating only when they succeed),2 or number of entries into therapeutic areas
or drug “classes” (which ignores innovation in common disease categories for which there already
exist treatments),3 our approach takes advantage of advances in the field of chemical informatics to
assess novelty on the basis of molecular structure.
       Using our measure of novelty, we show that many new drug candidates are close chemical
modifications of previous candidates: over 15 percent of newly developed candidates have a
maximum similarity score of over 0.8, meaning that they share more than 80 percent of their
chemical substructures with a previously developed candidate. As a benchmark, Figure 1 displays
the chemical structures for Mevacor and Zocor, two very similar statins, which share an 82 percent
overlap. Consistent with Bloom et al. (2017), among others, we document a decline in innovation
among small molecule drugs over time. For instance, the proportion of highly derivative compounds—
ones whose maximum similarity to prior candidates exceeds 0.9—has doubled from 1999 to 2014.
       Next, we characterize the economic risk and returns associated with developing novel drugs. We
show that novel candidates are riskier investments: relative to other drug candidates developed in
the same quarter for the same disease indication, a one-standard deviation increase in novelty is
associated with a 24 percent decrease in the likelihood that a drug candidate receives regulatory
approval from the FDA. This risk, however, appears to be accompanied by potentially greater
rewards: across a variety of metrics, we find that novel drugs are privately and socially more valuable.
Conditional on approval, novel drugs generate more revenue, contribute more to a firm’s market
value (as measured by event studies around the date of their approval), and are more likely to be
classified as adding clinical value (following Kyle and Williams, 2017).
       Novel drugs are also likely to be more valuable investments ex-ante, that is, based on their value
early in the development process. We reach this conclusion by comparing patents associated with
more versus less novel drug candidates. Because pharmaceutical firms have a strong incentive to
patent potential therapies early—well before they enter clinical development—measures of patent
value are useful indicators of a drug candidate’s expected worth to the firm. In particular, the value
of a pharmaceutical patent incorporates not only a drug candidate’s value to the firm conditional
on approval, but also the possibility that it may not be approved, as well as the value a firm may
   1
      Marcia Angell, a former editor of the New England Journal of Medicine argues that pharmaceutical output
is a poor measure of innovation because firms increasingly concentrate their research on variations of top-selling
drugs already on the market, sometimes called “me-too” drugs. She concludes: “There is very little innovative
research in the modern pharmaceutical industry, despite its claims to the contrary.” http://bostonreview.net/
angell-big-pharma-bad-medicine
    2
      See Dranove, Garthwaite, and Hermosilla (2014). While these may be useful measures of research success, they
are misleading measures of a firm’s willingness to invest in innovation ex-ante.
    3
      See DiMasi and Paquette (2004); Dranove et al. (2014); DiMasi and Faden (2010); Lanthier, Miller, Nardinelli,
and Woodcock (2013).


                                                        1
derive (e.g. learning) even if the candidate fails. We use two proxies for that value: future citations
to the patent (following Hall, Jaffe, and Trajtenberg, 2005) and the patent’s contribution to the
firm’s stock market value (following Kogan, Papanikolaou, Seru, and Stoffman, 2017). Our results
show that the key patents associated with novel candidates generate greater contributions to stock
market value and receive more citations. Specifically, a one-standard deviation increase in novelty is
associated with approximately a 10 percent increase in the estimated value of associated patents
and a 8–18 percent increase in future citations.
   If novel drug candidates are more valuable, this raises the question of why firms invest in so
many chemically derivative drugs. One answer is that viable novel drug candidates are scarce,
and firms have exhausted the set of such candidates available for development However, it is also
possible that various frictions lead firms to under-invest in novelty. In the remainder of this paper,
we explore the role that financial market imperfections—that is, costs of external finance, as in
Froot, Scharfstein, and Stein (1993)—can play in shaping firms’ willingness to pursue exploratory
R&D. We present a model in which firms favor more conservative development strategies because
they internalize the possibility that novel candidates are more likely to fail and leave them with
financing shortfalls in the future. In fact, firms may choose to develop safer but more derivative
drug candidates, even when novel drug candidates are ex-ante more valuable. In our model, novel
drugs are “missing” because concerns about managing cashflow risk discourage firms from investing
in such candidates.
   The second part of this paper explores this idea by examining how cashflow shocks impact firms’
development decisions. Absent financial frictions, firms should assess investments only on the basis
of their expected value. In such a world, a firm’s R&D decisions would not depend on its cashflows.
However, if firms face financing frictions, then an increase in their net worth may enable them to
invest in more drug candidates than they were previously able to. Such a response would suggest
that these marginal drugs were missing to begin with.
   We construct shocks to firm net worth using the introduction of Medicare Part D, which expanded
US prescription drug coverage for the elderly and increased the profitability of drugs targeting
the elderly (Friedman, 2009). Medicare Part D (hereafter “Part D”) differentially benefited firms
along two pre-existing dimensions: the extent to which they produce drugs for the elderly and the
remaining market exclusivity on these drugs. Using both dimensions of variation allows us to control
for confounders arising from each individual dimension. For example, firms with more existing drugs
for the elderly may respond to Part D by investing in more or more novel drugs—not because they
are responsive to cashflows, but because they may differentially see a greater increase in investment
opportunities. Similarly, firms with longer remaining exclusivity periods on their products may
have different development strategies than firms whose drugs face imminent competition, again,


                                                   2
even absent changes to cashflows. Our identification strategy thus compares firms with the same
share of drugs sold to the elderly and the same remaining exclusivity periods across their overall
drug portfolio, but that differ in how their remaining patent exclusivity is distributed across drugs
of varying elder shares. This strategy allows us to identify the impact of differences in expected
cashflow among firms with similar investment opportunities, and at similar points in their overall
product life-cycle.
   We find that treated firms develop more new drug candidates, and that this increase is driven
by an increase in molecularly novel candidates. By contrast, we find no evidence that firms increase
the development of very derivative, so called “me-too,” drugs. Using a back of the envelope analysis
based on R&D spending among firms in Compustat, we show that these results imply an elasticity
of drug development to firm R&D of between 1 and 1.6 for novel drugs, and of between 0 and 0.3
for me-too drugs.
   Importantly, our results document “missing novelty” across a host of drug markets. Although
our shock to net worth arises from an expansion in insurance coverage for elderly consumers, treated
firms respond by developing more novel drugs for patients of all ages—including infants, children,
and young adults. This finding also implies that our identification strategy is not simply picking up
firms’ response to an increase in demand for drugs targeting elderly patients. Further, we also find
some evidence that firm managers have a preference for diversification. Treated firms are more likely
to pursue drugs that focus on different diseases, or operate using a different mechanism (target),
relative to the drugs that the firm has previously developed. Taken together, these findings suggest
that firms respond to increases in net worth by diversifying their portfolios and undertaking more
exploratory development strategies at the margin. Moreover, since we show that novel drugs are
based on more valuable patents, our results are unlikely to result from ‘empire-building,’ whereby
managers deploy additional resources to pursue inferior projects.
   Perhaps surprisingly, our findings hold even for large publicly traded firms, some of which hold
substantial cash reserves. As such, it is unlikely that a scarcity of cash resources in the present is
the main factor impeding innovation in our setting. Rather, our findings suggest that firms invest
conservatively today because they are concerned about the prospect of facing R&D failure and
uncertain cashflows in the future (Froot et al., 1993). Indeed, rather than being a sign of financial
slack, the presence of large cash holdings can indicate that firms internalize the costs of potentially
needing to raise external finance in the future. These concerns likely to be particularly salient
in the pharmaceutical industry, where development costs are high, debt financing is more scarce
due to difficulties collateralizing potentially unproven intellectual property, and where asymmetric
information about project potential can make it costlier to raise equity.



                                                  3
       Our work makes a distinct contribution to the literature studying the impact of financial frictions
on firm investment decisions.4 While existing work typically observes the response of investment
aggregated at the level of individual firms or geographic locations, we are able to characterize the risk
and return of the marginal projects being undertaken as a result of ameliorating financial frictions.
By observing the economic characteristics of specific projects, our work clarifies the mechanism
through which financial frictions affect radical innovation and opens the door for a wider array of
potential policy prescriptions. Specifically, documenting a positive relation between firm resources
and innovation typically focuses attention on policies that stimulate R&D through subsidies. By
identifying firm risk aversion as a limiting factor, our results also lend support to a different set
of policies that reduce the relative risk of novel versus me-too investments, potentially at a lower
cost to the taxpayer. Examples of such policies include: creating diversified portfolios of drugs, as
proposed in Fernandez, Stein, and Lo (2012); providing convex incentive schemes to entrepreneurs,
as done by venture capital firms; or by limiting reimbursements for derivative drugs.
       Finally, our work also contributes to the literature studying the rate and direction of innovation.
For instance, Jones (2010); Bloom et al. (2017) argue for the presence of decreasing returns to
innovation. Consistent with this view, we find that drug novelty has decreased over time, although
an important caveat is that our novelty measure cannot be computed for biologic drugs, which have
been a vibrant research area in recent years. Our work also relates to research on how regulatory
policies and market conditions distort the direction of innovation (Budish, Roin, and Williams,
2015), as well as work and how changes in market demand affect innovation in the pharmaceutical
sector (Acemoglu and Linn, 2004; Blume-Kohout and Sood, 2013; Dranove et al., 2014). Similar
to us, Blume-Kohout and Sood (2013) and Dranove et al. (2014) exploit the passage of Medicare
Part D, and find more innovation in markets that receive a greater demand shock (drugs targeted
to the elderly). We use the same policy shock—but interact with the characteristics of firms’
patent portfolio—to ask a different question. Rather than looking at the impact of changes in
demand on disease-level innovation, we study the impact of cashflow shocks on firm-level investment
decisions—that is, we isolate a cashflow shock from the demand for new drugs. Indeed, our finding
that treated firms increase drug development for pediatric and young adult conditions strongly
suggests that we are identifying a cashflow shock rather than a shock to demand for drugs targeting
the elderly.
   4
    An incomplete list includes Almeida, Campello, Laranjeira, and Weisbenner (2011); Frydman, Hilt, and Zhou
(2015); Chodorow-Reich (2014); Duygan-Bump, Levkov, and Montoriol-Garriga (2015); Bond, Harhoff, and van
Reenen (2005); Brown, Fazzari, and Petersen (2009); Hall and Lerner (2010); Nanda and Nicholas (2014); Kerr and
Nanda (2015); Hombert and Matray (2017); Benmelech, Frydman, and Papanikolaou (2017). Kerr and Nanda (2015)
summarize the literature on financing frictions and R&D.




                                                      4
1        Measuring Drug Novelty

        The first step in our analysis is to construct an ex-ante measure of drug novelty. To do so,
we rely a core tenant of modern pharmaceutical chemistry, known as the “Similarity Property
Principle,” which states that structurally similar molecules are more likely to have similar functional
properties (Johnson and Maggiora, 1990). Chemists rely on this idea when they use molecular
similarity calculations to build libraries for drug screening (Wawer et al., 2014), quantify the “drug-
like” properties of a compound (Bickerton et al., 2012), or expand medicinal chemistry techniques
(Maggiora et al., 2014). We use the relationship between physical and functional similarity to
define a drug’s novelty based on its chemical similarity to all previously developed drug candidates.
This approach is similar in spirit to recent research in microbial biochemistry, which uses chemical
similarity to assess patterns of innovation in the discovery of bacterial and marine-derived natural
products (Pye et al., 2017).


1.1       Data Overview

        To conduct our analysis, we construct a panel dataset that tracks firm–quarter level drug
development outcomes using data from a number of sources.
        The primary data we use to construct drug output and novelty measures come from Clarivate
Analytics’ Cortellis Investigational Drugs database. Cortellis assembles the data on drug candidates
from public records (e.g., company documents, press releases, financial filings, clinical trial registries,
FDA submissions) and then further processes the data to assign the proper classifications (e.g.,
therapeutic indications and drug targets).5 Hence, the earliest point of entry for a given drug
candidate is generally the first time a patent is filed or when the drug candidate appears in documents
describing a firm’s research pipeline. Our data will have near complete coverage for drugs that enter
clinical trials—companies are required to file an Investigational New Drug (IND) Application with
the FDA, and this will almost always be observed. We also observe many later stage pre-clinical
drugs as most of these will be patented, but may miss early stage pre-clinical candidates that show
no promise in the earliest screening experiments (these may never leave a paper trail for Cortellis
to pick up). Among drugs that do enter our data, we are fairly confident that we have accurate
development dates because Cortellis attempts to backfill information; for example, if Cortellis first
becomes aware of a drug when it fills out an IND, Cortellis employees will work to ex-post determine
the dates of its earlier clinical development.
    5
     In our sample, we see the number of reported molecules increase sharply in the late 1990s; this increase is likely
due to an improvement in the reporting of molecules. The Food and Drug Administration Modernization Act, passed
in late 1997 and enacted in 1999, required the reporting of clinical trials to a centralized government registry. Even
though we observe some drug candidates pre-1999, we believe that our data provides fuller coverage post 1999.



                                                          5
       We supplement these data using a variety of other sources. We use ChemMine Tools, an open
source program for chemical-informatics, to compute similarity scores.6 We obtain accounting
information for a subset of the companies (those that we can match based on their name) from
Compustat. We link approved drugs to their key patents and exclusivity dates using the FDA
Orange Book and information from the Federal Register. We obtain patent value information from
Kogan et al. (2017). Last, we use the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS) to estimate drug
revenue and Medicare market share (MMS).


1.2      Similarity Based on Chemical Structure

       The first step in measuring novelty requires us to estimate the similarity of two molecules.
We follow the chemical informatics literature and measure similarity using the Tanimoto distance
(Jaccard coefficient) between two sets of chemical fragments (Nikolova and Jaworska, 2004),

                                              |A ∩ B|         |A ∩ B|
                                    TA,B ≡            =                     .                                        (1)
                                              |A ∪ B|   |A| + |B| − |A ∩ B|

The similarity measure in (1) takes values in [0, 1] and returns the fraction of chemical features
that are shared by the two chemical compounds. A Tanimoto distance of 0 implies that the pair
of drugs have no common fragments; a score of 1 means they have the same set of atoms and
bonding. However, a Tanimoto score of 1 does not necessarily mean that the two chemicals are
identical because the Tanimoto score does not take into account a structure’s orientation in space
(stereosymmetry).7 We compute the distance metric (1) using ChemMine Tools.
       We compute a drug candidate’s maximum pairwise similarity to previously developed candidates,
and define a candidate to be novel if it has a low maximum similarity:


                                        Maximum Similarityi ≡ max Ti,j ,                                             (2)
                                                                      j∈Pi


where Pi is the set of drug candidates that have reached Phase 1 clinical trials prior to the
introduction of candidate i. We compare to prior drugs in Phase 1 and above rather than to all
prior drugs in development to avoid mistakenly labeling a novel drug candidate as derivative if it
was developed at approximately the same time as other novel (but pair-wise similar) candidates
(DiMasi and Faden, 2011).
   6
       Appendix C.2 provides more detail about the construction of similarity scores using the simplified molecular-input
 line-entry system (SMILES) and ChemMine Tools.
     7
       For example, consider a classic example of a me-too drug, Nexium, and its antecedent, Prilosec. Prilosec is a
“racemic mixture,” meaning that it is a mixture of two orientations of the same molecule, each known as an enantiomer,
whereas Nexium consists of a single enantiomer of this same molecule. Despite their differing orientation, we record
 the pair as having a Tanimoto score of 1.



                                                           6
   Figure 1 illustrates an example of how our novelty measure works for several HMG-CoA reductase
inhibitors—more commonly known as “statins”—used to treat heart disease. In September of 1987,
Mevacor (Lovostatin) became the first statin to be approved by the FDA; it’s similarity score to
prior candidates is 0.25. In October of 1991, a second statin, Pravochol (Pravastatin), was approved.
Pravochol’s similarity to priority candidates is 0.61, and Mevacor was its closest prior candidate.
Next, in December of 1991, a third statin, Zocor, was approved. As one can see from Figure 1,
Zocor (Simvastatin) is quite similar to Mevacor and, indeed, its maximum similarity score is 0.82
(0.52 similarity to Pravochol and 0.82 similarity to Mevacor).


1.3   Descriptive Statistics

   We now describe the distribution and evolution of novelty in our data.
   Panel A of Figure 2 shows the distribution of our maximum similarity measure. Recall that
lower maximum similarity to prior candidates implies higher novelty. We see that the distribution
of our ex-ante novelty score is somewhat bi-modal; the vast majority of drugs have maximum
similarity scores in excess of 0.2, and most fall in the 0.3 to 0.6 range. However, there is a second
peak close to 1 (zero novelty). Approximately 10 percent of our sample candidates share the same
structure as a prior candidate that has also entered development. These include molecules that are
stereoisomers, meaning that they differ only in orientation, as well as combination therapies that
involve multiple compounds that were previously developed as separate therapies. Column 1 of
Table 1 documents the underlying number of drug candidates in various bins of similarity, as well as
by phase of development. In the second column, we show the characteristics of drug candidates that
are included in our firm-level analysis in Section 3, which we will discuss in Section 3.3.
   Panel B of Figure 2 shows that the novelty of the average new drug candidates has declined
over time. Part of this increase may reflect an increasing difficulty of finding new ideas when there
is a larger stock of existing knowledge. However, part of this increase may also be an artifact of our
truncated sample. A me-too drug that enters development in 1999 may appear more novel simply
because we observe less data on prior candidates, relative to a me-too drug that enters development
later in our sample period. To explore whether this is the main factor behind this trend, we also
plot the average novelty of new drug candidates where the comparison group is restricted to those
which entered Phase 1 over the last five years. We can see that even in this case the average
novelty of new drugs has declined over time. Panels C and D of the same figure also document an
increase in the fraction of new drug candidates that are very similar to prior candidates, those with
maximum Tanimoto scores of over 0.9. We refer to such candidates as “me-too” or “derivative”
drugs because they represent only a small modification from existing drugs. Regardless of whether
we include combination drugs (Panel C) or not (Panel D), we see that the proportion of such drugs

                                                  7
is increasing. This secular decline in drug novelty is consistent with the view that the average level
of innovativeness in the pharmaceutical sector has declined over time (Light and Lexchin, 2012;
Naci, Carter, and Mossialos, 2015) and is also consistent with the presence of decreasing returns to
scale in innovative activity (Jones, 2010; Bloom et al., 2017).


1.4      Validation and Caveats

      There are several important caveats to keep in mind regarding our proposed novelty measure.
      First and foremost, there is no perfect correspondence between structural and functional similarity.
Similar molecules may have divergent properties: the drug thalidomide, for instance, is comprised of
two mirror image molecules, one of which is a safe sedative, the other of which causes birth defects.
Conversely, chemically dissimilar compounds may have similar biological effects: Crestor and Lipitor
have different structural profiles, but are often prescribed interchangeably by doctors.
      Despite these exceptions, chemical informatics research has shown that Tanimoto similarity
measures are nonetheless useful for identifying drug qualities and novelty on average (O’Hagan
et al., 2015; Baldi and Nasr, 2010; Bickerton et al., 2012; Pye et al., 2017). We also independently
verify that our measure of chemical similarity captures a sense of functional similarity. Appendix
Table A.2 shows that pairs of drugs which share the same biological target action are approximately
2.2 times more similar than the average pair; sharing the same indication also increases similarity
by over 25 percent. Figure 3 further shows that there is a strong negative relationship between a
drug’s chemical similarity score and its likelihood of being the first drug candidate for a given target.
Comparing two drugs treating the same indication that enter development in the same quarter, we
find that a one standard deviation increase in novelty (-0.21) increases a drug’s chances of being the
first in its broad target class by over 40 percent.8
      Second, we can only measure novelty with respect to prior molecules in the Cortellis data. Hence,
our measure of novelty is an upper bound for true similarity because we may be missing earlier drugs
with similar properties. This is especially true for drugs with similarity scores near 0, which are
disproportionately candidates that enter development toward the start of our sample. To control for
cohort differences, we will include fixed effects for the quarter of a candidate’s earliest development
date in all of our empirical analysis.
      Finally our novelty measure cannot be applied to more complicated drug therapies whose
chemical structure is more difficult to characterize. Specifically, while most drugs are chemically
synthesized with known structures, a growing class of new therapies, known as biologics, are based
on biological products (proteins, cells, tissues, etc.) that cannot be compared with Tanimoto scores.
  8
      Appendix Table A.3 shows that these results are robust to other specifications and controls.



                                                           8
Although biologics make up for only 20 percent of drug development, their share is increasing
and are often considered to be a source of innovation in the drug industry (Ralf Otto, Alberto
Santagostino, and Ulf Schrader, 2014). In Section 3.7 we show that a positive cashflow shock also
leads to greater development of biologics.


2     Risk and Return of Investing in Novel Drugs

    In this section, we explore the risk and return of developing novel drugs. The main risk in drug
development is FDA approval; hence, we first examine the relation between novelty and likelihood
of FDA approval. Meanwhile, measuring the return of investing in novel drugs is somewhat more
challenging, and we will examine several proxies of private and social value. Some of these proxies
are at the drug level, and are therefore only available for approved drugs. To measure the ex-ante
return of investing in novel drugs we will instead focus on outcomes at the drug patent level. The
advantage of focusing on drug patents is that they are typically filed well before the drug approval
decision is made, which allows us to assess the value of drugs that have not been approved, including
that of early stage pre-clinical candidates.


2.1   Drug Novelty and Risk: Likelihood of FDA Approval

    We first examine how novelty relates to a drug candidate’s likelihood of FDA approval using
linear probability models that relate a candidate’s approval status (Outcomei ) to its ex-ante novelty,
given by its maximum similarity score:


                        Outcomei = a + b Maximum Similarityi + c Zi + εi .                         (3)


We saturate our specification with a battery of controls, including quarter of development, disease
(ICD-9 indication), and firm fixed effects. We cluster the standard errors by indication. We estimate
Equation (3) for all drug candidates, but also report results separately conditioning on different
stages in development. We will estimate versions of Equation (3) for a variety of other outcomes,
discussed in later sections.
    Novel drugs are significantly less likely to be approved by the FDA, as we can see in Column 1
of Table 2 and Panel A of Figure 4. Compared to drugs of similar age, that targeting the same
disease (ICD-9 indication), and are developed by the same firm, a one standard deviation increase in
drug novelty (-0.21) is associated with a -0.21*0.208=4.4 percentage point decrease in the likelihood
of FDA approval. Given that the unconditional likelihood of FDA approval for candidates in our




                                                  9
data is 18 percent, this estimate represents a 24 percent decrease in the likelihood of developing a
successful drug candidate.
   Further, this negative relationship between novelty and approval persists throughout the devel-
opment pipeline, as we can see in Figure A.2 and Table A.4 in the Online Appendix—though the
magnitude of the association attenuates as the drug progresses further along the approval process.
Focusing on our preferred specification with the full set of controls, we find that conditional on
reaching Phase 1 or Phase 2, a one standard deviation increase in novelty is associated with an
approximately 5 percentage point reduction in the likelihood of ultimate approval. However, condi-
tional on reaching Phase 3, there are no statistically significant differences in approval probabilities
between more and less novel drugs.


2.2   Novelty and Measures of Value for Approved Drugs

   Even if novel drugs are less likely to be approved by the FDA, they may still be valuable
investments if their expected value is high. To explore whether this is the case, we develop several
measures of the value of drugs that make it to market. We focus on the relation between the novelty
of a drug and its revenue, contribution to firm value and clinical value added.
   We relate the different measures of drug candidate value Outcomei to our novelty measure
using specifications similar to Equation (3). Depending on the measure of value, Outcomei takes
either binary values (to identify whether the drug is deemed clinically important), or consists of the
logarithm of revenues, or estimated contributions to firm value. To ensure that we are comparing
otherwise similar drugs, we control for a drug’s age (development quarter or year) and disease (ICD9
indication) fixed effects.


Drug revenue

   We begin by examining the relation between our novelty measure and revenue. To obtain data
on drug revenue, we use the expenditures reported in the Medicare Expenditure Panel Survey
(MEPS) from 1996–2012. To match drugs to Cortellis, we employ a name-matching procedure.
Appendix C.3 provides further details on the data construction and matching procedure. The data
is at the drug-indication-calendar year level. After restricting attention to drugs for which we can
compute a similarity score, we are left with 11,256 observations. We relate novelty to a drug’s log
revenues using a panel version of Equation (3), which now also includes calendar year fixed effects.
   Novel drugs generate greater revenue, on average. Column 3 of Table 2 reports the estimated
coefficient b from our baseline specification with our full set of controls. The economic magnitudes
are significant: a one standard deviation increase in novelty is associated with an increase in annual


                                                  10
revenue of approximately 0.14 log points. Given that the unconditional standard deviation of
log revenues is approximately 2.1 log points, our estimates imply that novelty can account for a
non-trivial fraction of this variation. Panel D of Figure 4 provides a binned scatter plot of the
results, and Appendix Table A.5 reports results using different combinations of controls.
       Measuring a drug’s private value using revenue has some disadvantages. First, it ignores the
costs of production. Markups may be systematically related to the novelty of a drug; if firms charge
higher markups for novel drugs, revenue estimates would understate the relation between novelty
and private value.9 Drug-level revenues also ignore potential spillovers on other drugs in a firm’s
portfolio. These spillovers can be positive if the firm markets some drugs jointly, or negative, if the
new drug cannibalizes older drugs. As a result, a more appropriate measure of the (private) value
of a drug is its contribution to the firm’s market value; we explore this idea next.


Stock market reaction to FDA approval

       To measure the market value of a drug, we exploit information contained in the stock market’s
reaction to news about a drug’s FDA approval. Specifically, we closely follow the methodology
of Kogan et al. (2017). This approach, which we discuss in more detail in Appendix C.4, allows
for stock price movements that are unrelated to the value of the approved drug, and adjusts our
estimates to account for the fact that markets may react more strongly to the approval of novel
drugs not because they are more valuable but because the news is more surprising. After restricting
the sample to drugs with similarity scores that we can match to the CRSP dataset, we are left with
34 firms and 462 announcement days, focusing our attention on the first approval date for each drug.
       We find that novel drugs generate more market value upon approval. Specifically, we estimate a
version of Equation (3), where the dependent variable is the logarithm of the estimated contribution
to firm value. We include controls for drug development year, indication, firm fixed effects and the
year the drug is approved. Column 3 of Table 2 reports the estimated coefficient b from our preferred
specification that includes the full set of controls. Panel E of Figure 4 provides the associated
scatter plot; Appendix Table A.6 reports estimates using different combination of controls. In terms
of magnitudes, a one standard deviation increase in novelty is associated with approximately 20
percent larger stock price increase. This correlation is robust to varying the set of controls. Panel
E of Figure 4 shows the associated binned scatter plot (with the full set of controls); this relation
appears to be monotone across the full distribution of drug similarity.
   9
    Further, revenues are potentially mis-measured because we do not observe the presence of pharmaceutical rebates,
discounts given to buyers, relative to a drug’s listed price. These discounts are negotiated, and often depend on
whether a buyer can claim a credible alternative (e.g. a generic or close substitute). To the extent that novel drugs
are less likely to have substitutes, we may expect unobserved discounts for novel drugs to be smaller. This would
further bias us away from finding a positive relation between revenue and novelty.



                                                         11
Drug effectiveness

   Next, we consider how novelty correlates with drug effectiveness. To do so, we follow Kyle and
Williams (2017) and use the data from the French Haute Autorité de Santé (HAS), which assigns
scores based on drug’s clinical contributions. These value-added (Amélioration du Service Medical
Rendu, or ASMR) scores range from one to five (I to V), with V indicating no value added and I
indicating the highest improvement relative to existing drugs. We match our data on developed
drugs to their ASMR scores; the details are discussed in Appendix C.5.
   We find that novel drugs contribute greater clinical benefits. To see this, we estimate Equation (3),
where now the definition of the dependent variable is either the raw ASMR score, or a binary variable
that takes the value of one if the drug has been deemed of adding sufficient clinical value (ASMR
scores below a threshold). Column 2 of Table 2 reports results using our baseline specification,
which examines whether a drug is assigned a score less than V (denoting it has some clinical benefit)
and controls for the age of the drug, as measured by the launch year, company, and indication fixed
effects. Comparing drugs of the same age, launched by the same firm that treat the same indication,
a one-standard deviation increase in novelty is associated with a 5 percentage point increase in
the likelihood that a drug is classified as adding any value (ASMR<V). These magnitudes are
substantial, given that only 24 percent of drugs are classified as having any clinical value-added.
Panel B of Figure 4 provides a binned scatter plot. Appendix Table A.7 reports results using
additional specifications.


2.3   Novelty and Measures of Value for Drug Candidates

   We next turn our attention to the relation between novelty and value for all drug candidates,
regardless of whether they obtain FDA approval. To do so, we examine the characteristics of patents
that are related to more or less novel drug candidates. Drug companies aim to patent all molecules
that they suspect may have any pharmacological value. These patents are taken out very early in
the pre-clinical testing processes, generally long before serious development begins on a drug. As
such, measures of the economic value of a patent are likely informative of the ex-ante value of a
drug candidate.
   Measuring the economic value of a patent has received considerable attention in the literature.
Hall et al. (2005) argue that patent citations are significantly related to economic value, based on
the relation of firm valuation ratios and their patent portfolio. Harhoff, Narin, Scherer, and Vopel
(1999) and Moser, Ohmstedt, and Rhode (2011) provide complementary evidence regarding the
positive relation between patent citations and economic performance, and Abrams and Sampat
(2017) specifically documents a relation between citations to drug patents and various measures of


                                                  12
private and social value. Kogan et al. (2017) provides a direct estimate of the market value of a
patent based on the firm’s stock market reaction around a patent grant.
       We therefore focus on two patent-level outcomes: the number of forward citations and the Kogan
et al. (2017) contribution of the patent to the firm’s stock market value. We restrict our attention
to key patents—that is, patents that are issued prior to any FDA approval. These patents are
more likely to be related to a drug’s active ingredients, rather than to auxiliary innovations such as
a drug’s manufacturing or mechanism of delivery. We link drug candidates to patents using the
process described in Appendix C.6. The resulting dataset has information on 31,915 patents, out of
which 3,955 are issued by the USPTO and the rest are international patents.10 Since a drug may be
associated with multiple main patents, our analysis in this section is at the drug-indication-patent
level.


Patent citations

       We begin by examining citations received by patents associate with more or less novel drug
candidates. We estimate Equation (3) where now the dependent variable is equal to the logarithm
of (one plus) the number of citation a patent receives. Column 5 of Table 2 reports the results
from our most conservative specification, which includes controls for the year the patent is granted
interacted with the country where the patent is issued; the indication (ICD9) treated by the drug;
company and drug age (year of development) fixed effects. Panel C of Figure 4 provides a binned
scatter plot of the results. Panel A of Appendix Table A.8 examines how the choice of controls
impacts our results.
       We find that patents associated with novel drugs on average receive a larger number of forward
citations. The correlation between our measure is both statistically and economically significant.
Our estimates imply that a one-standard deviation increase in drug novelty is associated with a
increase of 0.15 patent citations, which is economically significant when evaluated at the median
number of citations a drug-related patent receives (2). As a robustness check, we replicate our
analysis by restricting attention to patents issued in the US. Panel B of Appendix Table A.8 displays
the full set of results. We find that, using the full set of controls, the relation between novelty
and future citations is statistically significant and comparable to the full sample: a one-standard
deviation increase in novelty is associated with 0.36 more citations—relative to the median of number
of citations in US patents in the sample (2). In this case, however, our estimates are sensitive to the
choice of controls: omitting firm dummies results in estimates that are not statistically significant
from zero.
  10
    We scrape priority dates and the citation data for these 31,915 patents from Google Patents. We extend the
analysis of Kogan et al. (2017) to all the US patents in our sample, which ends in September 2016.



                                                     13
Stock market reactions to patent grants

   As further evidence that novel drugs generate higher economic benefits in expectation, we next
examine the correlation between novelty and the Kogan et al. (2017) measure of patent values.
Because patent approval occurs early in a drug’s development, market reactions to patent approval
incorporate the likelihood that the drug candidate does not ultimately make it to market. Since
their measure is only available for publicly traded firms, we restrict attention to successful patent
applications to publicly listed US companies that appear in CRSP. This restriction reduces the
sample to 5,130 drug-patent-indication observations, corresponding to 231 firms and 701 drug
candidates. As before, we estimate a version of Equation (3), where now the dependent variable
is the logarithm of the estimated contribution to firm value. We use the same set of controls as
before. Column 6 of Table 2 reports the estimated coefficient b from our preferred specification
that includes the full set of controls. Panel F of Figure 4 shows the associated binned scatter plot;
Appendix Table A.9 reports estimates using different combinations of controls.
   In brief, we find that patents of novel drug candidates are likely to contribute more to firm
value than patents associated with me-too drugs. The economic magnitude of the estimated effects
is substantial: a one-standard deviation increase in novelty is associated with an approximately
9.8 percent increase in the (estimated) value of associated patents. Since these point estimates
incorporate the likelihood that the drug does not make it to market, they are considerably lower
than the ones in Section 2.2 which condition on drug approval (20 percent). Given that it is unlikely
that the patent office applies a higher threshold for patents associated with novel drugs, it is unlikely
that our estimates of value are biased upwards for novel drugs.


2.4   Discussion and Caveats

   Our results so far strongly suggest that novel drug candidates are riskier but higher expected
return investments. Further, novel drugs are more likely to be commercially successful conditional
on regulatory approval. However, given the difficulties associated with measuring value, several
important caveats are in order. First, it is possible that novel drugs are more expensive to develop.
In general, assessing the costs of development is difficult because we do not have access to internal
investment data and, furthermore, a large part of R&D spending is on scientific staff, who may work
on multiple projects. One potential (though noisy) proxy for development costs are the number
of patients enrolled in clinical trials and the number of trials associated with drugs. Since clinical
trials are so expensive, recruiting patients and running trials constitutes a substantial proportion of
a drug’s development cost. In Table A.10 and Figure A.8 in the Appendix, we consider how the
number of patients and number of trials associated to a compound vary by its chemical novelty. We


                                                   14
find no consistent relationship between these proxies of development cost and drug novelty. Further,
the stock market reaction to FDA approvals, or patent issues, should already incorporate production
costs.
   Second, the value of a drug candidate to the developing firm may also take into account its
impact on a firm’s future portfolio through the unobserved value of learning, even in the case when
a drug fails. However, it is likely that firms learn more from developing novel drugs, rather than
derivative ones. For example, working on more cutting edge science may allow a firm (and its key
talent) to gain skills more quickly, or learning that a newly hypothesized mechanism does not work
may allow the firm to more efficiently allocate research funds to other approaches, which may lower
the cost of future drug development. In these cases, our estimates would in fact understate the
relative value of investing in novel drug candidates, relative to derivative candidates.
   Comparing estimates of the value of patents associated with novel versus me-too drugs addresses
many of these criticisms. The contribution of a patent to firm value incorporates the likelihood that
the drug will be approved by the FDA; any benefits to the firm from drugs that are not approved;
and production and other costs associated with bringing the drug to market. However, one may
be concerned that our measures of patent value are estimated based on stock price movements. In
particular, the relation we document between patent values and drug novelty may be spurious if it
is driven by an unobservable firm characteristic that affects both the distribution of firm returns as
well as drug development choices.
   To verify that the link between novelty and patent values, we perform a series of placebo
experiments. In each placebo experiment, we randomly generate a different issue date for each
patent within the same year the patent is granted to the firm. We repeat this exercise 5,000 times
and then reconstruct the Kogan et al. (2017) measure using the placebo grant dates. In Appendix
Figure A.9, we plot the distribution of the t-statistics corresponding to the point estimate of the
relation between novelty and patent values, using the specification in Column 6 of Table 2. We see
that the distribution of t statistics across the placebo experiments is centered at zero. Our estimates
lie on the tail of the distribution; only 2.3 percent of the simulations produce estimates that are of
the same sign and greater statistical significance as ours. This suggests that it is unlikely that our
results are spurious.
   Keeping these caveats in mind, our estimates suggest that novel drug candidates are on average
more valuable investments than me-too candidates. While novel candidates are less likely to obtain
FDA approval, this is a diversifiable risk from the perspective of the firm’s shareholders, and should
therefore not influence firm investment decisions in a frictionless market. By contrast, our results
in Section 1.3 indicate that firms devote substantial resources toward developing drug candidates
that are derivative and that, in fact, the proportion of “me-too” drugs in development has been


                                                  15
steadily rising. This raises the question of why firms are behaving in this way. If novel drugs are
indeed more valuable, why do firms develop so many me-too drugs? One possibility is that novel
drug candidates are scarce and firms are already pursuing all valuable opportunities. Another view
is that excessive risk aversion—for instance, due to the presence of financial frictions—constrains
firms’ willingness to take risks and develop novel drug candidates. The next section explores this
idea more fully.


3     Cashflow Shocks and Drug Development

    We begin by discussing the channel through which shocks to firm cashflows affect drug devel-
opment decisions. We then outline our empirical strategy and document our findings on the link
between cashflow shocks and drug development decisions.


3.1   Theoretical framework

    In the absence of financial frictions, shocks to cashflows that are orthogonal to the firm’s
investment opportunities should have no effect on the firm’s drug development decisions. In such a
world, all drug candidates that are deemed (ex-ante) profitable should be undertaken; the firm’s net
worth or current cash reserves are irrelevant since the firm can raise external funds for all projects
at no additional cost. By now, the literature on corporate financing decisions has concluded that
this frictionless benchmark is not consistent with the data and has argued for the importance of
financial frictions (see, e.g. Kerr and Nanda, 2015, for a summary of the literature on financing
frictions and R&D).
    We present a simple, yet tractable, model of investment in (potentially) innovative drugs. The
goals of the model are twofold. First, it provides intuition about how the presence of financing can
lead firms to develop not only fewer drugs, but also even fewer novel drugs—relative to a frictionless
benchmark. Second, the model clarifies how firms drug development decisions may respond to a
cashflow shock. Our model builds on Bolton, Chen, and Wang (2011), which provide a tractable
framework to study dynamic investment, financing, and risk management decisions for financially
constrained firms in continuous time. To simplify exposition, we outline the main ingredients of the
model and then discuss its key predictors. All technical details are provided in Appendix B.


Model setup and solution

    Firms grow by developing new drugs. We denote the scale of the firm by K, which here can
be thought of as the firm’s customer base. Each period, with probability λ dt the firm gets an
opportunity to develop a new drug candidate. Drug candidates are characterized by their probability

                                                 16
of success p (e.g., their ex-ante likelihood of FDA approval) and their contribution to the firm’s
customer base (that is, their value) given by χ, conditional on approval. When a firm receives a
development opportunity, it draws a pair (p, χ) from a distribution G(p, χ). Given (p, χ), the firm
decides whether to develop the drug or not, I ∈ {0, 1}. Developing a drug costs f K. If developed,
the drug is approved with probability p. If the firm foregoes that opportunity, we assume that it
cannot pursue it in the future. The evolution of firm scale Kt is therefore given by

                                       dKt
                                           = χ It S̃ dNt − δ dt.                                    (4)
                                       Kt

Here, dNt is a Poisson variable with intensity λ dt that counts the number of opportunities the firm
has received in the past; S̃ is an random variable denoting drug success, with E[S̃|p, χ] = p. When
drugs are successful (S̃ = 1), the firm’s customer base increases proportionally by a factor χ. If
they are unsuccessful, there is no increase in the customer base; in either case, the firm’s customer
base depreciates at a rate δ.
   The firm’s flow operating revenue over an instant dt is given by Kt dAt , where dAt is an i.i.d.
shock to profits, that could arise either due to changes in productivity or demand,


                                          dAt = µ dt + σ dZt .                                      (5)


Here, Zt is a standard Brownian motion. The parameters µ and σ govern the mean, and volatility,
of the profitability shock dAt . Firm profits depend its scale of operations or customer base, Kt .
   The firm’s operating cashflows—revenue minus development costs—are therefore equal to


                                      dYt = Kt dAt − It f Kt dNt .                                  (6)


   Firms can fund drug development through accumulated cash or external financing. External
financing has a fixed and variable cost. First, to access finance, a firm needs to pay a cost equal to
Φt = φKt . Denote by Ht the firm’s cumulative external financing up to time t, and hence by dHt the
firm’s incremental external financing over time interval (t, t + dt). In addition to a fixed cost, there
is a marginal cost of external financing equal to γdHt . Similarly, let Xt denote the cumulative costs
of external financing up to time t, and dXt the incremental costs of raising incremental external
funds dHt . The cumulative external equity issuance H and the associated cumulative costs X are
stochastic controls chosen by the firm.
   Given our assumptions, the firm’s cash holdings evolve according to


                                dWt = dYt + (r − c)Wt dt + dHt − dUt ,                              (7)


                                                  17
where r − c is the return on the firm’s cash holdings, dHt is external financing, and dUt denotes
payments from the firm to investors.
   Finally, the firm makes investment and finance decisions to maximize its value to its owners,
                                    Z    ∞                                                   
         V (Wt , Kt ) = max Et               e−r(s−t) Ks dAs − Is f Ks dNs + (r − c)Ws ds −dXs ,
                          H,U,I      t                 |               {z               }
                                                                    dUs −dHs


subject to (4)–(5). That is, the firm is maximizing its net payout to investors after financing costs.
   Given our assumptions, the value of the firm can be written as

                                                                          Wt
                                  V (Wt , Kt ) = v(wt ) Kt ,       wt ≡      ,                        (8)
                                                                          Kt

where the function v(w) solves the Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman equation (B.9) in Appendix B.


Model predictions

   Given the form of the firm’s value function (8), the key variable that determines firm policies
is its cash holdings to scale ratio w. Figure 5 plots the level and the gradient of the firm’s value
function, v(w), as a function of w.
   We see that v(w) is concave for w ∈ [0, w̄], which implies that the firm exhibits risk aversion.
This concavity arises from the presence of external financing costs that the firm incurs when its cash
balances drop to zero. The firm internalizes this, and will therefore be reluctant to take risks that
increase the likelihood that it needs to raise costly finance in the future. Further, for w ∈ (0, w̄), the
marginal value of cash v 0 (w) exceeds one. This implies that when a firm with limited cash balances
will retain earnings, rather than paying dividends to investors. Firms does so because cash provides
them with the funds to invest in potential drugs without having to raise as much external capital.
At the point w = w̄ the firm has sufficient cash balances, so that it pays any amount of cash in
excess of w̄ as dividends to its shareholders. Because the firm raises cash at w = 0 and pays excess
cash at w = w̄, w will fall between 0 and w̄ in equilibrium.
   We next turn to drug development decisions. In a world without external financing costs, the
value of the firm is independent of its cash holdings, and therefore v(w) is constant and equal to v̄.
In that case, the firm will develop all drugs i whose expected payoff exceeds their development cost,


                                                   v̄ pi χi ≥ f.                                      (9)




                                                        18
By contrast, in the presence of financing frictions, the firm decision rule is given by
                                                    
                                            w−f
                       pi (1 + χi ) v                    + (1 − pi ) v (w − f ) − v(w) ≥ f.          (10)
                                            1 + χi

The first term is the firm’s new value function if its drug is approved, which it is with probability pi .
In the case it is not, with probability 1 − pi , the firm’s new value function is instead given by the
middle term. The last term, v(w) is simply the firm’s starting value.
   Comparing (10) to the frictionless case (9), yields three key insights which follow directly from
the concavity of v(w). First, the threshold for developing a new drug is higher in the presence of
frictions, so fewer drugs will be developed. Second, the left hand side of (10) is increasing in w: the
same drug is more likely to be developed at a firm with more cash than in a firm with less cash.
Last, this effect differs with the a drug’s probability of success pi —which summarizes its level of
risk. Holding constant a drug’s expected payoff pi χi , increases in riskiness (decreases in pi ), will
decrease a firm’s expected payoff. Thus, the firm will apply a higher threshold to riskier projects
than safer projects, even if a drug’s expected value is unchanged. The magnitude of this distortion
will decrease with the level of cash balances to firm scale, w
   Figure 6 illustrates these tradeoffs. In Panel A, we plot the acceptance threshold, as a function of
cash balances, for two drugs with the same expected value, p χ, but different levels of risk (captured
by the acceptance probability p). The blue line represents a safer drug, and the red line represents
a riskier one. First, we see that different firms will make different development decisions for the
same drug: firms with cash above a certain threshold wi will develop drug i, while those with cash
below this threshold will pass. Second, we see that the exact threshold differs for safe (m) versus
risky drugs (n). In particular, the safer drug has a lower acceptance threshold than the riskier drug,
wm < wn . That is, ceteris paribus, safer drugs are more likely to get funded than riskier drugs.
   Panel B illustrates the implications for the development threshold associated with more or less
risky drugs. The x-axis tracks a drug’s likelihood of success, with riskier drugs closer to the origin.
The y-axis tracks a drug’s expected value p χ. The lines plot how the firm’s threshold for investing
in a drug relates to the drug’s riskiness. In a frictionless world, firms apply the same threshold
regardless of risk: they will invest in all drugs whose expected value pχ exceeds a threshold that is
independent of their probability of success p. When firms face financing frictions, however, they
become sensitive to risk. Firms apply a higher threshold for risky drugs than for less risky drugs.
The overall level threshold is higher as well, indicating that fewer drugs get developed.
   Panels C and D illustrate how these frictions may impact the novelty of drugs that are developed.
To illustrate which predictions are robust, we consider two cases: one in which the distribution
of expected value among novel drugs is better, and one in which it is worse. Panel C illustrates


                                                            19
the case where novel drugs have higher expected value on average: the blue line represents less
novel drugs and the red line represents more novel ones. In a frictionless world, firms invest in
all drugs, novel or not, developing all drugs with expected value pχ to the right of the frictionless
benchmark v f b , equating the expected values of the marginal novel and not novel drug. When there
are financing frictions, however, firms impose a higher threshold v n for novel (which we have shown
to be more risky) drugs than for less novel v m (less risky) ones. The shaded blue area represents
less-novel drugs that are ‘missing,’ that is drugs that would have been developed in the absence of
financing frictions but which are not. Similarly, the shaded red area represents missing novel drugs.
Similarly, Panel D illustrates the same phenomenon under a different set of assumptions about the
distribution of expected value among novel and less novel drugs.
       What would happen if firms received more cash—that is, if w increases exogenously? This would
lead firms to decrease the threshold they apply for both novel and less novel drugs closer to the
frictionless benchmark v f b . This model makes two unambiguous predictions about how a firm facing
financing frictions will respond to cashflow shocks. First, it will develop weakly more novel drugs,
and weakly more me-too drugs. The model also predicts that the value of marginal novel drugs will
be higher than that of marginal derivative drugs. These predictions can be seen in Panels C and D:
in both cases, relaxing financial frictions will increase drug development, and the marginal novel
drug will always be weakly more valuable than the marginal non-novel drug because the acceptance
threshold for novel drugs is always weakly higher than for me-too drugs.
       The model, however, does not make general predictions about how an increase in cash would
impact the relative number of novel vs me-too drugs. In general, this would depend on the number
and distribution of potential candidates of each type. To see this, note that in Panel C, there would
be more marginal novel drugs than marginal me-too drugs, whereas the opposite is true in Panel
D. This means that the model does not make predictions about either the overall novelty or value
of the marginal drugs a firm invests in, relative to their inframarginal investments. Nevertheless,
as long as the distribution of potential drug candidates is not too different, we are likely to see a
greater increase among novel drug candidates.11
  11
    One such example is AbbVie, which had the world’s top selling drug (Humira) from 2012–2017. With the
profits from Humira, a biologic that sells for roughly $5,000 for a prescription, AbbVie made some big risky bets
in some notoriously difficult drug development areas. The company invested more than $200 million in an R&D
partnership with Alector to develop immunotherapies for Alzheimer’s disease, and another $250 million in a deal with
Google’s Calico to take on multiple new drugs in neurodegeneration and cancer. While these therapeutic areas are
undeniably huge, both partnerships are incredibly risky given the rough track record of developing drugs for neurological
diseases, and the relative inexperience of the partner companies.(https://www.fiercebiotech.com/partnering/updated-
abbvie-partners-google-s-calico-on-1-5b-r-d-operation-focused-on-aging, https://www.reuters.com/article/us-abbvie-
alzheimers/abbvie-bets-on-alzheimers-immunotherapy-with-big-biotech-deal-idUSKBN1CT1NT




                                                          20
Discussion of Modeling Assumptions

   The key assumption in the model is the presence of external costs of external finance. Theoretical
foundations for these frictions include asymmetric information (Myers and Majluf, 1984) or limited
enforcement (see e.g., Tirole, 2010, for a textbook treatment). Indeed, these frictions are likely to
be particularly relevant for pharmaceutical firms, given the likely information asymmetry between
the firm and outside investors regarding the potential of a new drug candidate, or the difficulty of
collateralizing intellectual property before its value has been proven (Hall and Lerner, 2010). The
central prediction of models with financing frictions is that such frictions induce risk averse behavior
on the part of firms (see, e.g. Froot et al., 1993). Firms want to avoid states of the world in which
they need to access costly external funds; a shock to either current or future profits makes such
states less likely—since firms will have a larger buffer of internal funds available tomorrow—and
therefore induces more risk-taking behavior on the part of firms.
   In the interest of tractability we have made some simplifying assumptions. These assumptions
allow us to illustrate the economic forces at play and are not driving our results.
   First, we assume that production and financing costs scale with firm size. This assumption
greatly simplifies the solution of the model—constant returns to scale imply that the only relevant
state variable for firm decisions is the firm’s cash balances to firm scale, w. In the absence of
constant returns, we would need to keep track of two state variables K and W separately, which
greatly complicates the solution of the model. This assumption does not affect the main implications
of the model: firms will be risk averse and discriminate against riskier (novel) drugs. Shocks to
firm net worth will ameliorate this risk aversion. Nevertheless, this discussion reveals that our
model will be not very useful in comparing the behavior of large versus small firms. A richer model
that relaxes the constant returns to scale assumption and allows for more firm heterogeneity—for
example, differences in firm investment opportunities (λ)—is an interesting extension of our model
that we leave for future work.
   Second, the model has i.i.d. shocks to firm profitability. This means that cashflow shocks in
our model are unanticipated, so that firms effectively respond to changes in current cash balances
induced by profit shocks. In our empirical analysis, our identifying variation will generate a shock
to expected future cashflows. The same intuition will continue to hold in this case: firms are risk
averse because they want to avoid states of issuing costly external finance in the future; a positive
shock to future cashflows makes those states of the world less likely and will therefore induces firms
to take on more risk, just as a shock to current cashflows would.




                                                  21
Model Interpretation

   The key economic mechanism that generates risk aversion in the model is that decision makers
wish to avoid states of the world in which project cashflows are low—even when these returns are
idiosyncratic. In the model described above, this result arises due to the presence of costly ‘external’
finance.
   Our notion of ‘internal’ versus ‘external’ capital allows for several interpretations. As we
discussed above, asymmetric information between a firm and its potential outside investors can
generate a wedge between the cost of financing a project with internal cashflows and the cost of
raising outside funds (Myers and Majluf, 1984). Here, the notion of internal versus external is
defined by the boundary of the firm. Our model, however, also applies to cases in which similar
boundaries exist within the firm. For instance, a senior manager in charge of cancer research may
be allocated a budget by firm headquarters; if she pursues a risky project that fails, she will have to
seek additional funds from headquarters to continue her division’s work. However, just as there
may be asymmetric information between a firm and the market, firms may not perfectly observe
the effort of their employees. Knowing this, a division manager may choose to pursue safer projects
to avoid states of the world in which she will have to explain failure to the CEO or members of the
board.
   More broadly, the presence of agency frictions within the firm may lead managers to choose
projects that maximize their own utility rather than the shareholder value of the firm. For example,
a firm’s senior managers may hold a significant fraction of their wealth in their own firm, and hence
be poorly diversified (see, e.g. Smith and Stulz, 1985). In this case, a positive shock to firm net
worth may lead to greater investment in (idiosyncratically) riskier projects—not by alleviating the
firm’s own risk aversion—but rather by reducing the effective risk aversion of the firm’s senior
managers.


3.2   Identification Strategy

   To identify the causal impact of a shock to firm cashflows on drug development, we exploit
the introduction of Medicare Part D, a provision of the 2003 Medicare Modernization Act that
expanded prescription drug coverage for elderly Americans to include prescription drugs taken at
home. Previous work has shown that the passage of Part D (and its implementation in 2006) led to
an increase in sales of drugs to elderly consumers, a decrease in their price, and an overall increase
in the market value of the firms that produce high elderly-share drugs (Lichtenberg and Sun, 2007;
Duggan and Scott Morton, 2010; Friedman, 2009). To identify a shock to cashfows we utilize an
additional source of pre-existing variation—the remaining life of a firm’s patents. In particular, the


                                                  22
extent to which a firm benefits from the introduction of Part D depends not only on the types of
drugs it sells (elderly share), but also on the amount of market exclusivity remaining on those drugs.
Our empirical strategy makes use of both these sources of variation in order to isolate the impact of
Part D that comes through a shock to a firm’s cashflows in particular.
       First, the extent to which firms benefit from Part D depends on whether its customers are in
the Medicare population. A firm with drugs for osteoporosis would expect an increase in cashflows
because Part D ensures that its potential customers will now be reimbursed for their purchase of its
products. By contrast, a firm that only sells drugs for pediatric conditions should not expect to see
an increase in sales, except possibly through secondary factors such as wealth effects. Following
previous work (Blume-Kohout and Sood, 2013; Duggan and Scott Morton, 2010; Dranove et al.,
2014), we use the notion of a “Medicare Market Share” (MMS) to quantify a drug’s exposure to the
Part D policy shock, which is a function of the fraction of sales to elderly customers. Throughout
the paper, we use the terms MMS and elderly share interchangeably. To construct drug MMS, we
match approved drugs in our primary Cortellis dataset to the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey
(MEPS), which contains drug–level information on sales by patient demographics. Appendix C.3
describes the matching process. We define a drug’s MMS as the share of revenues generated by
patients over 65 in 2003, just prior to the introduction of Part D. We then construct a firm–level
Medicare exposure by aggregating these drug–specific MMS values into Firm MMSf,2003 , which is
the firm-average of drug level MMS.
       Second, the extent to which firms benefit from Part D also depends on the amount of market
exclusivity remaining on their current drug portfolios. A drug’s exclusivity period is determined by
the amount of time remaining on its patents (generally 20 years from the filing date), as well as the
existence of any federally legislated FDA extensions to this term.12 Firms with greater remaining
exclusivity on their drugs in 2003 would expect to benefit more from the introduction of Part D,
because of their longer horizon for charging monopoly prices. To determine remaining exclusivity
for each firm’s drugs, we match drugs approved as of 2003 to their associated patents and, where
possible, link the drugs to their key patent expiration dates and FDA exclusivity extensions. We
then aggregate these drug-level measures to the firm level by defining a firm’s overall drug life,
Overall Drug Lifef,2003 , as the proportion of its approved drugs with long remaining exclusivity as
of 2003. Since our data on exclusivity periods is somewhat noisy, we minimize measurement error
  12
     The FDA will grant extensions on a drug’s market exclusivity period, beyond the relevant patent expiration
date, under a number of scenarios that are outlined in legislation (as opposed to extensions being negotiated with
firms on a case by case basis). For example, the Orphan Drug Act of 1983 incentivizes the development of drugs
for rare (“orphan”) diseases through different provisions, including a guarantee of seven years of market exclusivity.
Other legislation also sets aside market exclusivity for additional drug designations (e.g., five years for New Chemical
Entities, and six months for Pediatric Exclusivity). For more information on our drug-to-patent data and patent
expiration dates see the Online Appendix, Section C.6



                                                          23
using a cutoff rule. In our baseline results we define long exclusivity as 5, or more, years, which is
close to the median remaining life in our sample. Our results are robust to alternative cutoffs of 7
and 10 year thresholds, as shown in Appendix Table A.23.
    We incorporate both the elderly share and market exclusivity sources of variation into a new
firm–specific measure of exposure to Part D:
                                                                                       
                                        X  Drug MMSi,2003
         Medicare Drug Lifef,2003 =                         I(on patent in X yrs)i,2003           (11)
                                                                                        
                                          P
                                             Drug MMSj,2003
                                        i∈Af
                                               j∈A


Here, firm f ’s Medicare Drug Life in 2003 is defined as the proportion of its approved drugs (i ∈ Af )
with long remaining exclusivity as of 2003, weighted by their drug–level MMS. Firms with the
highest Medicare Drug Life are those with long exclusivity on high MMS drugs.
    We note that simply comparing high vs. low Medicare Drug Life firms does not isolate the
impact of expected cash flow. Firms with high Medicare Drug Life may change their investment
behavior following Part D for three reasons: a) they expect greater cashflows due to increased
demand for their existing drugs (this is the effect we would like to identify); b) they expect increased
returns to future investments (we call this the demand channel); and c) their future development
decisions differ not because of Part D, but because high Medicare Drug Life firms have a younger
portfolio of drugs in general, and so may differ in their taste for exploratory work because they are
at different points in the product development cycle. To isolate the first channel, we estimate the
following regression, which takes advantage of variation in Medicare Drug Life, holding constant a
firm’s overall elderly share and its overall drug life:


              New Drug Candidatesf t = a0 + a1 Post × Medicare Drug Lifef,2003                     (12)
                                               +a2 Post × Overall Drug Lifef,2003
                                               +a3 Post × Firm MMSf,2003 + δf + δt + ef t


Our main coefficient of interest is a1 , which captures the cashflow impact of our main treatment
variable defined in Equation (11). We control for an interactions with the post Part D period
for both Overall Drug Life and Firm MMSf,2003 . In our baseline specification we include firm-
and quarter-dummies to account for unobservable firm differences and aggregate trends in drug
development. In addition, we also estimate a specification with company-specific linear time trends
(see Table A.20 in the Appendix), to ensure that our results are not driven by pre-existing trends.
To account for possible serial correlation in unobservables, we cluster standard errors at the firm
level.


                                                     24
    In Equation (12), our identifying variation for a1 comes from firms that have the same share
of elderly drugs, and the same overall remaining market exclusivity but which differ in how this
remaining exclusivity is allocated across high and low elderly share drugs. To see this, consider a
simple example. There are two firms, A and B, both with two approved drugs, one with a high
MMS of 0.75 (drug H) and another with a low MMS of 0.50 (drug L). Both firms have one drug
that will expire soon and another that will not. Since both firms have the same Firm MMS and the
same overall drug life, they are predicted to experience similar demand-induced increases in their
incentive to develop drugs for the elderly and they are at the same part of their drug development
cycle, as proxied by remaining exclusivity on their approved drugs. However, suppose that these
firms differ in which of its drugs will remain on patent: drug HA for Firm A, but drug LB for Firm
B. In this case, despite their other similarities, we would intuitively expect Firm A to receive a
greater cashflow shock as a result of Part D because its high MMS drug is the one that will remain
on patent. This is what the identifying variation in Equation (12) is based on: holding constant
                                                                               75            50
firm MMS and Overall Drug Life, Firm A’s Medicare Drug Life is               75+50   × 1 + 75+50 × 0 = 0.6, while
                75             50
Firm B’s is   75+50   ×0+    75+50   × 1 = 0.4.13
    Before continuing, we note that this empirical strategy requires that we observe the MMS and
remaining exclusivity of a firm’s marketed drugs, as of 2003. As a result, the firms in this analysis
tend to be larger and more established than the full set of firms we observe when we examined
the characteristics of novel drugs in Section 2.2. The type of selection can be seen in Table 1: our
original sample included over 12,000 drug candidates from 3,108 firms while our cashflow analysis
sample consists of approximately 6,000 candidates from 270 firms. This sample change is explained
by the fact that many firms in our descriptive sample have never had a successful approved drug;
indeed, 1,525 firms have only one drug candidate. By contrast, our sample restrictions do not
significantly impact the number of approved drugs that we observe: 356 out of 392 approved drugs
are represented in this cashflow analysis sample, consistent with the intuition that our empirical
strategy selects for larger, more established firms.14
  13
     Table 3 describes the distribution of this main treatment variable. The median firm has a Medicare Drug Life of
0.54 but most firms have a value of either zero or one. This is because many firms have only one approved drug on
the market as of 2003, so that their treatment values can only be 0 or 1. Appendix Figure A.10 shows a smoother
distribution of Medicare Drug Life for firms with non extremal values and we show in Appendix Tables A.22 and A.26
that our results are robust to restricting to this subsample, or to using a binary treatment measure.
  14
     The descriptives that we report in Section 2.2 continue to hold for drugs associated with firms in our cashflow
analysis sample. Indeed, our analysis on the relationship between novelty and measures of value for approved drugs is
largely the same because 90 percent of these drugs are associated with firms in our natural experiment sample.




                                                         25
3.3      Results

       Table 3 contains summary statistics of our dataset at the company–quarter level. The average
firm in our sample has 0.55 new drug candidates per quarter, but the data are highly skewed: most
firms do not have a new drug candidate under development every quarter. This implies that the
outcome variables for our analysis will be zero in most company–quarters. We therefore use the
logarithm of one plus the number of new, or the number of novel drugs, as our primarily outcome
measures. In the Appendix, we show that our findings are robust to using alternative specifications,
including count models (see A.21).


New Candidates

       Table 4 examines the causal impact of a financial shock, as described in Equation (12), on the
total number new drug candidates under development by our sample firms. Columns 1 to 3 focus on
the count of new candidates; Columns 4 to 6 focus on the logarithm of one plus the number of new
candidates, which is our preferred outcome measure. Column 4 presents our estimates with only
the main treatment variable and the company and time fixed effects. The estimated coefficient a1 is
equal to 0.06 and statistically significant. Looking at Columns 5 and 6, we find that controlling for
overall drug life and firm MMS increases the overall magnitude of our estimate (0.268 and 0.263,
respectively). The negative coefficient on Post × Overall Drug Lifef,2003 indicates that firms with
a newer set of drugs as of 2003 proceed to introduce fewer new candidates into development in
the post Part D period, suggesting that controlling for differences in firm development cycles is
important. Perhaps surprisingly, the inclusion of Post × Firm MMSf,2003 in Column 6 does not
materially affect our point estimates, suggesting that (in our sample) demand effects do not appear
to increase development separately from cash flow effects.15 For the remainder of our analysis, we
use Column 6 as our baseline specification.
       The estimated magnitudes are economically substantial. Focusing on Column 6, we can infer
that a one standard deviation (0.41) increase in the main treatment variable leads to an 11 percent
increase in the number of new drug candidates. This corresponds to an elasticity of output to
treatment of 0.40.16 In Section 3.6, we translate these magnitudes in terms of dollars for a subset of
our firms.
  15
      This finding may differ from drug market-level estimates of the impact of demand on innovation because our
firm–level analysis does not capture the innovation impact of entry by new firms.
   16
      To arrive at this figure, we note that for a regression of the form log(1 + y) = bx + e, the elasticity is given by
b × 1+y
      xy
         , where we evaluate at the mean of Medicare exposure in 2003 (0.54) and at the mean of drug output overall
(0.55).




                                                           26
Novelty of New Candidates

   Next, we examine the novelty of the marginal drug candidates that are developed as a result of
the cash flow shock we identify. Panel A of Figure 7 reports estimates of Equation (12) where the
outcome variable is the number of drug candidates with a given similarity score. We see that the
greatest increase in new candidates comes from an increase in candidates with maximum similarity
scores between 0.3 and 0.6. We see no increase in very similar (me-too) candidates, defined as those
with chemical similarity greater than 0.9. We also do not see increases in the number of drugs with
similarity below 0.3, perhaps because fewer than 8 percent of candidates have novelty scores in that
range (see Table 1).
   Since the number of drugs in each bin does vary, we also report the estimates across novelty
deciles in Panel B of Figure 7. Again, we see that the increase in overall drug development that we
document is driven by relatively more novel drugs. The response for highly similar drugs, those in
the top quintile of similarity, are smaller in magnitude and not statistically different from zero.
   Taken together, our findings are consistent with the presence of financing frictions in drug
development, as described by our model, or as in other models such as Froot et al. (1993). We see
that a relaxing of financing concerns increases total drug development and, in particular, leads to
the development of more novel drugs. Interestingly, we do not find an increase in the development of
more me-too drugs, even though our model allows for the possibility that firms may invest in these
types of drugs as well. Our finding therefore suggests something about the shape of the distribution
of potential drugs available to them, as schematically illustrated in Panels C and D of Figure 6. At
least at the margin of the cashflow shock we identify, it appears that the number of “missing” novel
drugs is substantially greater than the number of missing me-too drugs.


Event Studies

   One potential source of concern is that the differences in responses among the treatment and
control group reflect pre-existing trends. To address this concern, Figures 8 and 9 show how the
estimated effect of the cashflow shock on the number of new and novel drugs, respectively, vary
over time. Focusing on Figure 8, we see that firms with different values of Medicare Drug Lifef,2003
appear to be on parallel trends prior to the introduction of Part D. This suggests that their
development opportunities and patterns were largely similar prior to the policy. Following that,
firms with high exposure begin to increase their drug output relative to firms with lower exposure
starting in 2004, and this increase in drug development appears persistent. Similarly, Figure 9
shows that the number of drugs in the bottom three quartiles of similarity (shown in the top two
panels and bottom left panel) increases following the introduction of Part D. By contrast, we see


                                                 27
no such increase in output for the most chemically derivative drugs. To address any remaining
concerns about preexisting trends, Appendix Table A.20 also shows that our main results are robust
to including company-year-quarter linear trends.
       In Figure 9, we also observe a small increase in the number of new and novel drug candidates
starting in 2004, even though Part D did not go into effect until January 1, 2006, suggesting that
firms’ development decisions were responsive to positive shocks to net worth arising form higher
expectations of future cashflows.17 The fact that firms can quickly alter their development pipeline is
not particularly surprising for our sample of firms, those with an approved drug in 2003. Since these
firms are more established, they likely have a stock of potential drug candidates in the discovery
phases of development at any given point in time. Indeed, the majority of drug candidates that
entered development in 2004 or 2005 are based on at least one patent application that was filed
prior to the introduction of Medicare Part D in late 2003 (86 and 66 percent, respectively).
       In addition to developing new candidates, treated firms may also advance existing drug candidates
to later stages of development, and the timing of these responses may differ by stage: pre-clinical,
Phase 1, Phase 2, and Phase 3. Figure 10 plots event studies for the impact of cashflow on the
number of new drug candidates entering each stage of development. We find the largest and
most immediate response for drugs entering pre-clinical development. We find smaller–and more
delayed–impacts on the number of new drugs entering Phase 1, and even more delayed results for
Phase 2, where we don’t find any significant changes until 2012. These patterns are consistent with
treated firms engaging in more early stage experimentation—knowing that the bulk of development
costs are only incurred in later phases, and only for candidates that end up showing promise. Indeed,
the delayed increase in Phase 1 and Phase 2 trials that we see may in part reflect the later success
of some of the earlier stage investments that we observe initially.


3.4      What types of drugs do firms develop?

       A natural next step is to further examine the types of drugs that firms develop, and how these
new drugs fit into firms’ existing portfolios.
  17
     The model in Section 3 has i.i.d. cashflow shocks. However, the same intuition applies if firms were anticipating a
shock to future profits: firms would internalize that the likelihood that they need to raise costly external finance would
fall, which would imply that they are more willing to take risks today. Further, some firms may have seen actual
cashflow increases earlier than 2006, as a result of Medicare’s Drug Discount and Transitional Assistance Programs,
which operated from 2004 to 2006. These programs spent about $1.5 billion over an 18 month time period (Huh and
Reif, 2017).




                                                           28
Portfolio diversification

   If risk aversion is an important determinant of drug development decisions, then we would expect
firms to take steps to reduce the overall risk of their drug portfolio. In particular, firms receiving a
cashflow shock may want to use these marginal funds to help diversify its existing portfolio of drugs.
   Our empirical results support this prediction. Table 5 considers how these new drugs relate to
the firm’s existing portfolio of drug investments. Columns 1 and 2 focus on how new candidates
compare to a firm’s existing candidates on the basis of what disease indication they focus on. Column
1 shows that increased resources lead firms to develop drugs for indications for which they have
not developed candidates in the past. A one standard deviation (0.41) increase in Medicare Drug
Life increases the number of candidates in indications new to a firm by about 7 percent. Similarly,
Column 2 shows that firms receiving a larger Medicare shock reduce the concentration of indications
that they focus on, as measured by a decreasing indication–specific within–firm Herfindahl. Columns
3 and 4 show that firms also diversify their portfolios by investing in drugs with different biological
targets.


Drug development across patient age groups

   A potential concern with our empirical design is that firms which experience a greater shock to
their net worth as a result of Medicare Part D may also experience a greater increase in investment
opportunities arising from increased demand for elderly share drugs. If our identification strategy is
not fully successful in isolating a cashflow shock from increased demand for new drugs covered by
Part D, then we would expect the increase in drug development that we observe to be driven by an
increase in drugs that target elderly patients (high MMS drugs).
   We find that this is not the case. Although we identify an expected cashflow shock that comes
from an expansion of coverage for elderly patients, we find that firms respond to this increase by
developing new drugs for patients of all ages. In Panel A of Table 6, we split our outcome variable
(log of one plus number of new compounds) by the quartile of Medicare market share (MMS) that
the new drugs fall into. Comparing the elasticities across Columns 1 through 4, we see that firms
are equally responsive in developing drugs across all MMS quartiles. In Panel B, we narrow our
focus on drugs that are explicitly targeted toward younger consumers, an area that definitely did
not experience any demand shock as a result of Medicare Part D. In Columns 1 and 2, we show
that treated firms increase their development of drugs for conditions in which fewer than 5 or 10
percent of patients are elderly. In Column 3, we consider the development of drugs for pediatric
conditions—those defined as indications for which an above median share of drug trials require
enrollees to be newborns, infants, pre-school aged children, or simply just children. Column 4


                                                  29
expands this definition to include indications in which drug trials often explicitly require adolescents
or young adults. In all cases, we observe a relative increase in development for more treated firms.
   One may be concerned that increases in cashflows may spur additional development, but only
increases in demand lead to investments in innovation. Table 7 shows that this is not the case.
Examining Panels A through C, we see that firms respond to increased net worth by developing more
novel—as opposed to “me-too”—drugs for the non-elderly market: we consistently see more novel
drugs for below median MMS conditions, pediatric conditions, and conditions primarily afflicting
children and young adults. The overall shift toward more novel drugs that we observe is therefore
not driven solely by innovation in high elderly share categories.
   Collectively, these results indicate that financial frictions lead to missing drugs—in particular,
missing novelty—across a broad array of patient groups. The fact that firms are developing new
drugs that target younger patients, and not just drugs in the market that experienced a positive
demand shock as a result of Medicare Part D, further indicates that our identification strategy is at
least partially successful in isolating a shock to the profitability of current assets from a shock to
firms’ investment opportunities.


3.5   Firm Heterogeneity

   We next examine how the impact of cashflows on drug development decisions varies across firms.
One might expect firms that are more financially constrained are more responsive. It is important
to note, however, that identifying which firms are likely to be financially constrained is challenging
(Farre-Mensa and Ljungqvist, 2016). Financial constraints are a function both of a firm’s financing
cost, and of its investment opportunities. Hence, financial frictions may not matter for some small
firms because they have no investment opportunities. Conversely, financial frictions may be more
salient for certain large public firms with valuable investment opportunities. Further, a firm’s
cash holdings are (partly) a choice variable; large cash holdings may indicate that firms are less
constrained, but they may also be an endogenous response on the part of firms that are constrained.
As such, neither size nor the level of cash holdings are likely to be appropriate measures of financial
constraints.
   With these caveats in mind, we explore whether a given dollar increase in cashflows is likely
to be more relevant for firms that had low prior profits than for firms with high prior profits. As
a proxy for prior profitability, we create a measure of the firms’ total revenues generated by drug
candidates that are approved prior to 2003. We then estimate Equation (12) separately across the
firms that are below or above the median prior firm revenue in 2003.




                                                  30
    Table 8 presents the results. We see that the estimated coefficient a1 on the main treatment
effect is statistically significant for the firms with low prior revenue (Column 3). For the firms with
higher past revenue (Column 2), the point estimates are larger, but less precisely estimated. In
terms of elasticities, firms with low past revenue display a larger response: a one percent increase in
the main treatment variable is associated with a 0.64 vs 0.30 percentage increase in the number of
drug candidates across low- and high-revenue firms, respectively. By contrast, we find no meaningful
differences in the impact of cashflows between these two sets of firms on their propensity to develop
novel vs me-too drugs—see Appendix Figure A.12.
    In sum, we find that firms with low past revenues are more sensitive to the treatment than
firms with high past revenues—though the difference is not statistically significant. These results,
however, should be interpreted with caution because our measure of firm size conflates prior revenue
with firm experience. More experienced firms likely have more opportunities to develop novel drugs
than less experienced firms. Thus, the lack of differential response of across the two sets of firms
is not particularly surprising; there is simply not enough variation in the data to separate past
cashflows from investment opportunities.


3.6    Magnitudes

    Our analysis so far has been qualitative in nature. Our central finding is that a one standard
deviation change in pre-Part D Medicare drug life leads to an 11 percent percent increase in the
development of new and novel drugs. To assess the magnitude of this effect and benchmark it to
the existing literature, we need to express our estimates in terms of the implied elasticity of drug
development with respect to firm R&D spending. Hence, we need a measure of how much firm
resources increase as a result of this policy.
    To assess the response of R&D investment to our main treatment variable, we match the public
firms in our data to Compustat North America and Compustat Global. We are able to match
approximately 50 percent of our sample firms. For these firms, we estimate our main specification,
as defined by Equation (12), but with the log of firm profits and R&D spending as dependent
variables. These results are reported in Table 9. Columns 1 and 2 show that firms with higher
Medicare Drug Life in 2003 experienced higher growth in R&D and operating cashflows in the years
following treatment.18
   18
      Columns 3 and 4 examine whether treated firms responded by increasing their borrowing—an alternative
explanation for why firms appeared to increase their drug development before Part D cashflows were realized. Our
point estimates suggest this may be the case, but our coefficients are too noisily estimated to conclude that the
response is different from zero. Part of this may be due to the possibility the fact that pharmaceutical firms are
significantly less likely than other firms to use debt financing (see, e.g. Table A.1 in Appendix) given the relative
difficulty of collateralizing their IP.




                                                         31
    These results can be used to compute the elasticity of drug development with respect to firm
R&D spending. Using the point estimate (0.98) from Column 1 multiplied by the mean of treatment
exposure in the pre-period (0.54) yields an elasticity of treatment exposure to R&D expenditure of
0.53. If a one percent increase in treatment leads to both a 0.53 percent increase in R&D and a
0.40 percent increases in drug output, this suggests an elasticity of output to R&D of 0.75. If we
apply this same calculation to our analysis by novelty bins, we find an elasticity of output to R&D
of about 1.01 and 1.59 for drugs in the top 1 and 2 deciles of novelty, respectively, compared to an
elasticity of 0.02 and 0.31 for the top 1 and 2 deciles of similarity, respectively. These magnitudes
are broadly consistent with the literature.19


3.7    Additional Results and Robustness

    Here, we provide a brief description of some additional results. We refer the reader to Appendix
D for remaining robustness and specification checks.
    In Section 3.3 we showed that firms that experienced an increase in cashflows developed more
novel drugs. A natural question is whether these new candidates were developed in-house or acquired
by another firm. We find that the increase in development we see is primarily accounted for by
an increase in in-house development, rather than acquisitions (Table A.12 and Figure A.14 in
the Appendix). Further, we find that larger firms account for the majority of the marginal drugs
developed as a result of a finance shock, but, in looking at elasticities we find that smaller firms are
just as, if not more, responsive (Table A.15 and Figure A.15 in the Appendix). In interpreting this
result, we caution that our results cannot be fully extrapolated to the smallest pharmaceutical and
biotechnology firms because our sample is limited to firms that had an approved drug on the market
in 2003 (these are the firms for which we can calculate our key variable, Medicare Drug Life).
    Next, we examine the robustness of our main results across several dimensions. First, our
measures focus on chemical similarity as measured by Tanimoto scores. A limitation of this approach
   19
      There are several caveats to this analysis. Because some of our firms include large conglomerates (for instance
firms such as Dow Chemical), our R&D figures include spending on sectors that may not be related to pharmaceuticals.
More generally, we caution that while we estimate a causal impact of Medicare exposure on drug output, we cannot
say that we estimate the associated productivity of R&D spending because lags between R&D expenditure and
final commercial output are difficult to predict when it comes to drug innovation. With those considerations in
mind, our benchmark elasticity estimate is consistent with the range of estimates that exist in the literature. For
instance, Henderson and Cockburn (1996), examine determinants of research productivity in the pharmaceutical
sector. They find elasticities of R&D with respect to “important” patents of about 0.4 to 0.5. If firms are more
responsive to their own spending, we would expect private elasticities to be greater than public elasticities. More
recently, Azoulay, Graff-Zivin, Li, and Sampat (2016) estimate the casual impact of public investments in biomedical
research on patenting and drug development by private firms and find elasticities of approximately 0.4–0.6. Dubois,
de Mouzon, Scott-Morton, and Seabright (Dubois et al.) uses variation in demographic trends, and finds a smaller
elasticities of innovation to market size of 0.23. We may find a larger impact in part because the increase in novel drug
development that we document may reflect the development of pre-existing research ideas—which were unexplored by
choice (for instance, due to risk aversion).



                                                          32
is that it can only be applied to small molecule drugs, and not to more complex biological entities,
known as biologics, which make up a smaller fraction of pharmaceutical output but which have been
a growing area of R&D focus. If we were to find that our shock leads to decreases in biologic output,
this would complicate our finding that access to financial resources increase novelty. In Table A.18
in the Appendix, we show that this is not the case: more treated firms, especially those who have
developed biologics prior to Part D, increase their biologic output more relative to less treated firms.
In Table A.19, we also look at alternative measures of novelty based on a hierarchical classification
used to classify drugs’ molecular targets. These less precise alternative novelty definitions also yield
qualitatively similar results: more treated firms disproportionately increase their investments in
novel drugs.


4    Conclusion

    We introduce a new measure of drug novelty based on molecular structure and investigate
firms’ decisions to develop novel vs. derivative drug candidates. Our analysis of the economic
characteristics of novel drug candidates indicates that firms face a risk-reward tradeoff when deciding
whether to pursue more exploratory research. Novel candidates are less likely to be approved by the
FDA but, across a range of measures, appear to be better investments ex-ante (based on proxies
for the value of their underlying patents) and ex-post, if they are approved (based on measures of
clinical value-added and private market returns).
    In the second part of the paper, we show that—contrary to models of investment without
financial frictions—firms experience greater shocks to their net worth respond by developing more
drugs in general and more novel drugs in particular. These marginal drugs target a range of
conditions—including pediatric conditions—and are not simply a response to an increase in demand
for elderly drugs. Our results suggest that increased cashflows lead to more innovation by reducing
firms’ effective risk aversion, and therefore enabling them to invest in high-value exploratory research.
Because novel drugs are based on more valuable patents ex-ante, our results are less consistent with
a model in which managers or firms spend additional resources on wasteful empire building.
    Overall, our results suggest that risk aversion arising from financial frictions leads firms to invest
too conservatively, resulting in a pattern of missing novelty across a variety of research areas. By
proposing a specific mechanism—risk aversion—we also point to a wider array of potential policy
responses. Specifically, rather than supporting policies that increase pharmaceutical profits, our
paper lends support for policies that alter the relative risk/reward tradeoff associated with investing
in novel vs. me-too drugs. For example, creating larger portfolios of drug candidates may allow
firms to bear more idiosyncratic risk by decreasing aggregate risk. Such an idea has been suggested


                                                   33
by Fernandez et al. (2012) and is also similar to the strategies of venture capital firms, who are able
to invest in and encourage risk taking in small biotech firms because this risk is part of a larger
portfolio of investments. Our results also lends support to efforts to encourage innovation by either
increasing the risks or lowering the benefit associated with developing derivative drugs—for example
by limiting reimbursement for drugs that show little value relative to existing treatments. Our
paper therefore points toward a variety of avenues for future research.



References
Abrams, D. and B. Sampat (2017). What’s the value of patent citations? evidence from pharmaceuticals.
 Working Paper .

Acemoglu, D. and J. Linn (2004). Market size in innovation: Theory and evidence from the pharmaceutical
  industry. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 119 (3), 1049–1090.

Almeida, H., M. Campello, B. Laranjeira, and S. Weisbenner (2011). Corporate Debt Maturity and the Real
  Effects of the 2007 Credit Crisis. Critical Finance Review 1, 3–58.

Azoulay, P., J. Graff-Zivin, D. Li, and B. Sampat (2016). Public r&d investments and private-sector patenting:
  Evidence from nih funding rules.

Backman, T. W. H., Y. Cao, and T. Girke (2011, 05). Chemmine tools: an online service for analyzing and
  clustering small molecules. Nucleic Acids Research 39 (suppl 2), W486–W491.

Baldi, P. and R. Nasr (2010, 07). When is chemical similarity significant? the statistical distribution of
  chemical similarity scores and its extreme values. Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling 50 (7),
  1205–1222.

Benmelech, E., C. Frydman, and D. Papanikolaou (2017, March). Financial frictions and employment during
  the great depression. Working Paper 23216, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Berndt, E. R., I. M. Cockburn, and K. A. Grépin (2006). The impact of incremental innovation in
  biopharmaceuticals. PharmacoEconomics 24 (2), 69–86.

Bickerton, G. R., G. V. Paolini, J. Besnard, S. Muresan, and A. L. Hopkins (2012, 02). Quantifying the
  chemical beauty of drugs. Nat Chem 4 (2), 90–98.

Bloom, N., C. I. Jones, J. V. Reenen, and M. Webb (2017). Are ideas getting harder to find? working paper,
  Stanford University.

Blume-Kohout, M. E. and N. Sood (2013). Market size and innovation: Effects of medicare part d on
  pharmaceutical research and development. Journal of Public Economics 97, 327 – 336.

Bolton, P., H. Chen, and N. Wang (2011). A unified theory of tobin’s q, corporate investment, financing, and
  risk management. The Journal of Finance 66 (5), 1545–1578.

Bond, S., D. Harhoff, and J. van Reenen (2005). Investment, r&d and financial constraints in britain and
  germany. Annals of Economics and Statistics (79-80), 433–460.

Brown, J. R., S. M. Fazzari, and B. C. Petersen (2009). Financing innovation and growth: Cash flow, external
  equity, and the 1990s r&d boom. The Journal of Finance 64 (1), 151–185.




                                                     34
Budish, E., B. N. Roin, and H. Williams (2015, July). Do firms underinvest in long-term research? evidence
  from cancer clinical trials. American Economic Review 105 (7), 2044–85.

Chodorow-Reich, G. (2014). The employment effects of credit market disruptions: Firm-level evidence from
  the 2008-09 financial crisis. Quarterly Journal of Economics 129 (1), 1–59. Lead article.

DiMasi, J. and R. Chakravarthy (2016). Competitive development in pharmacologic classes: Market entry
  and the timing of development. Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics 100 (6), 754–760.

DiMasi, J. A. and L. B. Faden (2010). Competitiveness in follow-on drug r&d: A race or imitation? Nature
  Reviews Drug Discovery 10 (23).

DiMasi, J. A. and L. B. Faden (2011, 01). Competitiveness in follow-on drug r&d: a race or imitation? Nat
  Rev Drug Discov 10 (1), 23–27.

DiMasi, J. A., H. G. Grabowski, and R. W. Hansen (2016). Innovation in the pharmaceutical industry: New
  estimates of r&d costs. Journal of Health Economics 47, 20 – 33.

DiMasi, J. A. and C. Paquette (2004, Oct). The economics of follow-on drug research and development.
  PharmacoEconomics 22 (2), 1–14.

Dranove, D., C. Garthwaite, and M. Hermosilla (2014). Breakthrough or me-too? the impact of medicare
  part d on biotech innovation.

Dubois, P., O. de Mouzon, F. Scott-Morton, and P. Seabright. Market size and pharmaceutical innovation.
 The RAND Journal of Economics 46 (4), 844–871.

Duggan, M. and F. Scott Morton (2010, March). The effect of medicare part d on pharmaceutical prices and
  utilization. American Economic Review 100 (1), 590–607.

Dumas, B. (1991). Super contact and related optimality conditions. Journal of Economic Dynamics and
 Control 15 (4), 675 – 685.

Duygan-Bump, B., A. Levkov, and J. Montoriol-Garriga (2015). Financing constraints and unemployment:
  Evidence from the Great Recession. Journal of Monetary Economics 75 (C), 89–105.

Farre-Mensa, J. and A. Ljungqvist (2016). Do measures of financial constraints measure financial constraints?
  The Review of Financial Studies 29 (2), 271–308.

Fernandez, J.-M., R. M. Stein, and A. W. Lo (2012, 10). Commercializing biomedical research through
  securitization techniques. Nature Biotechnology 30 (10), 964–975.

Friedman, J. (2009). The incidence of the medicare prescription drug benefit: Using asset prices to assess its
   impact on drug makers.

Froot, K. A., D. S. Scharfstein, and J. C. Stein (1993, December). Risk Management: Coordinating Corporate
  Investment and Financing Policies. Journal of Finance 48 (5), 1629–58.

Frydman, C., E. Hilt, and L. Y. Zhou (2015). Economic effects of runs on early ”shadow banks”: Trust
  companies and the impact of the panic of 1907. Journal of Political Economy 123 (4), 902 – 940.

Gordon, R. (2016). The Rise and Fall of American Growth: The U.S. Standard of Living since the Civil War.
  The Princeton Economic History of the Western World. Princeton University Press.

Hall, B. H., A. B. Jaffe, and M. Trajtenberg (2005). Market value and patent citations. The RAND Journal
  of Economics 36 (1), pp. 16–38.

Hall, B. H. and J. Lerner (2010). Chapter 14 - the financing of r&d and innovation. In B. H. Hall and
  N. Rosenberg (Eds.), Handbook of The Economics of Innovation, Vol. 1, Volume 1 of Handbook of the
  Economics of Innovation, pp. 609 – 639. North-Holland.

                                                     35
Harhoff, D., F. Narin, F. M. Scherer, and K. Vopel (1999). Citation frequency and the value of patented
  inventions. The Review of Economics and Statistics 81 (3), 511–515.

Henderson, R. and I. Cockburn (1996). Scale, scope, and spillovers: The determinants of research productivity
  in drug discovery. The RAND Journal of Economics 27 (1), 32–59.

Hochberg, Y. V., C. J. Serrano, and R. H. Ziedonis (2016). Patent collateral, investor commitment, and the
  market for venture lending.

Hombert, J. and A. Matray (2017). The real effects of lending relationships on innovative firms and inventor
  mobility. The Review of Financial Studies 30 (7), 2413–2445.

Huh, J. and J. Reif (2017). Did medicare part d reduce mortality? Journal of Health Economics 53 (Supplement
  C), 17 – 37.

Johnson, M. A. and G. M. Maggiora (1990). Concepts and applications of molecular similarity. Wiley.

Jones, B. F. (2009). The burden of knowledge and the ”death of the renaissance man”: Is innovation getting
  harder? The Review of Economic Studies 76 (1), 283–317.

Jones, B. F. (2010). Age and great invention. The Review of Economics and Statistics 92 (1), 1–14.

Kerr, W. R. and R. Nanda (2015). Financing innovation. Annual Review of Financial Economics 7 (1),
  445–462.

Kogan, L., D. Papanikolaou, A. Seru, and N. Stoffman (2017). Technological innovation, resource allocation,
  and growth*. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 132 (2), 665–712.

Kyle, M. and H. L. Williams (2017, January). Is american health care uniquely inefficient? evidence from
  prescription drugs. Working Paper 23068, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Lanthier, M., K. L. Miller, C. Nardinelli, and J. Woodcock (2013). An improved approach to measuring drug
  innovation finds steady rates of first-in-class pharmaceuticals, 1987–2011. Health Affairs 32 (8), 1433–1439.
  PMID: 23918488.

Lichtenberg, F. R. and S. X. Sun (2007). The impact of medicare part d on prescription drug use by the
  elderly. Health Affairs 26 (6), 1735–1744.

Light, D. W. and J. R. Lexchin (2012). Pharmaceutical research and development: what do we get for all
  that money? BMJ 345.

Maggiora, G., M. Vogt, D. Stumpfe, and J. Bajorath (2014, 04). Molecular similarity in medicinal chemistry.
 Journal of Medicinal Chemistry 57 (8), 3186–3204.

Mann, W. (2016). Creditor rights and innovation: Evidence from patent collateral.

Moser, P., J. Ohmstedt, and P. Rhode (2011). Patents, citations, and inventive output - evidence from hybrid
 corn.

Myers, S. C. and N. S. Majluf (1984). Corporate financing and investment decisions when firms have
 information that investors do not have. Journal of Financial Economics 13 (2), 187–221.

Naci, H., A. W. Carter, and E. Mossialos (2015). Why the drug development pipeline is not delivering better
  medicines. BMJ 351.

Nanda, R. and T. Nicholas (2014). Did bank distress stifle innovation during the great depression? Journal
  of Financial Economics 114 (2), 273 – 292.

Nikolova, N. and J. Jaworska (2004). Approaches to measure chemical similarity—a review. QSAR &
  Combinatorial Science 22 (9-10), 1006–1026.

                                                     36
O’Hagan, S., N. Swainston, J. Handl, and D. B. Kell (2015). A ‘rule of 0.5’ for the metabolite-likeness of
  approved pharmaceutical drugs. Metabolomics 11 (2), 323–339.

Pye, C. R., M. J. Bertin, R. S. Lokey, W. H. Gerwick, and R. G. Linington (2017). Retrospective analysis of
  natural products provides insights for future discovery trends. Proceedings of the National Academy of
  Sciences 114 (22), 5601–5606.

Ralf Otto, Alberto Santagostino, and Ulf Schrader (2014, December). Rapid growth in biopharma: Challenges
  and opportunities. McKinsey & Company.

Smith, C. W. and R. M. Stulz (1985). The determinants of firms’ hedging policies. The Journal of Financial
  and Quantitative Analysis 20 (4), 391–405.

Tirole, J. (2010). Princeton University Press.

Wawer, M. J., K. Li, S. M. Gustafsdottir, V. Ljosa, N. E. Bodycombe, M. A. Marton, K. L. Sokolnicki, M.-A.
 Bray, M. M. Kemp, E. Winchester, B. Taylor, G. B. Grant, C. S.-Y. Hon, J. R. Duvall, J. A. Wilson,
 J. A. Bittker, V. Dančı́k, R. Narayan, A. Subramanian, W. Winckler, T. R. Golub, A. E. Carpenter, A. F.
 Shamji, S. L. Schreiber, and P. A. Clemons (2014, July). Toward performance-diverse small-molecule
 libraries for cell-based phenotypic screening using multiplexed high-dimensional profiling. Proceedings of
 the National Academy of Sciences 111 (30), 10911–10916.




                                                    37
   Tables and Figures

                             Mevacorfor Statins           Zocor
Tanimoto Examples:Figure
                    Cholesterol
                         1: Similarity
                                       Reducing
                     (Similarity Score=0.25)
                                                  Drugs
                                                (Similarity Score =0.82)




              Mevacor              Mevacor
                                         PravacholZocor                 ZocorLipitor
                            (Similarity
       (Similarity Score=0.25)          Score=0.25)
                                        (Similarity
                                 (Similarity ScoreScore       (Similarity
                                                    =0.61)=0.82)          ScoreScore
                                                                    (Similarity =0.82)=0.15)

       1. Mevacor (Lovostatin) is 1st FDA approved statin (Sep 1987): similarity to
            prior molecules is 0.25
   Notes: Figure 1 provides the molecular structure and maximum similarity score of three early statins. Mevacor
        2. Pravachol
   (Lovostatin)              (Pravastatin)
                 was the first                  is 2nd
                               FDA approved statin        (Octin 1991):
                                                    (approved     Septemberpair-wise
                                                                               1987) and itssimilarity   to
                                                                                              Tanimoto similarity to prior
   moleculesMevacor       is 0.61. Overall similarity to prior molecules is 0.61
              is 0.25. Pravachol (Pravastatin)  is was the second  such  statin, approved  in  October 1991; its pair-wise
   similarity to Mevacor is 0.61 and its overall maximum similarity is also 0.61. Finally, Zocor (Simvastatin) was the
   third such statin, approved December 1991: its pair-wise similarity to Mevacor is 0.82 and its pairwise to Pravachol is
        3. Zocor (Simvastatin) is 3rd (Dec 1991): pair-wise similarity to Mevacor is
   0.52. Zocor’s overall maximum similarity to prior molecules is 0.82.
            0.82. Pairwise to Pravachol is 0.52. Overall similarity to prior molecules is
            0.82
              Pravachol             Pravachol Lipitor                   Lipitor
                             (Similarity Score
       (Similarity Score =0.61)                =0.61)
                                         (Similarity           (Similarity Score =0.15)
                                                     Score =0.15)




                                                             38
                                                                                              Figure 2: Drug Novelty, Descriptive Statistics

                                                       A. Distribution of Similarity                                                                                                               B. Average Similarity Over Time




                                                                                                                                                                                    .6
                                                                           All Previous Candidates
       8




                                                                                                                                                             Max Similarity to Prior Candidates
                                                                                                                                                                                        .55
       6
Percent




                                                                                                                                                                   .5
4      2




                                                                                                                                                                                    .45
                                                                                                                                                                                                  1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Year
       0




                                                 0             .2                 .4                  .6                       .8   1
                                                                       Similarity to any previous drug candidate                                                                                                              All Prior        5 Year Rolling Window




                                                                C. Proportion > 0.9                                                          D. Proportion > 0.9, excl. Combination
                                                                                                                                                                    .05
                          .2




                                                                                                                                             Proportion of Candidates with Score [0.9,1)
   Proportion of Candidates with Score [0.9,1]




                                                                                                                                                                                .04
                                     .15




                                                                                                                                                                   .03
                       .1




                                                                                                                                                      .02
       .05




                                                                                                                                                                    .01
                          0




                                                 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013                                                                1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013
                                                                                    Year                                                                                                                                      Year

                                                                       All Prior Candidates            Rolling 5 Year Window                                                                                            All Prior Candidates         Rolling 5 Year Window




  Notes: Figure 2 displays descriptive statistics of our novelty measure. Panel A displays the distribution of our drug
  similarity measure. A drug’s similarity is measured as its similarity to the most similar drug candidate that had
  previously entered Phase 1 clinical trials. For more details on this similarity measure, see Section 1.2. Panel B plots
  the trend in average drug candidate similarity over time. The blue line represents the average value of new drug
  candidates’ maximum similarity to previously developed drugs, by year. To control for the fact that the number of
  prior drugs rises mechanically with time, the red line plots average similarity when comparing a drug candidate only
  with drug candidates that have entered Phase 1 trials in the 5 years prior. Panel C displays the proportion of new
  drugs that have greater than 0.9 similarity, comparing to both all prior drugs and drugs in a 5 year rolling window.
  Panel D plots the same figure as Panel C, excluding drugs with similarity equal to one; this is to avoid counting
  combination therapies which may use the same molecule in conjunction with another molecule. Although our sample
  includes drug output in 2014, we plot up to 2013 in Panels B and C because our 2014 data do not include the entire
  year.




                                                                                                                                        39
                                                                                   Figure 3: Proportion First-in-Target, by Drug Similarity




                                                                             .06
                   Proportion of Drugs that First Developed in Target-Action
                .02            .03             .04            .05




                                                                                   .2             .4                   .6               .8    1
                                                                                                       Similarity to Prior Candidates




Notes: Figure 3 presents a binned scatterplot of drug-level similarity against whether a drug is the first developed
in its target-action. Each dot represents the proportion of candidates that are the first to be developed in their
target-action, among all candidates within a given similarity score bin, conditional on disease (ICD9) and quarter of
development fixed effects.




                                                                                                                 40
                                                                               Figure 4: Drug Novelty: Risk and Return


                                             A. Likelihood of FDA Approval                                                                                            B. Drug Effectiveness
                 .25




                                                                                                                                                          .5
                                                                                                                Proportion of Drugs Adding Value (ASMR<V)
                                                                                                                                                   .45
                          .2
    Proportion FDA approved




                                                                                                                                          .4
               .15




                                                                                                                                .35
   .1




                                                                                                                     .3
                 .05




                                                                                                                                     .25
                                   .2               .4                    .6                .8        1                                                        .2    .4                  .6                 .8        1
                                                           Similarity to Prior Candidates                                                                                 Similarity to Prior Candidates



                                        C. Stock Market Reaction to FDA Approval                                                                                          D. Drug Revenue



                                                                                                                                     18.4
                 6           5.8
   log (adjusted) market value




                                                                                                                Annual US Revenue (log)
                                                                                                                                18.2
                  5.6




                                                                                                                  18
     5.4         5.2




                                                                                                                                     17.8




                                   .2               .4                    .6                .8        1                                                        .2    .4                  .6                 .8        1
                                                           Similarity to Prior Candidates                                                                                 Similarity to Prior Candidates



                                                         E. Patent Citations                                                                                         F. Patent Value (KPSS)
                                                                                                                                     2.2
                 1.5




                                                                                                                                     2.1
                 1.4
   FWD cites




                                                                                                                log KPSS
                                                                                                                    2
                 1.3




                                                                                                                                     1.9
                 1.2




                                                                                                                                     1.8




                                   .3          .4                .5               .6             .7   .8                                                        .3   .4               .5               .6        .7
                                                           Similarity to Prior Candidates                                                                                 Similarity to Prior Candidates




Notes: Figure 4 presents binned scatterplots of drug-level similarity against several drug characteristics. Panel A
examines whether a drug is FDA approved. Panel B examines the drug’s added benefit, which is derived from the
French health system’s clinical added benefits scores (ASMR), which range from one to five (I to V), with V indicating
no value added. Panel C examines the logarithm of one plus the number of forward citations the patent receives. Panel
D examines drug revenue. Panel E examines the logarithm of the estimated dollar reaction on the (first) approval of
the drug by the FDA. Last, Panel F examines the logarithm of the Kogan et al. (2017) estimated patent values. All
panels include fixed effects for drug development year; indication (ICD9); and company. Panels E and F also include
controls for patent priority and issue year, respectively. See Notes to Appendix Figures A.2–A.7 for more details.
                                                                                                           41
                                             Figure 5: Model Solution



                    A. Firm Value Function                             B. Marginal value of internal cash




                                                               v’(w)
     v(w)




                                                                       1
            0
                0                                w̄                        0                             w̄
                            Firm Cash (w)                                            Firm Cash (w)


Notes: Figure 5 plots the solution to the model in Section 3.1, specifically the properties of the firm’s value function
V (K, W ) = v(w) K, where w ≡ W/K. See Appendix B for details.




                                                          42
                                         Figure 6: Model and Drug Development Decisions



     A. Development of Novel/Me-too Drugs                                                  B. Development of Novel/Me-too Drugs
         as a function of cash holdings                                                     as function of risk and expected value
  Accept




                                                                    Expected Value (χ p)
                                                                                            vc




                                                                                           vfb



        Reject
                          0                 wm wn       w̄
                                      Firm Cash (w)                                                   Likelihood of Success (p)


                       C. Development of Novel/Me-too Drugs                                D. Development of Novel/Me-too Drugs
                           as a function of expected value                                     as a function of expected value
                           (novel drugs better on average)                                     (novel drugs worse on average)
  Population Density




                                                                    Population Density




                                         c,m v c,n                                                                 v c,m v c,n
                                  vf b v                                                                    vf b
                                      Expected Value                                                       Expected Value

Notes: Figure 6 illustrates how the drug development thresholds in the model described in Section 3.1 vary with
cash holdings (Panel A) and the drug’s expected value and likelihood of success (Panel B). wm and wn denote
cash thresholds for safe (m) and risky drugs (n), respectively. Panels C and D illustrate two examples in which
relaxing financing frictions (to the first-best level) affects the development threshold for drugs of different levels of
riskiness. Red line denotes a novel (high-risk) drug, blue line denotes a me-too (low-risk) drug. v f b is the frictionless
benchmark expected value investment threshold. v c,m and v c,n are the investment thresholds for safe and risky drugs,
respectively.


                                                              43
          Figure 7: Impact of Additional Resources on Novelty of Drug Investments


                                                                                                     (a) Coefficients




                                                                 .25
                                     Impact of Medicare Drug Life on Log(1 + # Candidates)
                                    0          .05         .1          .15        .2




                                                                                             1   2   3     4          5          6          7      8   9   10
                                                                                                         Similarity to Prior Candidates, Binned




                                                                                                         (b) Deciles
                                                                 .15
                                    Impact of Medicare Drug Life on Log(1 + # Candidates)
                                              0              .05 -.05         .1




                                                                                             1   2   3     4           5          6         7      8   9   10
                                                                                                         Similarity to Prior Candidates, Deciles




Notes: Figure 7 plots the estimated coefficients on Post × Medicare Drug Lifef,2003 from our main regression
specification defined by (12). Each point represents a different outcome variable: the number of new drug candidates
in a given bin of similarity. Bins are specified by absolute similarity scores: Bin 1, for example, counts the impact of
our treatment on the number of drugs with similarity score between 0 and 0.1, while Bin 10 is the impact on drugs
with similarity between 0.9 and 1.0. The bottom figure reports the estimated response for drugs in each novelty decile
bin.




                                                                                                                      44
                                              Figure 8: Event Studies: # of New Candidates


                                                                                # New Candidates




                          .6
                          .4
                  Estimated Impact
                          .2
                          0
                          -.2




                                     1999   2000   2001   2002   2003   2004   2005   2006 2007   2008   2009   2010   2011   2012   2013   2014
                                                                                         Year




Notes: Figure 8 reports the accompanying event study associated with Column 6 of Table 4. Each dot represents the
coefficient on Medicare Drug Lifef,2003 interacted with an indicator variable for that given year. 2003 is the omitted
year, and 90th percentile confidence intervals are reported.




                                                                                      45
                               Figure 9: Event Studies: # of New Candidates, by Similarity Quartile

                                    (a) Similarity Quartile 1                                                                                  (b) Similarity Quartile 2




                                                                                                                            .3
                 .3




                                                                                                                            .2
                 .2
         Estimated Impact




                                                                                                                   Estimated Impact
                                                                                                                                 .1
                .1




                                                                                                                    0
                 0




                                                                                                                            -.1
                 -.1




                                                                                                                            -.2
                            1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014                            1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
                                                                  Year                                                                                                       Year




                                    (c) Similarity Quartile 3                                                                                  (d) Similarity Quartile 4




                                                                                                                            .3
                 .3




                                                                                                                            .2
                 .2




                                                                                                                                  .1
         Estimated Impact




                                                                                                                   Estimated Impact
                      .1




                                                                                                                     0
          0




                                                                                                                            -.1
                 -.1




                                                                                                                            -.2
                 -.2




                            1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014                            1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
                                                                  Year                                                                                                       Year




Notes: Figure 9 reports event studies coefficients where the outcome variables are the number of new candidates in
each quartile of similarity. Each dot represents the coefficient on Medicare Drug Lifef,2003 interacted with an indicator
variable for that given year. 2003 is the omitted year, and 90th percentile confidence intervals are reported.




                                                                                                              46
                            Figure 10: Event Studies: # of New Candidates, by Stages of Development

                                    (a) Pre-clinical Development                                                                                                          (b) Phase 1
                            .6




                                                                                                                                            .4
                            .4




                                                                                                                                            .2
         Estimated Impact




                                                                                                                         Estimated Impact
                 .2




                                                                                                                                            0
                            0
                            -.2




                                                                                                                                            -.2
                                  1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014                                 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
                                                                        Year                                                                                                            Year




                                                          (c) Phase 2                                                                                                     (d) Phase 3
                            .4




                                                                                                                                            .3
                                                                                                                                            .2
                            .2
         Estimated Impact




                                                                                                                         Estimated Impact
                                                                                                                                  .1
                            0




                                                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                                                            -.1
                            -.2




                                  1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014                                 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
                                                                        Year                                                                                                            Year




Notes: Figure 10 reports event studies for number of novel drugs. Our outcome variables are the number of new candi-
dates in different stages of development for each quarter. Each dot represents the coefficient on Medicare Drug Lifef,2003
interacted with an indicator variable for that given year. 2003 is the omitted year, and 90th percentile confidence
intervals are reported.




                                                                                                                    47
                             Table 1: Drug Candidates Summary Statistics


                                                       All Drug Candidates           All Drug Candidates,
                                                            1999-2014               Sample Firms 1999-2014
    Compound Characteristics

    # Compounds                                                 12,191                          6,374

    # US Phase 1 or above                                        3,043                          1,894

    # US Phase 2 or above                                        2,251                          1,443

    # US Phase 3 or above                                         988                            756

    # FDA Approved                                                392                            356



    Maximum Similarity to Prior Compounds                        0.53                            0.50

    % between 0 and 0.1                                           0.20                           0.06

    % between 0.1 and 0.2                                         0.66                           0.31

    % between 0.2 and 0.3                                         6.60                           6.48

    % between 0.3 and 0.4                                        29.70                          34.77

    % between 0.4 and 0.5                                        21.97                          23.25

    % between 0.5 and 0.6                                        10.57                          10.06

    % between 0.5 and 0.6                                         7.65                           7.08

    % between 0.7 and 0.8                                         6.20                           5.65

    % between 0.8 and 0.9                                         5.96                           4.88

    % between 0.9 and 1.0                                        10.48                           7.47



    Coverage Characteristics

    # Target-Actions                                             2,211                          1,448

    # Disease Categories                                          430                            363




    Notes:
Notes: Table 1 reports characteristics of our full sample of drug candidates versus the sample of candidates associated
with firms for which we are able to compute Medicare exposure in 2003. See Section A.1 for details about phases of
drug approval in the United States. See Section 1.2 for details about how similarity is defined.




                                                          48
                                           Table 2: Drug Novelty and Risk, Social and Private Values—Summary Table

                                          Risk                                Measures of Value | Approval                            Measures of Value, unconditional

                                      Likelihood of            Drug Effectiveness        Revenue        Stock Reaction to              Patent               Patent
                                     FDA Approval                 (ASMR < V)                              FDA Approval                Citations             Value
                                           (1)                          (2)                 (3)                 (4)                      (5)                  (6)

     Maximum Similarity                 0.208***                     -0.263**           -0.641***            -0.977***                -0.238***            -0.469**
                                         (0.025)                     (0.053)              (0.293)             (0.299)                  (0.098)              (0.196)

     Observations                        19,127                       1,778               11,230                399                    116,611               5,031

     Appendix Table/Column               A.4.(3)                     A.7.(2)              A.5.(4)             A.6.(3)                  A.8.(4)              A.9.(4)


     Notes: Table 2 summarizes the relation between drug novelty and drug characteristics—specifically: risk (defined as the likelihood of FDA approval); proxies for
     social value (measured either using the ASMR score, or the number of citations to related patents); and estimates of private value (measured either by drug
     revenues, the stock market reaction following a drug’s FDA approval, or via the Kogan et al. (2017) measure of value for the associated patents). The last row
49




     indicates the Appendix Tables referenced in this summary table (along with the relevant columns). For brevity, we report the coefficients on novelty (along with
     standard errors) using the most conservative specification, which, whenever possible, control for disease (indication); drug age (drug launch or patent issue year);
     company; Please see the notes to the relevant Appendix Tables for more details. ∗ p < 0.10,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01.
                                Table 3: Firm–Quarter Summary Statistics


                                                      Mean         p10      p25        p50       p75       p90

          Firm-Quarter Output

          # New Drug Candidates                        0.55         0         0         0         0          2

          …own                                         0.36         0         0         0         0          1

          …acquired                                    0.19         0         0         0         0          1



          Average Max Similiarity Score                0.53        0.31     0.37      0.48       0.66      0.85



          Firm Characterisitics (2003)

          Medicare Drug Life                           0.54         0         0       0.54        1          1

          Firm MMS                                     0.35        0.12     0.20      0.32       0.49      0.65

          Overall Drug Life                            0.57         0         0       0.60        1          1



Notes: Table 3 reports characteristics of our firm–quarter sample. A drug is considered a firm’s own if it is assigned
to that firm on the first date it enters development (as recorded in Cortellis); it is considered acquired if, on that date,
it becomes associated with our focal firm even though it had previously been associated with another firm. Similarity
is defined as the maximum similarity score, compared to all candidates that had previously entered development. We
also compute distributions separately for prior candidates within the same indication or the same firm. Medicare drug
life is the proportion of a firm’s approved drugs in 2003 that had greater than 5 years of exclusivity left, weighted by
the drug’s Medicare Market Share (MMS). Firm MMS is the average MMS across that firm’s approved drugs as of
2003. Overall drug life is the unweighted proportion of a firm’s approved drugs in 2003 that had greater than 5 years
of exclusivity left. Number of high patent life drugs is the total number of such drugs.




                                                              50
                             Table 4: Impact of Resources on # New Candidates

                                                  # New Candidates            Log(1 + New Candidates)
                                            (1)         (2)        (3)       (4)       (5)        (6)
         Post 2003 X Medicare Drug Life   0.211**      0.860**   0.847**   0.057**    0.268***    0.263***
                                          (0.084)      (0.363)   (0.365)   (0.027)     (0.096)     (0.096)
         Post 2003 X Overall Drug Life                 -0.707*   -0.694*              -0.229**    -0.225**
                                                       (0.366)   (0.368)               (0.098)     (0.098)
         Post 2003 X Firm MMS                                     -0.153                            -0.049
                                                                 (0.140)                           (0.044)
         R2                               0.556        0.556      0.557     0.594      0.595        0.595
         Company FEs                       Yes          Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes          Yes
         Qtr of Development FEs            Yes          Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes          Yes
         Observations                     16442        16442      16442     16442      16442        16442


Notes: Table 4 examines the impact of additional resources on the number of new drug candidates. The dependent
variable is the count of new drug candidates entering development (models 1-3), or the log of one plus the number
of new drug candidates entering development (models 4-6). All models include a full set of company and quarter
indicator variables to control for firm and calendar time fixed effects. Models 3 and 6 correspond to our main
regression specification in defined by (12), with Post × Overall Drug Lifef,2003 and Post × Firm MMSf,2003 both
included as independent variables. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered around company identifiers.
∗
    p < 0.10,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01.




                                                         51
                        Table 5: Portfolio Expansion (Candidates New to Firm)

                                                        New Indications                 New Targets
                                                       (1)             (2)          (3)              (4)
                                                    Log(1+ #)        ∆ HHI       Log(1+ #)          ∆ HHI

       Post 2003 X Medicare Drug Life                0.160**        -0.013*        0.101*         -0.020***
                                                     (0.069)        (0.008)        (0.060)         (0.007)

       R2                                             0.260         0.029           0.440             0.025
       Company FEs                                     Yes           Yes             Yes               Yes
       Qtr of Development FEs                          Yes           Yes             Yes               Yes
       Overall Drug Life/Firm MMS                      Yes           Yes             Yes               Yes
       Observations                                   16442         12220           16442             12220

Notes:    Table 5 examines whether firms choose to diversify their drug portfolio, by pursuing candidates
that are sufficiently different that their existing portfolio.      We report the main specification coefficient for
Post × Medicare Drug Lifef,2003 . All models include a full set of company and quarter indicator variables, with
Post × Overall Drug Lifef,2003 and Post × Firm MMSf,2003 both included as additional independent variables, but
not reported in the table. The first model reports the main effect of the Medicare Part D shock on the number of new
(to the firm) indications entered. The second model reports how the introduction of Part D impacted the change
in firm project concentration, as measured by a Herfindahl-Hirschman index of projects by therapeutic indication.
The dependent variables in the third and fourth models are number of new drug targets, and the change in project
concentration across drug targets, respectively. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered around company
identifiers. ∗ p < 0.10,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01.




                                                               52
               Table 6: Drug Development across Elderly and non-Elderly Drugs

                     (a) Proportion of New Drugs Across MMS quartiles
                                                       Log(1+ New Candidates), by MMS Quartile
                                                       (1)        (2)           (3)       (4)
     Post 2003 X Medicare Drug Life                  0.085**          0.084**          0.110**          0.115**
                                                     (0.041)          (0.042)          (0.043)          (0.046)
     R2                                               0.337            0.343            0.366            0.358
     Company FEs                                       Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes
     Qtr of Development FEs                            Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes
     Overall Drug Life/Firm MMS                        Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes
     Observations                                     16442            16442            16442            16442

                     (b) Drugs for Pediatric and Young Adult Conditions
                                                 Log(1+ New Candidates), Non-Elderly Conditions
                                                   (1)           (2)           (3)          (4)
                                                < 5% MMS     < 10% MMS       Pediatric   Youth
   Post 2003 X Medicare Drug Life                  0.076**             0.090**            0.192**        0.138**
                                                   (0.038)             (0.041)            (0.080)        (0.066)
   R2                                               0.317               0.344              0.532          0.517
   Company FEs                                       Yes                 Yes                Yes            Yes
   Qtr of Development FEs                            Yes                 Yes                Yes            Yes
   Overall Drug Life/Firm MMS                        Yes                 Yes                Yes            Yes
   Observations                                     16442               16442              16442          16442

Notes: Table 6 examines whether firms developing more drugs in response to cashflow shocks do so in areas that
experience a greater increase in demand (depending on whether these drugs target elderly or non-elderly patients).
The table reports the main specification coefficient for Post × Medicare Drug Lifef,2003 . In Panel A, the dependent
variable in each column corresponds to each quartile of the Medicare market share (MMS) distribution. In Panel B, the
dependent variables are the number of drugs developed for (primarily) non-elderly conditions. Columns 1 and 2 define
non-elderly as low MMS conditions, while Columns 3 and 4 use clinical trial patient selection criteria from to define
conditions as “pediatric” or “youth.” We assign a condition the “pediatric” label if that condition’s drug trials have an
above median share requiring enrollees to be newborns, infants, pre-school children or children. The “youth” category
is assigned similarly, but expands this definition to include adolescants and young adults. All models include a full
set of company and quarter indicator variables, with Post × Overall Drug Lifef,2003 and Post × Firm MMSf,2003 both
included as additional independent variables, but not reported in the table. Robust standard errors in parentheses,
clustered around company identifiers. ∗ p < 0.10,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01.




                                                           53
                                    Table 7: Novelty for Non Elderly Drugs

                                         (a) Below Median MMS Drugs
                                               Log(1+ Non Elderly Candidates), by Similarity Quartile
                                                    (1)          (2)          (3)            (4)
       Post 2003 X Medicare Drug Life              0.062**          0.060**          0.060**           0.016
                                                   (0.029)          (0.030)          (0.028)          (0.019)
       R2                                           0.233            0.303            0.238            0.179
       Company FEs                                   Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes
       Qtr of Development FEs                        Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes
       Overall Drug Life/Firm MMS                    Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes
       Observations                                 16442            16442            16442            16442

                                     (b) Drugs for Pediatric Conditions
                                                 Log(1+Pediatric Candidates), by Similarity Quartile
                                                    (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)
       Post 2003 X Medicare Drug Life              0.093**          0.084**          0.084**           0.040
                                                   (0.043)          (0.039)          (0.035)          (0.030)
       R2                                           0.322            0.407            0.311            0.237
       Company FEs                                   Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes
       Qtr of Development FEs                        Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes
       Overall Drug Life/Firm MMS                    Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes
       Observations                                 16442            16442            16442            16442

                        (c) Drugs for Pediatric and Young Adult Conditions
                                                   Log(1+Youth Candidates), by Similarity Quartile
                                                     (1)         (2)          (3)           (4)
       Post 2003 X Medicare Drug Life              0.081**          0.058*           0.062*           0.026
                                                   (0.037)          (0.030)          (0.033)         (0.027)
       R2                                           0.292            0.377           0.295            0.231
       Company FEs                                   Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes
       Qtr of Development FEs                        Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes
       Overall Drug Life/Firm MMS                    Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes
       Observations                                 16442            16442           16442            16442

Notes: Table 7 reports the main specification coefficient for Post × Medicare Drug Lifef,2003 but focuses only on
novelty among drugs not targeted toward the elderly. The dependent variable in each column corresponds to
each quartile of the compound similarity distribution. Panel A excludes “elderly” drug candidates, by removing
drugs developed for conditions for which trials are above the median in likelihood of limiting patient selection to
“elderly” or “aged” adults. Panel B limits the drug candidates outcomes to “pediatric” drugs—drugs developed for
conditions whose trials are more likely to target newborns, infants and children. “Youth” candidates in Panel C
are defined as drugs developed for conditions above the median in terms of limiting trial participation to newborns,
infants, children, adolescents and young adults. All models include a full set of company and quarter indicator
variables, with Post × Overall Drug Lifef,2003 and Post × Firm MMSf,2003 both included as additional independent
variables, but not reported in the table. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered around company identifiers.
∗
    p < 0.10,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01.
                                                         54
          Table 8: Effect of Cashflows on Number of Drug Candidates, by Firm Size

                                                           Log(1 + New Candidates), by Size

                                                           (1)           (2)              (3)
                                                           All          Top 50         Bottom 50

                  Post 2003 X Medicare                  0.263***         0.299           0.192*
                  Drug Life                              (0.096)        (0.214)          (0.100)

                  R2                                     0.595           0.641            0.209
                  Company FEs                             Yes             Yes              Yes
                  Qtr of Development FEs                  Yes             Yes              Yes
                  Overall Drug Life/Firm MMS              Yes             Yes              Yes
                  Observations                           16442           5950             6207

Notes: Table 8 examines how the treatment effect of cashflows on number of developed drugs varies by firm size.
We measure firm size as the sum of revenue generated by approved drugs prior to 2003. We split firms into equal
sized groups based on their size as of 2003; the number of observations differs due to firm exit. We report the main
specification coefficient for Post × Medicare Drug Lifef,2003 . We estimate the model with the full set of company and
quarter indicator variables, including Post × Overall Drug Lifef,2003 and Post × Firm MMSf,2003 , separately across
groups. All control variables are allowed to vary across specifications, but are not reported in the table. Robust
standard errors in parentheses, clustered around company identifiers. ∗ p < 0.10,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01.




                                                          55
                                    Table 9: Impact on R&D and Profits


                                                   (1)               (2)                 (3)               (4)
                                                 Log(RD)         Log(Profits)         Log(Debt)          Leverage
   Post 2003 X Medicare Drug Life                 0.975*            1.046*               0.967             0.108
                                                  (0.573)           (0.564)             (1.118)           (0.108)
   R2                                              0.934             0.930               0.800             0.463
   Company FEs                                      Yes               Yes                 Yes               Yes
   Year of Development FEs                          Yes               Yes                 Yes               Yes
   Observations                                    1774              1572                1657              1925



Notes: Table 9 examines the response of firm-level research spending, operating cashflow, and debt to our main
treatment variable, Post × Medicare Drug Lifef,2003 . The dependent variable is either the logarithm of R&D spending;
the logarithm of operating cashflows (Compustat: ib + dp); the logarithm of long-term debt (Compustat: dltt); and
the logarithm of leverage (Compustat: dltt scaled by at). Sample period is 1999–2013. All specifications include a full
set of company and quarter indicator variables, with Post × Overall Drug Lifef,2003 and Post × Firm MMSf,2003 both
included as additional independent variables, but not reported in the table. Standard errors clustered by firm are
reported in parentheses.∗ p < 0.10,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01.




                                                           56
Online Appendix to “Missing Novelty in Drug Development”


      Joshua Krieger      Danielle Li   Dimitris Papanikolaou
     Harvard University   MIT & NBER    Northwestern University
                                              & NBER




                                57
A        A Primer on Drug Development

       Here, we provide a brief description of the process of drug development by pharmaceutical firms,
while also emphasizing the potential role of financial market imperfections in drug development.


A.1       Development Process

       The drug development process is typically divided into five stages: discovery / pre-clinical
research; Phase 1, 2, and 3 of human clinical trials; and post-approval monitoring and clinical trials
(Phase 4). From start to end, this process may take anywhere from 5 to 15 years. In the first
stage of this process, discovery, researchers identify biological mechanisms that impact diseases
and symptoms. For example, they may want to develop a drug that inhibits the functioning of
a particular target, such as an enzyme or the gene that encodes it. Having identified a potential
target, developers then screen potential compounds looking for structures that have some desired
action on this target. At some point during this first stage of development, firms will apply for
patents on promising candidates.20
       Having identified a set of promising compounds, researchers focus next on testing its phar-
macokinectic and pharmacodynamic properties: how the body impacts the drug (its absorption,
bioavailability, etc.) and how the drug impacts the body (drug actions, toxicity, etc.), respectively.
If a drug performs well in animal models, firms may choose to file an Investigational New Drug
(IND) application with the FDA to begin human clinical trials. Clinical trials have three phases.
Phase 1 clinical trials mainly test for toxicity and help set dosage levels, using a few dozen healthy
patients. Phase 2 trials involve hundreds of patients with the conditions of interest, and are typically
randomized. Phase 3 trials are randomized controlled trials on a focused subset of patients likely to
show the greatest response to the drug. These trials often include thousands of patients and involve
tracking outcomes over long periods to assess both safety and efficacy. At the end of Phase 3, firms
may submit a New Drug Application (NDA) to the FDA that includes the results of all trials and
preclinical testing. After a formal review process, the FDA decides whether or not to approve the
drug.
       Throughout the development process, firms make many decisions about what types of compounds
to invest in. These decisions are important for the ultimate novelty of drugs that are brought to
market. For instance, firms may choose to develop drug candidates that act on known targets
through known channels, or they can attempt to develop drugs that differ in either their mode of
action.
  20
    Firms typically apply for broad patents that would cover a collection of similar compounds, rather than a single
compound itself. This set of claims is described by a “Markush structure,” which is a generalized molecular structure
used to indicate a collection of similar compounds.



                                                         58
      One aspect of drug pipeline decisions that has attracted a lot of attention is the issue of “me–
too” innovation. The idea behind “me–too” or “copycat” drugs is that firms prefer to modify
existing drugs or create similar compounds in order to avoid the costs and uncertainty of more
novel drug development. Developing such drugs has the benefit of providing doctors with a menu
of valuable alternatives if a patient is not responding or having an adverse reaction to a specific
drug. For example, Berndt, Cockburn, and Grépin (2006) find that drugs that gained supplemental
approvals for new dosages, formulations and indications account for a large portion of drug utilization
and economic benefits. A common critique of these type of drugs, however, is that they yield
only marginal clinical improvements while increasing drug costs and diverting resources from the
development of truly innovative therapies. For example, Joseph Ross, a professor of medicine and
public health at Yale University School of Medicine, describes me-too drugs as those that “may
have some unique niche in the market, but they are fairly redundant with other therapies that are
already available” (New York Times, 2015). It is also worth noting that two similar drugs that
are both brought to market may have been developed in parallel (“racing”) rather than through a
scenario in which one drug imitated the other in order to capture a piece of the same, or similar,
pie (DiMasi and Chakravarthy, 2016).


A.2      Development Costs and Financing

      Drug development is financed through a number of different mechanisms, both public and private.
First, an important input into drug development is the scientific knowledge that enables researchers
to identify biological targets, and which enables the development of tools and techniques used in
drug discovery. This type of “basic” research is usually funded by the government, most often
through the National Institutes of Health. Translational research, in which insights from basic
research are advanced toward medical applications and commercialization, may also involve public
funding. For example, early stage biotechnology firms working on a proof-of-concept for a new
type of drug may receive capital from the government’s Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
program, as well as from private foundations and venture capital. In general, however, the direct
public funding of private–sector drug development is limited.
      The direct cost of drug discovery to firms themselves is substantial: DiMasi, Grabowski, and
Hansen (2016) estimate that the direct cost of developing a single approved drug is over $1.4 billion
and has been increasing over time.21 This total cost of development is spread unevenly across
the stages of drug development, with discovery and preclinical costs accounting for one third and
clinical costs accounting for the remaining two thirds. Phase 3 trials, in particular, can be extremely
 21
    This estimate is subject to some debate. See for instance, http://www.nytimes.com/2014/11/19/upshot/
calculating-the-real-costs-of-developing-a-new-drug.html.



                                                  59
costly and involve multiple thousands of patients over several years. Because of this escalating cost
structure, investments in drug development are essentially staged, with firms putting in smaller
amounts of money in early stages and making greater capital commitments only if the drug shows
promise.
       One possible reason why firms, especially smaller ones, may not choose to invest in novel drugs
is because these drugs may be more costly to develop. In general, assessing the costs of development
is difficult because we do not have access to internal investment data and, furthermore, a large
part of R&D spending is on scientific staff, who then work on multiple projects. A noisy proxy for
development costs, however, are the number of patients enrolled in clinical trials and the number of
trials associated with drugs: because trials are so expensive, recruiting patients and running trials
constitutes a substantial proportion of a drug’s development cost. In Table A.10 and Figure A.8,
we consider how the number of patients and number of trials associated to a compound vary by its
chemical novelty. In general, we find no consistent relationship between these proxies of development
cost and drug novelty. The left hand side panels of Figure A.8, for instance, plot bin scatters of the
relationship between drug novelty and number of patients or trials for our full set of drug candidates.
We find no relationship between novelty and the number of enrolled patients across all trials. We
find a weakly negative relationship between similarity and the total number of trials; however, these
appear to be driven by the set of drug candidates with similarity scores of exactly 1, which may
include extended release formulations that should require fewer additional trials. Restricting to the
set of candidates with similarity strictly less than 1, we find, if anything, that more similar drugs
are more expensive. Further, to the extent that novel drugs are less likely to survive to later stages,
our evidence suggests that their initial expected cost is likely to be weakly lower.
       Accessing external finance for such costly and uncertain projects can be particularly challenging.
In general, the pecking order theory (Myers and Majluf, 1984) predicts that using internal funds is
the cheapest form of financing, followed by debt and then equity. By now, a broadly accepted view
in corporate finance is that information asymmetries and moral hazard frictions make it particularly
costly for both public and private firms to raise external equity finance. For several reasons, these
frictions may be particularly salient for innovative firms (see, e.g. Kerr and Nanda, 2015; Hall and
Lerner, 2010, for a review of the literature).
       Financing drug development with debt is also difficult because few pharmaceutical firms have
assets that can be reliably used as collateral. Patents for drug candidates, for instance, are taken
out early in the development process, making their use as collateral something of a Catch 22—in
order to know whether the patent is valuable as collateral, a bank would have to lend the firm the
money to put it through testing, which is what the firm wanted the loan for in the first place.22
  22
    A growing set of papers have shown, however, that pharmaceutical patents are sometimes pledged as collateral
by public firms, although this phenomenon is small compared to the use of patents in electronics or medical devices


                                                        60
Consistent with this view, firms in the pharmaceutical industry have indeed lower leverage ratios
than comparable firms in other industries (see Appendix Table A.1 for more details).


B      Model Solution

     Here, we discuss the model solution. We begin by describing the frictionless benchmark and
then discuss the solution to the model with financing costs.


Frictionless benchmark

     We start with the frictionless benchmark—the model without any financing costs. In this case,
the only state variable at the firm level is K. So, the firm’s value function is V (Kt ). When the firm
decides to invest in a new project or not, it will trade off its expected benefit versus its cost. A
drug of type i will get developed as long as
                                                                 
                                      pi V (Kt + χi Kt ) − V (Kt ) − f Kt > 0.                                            (B.1)


Since the firm’s financial policy is irrelevant, we can assume that the firm pays all operating profits
to investors. Hence, the firm’s value function is equal to
                          Z   ∞                              
           V (Kt ) = Et        e−r(s−t) Ks dAs − f Ii,s dNs
                           t
                              Z ∞                    Z s                       h           i
                    = Kt , Et      e−(r+δ) (s−t) exp      log(1 + χi Ii,u )dJi,u µ − λ f Ii,u du
                                  t                                  t

Given our constant-returns assumption, we can conjecture (and verify later) that the investment
decision for drug i independent of firm scale K. In that case, since demand shocks are i.i.d., we
have that investment decision for drug i independent of firm scale K. In that case, since demand
shocks are i.i.d., we have that
                               Z      ∞                            Z    s                            h            i
                                              −(r+δ) (s−t)
           V (Kt ) = Kt , Et              e                  exp             log(1 + χi Ii,u )dJi,u     µ − λ f Ii,u du
                                  t                                  t
                          |                                                     {z                                    }
                                                                         v0 =constant


which therefore implies that the decision to invest in a given drug (pi , χ) is indeed independent of
K:
                                                             v0 pi χi ≥ f.                                                (B.2)

Put differently, the firm invests in all positive NPV projects.
(Mann, 2016). Hochberg, Serrano, and Ziedonis (2016) conduct a similar analysis examining the use of debt in venture
financing; their study includes some medical devices firms but few if any biopharmaceutical firms.


                                                                    61
Financing Frictions

   Profits minus investment equals


                                       dYt = Ks dAs − f Ii,s Ks dNt                                     (B.3)


Combining free cashflows and the firm’s financing decisions, we can write the evolution of firm’s
stock of cash as
                                  dWt = dYt + (r − c)Wt dt + dHt − dUt                                  (B.4)

where the last term dUt is payments to investors (‘dividends’).
   The objective of the firm equals
                                                 Z   ∞                           
                             V (Wt , Kt ) = Et           e−r(s−t) dUt − dHt − dXt                       (B.5)
                                                 t

which is what we had before, since in that case net payout was


                                   dUt − dHt = Ks dAs − f Ii,s Ks dNs                                   (B.6)


and there are no financing costs. This is a fixed cost problem. Most of the time the firm will not
raise external funds and use internal cashflow to finance development. In that region, the evolution
of the firm’s value function satisfies the following HJB equation:


                                1
r V (W, K) = VW K µ + (r − c)W + VW W σ 2 K 2 − δVK K+
                
                                  2
                   nZ Z                                                                                      o
           + λ max        p V (W − f K I, K + χ I K) + (1 − p) V (W − f K I, K) − V (W, K) G(p, χ)dχdp − f I K
                I    p   χ


The firm’s decision problem to invest in drug i now depends on the concavity of the value function:
it will invest as long as


               pi V (W − f K, K + χi K) + (1 − pi )V (W − f K, K) − V (W, K) > f K                      (B.7)


To make further progress, we can exploit the homotheticity of the problem. Conjecture that

                                                                           Wt
                                   V (Wt , Kt ) = Kt p(wt ),        wt ≡      .                         (B.8)
                                                                           Kt




                                                           62
The HJB equation thus becomes
                             1
   0 = v 0 (w) µ + (r − c) w + v 00 (w)σ 2 − δ v(w) − r v(w)+
                               2           
                                    w−fI
                 Z Z h                                                              i
     + λ max          p (1 + χI)v              − v(w) + (1 − p) v (w − f I) − v(w) − f I G(p, χ) dp dχ.
          I(p,χ)                     1 + χI
                                                                                                     (B.9)

and the firm will invest in drug i iff
                                                    
                                            w−f
                        pi (1 + χi )v                    + (1 − pi )v (w − f ) − v(w) > f          (B.10)
                                            1 + χi

To finish the characterization of the solution, we need to determine the payout region w > w̄ and
the region where the firm issues new securities, w < w. These arguments are straightforward and
follow the logic in Bolton et al. (2011). That is, the point at which the firm pays out dividends is
the point at which the firm value function becomes linear and the marginal value of cash equals one:


                                                         v 0 (w̄) = 1.                             (B.11)


The above can be seen as the limiting case of


                                  v(w) = v(w̄) + (w − w̄),               w > w̄.                   (B.12)


In addition, we also need the super-contact condition (Dumas, 1991),


                                                     v 00 (w̄) = 0.                                (B.13)


We next discuss the behavior at the issuance boundary. The firm will issue an endogenous amount
m K > 0 whenever it runs out of cash (w = 0). The value of the firm needs to be continuous before
and after equity issuance, so


                             V (0, K) = V (mK, K) − φK − (1 + γ) m, K                              (B.14)


or after re-normalization,
                                        v(0) = v(m) − φ − (1 + γ) m.                               (B.15)

Here, not that if the firm, for whatever reason, ends up in a negative position, the above still holds,
except that
                                  v(z) = v(m) − φ − (1 + γ) (m − z).                               (B.16)




                                                              63
for z < 0. This will be useful if the firm is investing close to the boundary. At the boundary, the
firm will optimize over m, which implies that at w = 0, we have


                                           v 0 (m) = 1 + γ.                                   (B.17)


This equation pins down the size of the intervention.
   In sum, this is a classic impulse control problem. There is an inaction region w ∈ (0, w̄), in
which the HJB equation holds. Whenever the firm reaches the boundaries, it either pays out cash
or issues new securities so that w remains in (0, w̄).
   We next give a sketch of the numerical algorithm which is based on finite differences on a grid.

  1. Start with a guess v 0 defined on the grid for w. We allow for the grid to take negative values.
     Denote the point k which corresponds to wk =.

  2. Find the amount of issuance for points n < k, which consist of maximizing over v 0 (m(n)) −
     (1 + γ) (m(n) − wn ) for n ≤ k.

  3. Solve the HJB which corresponds to grid point n as a function of its neighbours. Call that v̂n .

  4. Start from the bottom. For points n = 1 . . . k, set


                                vn1 = v 0 (m(n)) − φ − (1 + γ) (m(n) − wn ).                  (B.18)


     given the m(n) above.

  5. For each point vn1 , n > k update it as
                                                    vn1 = v̂n                                 (B.19)

  6. After updating check whether the firm should start paying dividends at grid point n:


                                         v̂n ≤ v̂n−1 + (wn − wn−1 )                           (B.20)


     If so, update w̄ = wn for point n∗ , and set

                                        1
                                       vm = v̂n∗ −1 + (wm − wn∗ −1 )                          (B.21)


  7. Update the firm’s drug development policy In (p, χ) for all points. Since they never actually
     spend time in negative regions of w (we just need these to compute the investment policy in
     the n ≥ k region, assume In (p, χ) = 0 for n < k.

  8. Repeat until convergence

                                                  64
C        Data Construction

       Here, we describe the construction of the data in more detail.


C.1       Drug Development Histories

       Our drug development data primarily comes from the Cortellis Investigational Drugs and Clinical
Trials databases.23 For drugs in the Cortellis data, we have information on characteristics, as well
as associated companies and clinical trials. Most notably, Cortellis uses information from patents,
regulatory filings, press releases, public press and company materials (e.g., pipeline “tables” and
company website) to derive key dates for each drug’s development history by company, therapuetic
indication and country. For example, Cortellis might list an earliest “discovery” date based on
the scientific publication or patent that describes a drug candidate’s use for a particular disease,
followed by dates corresponding to the start of clinical trials of each phase, and finally an approval
or market launch date.
       In our various analyses, we distinguish between a drug-indication’s earliest development date
with any company, its first development milestone with a non-originating company that acquired
the drug, and the drug candidate’s entry dates into phase I/II/III clinical trials. We calculate our
primary drug novelty measures by taking the maximuma new drug candidate’s chemical structure
similarity (at the time of earliest entry) to all prior drug candidates that ever reached phase I
clinical trials. While we also tested alternative definitions of novelty that compare new drugs to all
prior developed drug candidates of any stage, we prefer to compare to the phase I drugs because
doing so reduces the likelihood of comparing a new drug candidate to another compound that was
developed independently and simultaneously, but by chance was disclosed (or captured by Cortellis)
at a slightly earlier date.


C.2       Chemical Similarity Scores

       Section (1.2) in the paper provides a basic summary of our method for calculating drug similarity
scores. This section provides more details on the mechanics of gathering pairwise similarity scores,
and then calculating our novelty measures. The starting point for these scores is information on the
drug candidate’s chemical structure. Cortellis contains information about the chemical structure
of small molecule drugs, when that information is available. Chemical structure information is
not available for vaccines and biologic drugs, which involve more complex mixtures of substances
generated through biotechnology. Often, the chemical structure is also not available for drugs that
  23
   At the time of our data access agreement, Cortellis was owned by Thomson Reuters. In October 2016, Thomson
Reuters sold Cortellis to Clarivate Analytics.



                                                     65
never progress out of very early stage drug development stages. Roughly 36% of Cortellis drug
entries contain information on drug structure. This percentage is higher for small molecule drugs
(53%), and for small molecule drugs that reach clinical trials (70%). When the chemical structure is
known, Cortellis provides standardized chemical identifiers such as the simplified molecular-input
line-entry system (SMILES). SMILES codes represent chemical structures as ASCII strings, with
components of the string identifying atoms, bonds, branching, order and shape of a compound.
These SMILES strings serve as the inputs to our similarity calculations.
   In practice, calculating Tanimoto distance requires an algorithm that can convert a chemical
identifier like a SMILES string into its component fragments and compare to other compounds.
This process is both complex and computationally intensive. We used features of ChemMine Tools
(publicly available at http://chemmine.ucr.edu/) a system developed by chemical informatics
researchers at the University of California, Riverside (Backman, Cao, and Girke, 2011) in order
to process and calculate pairwise Tanimoto scores. We used the R package version of ChemMine
(ChemmineR) to batch submit similarity calculation requests for the unique SMILES codes repre-
sented in our drug development data from Cortellis. For data management purposes, we only kept
pairwise similarity score results for pairs of compounds that had a Tanimoto distance greater than
or equal to 0.1.
   After generating all the pairwise similarity score data, we merge in the key development dates
(e.g., earliest, phase I/II/III) for each drug, and calculate our novelty measures by drug candidate,
as of the drug candidate’s earliest development date, and based on the maximum similarity score to
all previously developed drugs, all drugs that previously reached phase I, all drugs that previously
reached phase I etc..


C.3    Matching Drugs to MEPS

   An important data step for our analyses is matching our drug development history and novelty
data with the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS). The MEPS program is run by the Agency
for Healthcare Research and Quality at the U.S. Department of Health & Human Services, and
tracks data on health services use and cost for a large nationally representative sample of households.
For 2003, the year congress approved Medicare Part D, the MEPS consolidated data file includes
11,929 household identifiers.
   Our matching process (described below) serves two purposes: 1) to estimate drug-specific
Medicare market share (“elderly share”), and 2) to estimate relative drug revenues. We aggregate
the former up to the firm-level to calculate one of the two components of our main “treatment”
variable (Medicare drug Life, see Section 3.2), and the latter helps us describe the correlation
between our novelty measure and private value to drug developers (see Section 2.2).


                                                  66
   To match our drug development and novelty data to the MEPS data, we use all the drug names
affiliated with Cortellis drug identifiers, and merge them with drug names represented in MEPs.
After finding all the perfect name matches, we manually inspect any potential matches using a
“fuzzy” name matching algorithm. Matching drug names from the MEPS prescription data to
Cortellis can also be challenging due to inconsistencies in the naming of drugs. For example, a
common antibiotic prescription may be listed as “Zithromax ,” “Zithromax Z-Pak,” or “Zithromax
250 Z-PAK.”
   If a drug is not matched in the 2003 MEPS data, we attempt to match it to observations in the
2002 survey; 2001 if that is also not available, and so forth. For drugs we are unable to match, we
infer the drug’s MMS using information on MMS for the other drugs in MEPS that share the same
therapeutic indications. Therapeutic level MMS is computed in MEPS by taking the average share
of revenues coming from elderly patients for all approved drugs in a particular ICD9 class in the
year 2003. For example, if a drug is used to treat two different conditions, we assign that drug the
average of the Medicare shares associated with each of these conditions, weighted by the relative
importance of the conditions. The weights assigned to ICD9s are the share of total revenue in the
2003 MEPS data that come from drugs associated with that ICD9.
   For drug revenue, we use all the years in our MEPS data (1996–2012) and adjust dollar
expenditures to 2015 dollars using the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers (CPI-U).
After matching to the Cortellis drug development data, we then estimate the correllations between
our drug novelty measure and annual drug revenue, controlling for sales year, the drug’s approval
year, and therapeutic area (see Section 2.2).


C.4    Measuring Market Value of Approved Drugs

   To construct an estimate of the drug’s private value, we closely follow the methodology of Kogan
et al. (2017). We focus on the firm’s idiosyncratic return defined as the firm’s return minus the
return on the market portfolio, for up to 5 trading days following FDA approval. This window
provides time for the market to incorporate this information, while also reducing the possibility
that this return also incorporates unrelated events. Similar to Kogan et al. (2017), we also allow for
the possibility that this return window also incorporates stock price movements that are unrelated
to the value of the approved drug.
   Specifically, we closely follow Kogan et al. (2017) and assume that the cumulative return of the
firm in that 5-day window equals
                                            Rj = vj + εj ,                                      (C.1)




                                                 67
where vj ∼ N + (0, σv2 ) denotes the value of drug j – as a fraction of the firm’s market capitalization
– and εj ∼ N (0, σε2 ) denotes the component of the firm’s stock return that is unrelated to the patent.
We focus our attention on the first approval date for each drug. After restricting the sample to
drugs with similarity scores that we can match to the CRSP dataset, we are left with 34 firms and
462 announcement days.
     To calibrate the noise-to-signal ratio σv2 /σε2 we compare the return volatility of the firm on days
with drug approvals to days without drug approvals. Since the distribution of vj is likely to depend
on the drug’s novelty, we estimate the signal-to-noise ratio separately across drug novelty categories.
We find that, on days in which drugs are approved, the variance of returns is approximately 11–36%
larger, depending on their novelty.
     Consequently, our estimate of the stock market change as a result of the drug’s FDA approval is
equal to
                                           ˆ = E[vj |rj ] Mj ,
                                           ∆V                                                      (C.2)

where Mj is the firm’s stock market capitalization at the end of the day prior to the FDA approval.
     However, the firm’s stock market change following the drug’s FDA approval is a composite
of both the contribution of the drug to the firm’s market value and the likelihood that the FDA
approval was a surprise to the market. Specifically, suppose that the ex-ante likelihood of FDA
approval is q. Following the approval of the drug by the FDA, the value of the firm should increase
by
                                           ∆V = (1 − qj ) ξj ,                                     (C.3)

where ξj is the private value of the drug (in dollars). But, novel drugs are less likely to be approved,
so qj varies with novelty. Hence, it is important to adjust these estimates. To do so, we linearly
approximate C.3 as log ∆V = log ξj + log(1 − q) ≈ log ξj − qj . The point estimates from Column
(9) of Table A.4 imply that the approval probability q̂j = q0 + 0.123 maxsimj , where the constant
incorporates, year, indication, and firm fixed effects.
     Putting the pieces together, our estimate of the log contribution of drug j to firm value is equal
to
                                    [
                                   log          ˆ j − 0.123 maxsimj .
                                       ξj = log ∆V                                                 (C.4)

That is, we have adjusted (C.3) for the differential likelihood that a more novel drug is approved by
the FDA—conditional on having reached Phase 3.


C.5     ASMRS

     We merge our drug-level data using both established drug naming conventions and manual
matching. Specifically, we first merge the Cortellis drugs to HAS drug identifiers (CIP7 codes) using

                                                   68
the Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical (ATC) drug codes associated with the CIP7 codes in the
French HAS. Next we use the HAS product names to merge to Cortellis drug names. We include
exact name matches and manually reviewed the results of a “fuzzy” name matching algorithm to
identify additional matches. Finally, we limited the matched set to a drug’s earliest entry in the HAS
data. The ASMR scores are assigned only to approved drugs that are available for reimbursement
from the French Government health system. After limiting our attention to the first approved
indication for drugs covered in both data sets, and for which we can compute novelty scores, we are
left with 385 drugs. In total, our data from Cortellis contains roughly 1,000 small molecule drugs
that achieved regulatory approval in the period of the French data coverage (2008–2013). We only
match 385 to the French data due to conservative name matching (with language differences) and
because not all drugs achieve regulatory approval in the European Union at the same time as they
reach the market in other countries.


C.6       Drug Patents

       In order to build our firm-level measure of drug patent life, we start by gathering patent
expiration and market exclusivity information for drugs that had been approved prior to the passage
of Medicare Part D in 2003. To maximize our drug patent life coverage, we combine multiple data
sources. As a starting point, we use information from the Federal Register on the key patents
for approved drugs, along with the patents’ expiration dates and market exclusivity extensions.
Extensions are usually the result of FDA rules that grant additional exclusivity after marketing
approval for new chemical entities, pediatric drugs, antibiotics, and orphan drugs.24 When we could
not match an approved drug to the Federal Register data, we used the patent expiration dates of
the drugs’ affliated “Orange Book” patents listed by the FDA.25
       After identifying exclusivity periods for approved drugs, we use drug names to merge this
information into our Cortellis drug data. We first match on exact names, then use a “fuzzy” match
technique to identify potential additional matches and reviewed that set manually. Once merged to
Cortellis entries, we can aggregate remaining exclusivity into a firm-level measure of drug patent
life as of 2003.


C.7       Matching Drugs to Companies

       One of the challenges in studying drug development pipelines is assigning drug candidates to
their developer firms in a given point in time. The reason for this issue is that multiple firms may be
  24
    We thank Duncan Gilchrist for sharing this Federal Registrar data.
  25
    The Orange Book covers all FDA approved drugs; however, a key limitation of Orange Book patents is that they
are designated by the producing firm and are subject to patent challenges.



                                                      69
connected with a single drug development project. Firms may team up to develop a drug through
joint ventures, financing partnerships, or web of licensing and subsidiary arrangements. Ideally, one
would assign ownership weights for a given drug (e.g., Firm A owns 30% and Firm B owns 70%).
But due to complicated licensing and royalty arrangements, the outside analyst cannot easily infer
such weights.
    As a result, we are left with two distinct options: a) allow a single drug candidate to count as
as a (full or equal weighted) member of multiple firms’ portfolios, or b) determine which company
is likely the central company in the development alliance, and assign that firm as the sole “lead”
developer. We use the former method—allowing multiple firms to get credit for a single drug
candidate or approved therapy. But when possible, we limit the set of assigned companies to those
that were most recently “active” with the drug in the Cortellis data.


C.8    Public Firms

    A number of our analyses require data on public firms in our drug development data. To
identify public companies in the Cortellis drug development data, we started by running all Cortellis
company names through Bureau Van Dijk’s Orbis software, which matches strings to company
identifiers (including ticker and cusip CUSIP identifiers for publicly traded firms). To ensure that
the Orbis process did not miss any notable public firms, we checked the match against historical
lists of public pharmaceutical firms (e.g., Nasdaq and Standard & Poor’s pharmaceutical indices) to
make sure we had positively matched major firms. In total, we match over 600 tickers to Cortellis
company identifiers. When we limit to publicly traded firms in our main analysis sample of 17,775
small molecule drugs, we are left with 140 public firms. While this may seem like a small number
given that we have over 3,585 distinct company identifiers linked to drugs in the sample, we also
see that these 140 public firms are responsible for more than half of the drug development activity
in the sample. After linking to public company identifiers (tickers and CUSIPS), we are able to
download daily stock data from The Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP), as well as
historical profits and R&D spending from Compustat. Out of these firms, approximately 71 are in
the United States and are publicly traded at some point (appear in CRSP). When estimating the
market reaction to an FDA approval, we further restrict the set to firms that were publicly traded
at the time of the drug’s first approval, we have 462 first-time approvals from 35 unique firms.


D     Additional Specification Checks

    We examine the robustness of our results with respect to an alternative measure of novelty,
specifically, the novelty of a drug’s biological target—this analysis includes both small molecule


                                                 70
drugs and biologics. Table A.19 in the Appendix, shows the results of this analysis for four different
biological criteria for target–novelty. First, whether a drug is the first using its target-action (e.g.,
Beta secretase 1 inhibitor, Cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitor). Second, whether a drug is the first in its
target, defined more coarsely based on the sixth level of the Cortellis target “tree” (e.g., Beta
secretase 1, Cyclooxygenase).26 Next, we use an even broader definition of target based on the
fifth level of the Cortellis tree (e.g., Beta secretase inhibitors are part of a larger class of Hydrolase
enzymes, and Cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitors fall within a group of Oxidoreductase targets). Finally,
we also developed a scoring a system that assigns a “target novelty” value to a drug according
to its targets’ locations in the tree and their entry order.27 These results show that treated firms
differentially develop more drug candidates aimed at new biological targets.
       In addition, we find that our results are not driven by pre-existing firm-specific trends (Appendix
Table A.20), and are robust to alternative definitions of novelty, specifically novelty with respect to
prior candidates for the same indication (Appendix Table A.17). Further, our results are robust
to different empirical specifications: Table A.21 in the Appendix considers Poisson count models,
Table A.24 considers a binary outcome variable (based on whether the firm have any new drugs),
and Table A.22 considers a binary treatment. Our results are also robust to different definitions
of treatment: Table A.23 shows that we can define Medicare Drug Life based on proportion of
drugs with more than 7 and 10 years of remaining exclusivity, weighted by drug MMS. In Appendix
Table A.25 we estimate alternative specifications wherein we control for the total years of remaining
patent life times the post period indicator, as a proxy for both development cycle and firm size, in
lieu of controlling for the overall proportion of drugs on patent. Last, our results are not driven by
the extreme values in the Medicare market share variable shown in Figure A.10; Table A.26 shows
that are results are similar if we exclude these firms.




  26
      The Cortellis target tree is a hierarchical ontology used to classify drug targets. It is similar in format to the
Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) target-based classification system that is commonly used in drug
databases (for example, the National Library of Medicine’s PubChem database reports KEGG codes for compound
entries).
   27
      The scoring system awards drugs higher target novelty scores if they are the first entrant into a target group, and
assigns greater scores to drugs that are first to lower level branches (i.e., closer to the tree’s root). For example, a
drug that is the first entrant to a fifth level branch is assigned a higher novelty score than a drug that is first in its
sixth level branch group, but the ninth entrant in its relevant fifth level branch.


                                                           71
Appendix Tables and Figures

                1200                      Figure A.1: # of Drug Candidates over Time




                                                                                                            200
                1000




                                                                                                                                    150
                                                                                                            Very Similar Candidates
                      800
       All Candidates
             600




                                                                                                                      100
                400




                                                                                                            50
                200
                0




                                                                                                            0
                            1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013
                                                               Year

                                                     All                     Score in [0.9-1]
                                                     Score in [0.9-1)



Notes: This figure plots the number of new drug candidates for which we have data on molecular structure over time.
The blue line all drug candidates. The red line represents drugs with similarity scores greater than 0.9, which indicates
over 90% overlapping chemical structures. The green line plots the same pattern, excluding drugs with similarity
equal to one; this is to avoid counting combination therapies which may use the same molecule in conjunction with
another molecule.




                                                                        72
                                                                       Figure A.2: Proportion FDA Approved, by Drug Similarity


                                   .25                            Binned Scatterplot, Disease and Quarter FE Adjusted                                                                       Binned Scatterplot, Disease and Quarter FE Adjusted




                                                                                                                                                                                 .35
                                                                                                                                 Proportion FDA Approved, Conditional on Phase 1
                                                                                                                                                                        .3
                                .2
        Proportion FDA Approved




                                                                                                                                                           .25
                   .15




                                                                                                                                                  .2
                                   .1




                                                                                                                                       .15
                                   .05




                                                                                                                                                            .1
                                                             .2            .4                   .6               .8     1                                                              .2            .4                    .6               .8    1
                                                                                Similarity to Prior Candidates                                                                                             Similarity to Prior Candidates


                                                                  Binned Scatterplot, Disease and Quarter FE Adjusted                                                                       Binned Scatterplot, Disease and Quarter FE Adjusted




                                                                                                                                                                                 .6
                                                        .4
        Proportion FDA Approved, Conditional on Phase 2




                                                                                                                                 Proportion FDA Approved, Conditional on Phase 3
                                                                                                                                                                       .55
                                              .35




                                                                                                                                                            .5
                                   .3




                                                                                                                                                 .45
                        .25




                                                                                                                                        .4
               .2                  .15




                                                                                                                                                            .35




                                                             .2            .4                   .6               .8     1                                                              .2             .4                    .6              .8    1
                                                                                Similarity to Prior Candidates                                                                                             Similarity to Prior Candidates




Notes: Figure A.2 presents binned scatterplots of drug-level similarity against whether a drug is FDA approved.
Each dot represents the proportion of candidates that FDA approved, among all candidates within a given similarity
score bin, conditional on disease (ICD9) and quarter of development fixed effects. The top left panel examines all drug
candidates; the top right represents only candidates that have made it into Phase 1 testing; the bottom left examines
approval outcomes conditional on making it into Phase 2; the final figure examines outcomes conditional on Phase 3.




                                                                                                                            73
                                         Figure A.3: Revenue, by Drug Similarity




                      19
           Log(Annual US Revenue)
             18       17.5 18.5




                                    .2        .4                 .6                 .8               1
                                                   Similarity to Prior Candidates

Notes: Figure A.3 presents a binned scatterplot of drug-level similarity against revenue conditional on approval. The
plot corresponds to the regression in Column (4) of Table A.5, which includes controls for drug indication, drug age,
and firm dummies.




                                                             74
          Figure A.4: Drug Similarity and Stock Market reaction on FDA Approval




            6
            5.8
         logVhat
           5.6
            5.4
            5.2




                   .2                  .4                  .6                      .8                    1
                                                        maxsim_p1

Notes: Figure A.4 presents a binned scatterplot of drug-level similarity against the logarithm of the estimated
dollar reaction on the (first) approval of the drug by the FDA. The dollar reaction to the FDA approval is estimated
following the methodology of Kogan et al. (2017) and uses a 5-day window following the FDA approval. Each dot
represents mean log value, among all candidates within a given similarity score bin, conditional on disease (ICD9);
patent issue year; firm; and year of development fixed effects, which corresponds to Column (3) of Appendix Table A.6.
We adjust our estimates for differences in the ex-ante probability of approval using the point estimates of Column (9)
of Table A.4.




                                                         75
                                                               Figure A.5: Drug Similarity and Drug Effectiveness




                                                     .5
           Proportion of Drugs Adding Value (ASMR<V)
                .1         .2     0 .3        .4




                                                          .2              .4                  .6                .8   1
                                                                               Similarity to Prior Candidates
Notes: Figure A.5 presents a binned scatterplot of drug-level similarity against drug added benefits. A drug’s added
benefit is derived from the from the French Haute Autorité de Santé (HAS) health system’s clinical added benefits
scores (Amélioration du Service Medical Rendu, or ASMR), which range from one to five (I to V), with V indicating
no value added. In the plot above, the y-axis values represent the proportion of drugs in each similarity bin that
had ASMR values less than V, after normalizing by disease area (ICD9) and the year of each drug’s first regulatory
approval year.




                                                                                         76
                               Figure A.6: Drug Similarity and Patent Citations




                    1.5
                    1.4
            FWD cites
                    1.3
                    1.2




                          .3          .4           .5               .6            .7              .8
                                             Similarity to Prior Candidates

Notes: Figure A.6 presents a binned scatterplot of drug-level similarity against the logarithm of one plus the
number of forward citations the patent receives. Each dot represents mean log value, among all candidates within
a given similarity score bin, conditional on disease (ICD9); patent issue year; company (assignee code), and year
of development fixed effects. This specification corresponds to Column (4) of Table A.8. Please see Table A.8 for
additional specifications.




                                                       77
                      Figure A.7: Drug Similarity and Market Value of Patents




                             2.2
                             2.1
                          log KPSS
                              2
                             1.9
                             1.8




                                     .3        .4               .5               .6      .7
                                                    Similarity to Prior Candidates


Notes: Figure A.7 presents a binned scatterplot of drug-level similarity against the logarithm of the Kogan et al.
(2017) estimated patent values. Each dot represents mean log value, among all candidates within a given similarity
score bin, conditional on disease (ICD9); patent issue year; firm and year of development fixed effects. This specification
corresponds to Column (4) of Table A.9. Please see Table A.9 for additional specifications.




                                                             78
                                 Figure A.8: Proxies for Development Costs, by Drug Similarity


                 7000                     Patients Enrolled, All Candidates                                         # Trials, All Candidates




                                                                                                50
                 6000




                                                                                                40
        Patients Enrolled




                                                                                            # Trials
               5000




                                                                                              30
                 4000




                                                                                                20
                 3000




                                                                                                10
                            .2       .4                      .6               .8   1                   .2   .4                    .6               .8   1
                                             Similarity to Prior Candidates                                       Similarity to Prior Candidates



                                    Patients Enrolled, Similarity=1 Excluded                                     # Trials, Similarity=1 Excluded
                 8000




                                                                                                60
                 7000




                                                                                                50
        Patients Enrolled
                 6000




                                                                                            # Trials
                                                                                               40
                 5000




                                                                                                30
                 4000




                                                                                                20




                            .2       .4                     .6                .8   1                   .2   .4                    .6               .8   1
                                             Similarity to Prior Candidates                                       Similarity to Prior Candidates




Notes: Figure A.8 presents a binned scatterplot of drug-level similarity against proxies for the direct cost of drug
development. Each dot represents the mean number of patients enrolled (or number of trials conducted), among all
candidates within a given similarity score bin, conditional on disease (ICD9) and quarter of development fixed effects.
In the bottom two panels, we exclude drug candidates with a similarity score of 1 to restrict to candidates that likely
did not rely on results of trials conducted for an identical past drug.




                                                                                       79
              Figure A.9: Drug Similarity and Market Value of Patents: Placebo Experiments



                 0.1



                0.08



                0.06



                0.04



                0.02



                   0
                        −4        −3        −2       −1         0        1         2         3        4
                                                           t-statistic

Figure plots the distribution of estimated coefficients t-statistics, from estimating equation (??) linking drug similarity
and the Kogan et al. (2017) measure of patent value across 5,000 placebo experiments. In each placebo experiment,
we randomly generate a different issue date for each patent within the same year the patent is granted to the firm.
We then reconstruct the Kogan et al. (2017) using these placebo grant dates. The solid line on the right corresponds
to the t statistic using the real data – column (6) in Table 2. Approximately 2.3% of the placebos generate estimates
that are of the same sign—and more significant—than our empirical estimates.




                                                           80
                      Figure A.10: Distribution of Medicare Drug Life in 2003


                                                             All Firms




                        40
                        30
                    Percent
                     20 10
                        0




                               0      .2               .4                    .6     .8   1
                                                            Drug Life, MMS



                                           Firms with Medicare Drug Life in (0,1)
                        20
                        15
                     Percent
                    10  5
                        0




                               0      .2              .4                    .6      .8   1
                                                    Restricted Drug Life, MMS




Notes: Figure A.10 plots the distribution of Medicare Drug Life in 2003. Each observation is a firm in our main
analysis sample.




                                                              81
                                                               Figure A.11: Firm Experience, by Drug Similarity


                                                                                    All Prior Candidates




                                     3.2             3
                   Log (1 + # of Previous compounds)
                 2.6               2.8
                                     2.4




                                                          .2              .4                      .6              .8   1
                                                                                 Similarity to Prior Candidates


                                                                                 Prior Original Candidates
                                     2.2
                                     2
                 Log (1 + # of Previous compounds)
                          1.6        1.4
                                     1.2 1.8




                                                         .2               .4                     .6               .8   1
                                                                                 Similarity to Prior Candidates




Notes: Figure A.11 presents a binned scatterplot of drug-level similarity against measures of firm experience. Each dot
represents the mean log of past firm experience, among all candidates within a given similarity score bin, conditional
on disease (ICD9) and quarter of development fixed effects. In the top panel, past firm experience is defined as
one plus the total number of compounds developed by this firm prior to a the drug candidate in question. In the
bottom panel, we count experience using only past compounds for which the given firm had ownership at the time the
compound first enters development.




                                                                                          82
          Figure A.12: Impact of Additional Resources on Novelty, within Indication


                                                                                              A. Coefficients




                                                      .4
                      Impact of MMS Drug Life on Candidates in Bin
                       0          .1            .2    -.1    .3




                                                                                    1       2                                    3                4
                                                                                        Maximum Similarity to Prior Candidates, Binned

                                                                                            Bottom 50th Percentile          Top 50th Percentile




                                                                                               B. Elasticities
                                                      2
                      Impact of MMS Drug Life on Candidates in Bin (elasticities)
                             0           .5            1
                                                      -.5            1.5




                                                                                    1       2                                    3                4
                                                                                        Maximum Similarity to Prior Candidates, Binned

                                                                                            Bottom 50th Percentile          Top 50th Percentile




Notes: Figure A.12 plots the estimated coefficients on Post × Medicare Drug Lifef,2003 from our main regression
specification defined by Equation (3) across firm size groups (defined by total revenue generated by approved drugs
prior to 2003). The outcome variable is number of drug candidates across novelty bins.




                                                                                                          83
         Figure A.13: Impact of Additional Resources on Novelty, within Indication




                                                .3
                    Impact of Medicare Drug Life on Log(1 + # Candidates)
                              0              .1 -.1           .2




                                                                            1   2       3            4         5         6          7         8        9   10
                                                                                    Similarity to Prior Candidates in Same Indication, Tanimoto Bins




Notes: Figure A.13 plots the estimated coefficients on Post × Medicare Drug Lifef,2003 from our main regression
specification defined by Equation (3). This figure is analogous to the bottom panel of Figure 7 of the main text,
except that similarity is measured with respect to other drugs in the same indication (disease).




                                                                                                              84
                                                                             Figure A.14: Original vs. Acquired




                                             .15
                      Impact of Medicare Drug Life on # Candidates
                          0               .05-.05           .1




                                                                     1   2      3     4             5           6           7               8   9   10
                                                                                      Similarity to Prior Candidates, Deciles

                                                                                      In House Candidates             Acquired Candidates




Notes: Figure A.14 plots the estimated coefficients on Post × Medicare Drug Lifef,2003 from our main regression
specification defined by Equation (3), with the sample split based on firm experience in drug development. Each point
represents a different outcome variable: the number of new drug candidates in a given bin of similarity. The blue line
(above) represents the coefficients corresponding firms. The red line (below) displays the coefficients for drugs that the
developer acquired. Both sets of coefficients include 95% confidence intervals around the point estimates.




                                                                                                     85
                                                                        Figure A.15: Experienced vs. Inexperienced Firms




                                            .15
                     Impact of MMS Drug Life on Candidates in Bin
                         0             .05  -.05         .1




                                                                    1       2     3       4          5             6           7                8   9   10
                                                                                      Maximum Similarity to Prior Candidates, Binned

                                                                                          Bottom 75th Percentile          Top 25th Percentile




Notes: Figure A.15 plots the estimated coefficients on Post × Medicare Drug Lifef,2003 from our main regression
specification defined by Equation (3), with the sample split based . Each point represents a different outcome variable:
the number of new drug candidates in a given bin of similarity. The red line (above) represents the coefficients
corresponding to firms in the top 25th percentile of experience (as proxied by one plus the number of new drug
candidates the firm had previously developed) while the blue line (below) displays the coefficients for firms in the
bottom 75th percentile of firm experience. Both sets of coefficients include 95% confidence intervals around the point
estimates.




                                                                                                           86
                          Table A.1: Pharmaceutical firms and debt finance

                               A. Compustat North America                            B. Compustat Global

                                (1)           (2)              (3)            (1)            (2)            (3)

  Pharmaceutical            -0.0330∗∗     -0.0709∗∗∗     -0.0808∗∗∗        -0.00775      -0.0287∗∗∗     -0.0324∗∗∗
                             (-2.60)        (-4.75)        (-5.24)          (-0.96)        (-3.40)        (-3.72)

  Size, log                                0.0188∗∗∗      0.0239∗∗∗                     0.00650∗∗∗      0.00658∗∗∗
                                            (32.09)        (40.39)                        (37.41)         (35.70)

  Profitability                                          -0.0384∗∗∗                                     -0.0270∗∗∗
                                                          (-12.46)                                       (-13.46)

  Mean leverage ratio          0.174         0.174          0.174            0.118         0.118           0.118

  N                          261,158        261,158        249,845          533,580       533,577        493,448
  R2                          0.008          0.058          0.086            0.003         0.024          0.022




Notes: Table A.1 compares leverage ratios of the pharmaceutical firms in our sample and compares them to
the broader Compustat universe. Standard errors are clustered by firm. Firm size is book assets (Compustat:
at); profitability is income before extraordinary items (Compustat: ib) plus depreciation (Compustat: dp) over
book assets. Panel A presents results for firms in Compustat North America; Panel B for Compustat Global. All
specifications include time fixed effects. We report t-statistics in parentheses, with standard errors clustered by firm.
∗
  p < 0.10,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01.




                                                          87
                             Table Drivers
                                   A.2: Drivers
                                           of Pairwise DrugDrug
                                                of Pairwise Similarity
                                                                Similarity

                                                        Drug Candidate Pairwise Similarity

                                                                       Mean = 0.106

                                              (1)                (2)                  (3)             (4)

          Share Target-Action               0.167***          0.122***
          Mean: 0.022                      (6.24e-05)         (0.00838)


          Share Indication                                                      0.0102***          0.0285***
          Mean: 0.149                                                           (8.51e-06)         (0.00200)




          N                               955,921,961       955,921,961        955,921,961        955,921,961

          R2                                 0.025              0.265             0.002              0.075

          Target-Action FEs                                      X

          Indication FEs                                                                               X




Notes: Table A.2 examines the relationship between indicator variables for sharing the same target-action or the same
indication (ICD9) on the pairwise similarity of two drug candidates, call them drug A and drug B. Because single drug
can be associated with multiple target-actions and indications, each observation is a drugA-actionA-indicationA-drugB-
actionB-indicationB pair. We include such a pair for every pair of drugs in our data. ∗ p < 0.10,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01.




                                                           88
                          Table A.3: Proportion First in Target, by Drug Similarity


                                                          First in Narrow Target            First in Broad Target

                                                                    Mean: 0.194                      Mean: 0.068

                                                             (1)                   (2)        (3)                   (4)

                                                          -0.210***           -0.175***    -0.144***          -0.141***
    Similarity Measure
                                                           (0.0148)            (0.0153)    (0.00858)          (0.00921)



    N                                                      15,160                 15,160    15,160                 15,160

    R2                                                      0.052                 0.129      0.044                 0.076

    Quarter of Development FEs                               X                      X         X                      X

    Disease FEs                                                                     X                                X
   *** p<0.1, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1


   Notes: Pre period mean of Medicare Drug Life is 0.54



Notes: Table A.3 examines the relationship between drug level similarity (maximum similarity to any prior developed
drug candidate) and a drug’s likelihood of being the first in its target, defined narrowly (target and action) and
broadly (coarse target family). Observations are at the drug level and results are reported with robust standard errors.
The accompanying binned scatterplot of results is shown in Figure 3. ∗ p < 0.10,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01.




                                                                         89
                                                  Table A.4: Proportion FDA Approved, by Drug Similarity

                                                           All                                   Phase 1                        Phase 2                       Phase 3
                                           (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)               (5)          (6)               (7)          (8)              (9)
         Maximum Similarity             0.269***        0.227***       0.208***        0.300***        0.254***       0.312***        0.249***       0.271***        0.123
                                         (0.033)         (0.031)        (0.040)         (0.045)         (0.060)        (0.051)         (0.071)        (0.073)       (0.088)
         R2                               0.091           0.165          0.466           0.103             0.519        0.097             0.544        0.080            0.668
         Development Year FEs              Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes               Yes          Yes               Yes          Yes              Yes
         ICD-9 FEs                                         Yes            Yes                               Yes                            Yes                           Yes
         Firm FEs                                                         Yes                               Yes                            Yes                           Yes
         Observations                     19191          19127           18488          11476              11036        9508              9152         5158             4873



     Notes: Table A.4 examines the relationship between drug level similarity (maximum similarity to any prior developed drug candidate that ever reached Phase 1
     clinical trials) and a drug’s likelihood of reaching FDA approval. Observations are at the drug-ICD9 level and results are reported with standard errors clustered
     at the firm level. The analysis sample changes by column, including all drugs (Columns 1 to 3), drugs that reach Phase 1 (Columns 4 and 5), drugs that
90




     reach Phase 2 (Columns 6 and 7), and drugs that reach Phase 3 (Columns 8 and 9). The accompanying binned scatterplot of results is shown in Figure A.2.
     ∗
       p < 0.10,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01.
                                Table A.5: Revenue, by Drug Similarity

                                                          Log(Annual US Revenue)
                                          (1)                (2)            (3)                       (4)
     Maximum Similarity                -1.449∗∗∗             -1.307∗∗∗         -1.253∗∗∗           -0.641∗
                                        (0.280)               (0.286)           (0.297)            (0.293)
     R2                                  0.092                0.272              0.293              0.574
     Year FEs                             Yes                  Yes                Yes                Yes
     ICD-9 FEs                                                 Yes                Yes                Yes
     Launch Year FEs                                                              Yes                Yes
     Firm FEs                                                                                        Yes
     Observations                       11,256                11,243             11,243             11,230



Notes: Table A.5 examines the relationship between drug level similarity (maximum similarity to any prior developed
drug candidate that ever reached Phase 1 clinical trials) and a drug’s revenue conditional on approval. Drug revenue
data is derived by matching approved drugs to the Medicare Expenditure Panel Survey. We estimate a panel regression
at the drug-ICD9-year level with year fixed effects throughout. To control for differences across drugs, we include
fixed effects for indication (ICD-9); drug cohort (the year the drug is launched); and firm. We cluster the standard
errors clustered at the calendar year and ICD-9 level. The accompanying binned scatterplot of results is shown in
Figure A.3. ∗ p < 0.10,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01.




                                                        91
               Table A.6: Market reaction to FDA approval, by Drug Similarity


                                                    (1)               (2)               (3)

                 Maximum Similarity              -1.321∗∗∗         -2.191∗∗∗         -1.100∗∗∗
                                                  (0.453)           (0.592)           (0.380)

                 R2                                0.065             0.373             0.858

                 Fixed Effects:
                  Approval Year                      Y                 Y                 Y
                  Indication (ICD-9)                                   Y                 Y
                  Firm                                                                   Y
                 Observations                       462               411               399




Notes: Table A.6 examines the relationship between drug level similarity (maximum similarity to any prior developed
drug candidate) and the logarithm of the estimated dollar reaction on the (first) approval of the drug by the FDA. The
dollar reaction to the FDA approval is estimated following the methodology of Kogan et al. (2017) and uses a 5-day
window following the FDA approval. Observations are at the drug level. We report standard errors in parentheses
clustered by firm and indication. Controls include: 1) the year the drug is approved; 2) the ICD9 disease area treated
by the drug; and 3) company fixed effects. The accompanying binned scatterplot of results is shown in Figure A.4.
∗
  p < 0.10,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01.




                                                          92
                         Table A.7: Drug Novelty and Drug Effectiveness

                                    (1)          (2)             (3)          (4)          (5)       (6)
                                 Any Value    Any Value         High         High         ASMR      ASMR
                                  Added        Added          Importance   Importance     Value     Value

                                 ASMR<V        ASMR<V         ASMR<IV      ASMR<IV

       Maximum Similarity        -0.343∗∗∗     -0.263∗∗∗       -0.100∗∗       -0.064     0.347∗∗∗   0.208∗∗
                                  (0.058)       (0.053)         (0.045)      (0.041)      (0.122)   (0.104)

       R2                          0.650         0.760          0.529         0.687       0.596      0.739

       Controls
       Development Year FEs         Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes         Yes        Yes
       ICD-9 FEs                    Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes         Yes        Yes
       Firm FEs                                   Yes                          Yes                    Yes

       N                            1839         1778            1839         1778         1839      1778




Notes: Table A.7 examines the relationship between drug level similarity (maximum similarity to any prior drug
candidate that had reached phase 1 clinical trials) and the French Haute Autorité de Santé (HAS) health system’s
measure of clinical added benefits (Amélioration du Service Medical Rendu, or ASMR). The ASMR scores range
from I (major value added) to V (no value added). The analysis sample includes approved small molecule drugs
that recieved ASMR scores and that we were able to match to drugs in the Cortellis database. Controls include
indication (ICD9 code), drug launch year and company identifiers. Standard errors are clustered by indication. The
accompanying binned scatterplot of results is shown in Figure A.5. ∗ p < 0.10,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01.




                                                         93
                           Table A.8: Patent citations and Drug Similarity


                                                                 A. All patents
         log(1 + citations)
                                               (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)

         Maximum Similarity                  -0.022          -0.160∗        -0.130∗         -0.173∗∗
                                             (0.081)         (0.084)        (0.078)          (0.078)

         N                                   119080          119080         119069           118765
         R2                                   0.268           0.287          0.301            0.404

                                                              B. US patents only
         log(1 + citations)
                                               (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)

         Maximum Similarity                   0.213           0.011          -0.002         -0.565∗∗∗
                                             (0.154)         (0.148)        (0.136)          (0.196)

         N                                   11,557          11,557          11,536          11,324
         R2                                   0.666           0.685          0.710            0.850

         Fixed Effects:
         Country × Issue Year                   Y               Y              Y                Y
         Drug Development Year                                  Y              Y                Y
         ICD-9                                                                 Y                Y
         Firm                                                                                   Y




Notes: Table A.8 examines the relationship between drug level similarity (maximum similarity to any prior developed
drug candidate) and the logarithm of one plus the number of forward citations. The matching between drugs and
patents is from Cortellis. We restrict attention to patents issued prior to the FDA approval. Observations are at the
drug-disease(ICD9)-patent level. We report standard errors in parentheses clustered by firm. Controls include: 1)
the country and the year the patent is granted; 2) the ICD9 disease area treated by the drug; 3) the year the drug
is developed; and 4) company fixed effects. The accompanying binned scatterplot of results is shown in Figure A.6.
∗
  p < 0.10,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01.




                                                        94
                        Table A.9: Patent market value and Drug Similarity


                                                                      US patents
      log(KPSS value)
                                              (1)               (2)                (3)             (4)

      Maximum Similarity                  -1.428∗∗∗          -1.662∗∗∗        -1.618∗∗∗         -0.469∗∗
                                           (0.447)           (0.386)           (0.361)          (0.196)

      N                                      5130              5130                5090           5031
      R2                                    0.104             0.206             0.346            0.862

      Fixed Effects:
      Issue Year                              Y                 Y                   Y              Y
      Drug Development Year                                     Y                   Y              Y
      ICD-9                                                                         Y              Y
      Firm                                                                                         Y




Notes: Table A.9 examines the relationship between drug level similarity (maximum similarity to any prior developed
drug candidate) and the logarithm of the estimated patent value, where the latter is based on Kogan et al. (2017).
The matching between drugs and patents is from Cortellis. We restrict attention to patents issued prior to the FDA
approval. Observations are at the drug-disease(ICD9)-patent level. We report standard errors in parentheses clustered
by firm. Controls include: 1) the year the patent is granted; 2) the ICD9 disease area treated by the drug; 3) the
year the drug is developed 4) company fixed effects; 5) the interaction between company and year fixed effects. The
accompanying binned scatterplot of results is shown in Figure A.7. ∗ p < 0.10,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01.




                                                        95
                         Table A.10: Drug Novelty and Development Costs


                                              (a) All Candidates

                                                       Patients Enrolled           # of Trials
                                                              (1)                     (2)
                  Maximum Similarity                          -580.394                -2.621
                                                             (509.676)               (3.550)
                  R2                                          0.194                   0.170
                  Qtr of Development FEs                       Yes                     Yes
                  ICD-9 FEs                                    Yes                     Yes
                  Observations                                8801                    10546

                               (b) Candidates with Similarity Score < 1

                                                      Patients Enrolled             # of Trials
                                                             (1)                       (2)
                Maximum Similarity                         1099.570*                  7.982*
                                                           (633.287)                  (4.418)
                R2                                            0.201                    0.175
                Qtr of Development FEs                         Yes                      Yes
                ICD-9 FEs                                      Yes                      Yes
                Observations                                  8280                     9903



Notes: Table A.10 examines the relationship between drug level similarity (maximum similarity to any prior developed
drug candidate) and the the cost of drug development (as proxied for by the number of patients and number of
clinical trials). Panel B excludes candidates with similarity scores of exactly 1, which may include extended release
formulations that require fewer additional trials. Observations are at the drug level-ICD9 and results are reported
with standard errors clustered by ICD9. The accompanying binned scatterplots of results are shown in Figure A.8.
∗
  p < 0.10,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01.




                                                        96
                            Table A.11: Firm Experience, by Drug Similarity

                                      Log(1 + All Prior Candidates)           Log(1 + Prior Original Candidates)
                                         (1)                 (2)                  (3)                (4)

     Maximum Similarity               -0.764**            -0.751***           -0.906***           -0.837***
                                       (0.315)             (0.291)              (0.204)            (0.198)

     R2                                 0.030               0.078               0.069               0.124
     Company FEs                         Yes                 Yes                 Yes                 Yes
     Qtr of Development FEs              Yes                 Yes                 Yes                 Yes
     ICD-9 FEs                                               Yes                                     Yes
     Observations                       28521               28486               21220               21182


Notes: Table A.11 examines the relationship between drug level similarity (maximum similarity to any prior developed
drug candidate) and the experience of the firm (as measured by the log of past compounds). Observations are at
the drug-icd9-firm level and results are reported with standard errors clustered by firm. The accompanying binned
scatterplot of results is shown in Figure A.11. ∗ p < 0.10,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01.




                                                           97
                         Table A.12: In-House vs. Acquired Drug Candidates

                                                               (1)          (2)              (3)
                                                               All      In House          Acquired

          Post 2003 X Medicare Drug Life                  0.263***       0.223**           0.094*
                                                           (0.096)       (0.086)           (0.049)

          R2                                                0.595         0.593             0.321
          Company FEs                                          Yes         Yes               Yes
          Qtr of Development FEs                               Yes         Yes               Yes
          Overall Drug Life/Firm MMS                           Yes         Yes               Yes
          Observations                                     16442          16442             16442

Notes: Table A.12 reports the main specification coefficient for Post × Medicare Drug Lifef,2003 . Model 1 repeats
the result from our main regression specification (Column 6 of table 4). Model 2 limits the dependent variable to
the number of new drug candidates that originated within the focal firm (in-house), while Model 3 includes only
drug candidates that the focal firm acquired (originated at another firm) All models include a full set of company
and quarter indicator variables, with Post × Overall Drug Lifef,2003 and Post × Firm MMSf,2003 both included as
additional independent variables, but not reported in the table. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered
around company identifiers. ∗ p < 0.10,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01.




                                                          98
                              Table A.13: Impact of Resources on # Original New Candidates, by Similarity Decile


                                                                       (a) In House Candidates

                                                                                 Log(1 + New In House Candidates), by Similarity Decile

                                               1            2             3             4           5             6               7             8           9          10

        Post 2003 X Medicare Drug            0.020       0.074**       0.046*         0.042      0.064**      0.048**       0.053**       0.035**       0.011        0.005
        Life                                (0.015)      (0.030)       (0.023)       (0.027)     (0.028)      (0.020)       (0.025)       (0.018)      (0.017)      (0.013)

        R2                                  0.169         0.273        0.272          0.302       0.310        0.238         0.218         0.187        0.172        0.104
        Company FEs                          Yes           Yes          Yes            Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes
        Qtr of Development FEs               Yes           Yes          Yes            Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes
        Overall Drug Life/Firm MMS           Yes           Yes          Yes            Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes
        Observations                        16442         16442        16442          16442       16442        16442         16442         16442        16442        16442


                                                                       (a) Acquired Candidates

                                                                               Log(1 + New Acquired Candidates), by Similarity Decile
99




                                               1            2             3             4           5            6            7             8           9            10

        Post 2003 X Medicare Drug           0.032**       0.016         0.012         -0.010      0.019        0.007        0.013        0.019        0.005        0.005
        Life                                (0.014)      (0.013)       (0.018)       (0.015)     (0.012)      (0.009)      (0.012)      (0.013)      (0.012)      (0.012)

        R2                                   0.069        0.084        0.081          0.079       0.079       0.066         0.056         0.083       0.085        0.076
        Company FEs                           Yes          Yes          Yes            Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes
        Qtr of Development FEs                Yes          Yes          Yes            Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes
        Overall Drug Life/Firm MMS            Yes          Yes          Yes            Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes
        Observations                         16442        16442        16442          16442       16442       16442         16442         16442       16442        16442


     Notes: Table A.13 reports the main specification coefficient for Post × Medicare Drug Lifef,2003 . In Panel A, the dependent variable is limited to new drug
     candidates that were originally developed in the focal firm, and varies by new drug candidates’ deciles of maximum similarity compared to all prior drug candidates
     that reached phase I trials. In Panel B, dependent variable includes only newly acquired drug candidates that originated at other firms. All models include a full
     set of company and quarter indicator variables, with Post × Overall Drug Lifef,2003 and Post × Firm MMSf,2003 both included as additional independent variables.
     Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered around company identifiers. ∗ p < 0.10,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01.
                                            Table A.14: Impact of Resources on # New Candidates, by Novelty


                                                                       (a) Absolute Similarity Bins

                                                                                        Log(1 + New Candidates), by Similarity Bin

                                                 1            2            3             4              5             6             7            8             9           10

         Post 2003 X Medicare Drug             0.001        0.000       0.054**       0.134**       0.123***       0.059**        0.028        0.010        0.012         0.008
         Life                                 (0.003)      (0.005)      (0.022)       (0.058)        (0.044)       (0.028)       (0.020)      (0.016)      (0.011)       (0.018)

         R2                                   0.023         0.034        0.188         0.506         0.395          0.231        0.163         0.128        0.111        0.118
         Company FEs                           Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes
         Qtr of Development FEs                Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes
         Overall Drug Life/Firm MMS            Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes
         Observations                         16442         16442        16442         16442         16442          16442        16442         16442        16442        16442


                                                                         (b) Deciles of Similarity

                                                                                       Log(1 + New Candidates), by Similarity Decile
100




                                                 1             2            3             4             5             6             7             8             9              10

         Post 2003 X Medicare Drug            0.049**      0.084**       0.053*         0.029       0.083***       0.051**       0.064**       0.052**        0.017        0.009
         Life                                 (0.023)      (0.035)       (0.029)       (0.028)       (0.031)       (0.022)       (0.029)       (0.024)       (0.020)      (0.019)

         R2                                   0.176         0.280         0.283        0.314         0.324          0.247         0.223         0.210        0.201         0.141
         Company FEs                           Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes
         Qtr of Development FEs                Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes
         Overall Drug Life/Firm MMS            Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes
         Observations                         16442         16442         16442        16442         16442          16442         16442         16442        16442         16442


      Notes: Table A.14 reports the main specification coefficient for Post × Medicare Drug Lifef,2003 . In Panel A, the dependent variable varies by new drug candidates’
      absolute maximum similarity compared to all prior drug candidates that reached phase I trials (e.g. bin 6 represents all drugs with maximum similarity scores in
      the range 0.5-0.6). In Panel B, the dependent variable is split into bins that represent new drugs’ deciles of maximum similarity score. All models include a full set
      of company and quarter indicator variables, with Post × Overall Drug Lifef,2003 and Post × Firm MMSf,2003 both included as additional independent variables.
      Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered around company identifiers. ∗ p < 0.10,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01.
                                        Table A.15: Firm Experience

                                                         Log(1 + New Candidates), by Experience
                                                          (1)                (2)                   (3)
                                                          All               Top 25              Bottom 75
       Post 2003 X Medicare                            0.263***             0.260**                0.053
       Drug Life                                        (0.096)             (0.118)               (0.040)
       R2                                               0.595                0.578                  0.049
       Company FEs                                       Yes                  Yes                    Yes
       Qtr of Development FEs                            Yes                  Yes                    Yes
       Overall Drug Life/Firm MMS                        Yes                  Yes                    Yes
       Observations                                     16442                11122                  4040

Notes: Table A.15 reports the main specification coefficient for Post × Medicare Drug Lifef,2003 . Column (1) repeats
the result from our main regression specification (Column (6) of Table 4). Column (2) limits the sample to firms in the
top 25% of the experience distribution (as proxied by number of drug candidates previously developed), while Column
(3) includes firms in the bottom 75th percentile in terms of experience. All models include a full set of company
and quarter indicator variables, with Post × Overall Drug Lifef,2003 and Post × Firm MMSf,2003 both included as
additional independent variables, but not reported in the table. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered
around company identifiers. ∗ p < 0.10,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01.




                                                         101
                                      Table A.16: Impact of Resources on # New Candidates, by Firm Experience


                                                            (a) Experienced Firms (top 25th percentile)

                                                                                   Log(1 + New Candidates), by Similarity Decile

                                                1            2            3            4            5            6            7             8            9          10

        Post 2003 X Medicare Drug            0.050*       0.084*        0.051        0.026       0.091**      0.050*         0.055       0.049*        0.014      0.009
        Life                                 (0.027)      (0.043)      (0.035)      (0.034)      (0.037)      (0.026)       (0.036)      (0.028)      (0.025)    (0.024)

        R2                                    0.171        0.276        0.274        0.308        0.317        0.241        0.220        0.202         0.195      0.133
        Company FEs
        Qtr of Development FEs
        Overall Drug Life/Firm MMS
        Observations                         11122        11122        11122        11122         11122        11122        11122        11122        11122       11122


                                                       (a) Less Experienced Firms (bottom 75th percentile)

                                                                                    Log(1 + New Candidates), by Similarity Decile
102




                                                1            2            3            4            5            6             7             8               9       10

        Post 2003 X Medicare Drug             -0.018       0.011        -0.007       0.000        0.001        -0.005      0.050***        0.003        0.003     0.016**
        Life                                 (0.017)      (0.010)      (0.008)      (0.002)      (0.002)      (0.006)       (0.017)       (0.004)      (0.005)    (0.006)

        R2                                    0.045        0.039        0.032        0.030        0.028        0.043         0.034         0.039        0.033       0.054
        Company FEs
        Qtr of Development FEs
        Overall Drug Life/Firm MMS
        Observations                          4040         4040         4040         4040         4040         4040          4040          4040         4040        4040


      Notes: Table A.16 reports the main specification coefficient for Post × Medicare Drug Lifef,2003 . In Panel A, the sample includes only firms in the top 25th
      percentile of experience (number of drugs developed by 2003). The sample Panel B includes only the remaining firms in the bottome three quartiles of firm
      experience. All models include a full set of company and quarter indicator variables, with Post × Overall Drug Lifef,2003 and Post × Firm MMSf,2003 both included
      as additional independent variables. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered around company identifiers. ∗ p < 0.10,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01.
                                 Table A.17: Impact of Resources on # New Candidates, Similarity within Indication


                                                                                         Log(1 + New Candidates), by Similarity Decile

                                                 1             2             3             4             5             6              7              8             9              10

         Post 2003 X Medicare Drug             0.050        0.089**       0.072*       0.094**       0.080**       0.092***        0.069**       0.103***       0.056*         0.030
         Life                                 (0.036)       (0.044)       (0.040)      (0.041)       (0.038)        (0.030)        (0.033)        (0.034)       (0.032)       (0.024)

         R2                                    0.186         0.234        0.293         0.317         0.348          0.365          0.333         0.300          0.251        0.209
         Company FEs                            Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes          Yes
         Qtr of Development FEs                 Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes          Yes
         Overall Drug Life/Firm MMS             Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes          Yes
         Observations                          16442         16442        16442         16442         16442          16442          16442         16442          16442        16442


      Notes: Table A.17 shows that our results are robust to alternative definitions of novelty: we compute drug similarities relative to all prior drug candidates that
      reached phase I trials and were developed for the same disease area as the focal drug. We report the main specification coefficient for Post × Medicare Drug Lifef,2003 .
      Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered around company identifiers. ∗ p < 0.10,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01.
103
                                         Table A.18: New Biologics

                                                                  Log(1 + New Biologics)
                                                        (1)             (2)              (3)
                                                        All          Past Exp.       No Past Exp.
         Post 2003 X Medicare Drug Life               0.045             0.352**                 0.007
                                                     (0.048)            (0.152)                (0.012)
         R2                                           0.366              0.306                 0.083
         Company FEs                                   Yes                Yes                   Yes
         Qtr of Development FEs                        Yes                Yes                   Yes
         Overall Drug Life/Firm MMS                    Yes                Yes                   Yes
         Observations                                 16442               825                  15609

Notes: Table A.18 reports the main specification coefficient for Post × Medicare Drug Lifef,2003 but focuses on the
development of biologics. The dependent variable is the log of one plus the number of new biologics introduced
into development per company-quarter. New biologic drugs are identified through the Cortellis Investigational
Drugs drug development histories. All models include a full set of company and quarter indicator variables, with
Post × Overall Drug Lifef,2003 and Post × Firm MMSf,2003 both included as additional independent variables, but not
reported in the table. Column 1 includes all firms, while Columns 2 and 3 separate firms by whether or not they had
developed biologic drugs prior to 2004. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered around company identifiers.
∗
    p < 0.10,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01.




                                                       104
                                           Table A.19: New Targets

                                                                  Log(1 + New Target drugs)
                                                   (1)                (2)            (3)                (4)
                                                  New               Coarse         Coarser             Novel
                                                 Target-            Target         Target              Target
                                                 Actions           (6-levels)     (5-levels)           Score

       Post 2003 X Medicare Drug Life             0.039*           0.021*             0.016**          0.024*
                                                  (0.021)          (0.011)            (0.007)          (0.013)

       R2                                         0.237             0.123             0.097             0.156
       Company FEs                                 Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes
       Qtr of Development FEs                      Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes
       Overall Drug Life/Firm MMS                  Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes
       Observations                               16442             16442             16442             16442

Notes: Table A.19 reports the main specification coefficient for Post × Medicare Drug Lifef,2003 . All new drugs,
including both small molecules and biologic drugs are included in the dependent variable counts. The dependent
variable in Column 1 is the log of one plus the number of drugs that the focal firm developed (in the given quarter) for
new molecular target-actions. We define drugs with “new” target-actions as drugs that were the first drug candidate
(chronologically across all firms) developed to treat any condition via the given target-action. The dependent variables
in Columns 2 and 3 use coarser definitions of targets, based on the Cortellis target tree ontology. The “coarse”
definition of targets in Column 2 counts the log of one plus the number of new drugs that were the first entrant to a
target group six levels deep into the Cortellis target tree, while the “coarser” outcome in Column 3 is the same but for
target groups five levels into the Cortellis ontology. Column 4 defines new target drugs as those in the top 10% of a
“target novelty” score. This score is based off target tree position and entry order for targets associated with a given
drug. All models include a full set of company and quarter indicator variables, with Post × Overall Drug Lifef,2003
and Post × Firm MMSf,2003 both included as additional independent variables, but not reported in the table. Robust
standard errors in parentheses, clustered around company identifiers.




                                                            105
           Table A.20: Impact of Resources on # New Candidates, Company Time Trends

                                                         Log(1 + New Candidates), by Similarity
                                                   All           Q1           Q2           Q3            Q4
       Post 2003 X Medicare Drug Life           0.174*          0.116**     0.095*        0.074         0.010
                                                (0.099)         (0.057)     (0.049)      (0.050)       (0.042)
       R2                                        0.644          0.471        0.527        0.432         0.339
       Company FEs                                Yes            Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes
       Qtr of Development FEs                     Yes            Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes
       Patent Life/Firm MMS X Post                Yes            Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes
       Company-Qtr Trends                         Yes            Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes
       Observations                              16442          16442        16442        16442         16442

Notes: Table A.20 shows that our results are not driven by company-specific trends. The table reports the main
specification coefficient for Post × Medicare Drug Lifef,2003 . The outcome variable in the first models includes
all new drug candidates, while the other four models limit the dependent variable to the count of new drug
candidates that fall into the given similarity quartile. All models include a full set of company and quarter indicator
variables, with Post × Overall Drug Lifef,2003 and Post × Firm MMSf,2003 both included as additional independent
variables, but not reported in the table. Additionally, these models include company-quarter indicator variables to
capture any firm-specific time trends. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered around company identifiers.
∗
    p < 0.10,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01.




                                                          106
Table A.21: Impact of Resources on # New Candidates, Poisson Quasi Maximum Likelihood

                                                            # New Candidates, by Similarity
                                                   All           Q1           Q2            Q3            Q4
    Post 2003 X Medicare Drug Life              0.790**         0.830       0.962**        0.693         0.631
                                                (0.389)        (0.593)      (0.445)       (0.514)       (0.577)
    Post 2003 X Overall Drug Life                 -0.397        -0.592       -0.312        0.208         -0.607
                                                 (0.429)       (0.614)      (0.513)       (0.547)       (0.659)
    Post 2003 X Firm MMS                          -0.495        -0.147       -0.592        -0.125        -0.622
                                                 (0.354)       (0.477)      (0.462)       (0.428)       (0.591)
    R2
    Company FEs                                   Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
    Qtr of Development FEs                        Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
    Observations                                 15611         11136         10354         12319         12861

Notes: Table A.21 reports the coefficients corresponding to those in our main specification, but obtained from a
Poisson quasi-maximum likelihood estimation regression. The outcome variable in the first models includes all new
drug candiates, while the other four models limit the dependent variable to the count of new drug candidates that
fall into the given similarity quartile. All models include a full set of company and quarter indicator variables, with
Post × Overall Drug Lifef,2003 and Post × Firm MMSf,2003 both included as additional independent variables, but not
reported in the table. One can interpret the coefficient from the first column (0.790) as a one unit change in Medicare
drug life leading to a 79% increase in all new drug candidates. This coefficient translates into an elasticity of 0.43.
QML (robust) standard errors in parentheses, clustered around company identifiers. ∗ p < 0.10,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01.




                                                         107
             Table A.22: Impact of Resources on # New Candidates, Binary Treatment

                                                   Log(1 + New Candidates), by Similarity
                                           All              Q1         Q2           Q3            Q4
       Post 2003 X Above Median          0.167***      0.111***      0.079**      0.084**       0.065**
       Medicare Drug Life                 (0.059)       (0.040)      (0.035)      (0.035)       (0.028)
       Post 2003 X Overall Drug          -0.138**      -0.104**      -0.060*       -0.054      -0.062**
       Life                               (0.063)       (0.041)      (0.035)      (0.036)       (0.030)
       Post 2003 X Firm MMS               -0.048        -0.014        -0.019       -0.014        -0.012
                                         (0.042)       (0.022)       (0.018)      (0.020)       (0.020)
       R2                                 0.596         0.397         0.480        0.386         0.301
       Company FEs                         Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes
       Qtr of Development FEs              Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes
       Observations                       16442         16442         16442        16442         16442

Notes: Table A.22 shows our results are robust to a less parametric definition of the treatment variable, given
that treatment might not be linear in medicare drug life because many of our firms have a Medicare exposure of
0 or 1. We define a binary treatment depending on whether our treatment variable is above or below the median.
∗
    p < 0.10,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01.




                                                      108
                                                       Table A.23:

  Impact of Resources on # New Candidates, Alternative Definitions of Remaining Exclusivity

                          (a) 7 Year Threshold for Remaining Drug Life

                                                            Log(1 + New Candidates), by Similarity
                                                      All            Q1         Q2           Q3            Q4
   Post 2003 X Medicare Drug Life                   0.236**         0.106**    0.093**     0.118**       0.028*
                                                    (0.098)         (0.054)    (0.046)     (0.052)       (0.037)
   Post 2003 X Overall Drug Life                    -0.214**        -0.101*    -0.075*     -0.090*       -0.030*
                                                     (0.098)        (0.053)    (0.047)     (0.052)       (0.037)
   Post 2003 X Firm MMS                             -0.056*         -0.020*    -0.022*     -0.015*       -0.016*
                                                    (0.042)         (0.022)    (0.017)     (0.020)       (0.019)
   R2                                                0.595          0.394      0.479        0.385         0.300
   Company FEs                                        Yes            Yes        Yes          Yes           Yes
   Qtr of Development FEs                             Yes            Yes        Yes          Yes           Yes
   Observations                                      16442          16442      16442        16442         16442

                          (a) 10 Year Threshold for Remaining Drug Life

                                                             Log(1 + New Candidates), by Similarity
                                                      All             Q1         Q2           Q3            Q4
   Post 2003 X Medicare Drug Life                   0.249**         0.107*     0.111**      0.129**        0.048
                                                    (0.103)         (0.056)    (0.048)      (0.059)       (0.040)
   Post 2003 X Overall Drug Life                    -0.218**        -0.110**   -0.092*      -0.103*        -0.039
                                                     (0.105)         (0.055)   (0.049)      (0.061)       (0.041)
   Post 2003 X Firm MMS                              -0.052          -0.021      -0.020      -0.013        -0.014
                                                    (0.043)         (0.022)     (0.016)     (0.020)       (0.020)
   R2                                                0.595           0.394      0.479        0.385         0.300
   Company FEs                                        Yes             Yes        Yes          Yes           Yes
   Qtr of Development FEs                             Yes             Yes        Yes          Yes           Yes
   Observations                                      16442           16442      16442        16442         16442

Notes: Table A.23 shows that our results are robust to different definitions of the threshold for having long remaining
patent life. ∗ p < 0.10,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01.




                                                              109
          Table A.24: Impact of Resources on # New Candidates, Any Development

                                                           Any New Candidates, by Similarity
                                                  All             Q1        Q2           Q3           Q4
  Post 2003 X Medicare Drug Life               0.187**          0.130***   0.113**     0.108**      0.068*
                                               (0.078)           (0.048)   (0.048)     (0.053)      (0.037)
  Post 2003 X Overall Drug Life                -0.166**         -0.123**   -0.091*     -0.070*      -0.063*
                                                (0.078)          (0.049)   (0.048)     (0.055)      (0.039)
  Post 2003 X Firm MMS                          -0.046*         -0.015*    -0.018*     -0.010*      -0.011*
                                                (0.040)         (0.023)    (0.018)     (0.023)      (0.023)
  R2                                            0.400            0.313     0.387        0.306        0.250
  Company FEs                                    Yes              Yes       Yes          Yes          Yes
  Qtr of Development FEs                         Yes              Yes       Yes          Yes          Yes
  Observations                                  16442            16442     16442        16442        16442

Notes: Table A.24 shows that our results are robust to considering a binary dependent variable and are not driven
purely by the intensive margin. ∗ p < 0.10,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01.




                                                          110
    Table A.25: Impact of Resources on # New Candidates, Total Patent Life Controls

                                                        Log(1 + New Candidates), by Similarity
                                              All             Q1               Q2               Q3              Q4
  Post 2003 X Medicare Drug               0.180***         0.119***         0.105***         0.111***         0.038**
  Life                                     (0.035)          (0.021)          (0.019)          (0.019)         (0.019)
  Post 2003 X Log(1 + Total               -0.085***        -0.066***        -0.051***        -0.048***        -0.021**
  Patent Life)                             (0.014)          (0.010)          (0.010)          (0.009)          (0.008)
  Post 2003 X Firm MMS                       -0.036          -0.004           -0.011           -0.006          -0.010
                                            (0.039)         (0.020)          (0.016)          (0.019)         (0.020)
  R2                                        0.604            0.417            0.490            0.396           0.302
  Company FEs                                Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes
  Qtr of Development FEs                     Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes
  Observations                              16442            16442            16442            16442           16442


Notes: Table A.25 shows that our results are robust to alternative specifications that control for the overall length of
remaining patents. Specifically, we control for the total patent life instead of proportion of drugs on patent – this
controls for the differential effect of part D by scale of firm more directly than controlling for the proportion of drugs
with patent life remaining. ∗ p < 0.10,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01.




                                                          111
Table A.26: Impact of Resources on # New Candidates, Extreme Treatment Values Excluded

                                                       Log(1 + New Candidates), by Similarity
                                                 All           Q1          Q2           Q3           Q4
    Post 2003 X Medicare Drug Life             0.303**        0.130*     0.098*       0.143**       0.110*
                                               (0.141)        (0.077)    (0.063)      (0.068)       (0.056)
    Post 2003 X Overall Drug Life              0.111*         0.043*     0.035*       0.134*        0.077*
                                               (0.166)        (0.085)    (0.084)      (0.080)       (0.067)
    Post 2003 X Firm MMS                       -0.179*        -0.143*    -0.061*      -0.089*       0.048*
                                               (0.167)        (0.088)    (0.088)      (0.082)       (0.076)
    R2                                          0.621         0.406       0.478        0.400         0.322
    Company FEs                                  Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes
    Qtr of Development FEs                       Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes
    Observations                                6208          6208        6208         6208          6208

Notes: Table A.26 shows that our results are robust to excluding firms with extreme values of Medicare exposure of
0 or 1. ∗ p < 0.10,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01.




                                                        112
