                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           SPINNING THE WEB:
THE IMPACT OF ICT ON TRADE IN INTERMEDIATES AND TECHNOLOGY DIFFUSION

                                          Réka Juhász
                                      Claudia Steinwender

                                      Working Paper 24590
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24590


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2018




We thank David Atkin, Esther Bøler, Rafael Dix-Carneiro, Kerem Co ar, Don Davis, Joe Doyle,
Federico Esposito, Ivan Fernandez-Val, Walker Hanlon, Rick Hornbeck, Amit Khandelwal,
Marta Martinez, Dávid Nagy, Suresh Naidu, Guillermo Noguera, Steve Pischke, Jim Rauch,
Pietra Rivoli, João Santos Silva, Silvana Tenreyro, Jon Vogel, David Weinstein, Susan Wolcott
and numerous conference and seminar participants for very helpful comments and suggestions.
David Jacks, Markus Lampe, Luigi Pascali and Roland Wenzlhuemer kindly shared data. Yue
Yu, Benjamin Wache, Lili Szabó, Laura Audet, Iain Bamford, Chelsea Carter, Dennis Egger,
Benjamin Guillon, Guillermo Carranza Jordan, Claire Lagesse, William Little, Rachel Neumann,
Caitlyn Schwartz, Jean Sohn, Pablo Torroella and Jean Philippe Wan provided excellent research
assistance. The title of the paper is borrowed from www.spinningtheweb.org.uk. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Réka Juhász and Claudia Steinwender. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Spinning the Web: The Impact of ICT on Trade in Intermediates and Technology Diffusion
Réka Juhász and Claudia Steinwender
NBER Working Paper No. 24590
May 2018
JEL No. F14,F60,N7,O14,O33

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper studies how information and communication technology (ICT) improvements affect
trade along the value chain and international technology diffusion. We examine the impact of a
revolutionary technology, the roll-out of the global telegraph network, on the 19th century cotton
textile industry. First, we show that connection to the telegraph disproportionately increased trade
in intermediate goods relative to final goods. We document that this was due to differences in
codifiability; that is, the extent to which product specifications could be communicated at a
distance using only words (and thus by sending telegrams) as opposed to inspecting a sample of
the product. Second, adoption of the telegraph also facilitated international technology diffusion
through the complementary mechanisms of importing machinery and acquiring knowledge of the
production process and local demand through importing intermediates. These results shed light on
how ICT facilitates the formation of global value chains and the diffusion of frontier technology.


Réka Juhász
Department of Economics
Columbia University
1133 International Affairs Building
420 West 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
rj2446@columbia.edu

Claudia Steinwender
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-521
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
csteinwe@mit.edu




An Online Appendix is available at
https://drive.google.com/file/d/18s_Qz6EOlMb_RtsQqTQ_F6xhbueTNGHf/view
1    Introduction
This paper is motivated by the observation that economic integration across countries has become
more complex. Global value chains that require the careful coordination of production across large
distances now span the globe (Feenstra, 1998), with trade in intermediate goods accounting for
a significant share of total global trade (Miroudot et al., 2009). In addition, some authors have
argued that as parts of the production process were offshored from high-wage to low-wage countries,
“Northern” technology also followed, allowing some initially poor countries to develop at previously
unprecedented rates (Baldwin, 2016). Dramatic improvements in information and communication
technology (ICT) are widely believed to be a driver of the increasingly complex nature of integration
in the global economy (Baldwin and Martin, 1999; Baldwin, 2016). According to this argument,
the reduction of the cost and the type of information that can be exchanged makes possible the
coordination of complex tasks at a distance (Grossman and Rossi-Hansberg, 2008; Leamer and
Storper, 2001).
    This paper aims to deepen our understanding of the forces driving trade in intermediates and
technology diffusion by examining the effect of a revolutionary information communication technol-
ogy, the roll-out of the global telegraph network in the second half of the nineteenth century, on the
cotton textile industry. In particular, we estimate the effect of communication time improvements
on imports of intermediate and final goods in the industry as well as on the subsequent adoption
of frontier technology.
    The setting serves as an ideal testing ground for these questions for a number of reasons. First,
estimating the causal effect of ICT on economic outcomes is notoriously difficult as investment in
communication technology is generally systematically related to economic fundamentals. In the case
of the global telegraph network, we exploit the fact that the technology took decades to develop and
mature, leading to significant variation in the year the telegraph was adopted in different countries.
We use one factor, variation in the ruggedness of the submarine terrain, that made laying the cable
more or less challenging in a particular location to isolate exogenous variation in the timing of a
successful cable connection (Company, 1915). This was a factor that contemporaries were initially
unaware of, and later was difficult to account for, given that the sea floor could not be mapped in
detail at the time.
    Second, standard trade data sources make it difficult to distinguish between intermediate inputs
and final goods, making it challenging to analyze how factors such as ICT affect trade along the
value chain. The cotton textile industry provides a rare exception where it is possible to definitively
separate the stages of production. Cotton textile manufacturing is a fairly simple, linear value chain
comprised of three stages of production (spinning, weaving, finishing). The output of each stage is
typically delineated separately in trade data: yarn, plain cloth, and finished cloth. The first two
categories, yarn and plain cloth, are intermediate inputs, whereas finished cloth is the final good.
Moreover, owing to a number of major technological breakthroughs, Britain completely dominated


                                                  2
trade in cotton textiles for the vast majority of the 19th century at all stages of the production
process. Taking these factors together, it is possible to recover the global supply chain using only
bilateral British product level trade data.
   Third, the historical setting makes it possible to study long run impacts of ICT and trade in
intermediate inputs on technology diffusion, which is highly relevant but not feasible with contem-
porary data.
   Our empirical analysis consists of two parts. First, we ask how communication time affected
imports of cotton textiles at different stages of the production chain. We find that communication
time improvements had a larger trade enhancing effect on intermediate inputs than on finished
goods. According to our preferred specification, a 1% fall in communication time increased imports
of yarn by 0.27%, by 0.13% for plain cloth, and by 0.03% for finished cloth, though this latter effect
is not statistically significant.
   To shed light on the mechanism driving these findings, we exploit the rich historical evidence to
understand how merchants conducted trade at a distance both prior to and after the introduction of
the telegraph. We show how before the introduction of the telegraph, buyers and sellers exchanged
information about product attributes at a distance by sending letters and product samples using
the fastest method of transportation. The introduction of a telegraph connection between the buyer
and seller dramatically affected the time it took to exchange information specified in words, but
had no effect on the time it took to exchange information that could not be expressed in words,
such as product samples.
   In this paper, we use the term codifiability to refer to the extent to which attributes of a product
can be specified in words as opposed to inspecting a sample of the product. We use a telegraph
codebook developed for trading cotton textiles to gauge the extent to which communication was in
line with what we would expect given the differences in the codifiability of our product categories.
Yarn was a standardized product categorized based on its fineness, and the telegraph used this
standard classification in the order process. Plain cloth, while not standardized, could be codi-
fied by providing information on a handful of characteristics, such as measurements and weaving
patterns. While more complicated and hence more costly, the telegraph was used to specify these
characteristics when ordering plain cloth. For the final good, finished cloth, no instructions were
provided using the telegraph. Specifying an order for finished cloth remained reliant on the ex-
change of product samples even after the telegraph was put in place, as this part of the production
process was non-codifiable. In light of this evidence, the extent to which imports increased along
the value chain in response to the introduction of the telegraph was systematically related to the
codifiability of the product.
   Second, we turn to examining the long-run effects of ICT on trade in intermediate inputs. We
show suggestive evidence that imports of yarn increased up to 10 years after the introduction of
the telegraph, but after that, the effect began to decline. We find no similar non-monotonicity on



                                                  3
imports of plain or finished cloth. A natural explanation for this pattern is that over time, yarn
importing countries started to develop their own mechanized industries. Our estimates show that
countries that had been connected to the telegraph for a longer period of time at the end of the 19th
century had larger growth in mechanized cotton spinning capacity, suggesting that ICT facilitated
the adoption of frontier technology.
   The historical evidence emphasizes two complementary mechanisms that allowed the transmis-
sion of technology from Britain (Farnie, 2004). The spinning machinery itself was imported from
Britain, the world’s leading machinery manufacturer. But having machinery alone was not suffi-
cient; to successfully operate modern cotton mills, managers needed to have knowledge about the
whole system of the production process and local demand conditions. As merchants accumulated
this knowledge from importing yarn, cotton mills appointed them as their managers. Imported
machinery together with knowledge acquired through imported intermediates made possible the
diffusion of technology. We find evidence for these mechanisms in the data. Using data on trade
in mechanized spinning machinery, we show that countries that achieved a telegraph connection
sooner imported more machines from Britain in the long-run. In addition, by matching names of
local and British merchants from trade directories to the names of managers from a directory of
cotton mills for Bombay, we also find that 28-46% of managers were indeed merchants, providing
suggestive evidence of the knowledge transfer mechanism.
   The paper is related to several strands of the literature. To the best of our knowledge, we
provide the first causal estimates of ICT’s impact on trade along the value chain. The paper
shows evidence in support of the argument that ICT has been an important factor facilitating the
formation of global value chains by disproportionately increasing trade for codifiable intermediate
inputs (Baldwin and Martin, 1999; Grossman and Rossi-Hansberg, 2008; Baldwin, 2016).
   Codifiability of tasks or product specifications is one mechanism that has been argued to facili-
tate offshoring and fragmentation of production in the contemporary setting (Leamer and Storper,
2001; Autor et al., 2003). In this respect, the paper is most closely related to Fort (2016), who shows
that codifiability of product specifications are associated with a firm’s willingness to contract for
manufacturing services either domestically or internationally. In addition, Startz (2017) finds that
in the contemporary setting in which ICT is far more sophisticated, Nigerian merchants expend
significant resources in order to travel to the source country and purchase products through face-
to-face interaction with the seller, suggesting that specifying product specifications at a distance
remains difficult.
   A number of papers have studied how information and search in general affect trading patterns
(Rauch, 1999; Rauch and Trindade, 2002; Startz, 2017) and some papers have examined the impact
of ICT on trade (Freund and Weinhold, 2004; Portes and Rey, 2005; Fink et al., 2005; Allen, 2014;
Steinwender, 2018). The paper contributes to this literature by providing causal estimates of the
impact of ICT on trade along the value chain, allowing us to speak to how ICT impacts the



                                                  4
composition of trade.
        In terms of ICT’s effect on technology diffusion through the imports of intermediates, the paper
is related to a recent literature that has shown that better access to (high-quality) imported inputs
has a positive effect on firm productivity (Amiti and Konings, 2007; Topalova and Khandelwal,
2011). The results in this paper suggest that importing intermediates may allow firms to learn
about the production process for these inputs in the long-run, allowing countries to move into
new parts of the value chain using frontier technology, facilitating technology diffusion through
importing as discussed in Keller (2004).
        The paper is structured as follows. The next section discusses features of trade in the 19th
century cotton textile industry that are key for our empirical strategy. Section 3 introduces the
main datasets used in the empirical analysis. Section 4 contains the empirical analysis. Section 5
concludes.


2        Trade in cotton textiles in the 19th century
Cotton textile manufacturing is a fairly simple, “snake” production chain comprised of the following
three stages: First, raw cotton fibers are twisted into yarn in a process called spinning. In the second
step, yarn is woven into cloth in a process called weaving. Finally, cloth is finished by bleaching,
dyeing, embroidering or printing patterns on the cloth. In what follows, we refer to the products
produced at each stage of the production process as “yarn”, “plain cloth” and “finished cloth”. Yarn
and plain cloth are intermediate inputs, whereas finished cloth is the final product of this industry.
Figure 1 provides examples of products at each stage of the value chain. Below, we discuss features
of trade in cotton textiles during the 19th century that are important for the empirical analysis.

2.1       British dominance of the industry with technology diffusion
Cotton manufacturing was a leading industry during the First Industrial Revolution owing to a
number of key innovations forged in Britain in the late 18th and early 19th century.1 These
innovations reduced the prices of machine spun yarn and woven cloth dramatically, as shown in
Figure A.1. Importantly for our setting, this led to Britain becoming the largest producer and
exporter of cotton textiles for most of the 19th century.
        Table 1 provides data on the value of exports of yarn and cloth for the most important cotton
textile exporters for 1871 to 1880, the last decade of our sample period in the trade data. As
is apparent from the table, Holland, Germany, and France, the most important cotton textiles
exporters behind Britain, each exported under 4% of Britain’s value. This aspect is helpful for our
    1
    Appendix A.1.1 discusses the various innovations in cotton textile manufacturing in detail. Crafts (1985) estimates
that cotton textiles accounted for 25% of British TFP growth between 1780 and 1860. The importance of the industry
for global trade is well reflected by the fact that cotton textiles were also the most traded good during the age of
industrialization (Riello, 2013).



                                                          5
analysis, as we only observe bilateral trade flows between Britain and the rest of the world, but
not total imports of cotton textiles in a specific country. However, given Britain’s dominance of
trade in the industry, we do not expect unobserved imports from other countries to confound our
analysis.
       Though Britain dominated trade in the industry, its primacy in terms of production was not
quite as overwhelming. Mechanized technology diffused worldwide, particularly during the second
half of the 19th century, as Figure 2 shows. Moreover, in the weaving industry, traditional hand-
loom weaving often survived British import competition, particularly in lower-wage regions such as
India and the Ottoman Empire (Beckert, 2014; Roy, 2010). The presence of domestic manufacturing
(mechanized or not) in a wide variety of locations around the world implies that imports were often
in competition with domestic production. This is helpful in terms of our analysis, as it means
that there was indeed scope to trade intermediates across international borders as many regions
around the world possessed absorptive capacity in the form of a cotton manufacturing industry.
Furthermore, the presence of technology diffusion in mechanized production provides scope for us
to examine the extent to which ICT facilitated technology diffusion.

2.2      The importance of trade in intermediate inputs
Crucially for the empirical analysis, in which we estimate the effect of communication time im-
provements at different stages of the value chain, there was significant trade in intermediate inputs
in the cotton textile industry. Figure 3 shows the share of yarn, plain and printed cloth exported
by Britain to the world between 1845 to 1880, our sample period. It is striking that about 70% of
total trade is in one of the intermediate stages, yarn or plain cloth, while the final good, finished
cloth, accounts for only about 30% of trade.2 This is a particularly interesting point to note, as
it offers a portrait of 19th century trade that is substantially different to how the pattern of trade
during the first wave of globalization is often represented: as consisting of mainly trade in raw
materials and finished goods.3

2.3      Codifiability affects the usefulness of the telegraph for exchanging informa-
         tion
In the case of 19th century cotton textiles, timely information about distant markets was crucial.
Much like the apparel industry today, cotton textiles in the 19th century was an industry char-
acterized by rapidly changing product cycles (Llorca-Jana, 2012). Prints and patterns in fashion
would change from one season to the next, meaning that merchants needed to specify attributes of
the particular type of product that was in fashion in a particular market at any given time.
   2
    The importance of trade in intermediate goods can be seen both in terms of quantities and values traded.
   3
    For example, Baldwin (2006) highlights trade in intermediates as a distinguishing feature of the second wave of
globalization.



                                                        6
      The historical evidence points to fluctuating demand as affecting a significant proportion of the
market. Llorca-Jana (2012, p. 108) quotes a Latin American based merchant advising that “care
must be taken that every fresh parcel is composed of different and newest patterns to the preceding
as if parcel after parcel arrive of the same patterns and designs our dealers will soon get tired of
them.”4 Novelty, however, was not sufficient, as demand was not only volatile, but also highly
market-specific; “(...) goods must be manufactured entirely for these markets to make anything by
them.” (Llorca-Jana, 2012, p. 96).5
      It should also be noted that fluctuating demand affected not only the final good, but also the
intermediate products, yarn and plain cloth. The type of finished cloth that could be produced was
determined in part by the type of yarn and plain cloth that was used in its production. Llorca-
Jana illustrates this point as follows; “The principal cause of your loss in these first shipments
arises according to our opinion from the change in demand for cloths that has latterly taken place
in our markets [Chile]. When you commenced your consignment, the advices received were very
favourable for star cloths ... but before the goods came out a change had taken place and the
principal demand was on good and middling cloths.” (Llorca-Jana, 2012, p. 98).6
      In light of the evidence above, when ordering cotton textiles at a distance, the attributes of
the product needed to be specified. This was easier for some, and more difficult for other product
categories. Yarn was a standardized product classified according to a metric, its count.7 This
attribute determined the fineness of the yarn that was spun, and was straightforward to specify in
words.
      In contrast, plain cloth was not standardized, meaning that there was no shorthand terminology
that had the same meaning to all parties. Instead, a number of product characteristics such as the
weaving pattern, the length and width of the cloth, and the count and color of yarn used had to
be specified.
      Finished cloth was the most difficult to specify in words. A particular piece of finished cotton
cloth was specified by the count of yarn used, the type and measurements of cloth woven and the
technique or pattern that it was finished with. A cursory look at the intricate printed design shown
for finished cloth in Panel C of Figure 1 should go a long way in convincing the reader of the
inherent difficulty in specifying, using only words, the product in question.
      Llorca-Jana (2012) describes the difficulties in specifying orders for finished cloth in words
by merchants in South-America in the 19th century in the following way; “Even if agents in the
Southern Cone could establish with certainty the sort of goods that would be in most demand, they
still had great ‘difficulty of specifying, in words, and at a distance of several thousand miles and
  4
    GFDP, Hughes to Garrett (London). Buenos Aires, March 8, 1843, quoted in Llorca-Jana (2012).
  5
    UGD/28/1/2, Wylie to Daglish (Glasgow). Buenos Aires, December 23, 1809, quoted in Llorca-Jana (2012).
  6
    HPEL, Volume 6, Huth to Waterhouse (Leeds). London, November 6, 1830, quoted in Llorca-Jana (2012).
  7
    Count was a measure of density. It was the number of hanks (840 yd or 770 m) of skein material that weigh 1
pound (0.45 kg). Under this system, the higher the number, the finer the yarn.




                                                      7
several months, exactly what was wanted’.8 Very often British manufacturers got it wrong, as seen
in this extract (...) ‘Your ideas with respect to the dresses ... have been sadly disappointed ... [and]
it is another proof, out of great many which the writer has seen, of the great risk in sending fancy
goods to a foreign market, when not selected by a person who knows exactly the article wanted, as
it appears the plainest written description which can be given, is seldom correctly understood.’9 ”
(Llorca-Jana, 2012, pp. 98-99). To overcome the inherent difficulty of communicating attributes of
the finished cloth in words, the standard practice was to send product samples (Llorca-Jana, 2012).
      Given the need for timely information, it is unsurprising that the telegraph was rapidly adopted
by textile traders. Moreover, as a way of minimizing telegraph charges, specific codes were developed
for traders of cotton textiles, and published in telegram code books.
      However, according to the historical evidence, the telegraph was differentially useful for ex-
changing information about product specifications at a distance at different stages of the produc-
tion chain. In this paper, we use the term codifiability to refer to the extent to which attributes
of a product can be specified in words as opposed to inspecting a sample of the product. This
definition is key, as the introduction of the telegraph dramatically reduced communication time for
exchanging words, but not for exchanging physical product samples, implying that the telegraph
may have had a differential effect on products depending on their codifiability.
      We examine the extent to which instructions about product specifications were communicated
using the telegraph depending on product type by examining the telegraph codes which were
developed specifically to trade cotton textiles. Figure 4 shows excerpts from the telegraph code
published in “Liddel’s The ‘Economic’ Telegram Code for Piece Goods and General Business”.
      The first column shows the code that specifies the count of yarn. Consistent with the discussion
above, as yarn was standardized and therefore a highly codifiable product, we see the code numbers
corresponding to the count of yarn.
      The second column shows examples of how the telegraph was used to order plain cloth. Several
characteristics described above were in fact communicated using the telegraph. For example, “buy
for us a trial lot one pick less in the weft” instructs the exporting merchant about the type of
weave that is demanded, “send samples of this made of heavier yarns” instructs the exporting
merchant about the type of yarn that should be used in the cloth, while the last photo shows a
table that buyers can use to specify measurements. However, it is also clear that it was more costly
to specify plain cloth compared to yarn, as more product attributes needed to be communicated in
a non-standardized way.
      Finally, the third column shows product specifications related to finished cloth. In stark contrast
to plain cloth, we find no instructions to the exporting merchants about how the finishing should
be done. Conversations about finished cloth were restricted to discussing product samples. For
example; “We cannot give the following patterns – we are sending substitutes for approval”. Note
  8
      Smail (1999) p. 83 quoted in Llorca-Jana (2012).
  9
      UGD/28/1/7, Wylie Cook to Daglish (Glasgow). San Luis de Potosi, June 22, 1834 quoted in Llorca-Jana (2012).


                                                         8
how there are no details given about the substitute pattern. Instead, the telegraph was used to
negotiate prices and quantities, and other terms and conditions of delivery – everything however,
always subject to inspection of a product sample. (Farnie, 2004, p. 38) writes, “Mail advices became
restricted to the dispatch of samples, general discussion, hypothetical inquiry, advice, admonition
and complaint”.
    The telegraph improved communication technology by dramatically reducing the time it took
to exchange information expressed in words, which is more relevant for products that are codifiable.
In the case of cotton textiles, the telegraph made it easiest to order yarn, followed by plain cloth,
while the impact on ordering finished cloth was smallest. In the empirical analysis we therefore
expect the telegraph to have had the largest effect on yarn, followed by plain, and then printed
cloth, if the mechanism by which the telegraph affected trade is via codifiability.


3     Data
Our empirical analysis estimating the effect of communication time on imports of different product
categories is based on a number of novel datasets constructed from primary sources for the years
1845 to 1880. This time period covers the initial roll-out of the global telegraph network. 1851 marks
the year the first underwater telegraph was put in place (between Britain and France). By 1880,
most countries were connected to the telegraph. The data sets include: 1) Bilateral British exports
at various parts of the cotton textile value chain that we digitized manually from handwritten
customs records, 2) “communication times” and “mail shipping times” (measured in days) between
Britain and the countries in our dataset for each year using data from the Lloyd’s List, and 3)
the year in which a country was first connected to the global telegraph network using data on
submarine cables from Wenzlhuemer (2013), supplemented with the most important international
overland connections from a variety of country-specific sources.
    With respect to the second data set, we collected data on communication and mail shipping
time relative to Britain from the Lloyd’s List, a daily London-based publication which printed the
most up to date shipping information for ports worldwide.10 We used optical character recognition
(OCR) technology to convert images into text files and text matching tools to extract information
on the dates of ship movements in foreign ports, and the date the information about this ship
movement was published in London. We then compute the difference between these dates, which
measures how fast information traveled, i.e., the information lag.11 We define communication time
as the minimum information lag across all observations in a port*year, and mail shipping time as the
median information lag. We are able to track communication and mail shipping times separately
  10
     Our method follows Kaukiainen (2001) who collected communication times for a number of ports at decadal
intervals from the Lloyd’s List between 1820 and 1870.
  11
     As the overland telegraph network was well-developed within Britain by 1850, it is reasonable to assume that
the information lag relative to production regions in Britain, i.e., Lancashire, was very similar to that of London.



                                                         9
as even once the telegraph was adopted for a given port, both forms of technology were used to
communicate information to London.12
         To estimate the effect of communication technology on the development of the domestic mech-
anized cotton spinning industry in the long run, we use data up to WW1. Data on mechanized
spinning capacity, measured as the number of mechanized spindles normalized by population, is
only observed for a sufficiently large number of countries before the roll-out of the global telegraph
network (1845) and once the network is well-established (1880, 1890, 1900, 1910), using a variety
of sources based on Farnie (2004) and Beckert (2014).
         To shed light on the mechanism, we use bilateral exports of textile machinery from Britain
for the years 1878-1914 using firm level data on the number of spindles exported to firms around
the world by British machine producers, which were the dominant exporters of capital equipment
(Saxonhouse and Wright, 2010), collected by Saxonhouse and Wright (2004). Appendices A.3 -
A.4 contains a more detailed discussion of the construction of each data source in addition to the
variables that are used in the robustness checks.


4         Empirical analysis
In this section we estimate the effect of ICT on trade along the value chain and the development of
the domestic industry in technological follower countries. We first discuss how the introduction of a
revolutionary information communication technology, the telegraph, affected communication times
around the globe. As the roll-out of the telegraph is potentially endogenous to trade potential of
different countries, we discuss our identification strategy based on the ruggedness of the submarine
terrain. We then present the estimation results.

4.1         The impact of the telegraph on communication times
It is hard to overstate the impact that telegraphy had on the speed at which information expressed
in words traveled. Prior to the development of telegraphy, information was able to travel only at
the speed of the fastest mode of transportation. This meant that even when frontier technology
such as steamships and railways were used to deliver information, the speed of communication was
painfully slow.
         Our newly collected data on communication time enables us to provide evidence for the aston-
ishing reductions in communication time brought about by the telegraph. Figure 5 plots communi-
cation times (pink lines) for three ports relative to London (Madras, New York and Constantinople).
Communication time fell gradually in the lead-up to a telegraph connection, reflecting transporta-
tion technology improvements. However, there is a sharp drop in communication times at the
vertical lines which indicate the year the port was connected to London via the telegraph. For
    12
         More details on the data collection and extraction are provided in Appendix A.4.



                                                            10
comparison, we are also able to examine mail shipping times, which track the number of days it
took to ship mail (i.e., letters, newspapers, and product samples) between London and the port in
question using the fastest mode of transportation.13 Communication and mail shipping time fell
in parallel up to the year of connection to the telegraph. This reflects the fact that prior to the
telegraph, information could only travel as fast as the quickest mode of transportation. Once a
port was connected to the telegraph network, however, there was stark divergence between the two,
as communication time dropped to within a couple of days, while mail shipping time continued on
its previous trend.
       Figure 6 shows heat-maps for communication times around the world during our sample period.
Communication lags relative to Britain are shown for every decade between 1850 and 1880. In 1850,
most of the world is colored in red or orange, meaning it takes several weeks to communicate between
London and these countries. Communication time increased with distance, reflecting the fact that
it was still determined by the fastest mode of physical transportation. By 1880, most major ports
were within instantaneous communication with Britain. Distance now had very little role to play
in determining communication times.

4.2      Identification strategy
Figure 7 shows the first telegraph links via which countries in our sample were connected to the
worldwide telegraph network.14 We define a country as having a connection to the global telegraph
network if it has an active (terrestrial and/or submarine) connection to London. As is apparent from
this figure, it took decades for all countries to be connected to the worldwide telegraph network.
       Investments in ICT infrastructure, such as the laying of submarines telegraph cables, may
be systematically related to trade potential or economic development. This poses an empirical
challenge when estimating the effect of communication technology on our outcomes of interest.
In the case of the roll-out of the global telegraph, we exploit the fact that entrepreneurs faced
significant technological challenges and setbacks in laying submarine cables. Our identification
strategy relies on one geographic aspect of laying submarine cables that introduced quasi-random
variation in the difficulty of establishing a submarine connection; the ruggedness of the underwater
terrain. A rugged sea-floor made laying a telegraph cable particularly difficult as the cable would
break if it became suspended between two peaks (Company, 1915). Laying a cable across a rugged
sea bed also meant that the cable had to be longer, which made the transmitted signal weaker and
noisier, because automatic signal re-transmission had not yet been invented. It also made the cable
heavier, which put more strain on it, making it easier to break during the cable laying process, or
afterwards, when it chafed against sharp rocks as the cable moved with the currents.
       Given the state of contemporary technology, mapping the sea floor in any meaningful detail
  13
    This was not generally the mode of transportation taken for shipping merchandise.
  14
    Our data end in 1899. At this point in time, only a handful of countries (almost all of which are small islands)
in our sample are unconnected.


                                                        11
was impossible. The lack of understanding implied that progress was made through trial and error.
To illustrate the extent to which contemporaries were initially unaware of the ruggedness of the
submarine terrain along a given connection, it is instructive to compare the elevation profile of the
ocean floor along the Atlantic cable route in Figure 8 with the description the New York Times
gave based on the soundings that had been taken; “[the telegraphic plateau] extends in a continuous
ledge from Cape Clear, in Ireland, to Cape Race in Newfoundland; the greatest depths being in
mid-ocean whence it ascends imperceptibly to the shore on either side.”15 Contemporaries were
aware neither of the steep drop in elevation on both side of the Atlantic, nor the significant amount
of ruggedness along what they called the telegraphic plateau, that modern data shows in Figure 8.
This was problematic, as the amount of slack cable that should have been laid depends crucially
on getting the elevation changes right. In fact, it took five attempts over the course of almost a
decade to establish the first successful transatlantic telegraph connection.16
       Our identification strategy isolates exogenous variation in the year a country was connected to
the telegraph by using variation in the ruggedness of the submarine terrain to predict the year of
the first successful connection to a given country. To measure ruggedness of the submarine terrain,
we use the Riley measure of local ruggedness as proposed by Riley et al. (1999) and first used in the
economics literature by Nunn and Puga (2012). As a robustness check, we also construct a second
measure, normalized cable length, defined as the ratio between 3-dimensional and 2-dimensional
distance along the shortest path. This measure naturally captures one way in which historical
accounts claim ruggedness mattered; the amount of “slack” that is needed because of underwater
peaks and troughs.
       We operationalize both ruggedness measures as follows. The nodes that make up a given
connection between a country c and London are taken from the global telegraph network that
we constructed (Figure 7). This is the shortest path along which a country was first connected to
London, using any combination of overland and submarine connections.17 To locate the actual path
along which ruggedness will be measured, we take the two endpoints of all submarine connections
and find the shortest sea-route between them. Note that the actual cable might have been laid
on a different route. We prefer to use the shortest distance route, as ex ante this is the most
economical (longer cables were costlier) and hence exogenous, while the path of the actual cable
may be endogenous if routes were changed after difficulties were experienced. The Riley measure
of ruggedness and the normalized cable length measure are then calculated along this route.
       Calculation of the Riley measure proceeds as follows. To calculate ruggedness in a representative
area around the shortest path, we take a 25km buffer along both sides of the shortest route. Within
this area, we then calculate a measure of local ruggedness as proposed by Riley et al. (1999). This
  15
     “The Atlantic Cable. Successful Completion of the Great Work”, The New York Times, July 30, 1866 (own
emphasis).
  16
     Appendix A.1.2 discusses additional historical evidence regarding the difficulty of laying submarine cables.
  17
     Construction of the global telegraph network is discussed in detail in Appendix A.4.



                                                       12
measure is designed to capture local changes in the terrain. This is well-suited to our purposes, as it
was precisely local variation in elevation that was difficult to map for contemporaries, yet crucially
important for the success of a given link. As knowledge about laying submarine cables advanced,
depth was measured at a few points along a proposed route, giving an approximation of large
changes in elevation. However, it was not possible to map the more local aspects of ruggedness,
which is the type of terrain variation that our measure utilizes.
       Ruggedness is defined at a point in space. The measure is the square root of the sum of the
squared differences in elevation between a point and its eight neighbors (ie. the point to the north,
north-east, east, south-east, south, south-west, west and north-west).18 We calculate this measure
of ruggedness for each cell within the 25km buffer. Following the methodology in Nunn and Puga
(2012), we take the mean of the ruggedness measure (defined at the level of individual cells) along
the 25km buffer of the given connection (edge), which we denote as Ri (mean ruggedness for edge
i). In the majority of cases, a connection between London and a country was made up of multiple
edges. We define the ruggedness of a connection in our dataset as the maximum across all edges
that form a particular connection. This captures the idea that the edge with the largest ruggedness
measure will be the binding constraint for establishing the full telegraphic connection to that place.
Normalized cable length is calculated as the ratio between 3-dimensional and 2-dimensional distance
along the shortest path (including only submarine edges).
       We predict the year a country is first connected to London based on these ruggedness measures
using a linear probability model. This yields non-integer predictions, which we round to the nearest
integer. We need integer predictions of the year of connection to the telegraph, as we will use this
instrument in a panel regression where it will take the value of one in years including and after a
predicted connection, and zero otherwise.
       Figure 9 and Table 2 show the scatterplot and the estimates from the linear prediction model.19
As the figure shows, ruggedness seems to be a better predictor of year of connection for early years,
while the relationship seems weaker from about 1880. This is consistent with ruggedness of the
submarine terrain mattering most at the earlier phases of the roll-out when the technology was still
being developed.
       One concern is that longer connections may be more likely to feature areas of large elevation
changes, meaning that distance to London may be correlated with these measures. For this reason,
we use only the variation in ruggedness not explained by distance to London when predicting the
year of the telegraph connection, as shown in Column (2) of Table 2. Another concern is that
ruggedness may be correlated with shipping time, for example, because submarine ruggedness may
be correlated with currents affecting ship speed. However, we can test for this in our data. Column
  18
       More formally, let erc denote elevation at the point located
                                                             qP in row    r and column c of a grid of elevation points.
                                                                  r+1   Pc+1
The terrain ruggedness index at point rc is calculated as         i=r−1
                                                                              (e − erc )2 .
                                                                         j=c−1 ij
  19
    Note that we use the full dataset of connection up to 1899 for this prediction, as we need to have a predicted
year of connection for those countries that are not connected to the telegraph by 1880.


                                                           13
(3) of Table 2 shows that this is not a concern; ruggedness does not predict mail shipping time.20

4.3      The effect of communication technology on imports along the value chain
As we have seen in previous sections, the telegraph was rapidly adopted by cotton textile merchants
to facilitate the exchange of information at a distance in an industry characterized by rapidly fluc-
tuating demand. In this section, we ask whether communication time improvements differentially
affected trade at different parts of the value chain. We estimate the elasticity of imports to changes
in communication time separately by product category using the following specification;


                                    E[impict |Cct ] = exp{β i ∗ ln Cct + λc + γt }                                      (1)

       impict denotes quantity imported of product category i (yarn, plain cloth, finished cloth) in
country c at time t. Cct denotes communication time as defined in the previous section. λc
and γt are country and time fixed effects, respectively. The parameters of interest are β i , which
capture the elasticity of imports of product category i with respect to changes in communication
time. We use Poisson pseudo-maximum likelihood (PPML) to estimate the equation following the
extensive literature showing PPML to be a consistent and relatively efficient estimator for gravity
equations featuring a large number of zeros and a multiplicative estimating equation (Santos Silva
and Tenreyro, 2006; Head and Mayer, 2013).21 We examine quantity imported as opposed to the
value of imports so as to not confound price and volume effects. Standard errors are clustered at
the level of countries to account for country level serial correlation in the error terms.
       The endogeneity concern in equation (1) is that communication time between two locations is
partially determined by ICT investments, which may be related to the trading potential between
those locations. On one hand, countries that traded intensively with each other had larger incentives
to invest in faster communication infrastructure. On the other hand, political considerations may
have resulted in larger investments in infrastructure for more peripheral or conflict-ridden regions
where trading potential was lower.22
       As discussed in the previous section, we address these concerns by using the variation in tele-
graph connections that is predicted based on ruggedness. We transform the predicted telegraph
year into a binary variable that takes the value of zero in years preceding a predicted connection,
and one thereafter. However, the telegraph had a differential effect on the communication times
of different countries: While communication time to France was reduced only by 1 day, communi-
  20
     Mail shipping time is averaged across 1845 to 1850, i.e., before any country was connected to the telegraph
network.
  21
     Estimation of the relationship using ordinary least squares does not yield similar results. The reason in this
particular case seems to be because of heteroscedasticity in the error term rather than differential shares of zeros,
because non-linear least squares, which is a less efficient method to deal with heteroskedasticity yields similar results to
PPML and diagnostic tests suggested by Head and Mayer (2013) also point to PPML being the preferred specification.
Appendix A.2 contains a more in depth discussion of these issues.
  22
     Headrick (1981) discusses in detail the extent to which the telegraph was a tool for empire building of the British.


                                                            14
cation time to Australia was reduced by several weeks. To exploit this cross-sectional variation in
communication time reductions, we interact our predicted telegraph dummy with the log average
reduction in the communication time of a country’s neighbor. Neighbors are defined according to
sea-distance between the ports used for each country. We use the neighbor with the largest number
of observations among the three closest neighbors of a country. The log drop in communication
time is defined as the log of the difference in communication time across all years pre- and post-
telegraph (excluding the year of the telegraph connection). We use the communication time drop of
the neighboring country rather than the country itself in order to avoid potential reverse causality:
If a country was more important in terms of trade or trade potential, its communication times
before the telegraph might have been influenced, e.g., by using faster mail ships instead of slower
sail ships before the telegraph.
   While there is no first stage defined in GMM similarly to that in the linear 2SLS case, it is still
important to assess the strength of relationship between the endogenous variable, communication
time, and each instrument, because weak instruments can invalidate the GMM estimates. In Table
3, we therefore report the equivalent first stages from an OLS regression with two-way fixed effects.
It is reassuring to see that both instruments are highly statistically significant and have the expected
sign.
   Estimation of a Poisson regression model with endogenous regressors is done using generalized
method of moments (GMM), following Windmeijer and Santos Silva (1997) and implemented using
Stata’s ivpoisson command. It has been known since Neyman and Scott (1948) that non-linear
regressions with fixed effects may suffer from the incidental parameters problem. Fernández-Val
and Weidner (2016) have shown that, for the case of exogenous or predetermined regressors, Poisson
models do not suffer from the incidental parameters problem. However, it may well be a concern
for the IV Poisson model. If both N and T are relatively large, as is the case in our data with
72 countries and 36 years, the bias arising from the incidental parameters problem is unlikely to
be large. However, to gain a better sense of the potential size of the bias, we implement a panel
jackknife bias correction that has recently been proposed in the literature (Hahn and Newey, 2004;
Fernández-Val and Weidner, 2016; Cruz-Gonzalez et al., 2017).

4.3.1   Baseline Results

Table 4 contains summary statistics for quantities and values imported for each group of products
across the sample period. The table also splits the sample according to years before and after the
telegraph was put in place in. This provides a first assessment of the extent to which the effect of
the telegraph is apparent in the raw data without imposing additional structure. As can be seen,
both in terms of quantities and in terms of import values, the percentage increase in imports after
the telegraph was put in place is largest for yarn, followed by plain and finished cloth. We now
turn to estimating the effect of interest; the elasticity of imports with respect to communication


                                                  15
time.
      Table 5 presents the baseline results. Panel A reports the coefficients for the effect of communi-
cation time on yarn, plain and finished cloth in the different columns, using country and year fixed
effects.23 We see a clear pattern: A 1% decrease in communication time increases the quantity
of yarn imported by 0.183% (s.e. 0.041), plain cloth by 0.097% (s.e. 0.029), while there is no
statistically significant effect on finished cloth (the point estimate is effectively zero; 0.006).
      In order to explore which components of the time series and cross-sectional variation used are
important for our results, Table A.2 explores alternative regressors. Results using only (time series)
variation from the telegraph dummy are similar, but less precise, which is to be expected as the
cross-sectional variation in communication time drops is not exploited, which adds a lot of noise
to the estimation. Results using the telegraph dummy interacted with the average communication
time drop of a country yield similar results to those in Panel A (though the interpretation of the
estimated coefficients are different). The importance of the cross-sectional variation motivates our
inclusion of a plausibly exogenous component of it (the closest neighbor’s drop in communication
time) in the instrument.
      Panels B and C of Table 5 report the IV estimates based on the Riley measure and the normal-
ized cable length, respectively. The estimated coefficients decrease in size as we move from yarn
to plain and then to finished cloth, consistent with our previous results. The coefficients are very
similar across the two IVs. Comparison of the coefficients between the Poisson specification and IV
estimates shows that while the IV estimates are marginally larger, the two are fairly similar and
statistically indistinguishable. This is suggestive of the fact that the timing of successful telegraph
connections is predominantly determined by exogenous factors such as ruggedness of the submarine
terrain.
      In terms of magnitudes, e.g. in panel B, a 1% drop in communication time is predicted to
increase quantity imported by 0.272% (s.e. 0.076) for yarn, 0.128% (s.e. 0.065) for plain cloth, and
by 0.030% (s.e. 0.066; not significant) for finished cloth. To gain a better sense of the economic effect
of the telegraph, we scale the elasticities by the average drop in communication time caused by the
telegraph. Based on this, introduction of the telegraph increased imports of yarn by 10.6%, of plain
cloth by 5.0% and of finished cloth by 1.2%, though this latter effect is statistically indistinguishable
from zero, consistent with the historical evidence that trading finished cloth required the physical
shipping of samples, which could not be done via telegraph.
      The difference between the estimated effect on yarn and the effect on plain cloth is statistically
different, as we show in Table A.3, which presents the pooled baseline and IV specifications. The
difference between the effect on plain and finished cloth is statistically different in the Poisson
specification, but not in either IV specification.
 23
      Results without fixed effects are shown in Table A.1.




                                                          16
4.3.2    Robustness

We explore the robustness of our results along a number of dimensions. First, Table 6 examines
robustness of the results for various subsamples of the data. The robustness checks are based on
the instrument that uses the Riley measure of ruggedness. We use this as our baseline instrument
as this measure has been used previously in the literature. All results are similar when we use
normalized cable length as reported in Table A.4.24 Panel B reports results for the sample that
excludes years during the American Civil War (1861-1865), when the supply of raw cotton to the
British textile industry was severely disrupted because of the blockade of the raw cotton exporting
Southern states (Hanlon, 2015). Comparison with the baseline IV results show virtually no change
in the size of the coefficients and their statistical significance.
    Panel C estimates the effects of interest by excluding British colonies from the sample. It is
likely that trade with colonies was more regulated thus restricting the impact of communication
time on trade. Indeed, the gradient of the effect across product categories is larger when British
colonies are dropped, suggesting that our results hold (and are even stronger) in contexts that
resemble competitive markets more closely.
    Panel D includes time-varying product level ad-valorem tariffs from Tena-Junguito et al. (2012)
for the subset of countries for which they are available. The coefficients of interest remain similar in
both magnitude and significance, confirming that our identification strategy is robust. Tariffs enter
with the expected negative sign, though they are only statistically significant for finished cotton
cloth.
    Panel E includes controls for GDP for the countries for which they are available using data from
the Maddison Project Database (Bolt et al., 2018) and from Fouquin and Hugot (2016). The point
estimates for the coefficients of interest retain their pattern, however, the estimated effect on yarn
is somewhat larger and plain cotton cloth is no longer different statistically from zero. The reason
for this does not seem to be the effect of including GDP, but rather the different (and substantially
smaller) subsample on which this specification is estimated. The coefficients of interest are virtually
identical when the sample is restricted to the same subsample and the control for GDP is omitted.
    Panel F shows the estimated effect on import values. Interestingly, the magnitudes of the effect
are smaller and insignificant, even though the same gradient of the effect across product categories
is present. This suggests that unit values decreased as the quantity imported increased.
    Table A.6 contains the panel jackknife bias correction to assess the size of bias arising from the
incidental parameters problem. The effects on yarn and finished cloth are basically unchanged, but
the effect on plain cloth is slightly reduced, turning it marginally insignificant. Reassuringly, the
gradient of the effect across product categories is unchanged.
  24
     It should be noted that the effect on plain cloth is not always statistically significant when normalized cable
length is used as the instrument.




                                                        17
4.3.3    Discussion of mechanism

The results presented above show that communication time improvements driven by connection to
the telegraph network had a larger effect on more codifiable product categories, i.e., when buyers
and sellers could specify and order at a distance using only words instead of needing to exchange
product samples.
    Are there other mechanisms besides codifiability that could explain the empirical findings? In
the cotton textile industry, codifiability is correlated with upstreamness, as more codifiable products
are located further upstream, and it is also correlated with the degree of product differentiation,
as less differentiated products are more codifiable. We explore a range of alternative mechanisms,
starting with a discussion of mechanisms that yield the opposite prediction to what we find in our
empirical section: contracting frictions, search frictions, and demand volatility.
    First, better communication technology may have facilitated search or reduced contracting fric-
tions, e.g., by increasing trust (Nunn, 2007). Contracting frictions are expected to be larger in
product categories that are less standardized, as the hold-up problem is less severe for these prod-
ucts. Similarly, search frictions are expected to be larger in more downstream, more differentiated
product categories. If better communication increased contract enforcement or reduced search fric-
tions, we would therefore expect to see the pattern across products to be the opposite of what we
find, so this is unlikely to be an alternative mechanism.
    We explored the extent to which search or contracting frictions are empirically relevant in our
setting by collecting data on the number of international merchant houses active in a particular
country in the cotton goods trade. International merchant houses with representatives in both
the exporting and importing countries were common during the 19th century, solving contract
enforcement problems for a significant proportion of trade (Chapman, 1992). Moreover, as the
buyer and seller for these transactions interacted repeatedly, search would not seem to play an
important role for these relationships. In Panel A of Table 7, we explore whether our effect is
indeed weaker or insignificant for those countries where international merchant trading houses were
widespread, by adding an interaction term between the coefficient of interest and the number of
international merchants. The effect on the interaction term is very small and not large enough to
offset the pattern across product categories that we see, suggesting that contract enforcement or
search are unlikely to be the driving force behind the different estimated elasticities.25
    Second, notice that in order for faster communication time to have any effect on imports, demand
must be fluctuating (if there were no changes to local market conditions, information about them
would not matter as the market conditions would already be known). Communication time could
have a different effect on product categories along the value chain, if demand volatility varied across
those categories. Upstreamness implies that inputs are transformed into a variety of outputs at
  25
     Table 7 uses the Riley ruggedness measure as the instrument, the results with the cable length instrument are
shown in Table A.5.



                                                       18
every stage of the production chain. For example, in the case of the cotton textile industry, the
same unit of yarn can be turned into different types of plain cloth, and the same unit of plain
cloth can be turned into innumerable different varieties of printed cloth. Because of this, the more
aggregate demand at the level of the input of each stage would then have a lower coefficient of
variation than the output of that stage, and this holds throughout the production chain. Since
communication time should be expected to be most valuable at stages for which demand volatility
is largest, we would expect the telegraph to have the largest trade enhancing impact at the more
downstream stages, contrary to what we find.
   We now turn to discussing mechanisms that yield predictions that are in line with what we find
empirically. In fact, the mechanism that is arguably the most difficult to rule out is a fairly generic
one. Assume demand elasticities are larger further upstream for an unspecified reason. In this case
the same 1% decrease in price will increase yarn imports by more than imports of finished cloth.
   However, note that this effect should hold for any reduction in trading frictions. To test for
this, we can exploit the fact that data from the Lloyd’s List also yields shipping time for mail
and product samples, and explore whether the effects are similar when a different trading friction
decreases. Panel B of Table 7 shows that while the estimated coefficients for mail shipping time are
not statistically different from zero, the point estimates increase in magnitude as we move further
downstream, which is precisely the opposite of what we find for communication time. This suggests
that the main driver of the effect of communications times is not the generic effect of a reduction
in trading frictions.
   Interestingly, however, our preferred mechanism — codifiability — is highly consistent with
mail shipping time having the opposite effect: Reductions in mail shipping time, which are also
used for mailing samples, are most relevant for the non-codifiable information, i.e., for finished
cloth.

4.3.4    Codifiability and trade in intermediates

The previous sections showed that communication time improvements disproportionately increased
trade for products further upstream as these were more codifiable. In order to understand the
extent to which this mechanism has the potential to shed light on how ICT affects the formation
of global value chains more generally, in this section, we explore the extent to which codifiability
and position in the value chain are related.
   It seems reasonable to expect codifiability to decrease as we move down the value chain, because
— as we described in the case of cotton textiles —, when specifying the attributes of a product
further downstream, it is necessary to specify all inputs that are used and their transformations up
to that point. This naturally leads to the prediction that codifiability should decrease as we move
downstream, though it is clearly possible to find counterexamples.
   We correlate a widely used measure of position in the value chain with a proxy for codifiability


                                                  19
as follows. Antràs et al. (2012) define upstreamness as an industry’s relative product line position
(or its average distance from final use). We correlate this measure with the Rauch classification of
products. Rauch classifies products according to whether they are traded on an organized exchange
(we assign these a value of 3), whether they have a reference price published in a trade journal
(assigned a value of 2), or neither (1). These categories are commonly interpreted as the degree
of differentiation of a product, however, this measure also captures our notion of codifiability well;
products which are traded on an organized exchange must have easily codifiable attributes that are
standardized such that they mean the same to all parties. Products that are reference priced also
need to be easily specified along a small number of dimensions. Finally, products that are neither
traded on organized exchanges, nor are reference priced will likely have attributes that are more
difficult to specify.26
    Column 1 in Table 8 shows the full sample, while column 2 drops all product categories from
the Rauch classification that are primary products.27 It is important to make sure the correlation
is not driven exclusively by primary products, as the location of production is determined to a large
extent by natural resource endowments. In both specifications, codifiability and upstreamness are
strongly correlated.
    An important point to bear in mind is that the Rauch measure captures aspects of product
categories beyond their codifiability; Rauch (1999) focuses on the extent to which search at a
distance will affect products differentially, while Nunn (2007) highlights the differing extent to
which the products are vulnerable to hold-up problems. Disentangling the multitude of different
factors that undoubtedly affect the Rauch classification of these product categories is beyond the
scope this paper. The point is simply that the correlation between upstreamness and the Rauch
measure suggests that the mechanism via which communication time affects trade along the value
chain in this paper, the positive relationship between codifiability and upstreamness, also seems to
be present more generally in the data.
    Finally, it should also be noted, that for ICT to facilitate the formation of global value chains,
codifiability does not need to be monotonically decreasing along the value chain. It does not
even need to be the case that all intermediates along the value chain are more codifiable than the
final good. All that is necessary is that intermediate inputs are generally more codifiable than
final goods. If this latter holds true, in response to ICT improvements, trade in intermediate
goods should increase more than trade in final goods. Moreover, all else equal, firms will have a
higher incentive to offshore the production of more codifiable inputs, while less codifiable inputs
   26
      The I-O classification system and the SITC codes for which the Rauch classification is available are matched
following the methodology in Nunn (2007). When more than one SITC code matches with the same I-O code, we
take the average of the Rauch classification. Admittedly, this imposes cardinality on the Rauch measure which it
does not have. However, the results are robust to using the minimum or maximum of the Rauch measure for all
products that belong to the same I-O classification which do not rely on cardinality.
   27
      In particular, all SITC codes belonging to “Crude materials, inedible, except fuels” and “Mineral fuels, lubricants
and related materials” are dropped.



                                                           20
are produced in-house or are sourced from geographically proximate suppliers.

4.4      The effect of communication technology on technology adoption
The previous section established that communication technology improvements disproportionately
increased imports of intermediate goods, and in particular imports of yarn, in destination markets.
In this section, we explore how imports of intermediate goods evolved in the long run, and in
particular, how this is related to the adoption of frontier technology in the upstream part of the
value chain, cotton spinning.

4.4.1      Dynamic effects of communication time on imports

We begin the empirical analysis by exploring the dynamic effects of communication time on import-
ing at different parts of the cotton textile value chain. Table 9 estimates the effect of the telegraph
on imports of yarn, plain and finished cotton cloth separately for the period within 5 years of the
introduction of the telegraph, between 6-10 years of the introduction of the telegraph and more
than 10 years after the introduction of the telegraph.28
       For yarn, the effect of the telegraph is non-monotonic across time. In particular, imports of yarn
increase within 5 years of the introduction of the telegraph, and increase further between 6-10 years
after the connection is put in place. However, after 10 years the effect falls by a sizable magnitude
(although the reduction in the effect is only statistically significant in the Poisson specification and
not in the IV Poisson specification). For plain and finished cloth, the estimated effects do not show
the same pattern. The estimated additional effect of the telegraph within 6-10 and after 10 years
is typically very small for these goods, never statistically significant and does not display the same
non-monotonicity as yarn.29

4.4.2      Effect of telegraph on adoption of mechanized spinning

One natural explanation for this decline in imports of British machine-spun yarn after 10 years is
that over time, yarn importing countries started to develop their own mechanized industries. In
fact, the historical literature has emphasized a link between importing yarn and the subsequent
development of a domestic mechanized spinning industry. For example, Farnie (2004, pp. 574)
writes; “The role of yarn exports has never achieved due recognition in historiography [...] The
  28
      The corresponding specification without interaction terms allowing for heterogeneous effect over time is estimated
in Panel C of Table A.2.
   29
      The specification presented in Table 9 estimates the effect on a subsample of the data that drops all observations
more than 20 years before or after the telegraph connection is achieved. This is in order to estimate the dynamic
effects for comparable time horizons across countries. Table A.7 estimates an alternative specification that includes
the full sample of observations 1845-1880. The estimated coefficients are similar in magnitude, though in this case,
the effect on yarn within 5 years of the telegraph is not statistically significant, while the effects within 6-10 years
and after 10 years are highly significant.




                                                          21
trade in yarn became more influential than the trade in cloth in one key respect. It stimulated the
establishment of spinning mills overseas and so fostered the spread of industrialization abroad.”
   We test this hypothesis using data on worldwide spinning capacity. These data are only available
for the first and last years of our sample period, i.e., 1845 and 1880 (and several decades thereafter),
so we begin by asking whether mechanized spinning capacity increased the longer a country was
connected to the telegraph network, using our ruggedness measure as an instrument for years since
adoption of the telegraph:

                                Sc,1880 − Sc,1845
                                                  = βt ∗ Y RSc,1880 + c                            (2)
                                   P OPc,1845
   where Sc,1880 − Sc,1845 denotes the growth in spindles in country c between 1845 and 1880
normalized by the population of a country in 1845, P OPc,1845 . We use levels of the dependent
variable because of the large number of zeros in the data.
   Y RSc,1880 denotes years since the introduction of the telegraph for country c in 1880. For
countries that are not yet connected in a particular period t, we set Y RSct = 0. In order to account
for the potential endogeneity of the telegraph connections, we use the same identification strategy
as before, with two simplifications: As we are now estimating a cross-sectional regression, we can
use the ruggedness measures directly as instruments. Moreover, we can also directly control for the
effect of distance (rather than taking out that variation from the predicted telegraph year).
   Table 10 begins the analysis by estimating the effect of a telegraph connection on growth in
normalized mechanized spinning capacity for 1880. Column (1) reports the first stage in order to
asses the strength of the instrument. The instrument is highly significant and of the expected sign;
a more rugged submarine terrain leads to a later connection to the network. This will also be
apparent from the first stage KP F-statistics, which are consistently high across all specifications.
Columns (2) and (3) show the OLS and 2SLS specifications, respectively. Both estimates are
positive and highly statistically significant; countries that had been connected to the telegraph for
a longer period of time in 1880 had higher growth in mechanized spinning capacity. Consistent
with the previous section, the OLS and 2SLS coefficients are only marginally different, in line with
our contention that the timing of a successful telegraph connection was mainly driven by exogenous
factors.
   We assess the robustness of these results to the inclusion of a number of controls across columns
(4) to (8). The coefficient of interest remains stable and highly significant across all specifications.
Column (4) includes a control for distance to London, motivated by the fact that our instrument is
correlated with distance to London and also that the diffusion of technology may follow a gravity
equation (Keller and Yeaple, 2013). Distance enters with the expected negative sign, though it is
not statistically significant. Countries may have used tariff policy as a way to protect what was
seen as a strategic industry in the 19th century. For this reason, columns (5) to (7) add cotton yarn,
plain cotton cloth and finished cotton cloth ad-valorem tariffs measured in 1845, respectively. There


                                                  22
is no clear pattern in terms of the estimated effect of these tariffs, however, only finished cotton
cloth tariffs are statistically significant. Finally, one concern is that more developed countries may
have achieved a telegraph connection sooner and also developed their mechanized cotton spinning
industries to a greater extent. In the absence of GDP per capita data for the majority of our sample
in pre-telegraph years, we proxy for development using urbanization rates measures in 1850 from
Pascali (2017). Urbanization enters with the expected positive sign, though it is not statistically
significant.
    While spindle data is not available for more years within our baseline sample period, it does
become more readily available after 1880. In particular, we were able to collect decadal mechanized
spinning capacity for the years 1890, 1900 and 1910. Table 11 estimates our baseline specification
                                                                     Sc,t −Sc,1845
using growth of spindles over these longer time horizons,             P OPc,1845 ,   where t ∈ {1890, 1900, 1910}.
Distance to London is always included as a control as our ruggedness instrument is weakly correlated
with distance to London. The results hold independent of the time span used; if anything, the
magnitude may grow over time (with the exception of 1890, where our sample size is reduced).30
    Column (5) reports the result from a placebo test that asks whether the year of connection to
the telegraph predicts mechanized spinning capacity in 1845 (normalized by population); before
the telegraph was introduced. The coefficient of interest is defined as the year of connection to the
telegraph in this specification, as “years since connection to telegraph” would be zero everywhere.
This is simply a rescaling of our regressor of interest. Reassuringly, the coefficient of interest is not
statistically different from zero. This is also the single specification in which distance to London is
of the expected sign and highly statistically significant. One potential concern with the strength of
this placebo is that the ban on British exports of spinning machinery was lifted in 1843, implying
that technology diffusion may have been limited before this point in time. However, as Saxonhouse
and Wright (2010) point out, prior to the lifting of the ban, a license system was in place between
1824-1843 allowing some exports of textile machinery.

4.4.3    Potential mechanisms

The historical evidence emphasizes two complementary mechanisms that facilitated the diffusion
of mechanized spinning technology from Britain throughout the world (Farnie, 2004). On the one
hand, spinning machines were imported from Britain, the world’s leading machinery manufacturer.
But having machinery was not sufficient; in order to successfully operate modern cotton mills,
managers needed to have knowledge about the whole system of the production process and local
demand conditions. Through their experience in importing yarn and distributing it to local weavers,
merchants were well placed to accumulate this type of knowledge, making them well suited to
managing the newly established cotton mills. Farnie (2004, pp. 120) writes: “British merchant
  30
     As our sample size is relatively small and data coverage is not complete across years, we estimate the effect for
each year on the largest sample for which data are available.



                                                         23
houses ‘were the principal innovators in India’ [...] In Bombay, almost from the start, local merchant
houses were appointed managers of the new cotton-spinning mills. [...] Management of the Bombay
cotton spinning mills by managing agents who were invariably merchant houses remained the
prevailing pattern”. Moreover, “ (...) merchant houses were well-placed to distribute the yarn
and cloth produced by their mills.” (Jeremy, 2004, p. 120).
         In the following, we present empirical evidence for both mechanisms. First, we use data on
imported spinning machinery from Britain to test for the relevance of imports of capital from
the technology frontier, Britain. As annual imports represent flows of technology, our dependent
variable is defined as total machinery imports for the time period 1878 to 1914. This yields an
estimate of the stock of mechanized imported spindles per country. Column (6) of Table 11 uses this
imported mechanized spindle stock measure (normalized by population) as the dependent variable.
The coefficient is positive and significant, as in columns (1) to (4). This suggests that importing
machinery from Britain played an import role in technology diffusion. Table A.8 provides the same
set of robustness checks used in Table 10, all of which are consistent with this finding.
         To assess whether merchant houses were systematically involved in the management of cotton
spinning firms, we use directories for both cotton mill managers (in 1925) as well as merchants (for
1886-87) for Bombay, which was where most of the Indian cotton spinning industry was located.
We matched the names of managers to the merchant directory, and depending on the strictness of
the matching criteria of the name, we in fact find that 28 to 46% of managers had been merchants
previously.31 Note that half of these matched merchants are British, and half were local merchant
houses, so no particular merchant origin explains this pattern. While we were only able to collect
data for India for this exercise, we do not believe that the link between merchants and local
mechanized cotton spinning firms is limited to this specific country. For example, Jeremy (2004)
discusses a similar mechanism for the case of Russia and China.
         Taking together the empirical and historical evidence presented in this section, establishing
a connection to the telegraph network had a positive effect on the development of a domestic
mechanized cotton spinning industry. While far from conclusive, this section provides evidence
that technology diffusion through the imports of capital equipment from Britain was complemented
with learning through importing intermediates.


5         Conclusion
This paper has examined how a revolutionary ICT, the telegraph, affected trade along the value
chain in cotton textiles and the subsequent adoption of frontier technology in the industry. This
setting allows us to isolate exogenous variation in the time at which a country was connected to
the global telegraph network. Moreover, the fact that distinct stages of the production process
    31
         Note that this is plausibly an underestimate, as the merchant directory and firm list are 40 years apart.



                                                              24
are delineated in the trade data, coupled with British dominance in trade, presents us with a rare
opportunity to recover the global value chain.
   In the first part of the empirical analysis, we find that imports from the technological leader,
Britain, increased disproportionately for more upstream products. These were products that were
easier to codify. This finding is in line with the literature that has argued that ICT facilitates
the formation of global value chains by making it easier to communicate product specifications at
a distance. While understanding the extent to which codifiability is systematically related to the
position in the value chain is outside the scope of this paper, we have shown suggestive evidence
that upstreamness and codifibaility may be related more generally. However, as discussed in the
paper, the conditions under which ICT facilitates the formation of global value chains seem to rely
on even weaker assumptions about the relationship between codifiability and position in the value
chain. In particular, if intermediate inputs are generally more codifiable than final goods, trade in
the former should increase disproportionately in response to ICT improvements. Moreover, all else
equal, firms will have a higher incentive to offshore the production of more codifiable inputs, while
less codifiable inputs are produced in-house or are sourced from geographically proximate suppliers.
   In the second part of the analysis, we exploit the fact that the historical setting allows us to
examine dynamic effects. We show that over time, imports of yarn began to decline relative to their
initial increase after connection to the telegraph. This suggests that importing countries may have
moved into this part of the value chain themselves. Indeed, we find that ICT affected the diffusion
of frontier technology and show suggestive evidence that this took place through the complementary
mechanisms of capital imports and knowledge transfer acquired through importing intermediates.
   Though we have highlighted the similarities between the 19th century cotton textile industry
and the contemporary setting, it is also clear that there are important differences. The prevalence
of multinational activity is one feature of the current environment that we believe may affect both
the formation of global value chains and the complex nature of trade and international technology
diffusion within these value chains. Understanding how MNC activity interacts with these forces
is far from trivial. For example, recent work suggests that even though multinationals account
for a large fraction of US imports and exports, only the very largest multinationals engage in
trade between parent and affiliate (Ramondo et al., 2016). One explanation may be that only the
largest multinationals find it profitable to invest in the type of within firm ICT system that makes
possible the building of cross-country supply chains. In addition, the literature has found evidence
on technology transfer within the boundaries of the multinational firm (Branstetter et al., 2006;
Keller and Yeaple, 2013; Bilir and Morales, 2016), suggesting that MNC activity may facilitate
knowledge transfer. The aim of this paper is to focus on a setting in which it is possible to isolate
the key forces we are interested in (ICT, trade along the value chain and international technology
diffusion). We view understanding how other forces such as MNC activity interact with the factors
considered in this paper as a fruitful avenue for future research.



                                                 25
References
Allen, T. (2014). Information frictions in trade. Econometrica 82 (6), 2041–2083.
Amiti, M. and J. Konings (2007). Trade liberalization, intermediate inputs, and productivity:
  Evidence from Indonesia. American Economic Review 97 (5), 1611–1638.
Antràs, P., D. Chor, T. Fally, and R. Hillberry (2012). Measuring the upstreamness of production
  and trade flows. The American Economic Review 102 (3), 412–416.
Autor, D. H., F. Levy, and R. J. Murnane (2003). The skill content of recent technological change:
  An empirical exploration. Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (4), 1279 – 1333.
Baldwin, R. (2006). Globalisation: the great unbundling(s). Technical report, Economic Council
  of Finland.
Baldwin, R. (2016). The Great Convergence: Information Technology and the New Globalization.
  Belknap.
Baldwin, R. and P. Martin (1999). Two waves of globalisation: superficial similarities, fundamental
  differences. National Bureau of Economic Research w6904.
Beckert, S. (2014). Empire of Cotton: A Global History. Knopf.
Bilir, K. and E. Morales (2016). The impact of innovation in the multinational firm. mimeo.
Bolt, J., R. Inklaar, H. de Jong, and J. L. van Zanden (2018). Rebasing ‘Maddison’: new income
  comparisons and the shape of long-run economic development. Madison Project Working Paper
  10 .
Branstetter, L. G., R. Fisman, and C. F. Foley (2006). Do stronger intellectual property rights
  increase international technology transfer? Empirical evidence from US firm-level panel data.
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics 121 (1), 321–349.
Chapman, S. (1992). Merchant enterprise in Britain: From the industrial revolution to World War
  I. Cambridge University Press.
Company, T. C. C. (1915). How submarine cables are made, laid, operated and repaired. The
  Commerical Cable Company.
Crafts, N. F. (1985). British Economic Growth During the Industrial Revolution. Clarendon Press.
Cruz-Gonzalez, M., I. Fernández-Val, and M. Weidner (2017). probitfe and logitfe: Bias corrections
  for probit and logit models with two-way fixed effects. Stata Journal fothcoming.
Ellison, T. (1886). The Cotton Trade of Great Britain. Effingham Wilson.
Farnie, D. A. (2004). The role of merchants as prime movers in the expansion of the cotton industry,
  1760-1990. In D. A. Farnie and D. J. Jeremy (Eds.), The Fibre that Changed the World: The
  Cotton Industry in International Perspective, 1600-1990s. Oxford University Press.
Feenstra, R. C. (1998). Integration of trade and disintegration of production in the global economy.
  Journal of economic Perspectives 12 (4), 31–50.
Fernández-Val, I. and M. Weidner (2016). Individual and time effects in nonlinear panel models
  with large N, T. Journal of Econometrics 192 (1), 291–312.
Fink, C., A. Mattoo, and I. C. Neagu (2005). Assessing the impact of communication costs on
  international trade. Journal of International Economics 67 (2), 428–445.
Fort, T. C. (2016). Technology and production fragmentation: Domestic versus foreign sourcing.
  The Review of Economic Studies, 1–38.
Fouquin, M. and J. Hugot (2016). Two centuries of bilateral trade and gravity data: 1827-2014.
Freund, C. L. and D. Weinhold (2004). The effect of the Internet on international trade. Journal
  of International Economics 62 (1), 171–189.
Grossman, G. M. and E. Rossi-Hansberg (2008). Trading tasks: A simple theory of offshoring. The

                                                26
  American Economic Review 98 (5), 1978–1997.
Hahn, J. and W. Newey (2004). Jackknife and analytical bias reduction for nonlinear panel models.
  Econometrica 72 (4), 1295–1319.
Hanlon, W. W. (2015). Necessity is the mother of invention: Input supplies and directed technical
  change. Econometrica 83 (1), 67–100.
Head, K. and T. Mayer (2013). Gravity equations: Workhorse, toolkit, and cookbook. In
  G. Gopinath, E. Helpman, and K. Rogoff (Eds.), Handbook of International Economics, Vol-
  ume 4. Elsevier.
Headrick, D. R. (1981). The tools of empire: Technology and European imperialism in the nineteenth
  century. Oxford University Press.
Hugot, J. and C. U. Dajud (2016). Trade costs and the Suez and Panama Canals. Technical report,
  CEPII.
Jeremy, D. J. (2004). The international diffusion of cotton manufacturing technology, 1750-1990s.
  In D. A. Farnie and D. J. Jeremy (Eds.), The Fibre that Changed the World: The Cotton Industry
  in International Perspective, 1600-1990s. Oxford University Press.
Kaukiainen, Y. (2001). Shrinking the world: Improvements in the speed of information transmis-
  sion, c. 1820–1870. European Review of Economic History 5 (1), 1–28.
Keller, W. (2004). International technology diffusion. Journal of Economic Literature 42 (3), 752–
  782.
Keller, W. and S. R. Yeaple (2013). The gravity of knowledge. American Economic Review 103 (4),
  1414–1444.
Leamer, E. E. and M. Storper (2001). The economic geography of the Internet age. Journal of
  International Business Studies 32 (4), 641–655.
Llorca-Jana, M. (2012). The British textile trade in South America in the nineteenth century,
  Volume 97. Cambridge University Press.
Miroudot, S., R. Lanz, and A. Ragoussis (2009). Trade in intermediate goods and services.
Neyman, J. and E. L. Scott (1948). Consistent estimates based on partially consistent observations.
  Econometrica 16 (1), 1–32.
Nunn, N. (2007). Relationship-specificity, incomplete contracts, and the pattern of trade. The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 122 (2), 569–600.
Nunn, N. and D. Puga (2012). Ruggedness: The blessing of bad geography in Africa. Review of
  Economics and Statistics 94 (1), 20–36.
Pascali, L. (2017). The wind of change: Maritime technology, trade and economic development.
  The American Economic Review 107 (9), 2821–54.
Portes, R. and H. Rey (2005). The determinants of cross-border equity flows. Journal of Interna-
  tional Economics 65 (2), 269–296.
Ramondo, N., V. Rappoport, and K. J. Ruhl (2016). Intrafirm trade and vertical fragmentation in
  US multinational corporations. Journal of International Economics 98, 51–59.
Rauch, J. E. (1999, June). Networks versus markets in international trade. Journal of International
  Economics 48 (1), 7–35.
Rauch, J. E. and V. Trindade (2002, February). Ethnic Chinese networks in international trade.
  The Review of Economics and Statistics 84 (1), 116–130.
Riello, G. (2013). Cotton: the fabric that made the modern world. Cambridge University Press.
Riley, S. J., S. D. De Gloria, and R. Elliot (1999). A terrain ruggedness index that quantifies index
  that quantifies topographic heterogeneity. Intermountain Journal of Sciences 5 (1-4), 23–27.


                                                 27
Roy, T. (2010). The long globalization and textile producers in India. In E. H.-K. Lex Heerma van
  Voss and E. van Nederveen Meerkerk (Eds.), A Global History of Textile Workers, 1650 - 2000.
  Ashgate.
Santos Silva, J. and S. Tenreyro (2006). The log of gravity. The Review of Economics and Statis-
  tics 88 (4), 641–658.
Saxonhouse, G. R. and G. Wright (2004). Technological evolution in cotton spinning. In D. Farnie
  and D. Jeremy (Eds.), The Fibre that Changed the World: The Cotton Industry in International
  Perspective, 1600-1990s, pp. 129–152. Oxford University Press.
Saxonhouse, G. R. and G. Wright (2010). National leadership and competing technological
  paradigms: the globalization of cotton spinning, 1878–1933. The Journal of Economic His-
  tory 70 (3), 535–566.
Startz, M. (2017). The value of face-to-face: Search and contracting frictions in Nigerian trade.
  mimeo.
Steinwender, C. (2018). Information frictions and the law of one price: "when the states and the
  kingdom became united". American Economic Review 108 (3), 657–696.
Tena-Junguito, A., M. Lampe, and F. T. Fernandes (2012). How much trade liberalization was
  there in the world before and after Cobden-Chevalier? The Journal of Economic History 72 (3),
  708–740.
Topalova, P. and A. Khandelwal (2011). Trade liberalization and firm productivity: The case of
  India. Review of Economics and Statistics 99 (3), 995–1009.
Wenzlhuemer, R. (2013). Connecting the nineteenth-century world: The telegraph and globalization.
  Cambridge University Press.
Windmeijer, F. and J. Santos Silva (1997). Endogeneity in count data models: An application to
  demand for health care. Journal of Applied Econometrics 12 (3), 281–294.




                                               28
A   Tables

                Table 1: World exports of cotton goods and yarn, by country

                                          Exports of cotton goods and yarn
                                      Value exported Ratio relative to British
                                        1876-1880             1876-1880
                 Great Britain            68,457
                 Holland                   2,818                0.041
                 Germany1                  2,727                0.040
                 France                    2,616                0.038
                 United States             2,008                0.029
                 Belgium                    770                 0.011
                 Notes: British exports are declared value. There are no recorded exports
                of cotton goods and yarn from Russia, Austria, Spain or Italy. Source:
                Ellison (1886, p. 113).
                1
                  German exports are estimates.


    Table 2: Prediction of first successful telegraph connection based on Riley ruggedness

                                                   (1)            (2)            (3)
                    VARIABLES                                                   Mail
                                               Telegraph      Telegraph       shipping
                                                  year           year           time

                    Riley ruggedness            0.029***       0.026***         -0.011
                                                 (0.004)        (0.004)        (0.010)
                    Distance to London                         0.000***       0.007***
                                                                (0.000)        (0.000)

                    Observations                    73             73             63
                    R-squared                     0.499          0.531          0.648
                    Notes: Estimation via linear probability model. Riley ruggedness de-
                   fined as the maximum Riley measure across all submarine edges that
                   make up a connection. Distance to London is the natural logarithm of
                   great circle distance to London. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
                   Notation for statistical significance; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                    29
                              Table 3: First stage equivalent

                                                              (1)                         (2)
    VARIABLES                                           ln(comm time)               ln(comm time)

    (Pred tele Riley)*                                       -0.297***
    (comm time change neighbor)                               (0.046)
    (Pred tele cable length)*                                                            -0.296***
    (comm time change neighbor)                                                           (0.044)

    Observations                                                2,150                       2,150
    R-squared                                                   0.557                       0.557
    Number of countries                                           72                          72
   Notes: OLS specification for the pseudo-first stage. ln(commtime) defined as
  the natural logarithm of communication time (in days) to London. Regressors:
  (Pred tele Riley)* (comm time change neighbor) is a binary variable that takes
  the value of one including and after the predicted year of connection based on the
  Riley measure interacted with the closest neighbor’s drop in communication time
  after connection to the telegraph. (Pred tele cable length)* (comm time change
  neighbor) is a binary variable that takes the value of one including and after
  the predicted year of connection based on the normalized cable length measure
  interacted with the closest neighbor’s drop in communication time after connection
  to the telegraph. Year and country FEs included. Standard errors clustered
  by country in parentheses. Notation for statistical significance; *** p<0.01, **
  p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                Table 4: Summary statistics
                                                         Before            After                       Change
                                               All      telegraph        telegraph       Change         in %
 Num. observations (country*year)             2,684        1,884             800

 Quantities
 Yarn, million pounds1                        2.33          0.78            5.99           5.21           668
 Plain cloth, million yards                   21.73         12.25           44.05          31.80          260
 Finished cloth, million yards                10.72         7.45            18.41          10.95          147

 Values (000’s of £’s)
 Yarn                                        138.23          40.09         369.34         329.24          821
 Plain cloth                                 300.73         172.97         601.60         428.62          248
 Finished cloth                              203.20         138.96         354.51         215.54          155
 Notes: “Before telegraph” includes all country*year observations prior to achieving a connection to the telegraph
network. “After telegraph” includes all country*year observations including and after achieving a connection to the
telegraph network. On average, 1 pound of yarn yields 5 yards of cloth (Ellison, 1886).




                                                       30
               Table 5: Baseline specifications

                            (1)            (2)                  (3)
 VARIABLES                 Yarn        Plain cloth        Finished cloth

 Panel A. Baseline, no IV
 ln(comm time) -0.183***                -0.097***               0.006
                 (0.041)                 (0.029)               (0.044)
 Observations     2,150                   2,150                 2,150
 Nr of countries    72                      72                    72

 Panel B. Riley measure * comm time drop
 ln(comm time) -0.272***   -0.128**      -0.030
                 (0.076)    (0.065)     (0.066)
 Observations     2,150      2,150        2,150
 Nr of countries    72         72          72

 Panel C. Normalized cable length * comm time drop
 ln(comm time) -0.269***    -0.110*      0.007
                 (0.077)    (0.065)     (0.064)
 Observations     2,150      2,150       2,150
 Nr of countries    72         72          72
 Notes: ln(commtime) defined as the natural logarithm of communication
time (in days) to London. The instrument in Panel B is a binary variable
that takes the value of one including and after the predicted year of connec-
tion based on the Riley measure interacted with the closest neighbor’s drop
in communication time after connection to the telegraph.The instrument in
Panel C is a binary variable that takes the value of one including and after
the predicted year of connection based on the normalized cable length mea-
sure interacted with the closest neighbor’s drop in communication time after
connection to the telegraph. Year and country FEs included. Standard er-
rors clustered by country in parentheses. Notation for statistical significance;
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                      31
                       Table 6: Robustness

                          (1)            (2)               (3)
 VARIABLES               Yarn        Plain cloth     Finished cloth

 Panel A. Baseline IV (Riley measure)
 ln(comm time) -0.272***    -0.128**                      -0.030
                 (0.076)     (0.065)                     (0.066)
 Observations     2,150       2,150                       2,150
 Nr of countries    72          72                          72

 Panel B. Drop Civil War
 ln(comm time) -0.265***               -0.128*            -0.036
                 (0.076)               (0.069)           (0.080)
 Observations     1,845                 1,845             1,845
 Nr of countries    72                    72                72

 Panel C. Drop British colonies
 ln(comm time) -0.401***   -0.212***                      0.067
                 (0.122)    (0.073)                      (0.107)
 Observations     1,632      1,632                        1,632
 Nr of countries    55         55                           55

 Panel D. Control for tariffs
 ln(comm time) -0.282***      -0.125**                    -0.047
                 (0.069)       (0.055)                   (0.062)
 tariff rate      -0.430        -0.041                  -0.020***
                 (0.276)       (0.293)                   (0.001)
 Observations      1,096         1,096                    1,096
 Nr of countries    36            36                        36

 Panel E. Control for GDP
 ln(comm time)   -0.428**   -0.076                        0.153
                  (0.195)  (0.093)                       (0.094)
 ln(GDP)           0.082  -0.680***                     -0.757***
                  (0.417)  (0.173)                       (0.258)
 Observations       920      920                           920
 Nr of countries     38       38                            38

 Panel F. Import values
 ln(comm time)    -0.158                -0.076            0.005
                 (0.104)               (0.067)           (0.066)
 Observations      2,150                2,150             2,150
 Nr of countries    72                    72                72
 Notes: ln(commtime) defined as the natural logarithm of communication
time (in days) to London. The instrument used across all specifications
is a binary variable that takes the value of one including and after the
predicted year of connection based on the Riley measure interacted with
the closest neighbor’s drop in communication time after connection to
the telegraph. Controls: ad-valorem product specific tariffs from Tena-
Junguito et al. (2012), current price annual (log) GDP values from Bolt
et al. (2018) and Hugot and Dajud (2016). Appendix A.3 contains a
detailed discussion of the construction of each variable. Year and coun-
try FEs included. Standard errors clustered by country in parentheses.
Notation for statistical significance;32
                                       *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
                            Table 7: Mechanism

                                     (1)             (2)               (3)
   VARIABLES                        Yarn         Plain cloth     Finished cloth

   Panel A. Interaction with international merchants
   ln(comm time)        -0.335***   -0.230***     -0.094
                         (0.095)     (0.059)     (0.065)
   ln(comm time)*         -0.001     0.023**     0.020**
   number int merchants  (0.020)     (0.010)     (0.009)
   Observations            2,019      2,019        2,019
   Nr of countries           68         68          68

   Panel B. Control for mail shipping time
   ln(comm time)        -0.306***   -0.127*                            -0.014
                         (0.092)    (0.068)                           (0.068)
   ln(mail ship time)     0.201      -0.074                            -0.212
                         (0.148)    (0.123)                           (0.142)
   Observations           2,150       2,150                             2,150
   Nr of countries          72          72                               72
   Notes: ln(commtime) defined as the natural logarithm of communication time
  (in days) to London. The instrument used across all specifications is a binary
  variable that takes the value of one including and after the predicted year of con-
  nection based on the Riley measure interacted with the closest neighbor’s drop
  in communication time after connection to the telegraph. Controls: international
  merchants defined as the number of British merchant houses that have an affili-
  ate merchant house in the destination market, mail shipping time defined as the
  natural logarithm of mail shipping time (in days) to London. Appendix A.3 con-
  tains a detailed discussion of the construction of each variable. Year and country
  FEs included. Standard errors clustered by country in parentheses. Notation for
  statistical significance; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




Table 8: Correlation between upstreamness and codifiability

                                   (1)                       (2)
         VARIABLES            Upstreamness              Upstreamness

         Rauch class.             0.720***                 0.669***
                                   (0.095)                  (0.094)

         Observations                291                   291
         R-squared                  0.191                 0.179
         Sample                      Full           Exc. Raw materials
         Notes: Upstreamness measure represents poistion in the value
        chain as defined in Antràs et al. (2012). Rauch classification as
        defined in Rauch (1999). Column (1) includes the full sample that
        can be matched. Column (2) excludes all raw materials; in par-
        ticular, all SITC codes belonging to “Crude materials, inedible,
        except fuels” and “Mineral fuels, lubricants and related materials”
        are dropped. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Notation for
        statistical significance; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                          33
                                  Table 9: Dynamic effects

                                                      (1)          (2)                (3)
 VARIABLES                                           Yarn      Plain cloth      Finished cloth

 Panel A. Poisson
 (Tele dummy)*(change comm time)                 0.104**          0.059              -0.013
                                                  (0.052)        (0.040)            (0.044)
 (Tele dummy)*(change comm time)*                0.154***         0.038              0.004
 (>5 yrs after tele)                              (0.051)        (0.044)            (0.034)
 (Tele dummy)*(change comm time)*                -0.196**         0.022              0.012
 (>10 yrs after tele)                             (0.092)        (0.040)            (0.066)

 Panel B. IV poisson (Ruggedness IV)
 (Tele dummy)*(change comm time)  0.240**                         0.080              0.039
                                   (0.112)                       (0.092)            (0.086)
 (Tele dummy)*(change comm time)* 0.199***                        0.001              -0.007
 (>5 yrs after tele)               (0.042)                       (0.029)            (0.046)
 (Tele dummy)*(change comm time)*   -0.110                        0.049              -0.002
 (>10 yrs after tele)              (0.093)                       (0.038)            (0.086)

 Panel C. IV poisson (Cable length IV)
 (Tele dummy)*(change comm time)   0.242**                        0.073              -0.048
                                   (0.121)                       (0.075)            (0.092)
 (Tele dummy)*(change comm time)* 0.195***                        0.020              0.003
 (>5 yrs after tele)               (0.044)                       (0.039)            (0.042)
 (Tele dummy)*(change comm time)*   -0.117                        0.046              -0.038
 (>10 yrs after tele)              (0.096)                       (0.036)            (0.096)

 Observations                                        1,757        1,757              1,757
 Number of countries                                   68           68                 68
 Notes: Tele dummy is a binary variable that takes the value of one including and after the year
of connection to the telegraph and is zero otherwise. (>5 yrs after tele) is a binary variable
that takes the value of one 6 years and after the telegraph connection is established and is zero
otherwise. (>10 yrs after tele) is a binary variable that takes the value of one 11 years and after
the telegraph connection is established and is zero otherwise. Change in comm time is the drop
in communication time after connection to the telegraph. The instrument in Panel B is a binary
variable that takes the value of one including and after the predicted year of connection based
on the Riley measure interacted with the closest neighbor’s drop in communication time after
connection to the telegraph. The instrument in Panel C is a binary variable that takes the value
of one including and after the predicted year of connection based on the normalized cable length
measure interacted with the closest neighbor’s drop in communication time after connection to
the telegraph. Observations more than 20 years before/after telegraph connection is achieved are
dropped. Year and country FEs included. Standard errors clustered by country in parentheses.
Notation for statistical significance; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                34
                                 Table 10: Impact of telegraph on technology adoption
                                              (1)                  (2)           (3)            (4)         (5)          (6)           (7)            (8)

 VARIABLES                         Years since telegraph                                     Growth mechanized spindles

 Riley ruggedness                         -0.023***
                                           (0.003)
 Years since telegraph                                          2.282***     2.346***      2.108***      2.551***      2.153**     2.668***        2.385***
                                                                 (0.613)      (0.612)       (0.721)       (0.875)      (0.847)      (0.930)         (0.881)
 Distance to London                                                                          -3.012
                                                                                            (4.337)
 Yarn tariff (1845)                                                                                       -2.808
                                                                                                         (13.038)
 Plain cloth tariff (1845)                                                                                             7.514
                                                                                                                      (10.880)
 Printed cloth tariff (1845)                                                                                                        -0.388*
                                                                                                                                    (0.209)
 Urbanization rate (1850)                                                                                                                           128.179
                                                                                                                                                   (351.868)

 Observations                                67                    67            67           67            32           32           32             46
 Specification                           First stage              OLS           2SLS         2SLS          2SLS         2SLS         2SLS           2SLS
 First stage KP F-stat                                                          59.25        32.10         30.29        27.62        35.53          43.63
 Notes: Column (1) contains the first stage specification, Column (2) contains the OLS specification and Columns (3)-(8) contain 2SLS specifications. Growth
mechanized spindles is defined as the change in mechanized spindles 1845-1880 normalized by country population in 1845. Years since telegraph measured as
years since first telegraph connection. Countries as yet unconnected to the telegraph are set to zero. The instrument is the Riley measure of ruggeddness.
Controls: Distance to London is the natural logarithm of great circle distance to London, ad-valorem tariffs for cotton yarn, plain cotton cloth and finished
cotton cloth measured in 1845 from Tena-Junguito et al. (2012), urbanization rate measured in 1850 from Pascali (2017). Appendix A.3 contains a detailed
discussion of the construction of each variable. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Notation for statistical significance; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                  Table 11: Impact of telegraph on technology adoption - 2SLS, all years

                                          (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)                  (5)                           (6)

                                            Growth mechanized spindles                                Mech. spindles             Imported spindles
  VARIABLES:                             1880     1890     1900      1910                                 1845                      1878-1914

  Years since telegraph               2.108***         1.157*         3.696**           4.717**                                          3.138*
                                       (0.721)         (0.615)        (1.502)           (2.249)                                          (1.871)
  Telegraph year                                                                                            -0.812
                                                                                                           (0.778)
  Distance to London                    -3.012          -4.644         -8.189            -17.823          -9.871***                   -18.840***
                                       (4.337)         (4.142)        (9.271)           (12.524)           (3.705)                      (6.121)

  Observations                            67              62              70              73                  73                           73
  Specification                          2SLS            2SLS            2SLS            2SLS                2SLS                         2SLS
  First stage KP F-stat                  32.10           20.36           23.53           25.27               25.27                        64.00
 Notes: Dependent variable in Columns (1) - (4) is the change in mechanized spindles between 1845 and 1880, 1890, 1900
and 1910, respectively, normalized by country population in 1845, Column (5) uses the level of mechanized spindles in 1845
normalized by population, Column (6) uses the sum of imported spinning machinery (measured in spindles) over 1878 to 1914
normalized by population to get a proxy of the stock of imported machinery in the long run. Years since telegraph measured as
years since first telegraph connection. Countries as yet unconnected to the telegraph are set to zero. Telegraph year is the year
of connection to the telegraph. Distance to London is the natural logarithm of great circle distance to London. The instrument
for both Years since telegraph and Telegraph year is the Riley ruggedness measure. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
Notation for statistical significance; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                             35
B   Figures

                               Figure 1: Cotton textile value chain




       SPINNING                            WEAVING                           FINISHING




        (a) Cotton yarn                (b) Plain cotton cloth             (c) Finished cotton cloth

     Notes: Images from www.globaltextiles.com, www.aliexpress.com, www.vam.ac.uk (left to right).



    Figure 2: Worldwide mechanized production capacity. Source: Farnie 2004, pp. 23-25




      (a) Mechanized spindles, 1800-1930                         (b) Power looms, 1820-1929




                                                  36
       Figure 3: British cotton textile exports, by product category, (average 1845-1880)




        Notes: For quantities chart, 1 pound of yarn yields on average 5 yards of cloth (Ellison, 1886)




Figure 4: Excerpts from "Liddel’s The ‘Economic’ Telegram Code for Piece Goods and General
Business"




                                                      37
Figure 5: Communication and mail shipping times relative to London (in days)




   (a) Madras                  (b) New York                (c) Constantinople




Figure 6: Global communication times in days to London by decade, 1850-1880




                                    38
Figure 7: Year of first successful connection to London via telegraph, 1850-1899




    Figure 8: Ruggedness of “telegraphic plateau” (transatlantic telegraph)




                                      39
Figure 9: Predicted versus actual year of first successful telegraph connection




     (a) Riley ruggedness                         (b) Normalized Cable Length




                                      40
