                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           THE CARBON ABATEMENT GAME

                                     Christoph Hambel
                                       Holger Kraft
                                    Eduardo S. Schwartz

                                     Working Paper 24604
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w24604


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                          May 2018, Revised September 2018




We thank Elizabeth Baldwin, Valentina Bosetti, Max Croce, Simon Dietz, Johannes Emmerling,
Svenn Jensen, Rick van der Ploeg, Soheil Shayegh, and Christian Traeger for helpful comments
and suggestions. We also thank seminar participants at Bocconi University, WU Vienna, Nova
University, and ICADE Business School as well as the participants of the Workshop on Optimal
Carbon Price under Climate Risk at FEEM in Milano and the 33rd annual congress of the
European Economic Association (EEA) for helpful comments and suggestions. All remaining
errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Christoph Hambel, Holger Kraft, and Eduardo S. Schwartz. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Carbon Abatement Game
Christoph Hambel, Holger Kraft, and Eduardo S. Schwartz
NBER Working Paper No. 24604
May 2018, Revised September 2018
JEL No. D81,Q5,Q54

                                          ABSTRACT

Climate change is one of the major global challenges. Mitigating its impact is however bedeviled
by free-rider problems and external effects. We thus study the problem of optimal carbon
abatement in a dynamic non-cooperative game-theoretical setting involving multiple countries
that are open economies. Our framework involves stochastic dynamics for CO2 emissions and
economic output of the countries. Each country is represented by a recursive-preference
functional. Despite its complexity, the model is analytically tractable. We can explicitly quantify
each country's decision on consumption, investment, and abatement expenditures. We also derive
closed-form solutions for the country-specific and global social cost of carbon (SCC). One key
finding is that both versions of the SCC are increasing in trade volume. This result is robust to
adding capital transfers between countries. Our numerical examples suggest that disregarding
trade might lead to a significant underestimation of the SCC.

Christoph Hambel                                 Eduardo S. Schwartz
Goethe University                                Anderson Graduate School of Management
Department of Finance                            UCLA
Frankfurt                                        110 Westwood Plaza
Germany                                          Los Angeles, CA 90095
christoph.hambel@hof.uni-frankfurt.de            and NBER
                                                 eduardo.schwartz@anderson.ucla.edu
Holger Kraft
Goethe University
Theodor-W.-Adorno-Platz 3
60323 Frankfurt am Main
Germany
holgerkraft@finance.uni-frankfurt.de




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w24604
1         Introduction

          IPCC (2014): “Effective mitigation [of greenhouse gases] will not be achieved if
          individual agents advance their own interests independently.”


Climate change is considered as one of the major global challenges. Although countries past
and future contributions to the accumulation of greenhouse gases (GHGs) in the atmosphere
are different, all countries are affected, but not necessarily in the same way. For instance,
rising sea levels affect coastal areas much more than inland areas. On the other hand, countries
that are potentially affected the most are not necessarily the ones emitting most of the GHGs
and vice versa. Furthermore, mitigating the effects of climate change is bedeviled by free-rider
problems and external effects that make it hard to achieve global agreements to mitigate the
potential consequences of anthropological emissions. For instance, it took several years to reach
the Paris Agreement, but the result is still considered as imperfect by some (e.g., Rogelj et al.
(2016) and UNEP (2016)), binding commitment devices are missing, and some countries are
already threatening to defect.

This paper proposes a novel non-cooperative game-theoretical framework that allows us to
study crucial issues prevalent in the international efforts to address climate change. Our model
is formulated as a repeated game reflecting the fact that dealing with climate change involves
continuous actions by all countries. Problems of this type are in general hard to solve, but
our formulation is analytically tractable. Assuming that each country’s decision making can
be characterized by a recursive utility functional, we can explicitly calculate the optimal con-
sumption and abatement decisions of all countries as well as the corresponding social cost of
carbon (SCC). One important feature of our model is that countries are open economies, i.e.,
there is potentially international trade between all countries. We can thus study the effect of
international trade on the SCC, which is a key contribution of our paper. We find that the
SCC is increasing in trade volume. This effect can be significant and disregarding trade might
lead to a severe underestimation of the SCC, both at the country and global level. We show
that this result is robust to allowing for capital transfers. Notice that the majority of the exist-
ing optimization-based integrated assessment models (IAMs) involves only one representative
agent, i.e., by construction there is no trade. The few IAMs with multiple countries typically
assume that these countries are autarkies, i.e., they also abstract from international trade.1
    1
        See the discussion of the literature below.


                                                      1
We also show that the number of countries is a crucial determinant of the optimal amount of
abatement. In fact, we find that as the number of countries becomes larger, the optimal efforts
that each country implements become smaller, leading to less global abatement. In the limit,
it may be optimal to do no abatement. This is in line with the nature of the carbon abatement
game that due to all its externalities can lead to a Prisoner’s dilemma. However, the initial
SCC remains the same independently of the number of countries. We thus document that in
a non-cooperative setting there is no tight connection between the amount of abatement and
the size of SCC, which is in contrast to cooperative games (in particular to models with only
one representative agent), where both move in tandem.

From a formal point of view, this paper offers a closed-form solution to an involved stochastic
differential game with recursive preferences (stochastic differential utility) that are typically
very challenging to solve. Our model involves several stochastic state variables such as the
global average temperature and the capital stocks that generate the outputs of the different
countries. All countries can decide on how to use their output: Each country can implement
carbon abatement strategies to reduce carbon emissions and thus mitigate the increase in global
temperature. This decision is plagued by external effects, since the benefits of carbon abate-
ment are shared by all countries, but the expenditures are paid by each country individually.
Alternatively, each country can consume or reinvest its output to increase its capital stock. To
compare our findings with a cooperative setting, we also provide the solution for a particular
problem where a social planner makes all decisions. We can explicitly determine the welfare
gains that arise from having a social planner who forces all countries to implement strategies
that are optimal from a global perspective and that internalizes all external effects. Of course,
this solution is not attainable in a realistic setting since defecting from this global optimal
strategy is difficult to penalize.

Our work is related to several other papers. First, there are integrated assessment models
studying the impact of climate change. The DICE model (Dynamic Integrated Model of Climate
and the Economy) is the most common framework to study optimal carbon abatement. It is
formulated in a deterministic setting, see for example Nordhaus (1992, 2008), Nordhaus and
Sztorc (2013). This framework has been extended by several authors: Crost and Traeger (2014),
Jensen and Traeger (2014), and Ackerman et al. (2013) analyze versions where one component
is assumed to be stochastic and the decision maker has recursive preferences. Ackerman et al.
(2013) introduce transitory uncertainty of the climate sensitivity parameter into the DICE


                                               2
model. A stochastic version is analyzed by Cai and Lontzek (2018). All these papers study
frameworks with one representative agent.

Closed-form solutions are only available in few special cases. The most prominent example is
the combination of log utility, Cobb-Douglas production and full depreciation as in Golosov
et al. (2014). Traeger (2015) generalizes this setting to recursive preferences and provides a
sound description of the carbon cycle and the climate system. An alternative approach is
proposed by van den Bremer and van der Ploeg (2018) who combine AK-growth and recursive
preferences to solve for the optimal fossil fuel use. These papers are all single-agent models.

There are few papers taking a game-theoretical approach. van der Ploeg and de Zeeuw (1992)
analyze a deterministic setting and distinguish between open-loop and feedback Nash equilib-
rium outcomes. Nordhaus and Yang (1996) is a deterministic game-theoretical version of the
DICE model which is called the RICE model. Ackerman et al. (2011) extend the RICE model
and focus on a social-planner solution. Tol (2002a,b) considers a static game with deterministic
actions called the FUND model to estimate the damages of climate change. Nordhaus (2015)
emphasizes the non-cooperative feature of international efforts to mitigate climate change and
proposes so-called climate clubs involving external penalties in the form of trade tariffs. All
these papers are formulated in a deterministic setting or restrict the optimal abatement strate-
gies to be deterministic. Furthermore, they do not allow for trade, except for Nordhaus (2015).
His model, however, is static and does not analyze the effect of trade on the SCC, which in his
analysis are exogenously given. By contrast, we determine the SCC endogenously. Hassler and
Krusell (2012) analyze a stochastic general-equilibrium version of RICE which is a multi-region
version of Golosov et al. (2014). In their model, there is no trade except for trade in oil. They
show that in this setup only taxes on oil producers can mitigate climate change, whereas taxes
on oil consumers have no effect. van der Ploeg and de Zeeuw (2016) study the effect of produc-
tivity shocks resulting from climate change (tipping point) in cooperative and non-cooperative
settings. However, they also abstract from international trade.

The remainder of the paper is structured as follows: Section 2 introduces the model setup.
Section 3 formalizes the non-cooperative game that all countries face. Section 4 provides the
solution to the non-cooperative game. Section 5 contains a detailed analysis of how interna-
tional trade contributes to the SCC. Section 6 shows that the world abatement effort becomes
negligible if the number of countries is large. Section 7 shows that our results regarding in-
ternational trade are robust to adding capital transfers between countries. Section 8 studies


                                                3
            Consumption                         Imports
                                                                           Exchange Rates
                                                Exports


                                                                           Carbon Dioxide
                Output                      Carbon Abatement
                                                                             Emissions

                                                                           Carbon Dioxide
                     Investment
                                                                           Concentration


                                                                           Temperature
            Capital Stock                    Climate Damages
                                                                             Dynamics


                            Country Level                                   Global Level



Figure 1: Model Structure. This figure depicts the structure of the model presented in Section 2.
The arrows depict the flow of goods and the direction of operation.


a cooperative version of the game and quantifies welfare effects. Section 9 reports numerical
results for a calibration with five regions given by the AR5 Scenario Database of IPCC (2014).
It is shown that for this calibration 22.5% of the global SCC are generated by international
trade. Section 10 concludes. An Appendix provides additional material such as proofs and
calibrations.



2     Model Setup

The world is divided into N heterogeneous regions (syn. countries), which are indexed by
n ∈ {1, . . . , N }. On a global level, we model carbon dioxide emissions, concentrations, and
changes in global warming and incorporate these building blocks into an economic analysis.
We solve for economic key variables such as the optimal abatement-consumption strategies and
the social cost of carbon. Figure 1 depicts the general model structure.




                                                       4
2.1    Economic Model

Production Following Barro (2006, 2009) and Pindyck and Wang (2013), every country
produces output (syn. GDP) using a production technology that is linear in capital (AK-
technology). Formally, output of country n is

                                            Ynt = An Knt ,                                         (1)

where An is a country-specific constant that models productivity and Kn models capital, which
is the only factor of production. Kn is the total stock of capital, i.e., it includes physical capital,
but also human capital and firm-based intangible capital such as patents. We assume that Kn
is measured in the domestic currency.


Budget Constraint Climate change has a negative impact on economic growth. In order to
mitigate this impact, each country controls carbon dioxide emissions by choosing an abatement
strategy αn which reduces current CO2 emissions and thus the CO2 concentration in the atmo-
sphere. This strategy is costly and leads to abatement expenditures Aαn . The budget constraint
of country n reads

                                       Ynt = Int + Aαnt + Cnt ,                                    (2)

i.e., output can be used to invest, to abate carbon, or to consume. Notice that Cnt is the part
of output that is consumed in country n or exported to another country and consumed there.
We allow for international trade and assume that the trade balance is balanced, i.e., exports
EX nt equal imports IMnt . In our framework, the exports and imports of country n are given
by
                                                                        X
                                        n                                       k   n
                         EX nt = Cnt − Cnt     and      IMnt =                 Pnt Ckt ,
                                                                        k6=n

where Ckn denotes the amount of consumption units produced in country k and consumed by
country n. Furthermore, Pnk denotes the exchange rate between country k and n, i.e., the price
of the k-currency expressed in terms of the n-currency. Therefore, an even trade balance implies
                                                     X
                                              n              k   n
                                       Cnt = Cnt +          Pnt Ckt .                              (3)
                                                     k6=n




                                                  5
Capital Accumulation Following Pindyck and Wang (2013), capital accumulation in coun-
try n is given by

                         dKnt = Φn (Int , Aαnt , Knt )dt − ξn Tt Knt dt + σn Knt dWnt .                 (4)

We model economic damages from climate change as in Dell et al. (2009, 2012). The parameter
ξn is a country-specific damage parameter that relates global average temperatures Tt to loss
of economic growth in country n. The adjustment function Φn (In , Aαn , Kn ) captures effects
of depreciation and costs of installing capital and implementing an abatement policy. As
in Hayashi (1982), we assume that Φn (In , An , Kn ) is homogenous of degree one in Kn , i.e.,
                               Aα
Φn (In , An , Kn ) = φn KInn , Kn
                                n
                                  Kn . We choose the following quadratic adjustment function
involving quadratic adjustment costs
                                                                                         2
                        In Aαn                                                       Aαn
                                                                            
                                            In                           1      In
               φn         ,          =             −     δnK      −        θn      +        ,           (5)
                        Kn Kn               Kn          |{z}             2      Kn Kn
                                                     depreciation
                                           |{z}                          |       {z       }
                                       investments                        adjustment costs

where θn is a positive constant that scales the adjustment costs and δnK denotes the depreciation
rate of capital.2 The process W = (W1t , . . . , WN t )t≥0 is an N -dimensional standard Brownian
motion, where its components are correlated via dhWk , Wn i = ρkn dt, for k, n = 1, . . . , N . The
volatility σn is assumed to be constant.


Abatement Costs and Economic Growth For tractability, we assume that the abatement
costs Aαn are proportional to capital. More precisely, suppose that the abatement costs are of
the following form

                                              Aαnt = an (t)αnt
                                                            bn
                                                               Knt                                      (6)

with bn > 1. The abatement costs are thus convex in the abatement policy implying that the
costs for the implementation of more stringent abatement policies increase disproportionately.
The time-dependent coefficient an (t) > 0 captures exogenous technological progress and is
   2
    Homogeneous adjustment costs have been widely used in the literature, see, e.g., Hayashi (1982), Jermann
(1998), Pindyck and Wang (2013).




                                                       6
assumed to decline over time.3 We refer to an as the cost function trend. Combining (1), (2),
(4), (5), and (6), we obtain

                        dKnt = Knt [(gn (χnt ) − κn (t, αnt ) − ξn Tt )dt + σn dWtn ] ,                       (7)

where χn = Cn /Yn is the fraction of output that country n designates for consumption. Fur-
thermore, gn (x) = An (1 − x) − 12 ϑn (1 − x)2 − δnK with ϑn = θn A2n denotes the expected economic
                                                      bn
gross growth rate. The function κn (t, αnt ) = an (t)αnt models the costs of abatement relative
to output or capital. Therefore, the expected economic growth rate gn (χnt ) − κn (t, αnt ) − ξn Tt
consists of three parts that can be interpreted as follows: (i) the expected gross growth rate
gn (χn ) models the growth rate of capital in the absence of climate change, (ii) implementing an
abatement strategy α reduces economic growth by κn (t, αnt ), (iii) the growth rate is negatively
affected by current temperatures via ξn Tt .


2.2     Climate Model

Atmospheric Carbon Dioxide Concentration The average pre-industrial concentration
of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere is denoted by M PI . The dynamics of the atmospheric
carbon dioxide concentration are given by

                                          h              N
                                                          X                         i
                              dMt = Mt         µm (t) −         αnt dt +   σm dWtm    .                       (8)
                                                          n=1


The carbon dioxide concentration is measured in parts-per-million (ppm). We use the notations
mt = log(Mt ) and mPI = log(M PI ). The control variables αn are the above mentioned abate-
ment policies.4 The process W m = (Wtm )t≥0 is a standard Brownian motion that is correlated
with (Wn )N          m   n
          n=1 via dhW , W i = ρmn dt, for n = 1, . . . , N and models environmental shocks
on the carbon dioxide concentration. The correlation structure makes it possible that carbon
   3
     The assumptions regarding the abatement cost functions are standard in the IAM literature (e.g., DICE
model).
   4
     For tractability, we formulate our model such that the countries control the change in concentration (instead
of the emissions). This is without loss of generality since every change in concentration (stock variable) is
connected to a change in emissions (flow variable). In other words, for every country one can back out the
implicit size of emissions that is consistent with a particular αn (see (10) below). The only issue that could
arise is that some values of αn might imply negative emissions leading to a constraint on αn . It turns out that
such a constraint would only be binding for unrealistically high values of αn and is thus practically redundant.



                                                          7
dioxide emissions change if there is a shock to economic growth.5 The volatility of these shocks
σm is assumed to be constant. Atmospheric carbon dioxide evolves with an expected business-
as-usual growth rate µm . In other words, µm is the growth rate if no country takes additional
actions to reduce carbon dioxide emissions. The phenomena of carbon dioxide depletion can
be captured by calibrating the business-as-usual drift appropriately. The abatement policies
αn model how additional actions (beyond BAU) reduce carbon dioxide emissions and thus the
concentration in the atmosphere. By definition, these abatement policies were zero in the past.
If no abatement policy is chosen and the countries stick to BAU, we also use the notation M BAU
instead of M .


Carbon Dioxide Emissions Our dynamics of the carbon concentration M are controlled
by the abatement policies αn . However, we are also interested in the implied CO2 emissions
that generate these dynamics. To back out CO2 emissions that are consistent with (8), we
now consider an alternative representation of the CO2 dynamics where – up to environmental
shocks – the change in M is expressed as the difference between CO2 emissions and the amount
of carbon absorbed by natural sinks. Formally, if Ent denotes the time-t anthropological CO2
emissions of country n, it is reasonable to postulate that Ent can be determined from

                                   N
                                   X
                        dMt = ζe         Ent dt − δm (Mt − M PI )dt + Mt σm dWtm .                         (9)
                                   n=1


Here ζe is a factor converting emissions into concentrations6 and δm denotes the decay rate of
atmospheric carbon dioxide, i.e., the speed at which CO2 is absorbed from the atmosphere. By
equating (8) and (9), we can solve for the world CO2 emissions that are consistent with both
dynamics. Assuming that the regional BAU-emissions are given by Ent = νn (t)Et where νn is
a deterministic function,7 Appendix A shows that regional carbon dioxide emissions En which
   5
     By contrast to the DICE model, we do not assume that carbon dioxide emissions are directly proportional
to global output, but positively correlated. Our assumption is more in line with historical data. According to
IPCC (2014), less than 45% of greenhouse gas emissions in 2010 came from industrial or agricultural production.
Maddison and Rehdanz (2008) examine a panel of data for evidence of a causal relationship between GDP and
CO2 emissions. They find in particular that the non-causality hypothesis that GDP does not Granger-cause
CO2 emissions cannot be rejected.
   6
     While carbon dioxide concentration is measured in parts-per-million (ppm), we measure emissions in giga-
tons of CO2 (GtCO2 ). ζe thus takes the different units into account.
   7
     This can be well calibrated by the RCP 8.5 scenario, see Appendix F.2.




                                                      8
are consistent with (8) are given by

                               Mt                                    δm
                                   νn (t)(µm (t) + δm ) − αnt − νn (t) M PI .
                                                             
                       Ent =                                                               (10)
                               ζe                                     ζe

Temperature Dynamics Following Nordhaus and Sztorc (2013) and Cai and Lontzek (2018)
we assume that the temperature dynamics can be captured by a two-layer atmosphere-ocean
temperature system where temperatures are measured in degrees Celsius (◦ C). These dynamics
are given by
                                           
                                 Mt
                  dTt = κτ ητ log PI + F (t) dt − φTt dt + φ21 (Tto − Tt )dt,
                                        ex
                                                                                           (11)
                                 M
                  dTto = φ12 (Tt − Tto ) dt,                                               (12)

where T denotes the atmospheric global average temperature increase relative to pre-industrial
levels and T o the average change in oceanic temperatures. The parameter φij is the heat
diffusion rate from layer i to layer j and φ is the rate of atmospheric temperature change by
infrared radiation to space. The parameter ητ is the radiative forcing parameter and κτ measures
the speed at which temperatures react to changes in radiative forcing. Atmospheric temperature
is affected by carbon dioxide concentrations, but also by other greenhouse gases which are
treated exogenous as in Nordhaus and Sztorc (2013). This is captured by the deterministic
function F ex .



3     Non-cooperative Game

Since every country is affected by the decisions of all other countries, the problem can be
formalized as a stochastic differential game. Most popular models (such as RICE, e.g., Nordhaus
and Yang (1996), Nordhaus (2010)) consider a social planner who makes the decisions for all
regions in order to maximize a global welfare functional. Such a framework can be interpreted
as a cooperative game and leads to a globally optimal solution. The more realistic situation
is that countries make their decisions themselves (and not the social planner), which leads
to a non-cooperative game in the sense of Nash (1950). In such a framework, the countries
anticipate the decisions of all other countries and act individually to maximize their national
welfare.

                                                 9
3.1      Preferences

At every point in time t ∈ [0, ∞), each region optimally chooses a consumption strategy and
an abatement policy. Every region is affected by its own decision, but also by the decisions
                                                              n
of all other regions. We use the notation π ≡ (C1n , . . . , CN , αn )N
                                                                      n=1 for a given (N + 1)-tuple of
consumption-abatement strategies. Following Colacito and Croce (2013), among others, each
region derives utility from a consumption bundle Cn that is given by

                                                           N
                                                                      n
                                                           Y
                                                  Cnt =          n βk
                                                               (Ckt ) ,                                    (13)
                                                           k=1


where βkn denotes the weight that region n puts on the consumption good produced by region
k. The weights satisfy N       n                                                   π
                       P
                          k=1 βk = 1 for all n = 1, . . . , N . The utility index Jn of region n
associated with a given (N + 1)-tuple of consumption-abatement strategies π is then defined
by
                                             Z   ∞                                       
                         Jnπ (t, x)   = Et            fn (Cns , Jnπ (s, Xs ))ds     Xt = x ,               (14)
                                              t


where Xt = (mt , Tt , Tto , K1t , . . . , KN t ) is the current state of the world. Furthermore, fn is the
continuous-time Epstein-Zin aggregator for unit EIS given by
                                                                                  
                                       δn (1 − γn )J log                 C
                                      
                                                                              1      ,   γn 6= 1,
                     fn (C , J) =                                 [(1−γn )J] 1−γn
                                       δn log(C ) − δn J,
                                      
                                                                                         γn = 1,

For region n, the parameter δn > 0 denotes the time-preference parameter and γn > 1 measures
the degree of relative risk aversion.8


3.2      Nash Equilibrium

Each region maximizes its own utility from consumption by implementing a consumption-
abatement strategy. The regions anticipate the activities of the other regions and choose ad-
     8
     Although empirical evidence suggests that γn > 1 is the reasonable specification for the index of relative
risk aversion, it is also possible to define aggregator functions for γn ∈ [0, 1]. For γn > 1 the region prefers
early resolution of uncertainty and is eager to learn outcomes of random events before they occur. On the other
hand, if γn < 1 the region prefers late resolution of uncertainty.


                                                            10
missible consumption-abatement strategies πn = (C1n , . . . , CN
                                                               n
                                                                 , αn ) in order to maximize their
utility indexes Jnπ at any point in time t ∈ [0, ∞). A Nash equilibrium is a situation where no
region has a reason to deviate unilaterally from its strategy. For a precise formulation, we use
                    ∗
the notation (πn | π−n ) ≡ (π1∗ , . . . , πn−1
                                           ∗           ∗
                                               , πn , πn+1            ∗
                                                           , . . . , πN ):

Definition 3.1 (Nash Equilibrium). An (N + 1)-tuple of consumption-abatement strategies
(πn∗ )N       n∗           n∗   ∗ N                                                              n            n
      n=1 = (C1 , . . . , CN , αn )n=1 is called a Nash equilibrium if for every strategy πn = (C1 , . . . , CN , αn )
and all (t, x)

                                                        ∗ )
                                                  (πn |π−n                ∗
                                              Jn              (t, x) ≤ Jnπ (t, x)

for all regions n = 1, . . . , N . The indirect utility functions (syn. value functions) are given by
                                                        n (π |π∗ )   o
                                                            n
                                        J n (t, x) = sup Jn −n (t, x) .
                                                          πn



We use the terms optimal strategies and Nash equilibrium interchangeable. The optimal strate-
gies can be determined by solving a coupled system of Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman (HJB) equa-
tions (see, e.g., Dockner et al. (2000)). The HJB equation of region n = 1, . . . , N reads

                                                         N
                      n                      h    1 2   X     i    1 2 n
  0=       sup         Jtn + fn (Cn , J n ) + µm − σm −         n
                                                            αk Jm + σm Jmm + φ12 (τ − τto )Jτno (15)
        n       n
       C1 ,...,CN ,αn                             2     k=1
                                                                   2
                                                                                                N
                                                                                                X
                                PI       ex                                   o
                                                                                      Jτn                            n
                                                                                
          + κτ ητ (m − m ) + F                    − (φ + φ21 )τ + φ21 τ                     +         Kk ρm,k σm σk JK km
                                                                                                k=1
              N                                                          N X
                                                                           N
              X
                   n
                                                              1        X
                                                                                                              n
                                                                                                                     o
          +       JK   K k   gk (·, χk ) − κk (·, αk ) − ξk τ  +                            Kk Kl ρl,k σl σk JK k Kl
                                                                                                                      ,
              k=1
                     k
                                                                 2       k=1 l=1


where subscripts of J n denote partial derivatives (e.g., Jtn = ∂J n /∂t).


3.3      Social Cost of Carbon

Following Nordhaus and Sztorc (2013), among others, we define the social cost of carbon (SCC)
as the marginal rate of substitution between atmospheric carbon dioxide and capital. Formally,




                                                                 11
the country-specific social cost of carbon is given by

                                                              ∂Jtn . ∂Jtn
                                             SCCnt = −                    .                                       (16)
                                                              ∂Mt ∂Knt

It thus measures the climate damage to the capital of country n caused by an marginal increase
of time-t emissions. The global social cost of carbon expressed in terms of the currency of the
first country is9

                                                            N
                                                            X
                                                 SCC =             P1n SCCn                                       (17)
                                                            n=1


and quantifies the total damage of all countries. Consequently, SCC can be interpreted as an
hypothetical global carbon tax that would internalize all negative external effects from burning
carbon. Notice that from the perspective of a country implementing such a tax is not optimal in
a non-cooperative setting. By contrast, SCCn only takes country-specific climate damages into
account, i.e., implementing this country-specific carbon tax only internalizes external effects
within a country.



4       Solution to the Non-cooperative Game

This section presents the main results for the non-cooperative game. In particular, we solve for
a Nash-equilibrium and determine the social cost of carbon.

Theorem 4.1 (Unit EIS). If γn 6= 1 for country n ∈ {1, . . . , N }, then its indirect utility
function is given by

                                                 N
                                                              !1−γn
                                           1     Y      βkn
J n (t, m, τ, τ o , K1 , . . . , KN ) =                               exp (γn − 1) pbnm m + pbnτ τ + pbnτo τ o + pn (t)
                                                                                                             
                                                       Kk
                                        1 − γn   k=1
                                                                                                                  (18)
    9
     Notice that SCCn is measured in the domestic currency of country n since the SCCn is the derivative of Kn
with respect to M and Kn is measured in this currency as well. Therefore, we must multiply all SCC except
for one country (here the first one) by the exchange rate. If the first country is the US, then the global SCC
is expressed in dollars. If we consider regions instead of countries, then typically regions do not have common
currencies and one has to choose a currency of a particular country. In applications, one then typically expresses
all variables in USD, i.e. P1n SCCn is the SCC of country n in USD. This is the case in our numerical example
(see Section 9).


                                                              12
with
                                PN
                                     βkn ξk                    pbnτ φ21                    κτ ητ
                    pbnτ   =       k=1
                                               ,    pbnτo   =           ,    pbnm = pbnτ         ,    (19)
                             δn + φ + δφn21 δn
                                         +φ12
                                                              δn + φ12                      δn

and pn is given in (49). The optimal controls are given by

                                     b 1−1           N
                                                                                          ! b 1−1
                                                                                             n
                      pbnm 1
                     
              ∗
                                       n        1 X n             κτ ητ           1
             αnt   =                        =            β ξk                                     ,   (20)
                       βnn an (t)bn           βnn δn k=1 k     δn + φ + δφn21 δn a (t)b
                                                                           +φ12 n       n
                                  q
                     ϑn − An + (ϑn − An )2 + 4ϑn βδnn
              ∗                                        n
             Cnt   =                                     Ynt ,                                        (21)
                                       2ϑn
             n∗        ∗
            Ckt = βnk Ckt .                                                                           (22)

The country-specific social cost of carbon is given by

                                                                    N
                                    pbn Knt      Ynt    X                κτ ητ
                           SCCnt   = mn     = n              βkn ξk                                   (23)
                                     βn Mt   βn δn An Mt k=1          δn + φ + δφ21
                                                                                 +φ
                                                                                    δn
                                                                                            n   12



and the global SCC follows from (17). The equilibrium exchange rates are
                                                                   ∗
                                                    k         βkn Cnt
                                                   Pnt =           ∗
                                                                      .                               (24)
                                                              βnk Ckt

This solution constitutes a Nash equilibrium and the goods markets clear under the equilib-
rium exchange rates (24), i.e., a general equilibrium obtains. Condition (47) ensures that the
investments of all countries are positive.10

Proof. See Appendix B.1.                                                                                2
                                k
Notice that the exchange rates Pnt take the usual form as for instance in Colacito and Croce
(2013). The optimal abatement policies (αn )N
                                            n=1 , the optimal consumption decisions, and the
SCC depend on several parameters. Table 1 summarizes the qualitative effects of these input
parameters on the SCC and the optimal decisions. We discuss these effects in the following
paragraphs.
 10
      See Appendix B.1 for a discussion of this condition. It is satisfied in all our calibrations.




                                                             13
                             γn   δn     βnn   ξk   ητ   κτ        φ   φ12   φ21   An   ϑn   an (t)   bn
                   SCCn       0    –      –    +    +    +         –    +     –     0    0     0       0
                    αn        0    –      –    +    +    +         –    +     –     0    0     –      +
                    Cn        0   +       –    0    0    0         0    0     0     –   +      0       0
                    In        0   NU     +     –    –    –         +    –     +    +     –    +        –


Table 1: Influence of the model input parameters. The table summarizes the influence of
several parameters on the SCC and optimal decisions. A positive influence is labeled by +, a negative
by −, and independence by 0. NU indicates that the influence is not unique.


Optimal Abatement and the SCC The SCC does not depend on cost parameters since it
measures marginal damage that is not affected by abatement costs. For all other parameters,
the effects on (20) and (23) go in the same direction since higher values of the SCC induce
more abatement efforts.
                                                         PN
Effect of damage-related terms: The term                  k=1      βkn ξk is a weighted average of country-specific
damage parameters weighted by the country’s Cobb-Douglas weights. It relates to the economic
impact of climate change on economic growth, i.e., it measures the severity of climate change.
Intuitively, country n only cares about the damage in country k if it consumes a significant
amount of the good produced in country k. This is measured by the size of the weight βkn
scaling the damage parameter ξk of country k. In other words, if the weight βkn is small, then
the abatement policy is not significantly affected.11

Effect of the climate system: The effect of the climate system parameters is reasonable: First,
the higher the climate sensitivity parameter ητ or the speed κτ at which temperatures reacts
to changes in atmospheric CO2 , the higher is the SCC and, in turn, the more are the incentives
to abate carbon dioxide emissions. Second, intuitively φ captures the speed at which the space
absorbs heat from the atmosphere and thus higher values make climate change more transitory.
                                                                                          φ21 δn
Therefore, the abatement policy is decreasing in φ. Finally, the term                    δn +φ12
                                                                                                   captures the effect
of the temperature exchange between oceans and atmosphere. Since φ21 models heat diffusion
from atmosphere to oceans, its effect is negative on abatement policies, whereas the opposite
is true for φ12 .

Effect of preference parameters: It is well-known that a higher time preference rate δn reduces
the social cost of carbon and the demand for abatement. On the other hand, we find that
risk aversion does not affect the results at all. This confirms the earlier findings of Crost and
  11
       The effect of βnn is extensively discussed in Section 5.


                                                              14
Traeger (2014) and Jensen and Traeger (2014).

Effect of abatement costs: The optimal abatement policies depend on the costs of abatement.
Optimal abatement is more stringent if the cost function trend an (t) is smaller. We also find
that countries implement more abatement if the abatement cost function is more convex. This
is because incremental improvements are relatively cheaper than drastic actions. As mentioned
above, the parameters of the abatement cost function do not influence the SCC.


                                                                       n N
Optimal Consumption The optimal consumption strategies (C1n , . . . , CN )n=1 are propor-
tional to output, i.e., in equilibrium, the countries consume and export constant fractions of
their output. The total amount of optimal consumption units Cn∗ produced in region n is in-
creasing in the time-preference rate δn . A higher time-preference rate puts implicitly more
weight on the presence so that society cares less for the future. This reduces the demand for
abatement and investment and thus increases aggregate consumption. Optimal consumption
is also increasing in the capital adjustment cost parameter ϑn . This is because higher capital
adjustment costs reduce the efficiency of investments so that consumption becomes more at-
tractive. Similarly, a higher productivity An makes investments more efficient and thus reduces
aggregate consumption.

Finally, we provide the optimal solution for the special case of log utility.

Corollary 4.2 (Log Utility). Assume γn = 1 for some n = 1, . . . , N . The indirect utility
function of region n, J n is given by

                                                N
                                                X
           n            o
          J (t, m, τ, τ , K1 , . . . , KN ) =         βkn log(Kk ) − pbnm m − pbnτ τ − pbnτo τ o + pnlog (t),   (25)
                                                k=1


where pbnm , pbnτ , and pbnτo are given as in (19) and pnlog is stated in Appendix B.2. The optimal
controls, the SCC, and the exchange rate are given by (20)-(24).

Proof. See Appendix B.2.                                                                                          2




                                                          15
5    SCC and International Trade

The countries in our model are open economies that are allowed to trade their goods with each
other. Every country consumes a consumption bundle (13) potentially containing all goods
that are available world-wide. Empirically, countries typically have a home bias for their own
good which is captured by the weight βnn . In practice, countries also import significant amounts.
This part of consumption can be calibrated to the data by choosing the remaining weights βkn
appropriately.

We now address the question of how international trade influences the size of the SCC, both
for a country and globally. By (23), the country-specific SCC can be rewritten as

                                    Yn       X βn           κτ ητ
                                                   k
                       SCCn =            ξn +        ξk
                                 δn An M          βn
                                              k6=n n
                                                        δn + φ + δφn21 δn
                                                                    +φ12
                                                                          .

In a closed economy without trade, the country is only consuming its own good, i.e., βnn = 1
and βkn = 0 for all k 6= n, and thus its SCC becomes

                                              Yn        κτ ητ
                             SCCclosed
                                n      =          ξn                ,
                                           δn An M δn + φ + δφ21
                                                              +φ
                                                                 δn
                                                               n   12



which denotes the country-specific SCC of a closed economy. Therefore, the adjustment for
international trade is driven by the weighted damage term in brackets
                                             X βn
                                                  k
                                                    ξk ,
                                                 βn
                                             k6=n n


which captures the relative importance of the damage in country k that delivers goods to
country n. This importance increases in the fraction of weights of the foreign and domestic
good βkn /βnn . Consequently, we get the following result.

Proposition 5.1 (SCC in Open and Closed Economies). The SCC in an open economy is
higher than in a closed economy. More precisely, the SCC can be decomposed as follows

                                  SCCn = SCCclosed
                                            n      + SCCtrade
                                                        n                                    (26)




                                                 16
where the additional SCC from trade are given by
                                                                n
                                                    P
                                                        k6=n βk ξk
                                 SCCtrade
                                    n           =                  SCCclosed
                                                                      n      .              (27)
                                                         βnn ξn

In our model, international trade of country n can be quantified by

                   Tn = Cn − Cnn = Cn − βnn Cn = Cn (1 − βnn ) = χn Yn (1 − βnn ),          (28)

which is the amount of output of country n that is designated for consumption minus the
amount that remains in country n and is consumed there (in monetary units). Aggregating
over all countries, we obtain

                                       N
                                       X                N
                                                        X
                                T =          P1n Tn =         χn P1n Yn (1 − βnn ),
                                       n=1              n=1


which is the global trade volume expressed in the currency of the first country. Solving (28)
for Yn and substituting into (27) yields

                                                           κτ ητ
                                         SCCtrade
                                            n     =              $ n Tn
                                                            M

where                                        P       n
                                   1           k6=n βk ξk        1
                     $n =                                                   .
                                     n
                           χn (1 − βn )δn An       n
                                                  βn      δn + φ + δφn21 δn
                                                                      +φ12

We define the weights wn = P1n $n / k P1k $k . Then the additional social cost of carbon from
                                   P

trade can be written as a weighted average of the country-specific amount of international trade

                                 N                                    N               N
                                 X                            κτ ητ  X n  X
                  SCCtrade =           P1n SCCtrade
                                              n     =                  P $n     wn Tn ,
                                 n=1
                                                               M n=1 1      n=1


which is expressed in the currency of the first country.


Homogeneous Countries Let us consider the special case where all countries are homoge-
nous except for their weights on foreign goods βkn , k 6= n. For all other parameters we can thus
drop the indices n. Furthermore, we set β home = βnn , which is the homogenous weight on the



                                                        17
domestic good. Then $n is also independent of n and we thus get

                                                    1     ξ      1
                                             $=          home                     φ21 δ
                                                                                          ,
                                                   χδA β      δ+φ+               δ+φ12


                βkn ξk = ξ              βkn = ξ(1 − β home ). Hence, we arrive at the following result.
        P                    P
since    k6=n                    k6=n

Corollary 5.2 (SCC from Trade for Homogenous Countries). If all countries are homogeneous
except for their weights for foreign goods, the additional global SCC are linear in global trade
T = n P1n Tn :
     P
                                          1      ξ       κτ ητ
                           SCCtrade =           home           φ21 δ
                                                                     T.
                                        χδAM β       δ + φ + δ+φ                              12




6       Abatement for a Large Number of Countries

This section addresses the question of how the Nash-equilibrium is affected by an increasing
number of countries. We show that under mild regularity conditions the world-wide abatement
effort decreases with the number of countries. In particular, it can be optimal to implement
almost zero carbon abatement if the number of countries becomes large. Therefore, our model
is consistent with little abatement efforts observed in reality.


Notation To compare abatement policies of models with different numbers of countries, we
                                                (N )
introduce the following notation: αn                   denotes the abatement policy of region n ∈ {1, . . . , N } in
                                                                                                   (N )
a model with N regions. We use a similar notation for the trends an (t) of the cost functions.
For the polar case of a global model with only one aggregated country, we drop the superscript
index and write a(t) instead. The structure of the CO2 -dynamics (8) suggests that we define
the world abatement policy as
                                                                   N
                                                                   X
                                                        (N )              (N )
                                                       αt      =         αnt .
                                                                   n=1

We consider the homogenous case where the world is successively split up in more and more
homogenous countries. Homogeneity means that the countries face the same impact of climate
change, release the same emissions, and have the same costs for abatement. The only parameters
that are allowed to differ are the consumption weights (βkn )(N ) and every country can have a
home bias which is captured by the size of (βnn )(N ) , i.e., the weight of country n on the domestic
good in a setting with N countries.

                                                                   18
We now assume that implementing an abatement strategy in the case with one country generates
the same or fewer costs than in the disaggregated settings with more than one country, i.e.,

                       N                                 N                         N
                                                                                                   (N ) b
                       X          (N )
                                                         X              (N )
                                                                                   X       (N )                  (N )
                 A≤          P1k Ak      ⇐⇒       aαb          P1k Kk          ≤          ak      αk         P1k Kk .
                       k=1                               k=1                       k=1

                                           (N )                         (N )       (N )
In the homogenous case, we have αk                = α/N and ak                 αk )b is the same for all k. Therefore,
we obtain
                                                    (N )
                                                   ak      ≥ a · N b.

Then, we can show the following result.

Proposition 6.1 (Abatement Limit for Homogenous Countries). Assume that the weights
(βnn )(N ) on the domestic goods are uniformly bounded away from zero. Then, the optimal world
abatement policies vanish as the number of countries goes to infinity, i.e.,

                                                         N
                                                         X       (N )
                                                  lim          αnt = 0                                                  (29)
                                                  N →∞
                                                         n=1


for all t ≥ 0.

Proof. See Appendix C.                                                                                                    2

Proposition 6.1 shows that in a world with many countries, global abatement activities are
very small if the countries do not cooperate. However the global social cost of carbon is not
decreasing in the number of countries. This shows in particular that it can be optimal to have
almost zero carbon abatement even if the global SCC is large. This result relaxes the well-known
relation between high abatement and high SCC that typically follows in cooperative frameworks
such as models with a single representative agent. It also raises the question of how abatement
would look like if the countries cooperated. We analyze this situation in Section 8. To illustrate
Proposition 6.1 we consider an example. Figure 2 depicts the optimal emission control rate as
a function of the number of countries. It turns out that optimal abatement decreases rapidly
in the number of countries. Finally, notice that the results of the homogenous case also hold in
heterogeneous settings if the countries are not becoming too diverse. In particular, we cannot
allow one country to dominate the limit.12
  12
       The corresponding results are available upon request.


                                                            19
                                               Emission Control Rate [%]
                              20



                              15



                              10



                               5



                               0
                                   0      10         20        30          40       50
                                                  Number of Countries


Figure 2: Optimal Emission Control Rate. The graph depicts the optimal emission control rate
in 2015 as a function of the number of homogeneous countries. The figure is based on our calibration
of aggregated parameters that we discuss in Appendix F.


7       Capital Transfers

There are two interesting questions that arise: Would a country be willing to do abatement
in another country if this can be achieved via transfers? If the answer is positive, what is the
effect on the SCC? A way to address these points in our framework is that we allow country n
to donate some of their imports from country k so that country k can implement additional
abatement.13 There are two possible scenarios.

1st scenario without a commitment device. In this case, all countries are allowed to optimize
consumption, abatement, and transfers simultaneously, i.e., we add transfers as an additional
decision variable in (15). One can show that in such a setting optimal abatement stays the
same in all countries.14 Only the financing of the abatement policies changes since some of it
might be financed by transfers. This might not be satisfying for the giving countries.

2nd scenario with a commitment device. Here, it is assumed that there is a commitment device
that binds a receiving country to maintain its optimal abatement expenditures before transfers
and to use the transfers to implement additional abatement. To determine the equilibrium in
this scenario, we suggest that decisions are made in three steps: First, all countries optimize over
consumption and abatement without transfers. This leads to the solution of the non-cooperative
 13
      This is in line with our earlier assumption that the source of abatement in a country is its output.
 14
      The proof is available upon request.


                                                          20
game presented in Section 4. Second, all countries determine whether it is optimal for them to
make transfers to other countries. To do so, we assume that countries optimize over transfers
and again over consumption, but keep abatement from the first step fixed. Third, countries
that do not receive any transfers are allowed to reoptimize both abatement and consumption.

As explained above, we model a transfer from country n to country k in such a way that country
n leaves some of its imports of good k in country k, i.e., Ckn is reduced by the size of the transfer
Tkn . Formally, the consumption bundles (13) and the abatement expenditures can be rewritten
in the presence of capital transfers as

                                  N                                           N
                                                      n
                                  Y                                           X
                          Cbn =      (Ckn   −   Tkn )βk ,        Abn = An +         Tnk .       (30)
                                  k=1                                         k=1


Let A∗n denote the optimal abatement expenditures of the non-cooperative game that are de-
termined in Section 4. In the first scenario, An can be different from the optimal abatement
A∗n without transfers. In the second scenario, An is identical to A∗n for receiving countries
due to the commitment device, but it can differ for countries that do not receive any trans-
fers. In any case, we impose the constrained that transfers must be positive, i.e., Tnk ≥ 0 for all
n, k ∈ {1, . . . , N }. The following proposition summarizes the effects of optimal capital transfers
on the SCC in both scenarios.

Proposition 7.1 (SCC and Capital Transfers). The country-specific social cost of carbon is
given by

                                                            N
                                       Ynt    X                κτ ητ
                        SCCnt     = n              βkn ξk                    ,
                                   βn δn An Mt k=1          δn + φ + δφ21
                                                                       +φ
                                                                          δn
                                                                                n     12



i.e., initially the social cost of carbon is the same for the non-cooperative game with and without
capital transfers.

Proof. See Appendix D.                                                                             2

Recall that in the first scenario the optimal abatement policies with and without transfers are
identical, i.e., transfers have no effect on global abatement activities. In the second scenario, it
is obvious that receiving countries are forced to implement higher abatement policies than in
the case without capital transfers. In the proof of Proposition 7.1, we also show the following
for countries which do not receive transfers: These countries do not see any need to change

                                                            21
their abatement, i.e., the optimal abatement policies before and after transfers are identical.
Therefore, no country reduces its abatement efforts, but receiving countries implement more
stringent policies with the transfer funds provided by the giving countries and giving countries
reduce consumption. Consequently, transfers with a commitment device have a positive effect
on global abatement activities.



8     Cooperative Game

This section compares the solution of the non-cooperative game with a situation where a social
planner (e.g., the United Nations) chooses an consumption-abatement strategy to maximize a
social welfare functional.


8.1    Social Planner Problem

The social planner’s utility index associated with a given (N + 1)-tuple of consumption-
abatement strategies π = (C1n , . . . , CN
                                         n
                                           , αn )N
                                                 n=1 is defined as the weighted sum of utility indices

                                                    N
                                                    X
                                       π
                                     V (t, x) =            ϕnt Jnπ (t, x),                        (31)
                                                    n=1


where the regional utility indices Jnπ is defined in (14) and the utility weights (ϕnt )N
                                                                                        n=1 satisfy
            PN
ϕnt > 0 and n=1 ϕnt = 1 for all t ≥ 0.

Definition 8.1 (Social Planner Solution). For a given set of utility weights (ϕn )N n=1 , an (N +
                                              πn ) N
1)-tuple of consumption-abatement strategies (b           bn           bn bn )N is called a social
                                                   n=1 = (C1 , . . . , CN , α n=1
planner solution if for every π and all (t, x)

                                           V π (t, x) ≤ V πb (t, x).

The social planner’s indirect utility function is defined by

                                     V (t, x) = sup {V π (t, x)} .
                                                     π




                                                      22
8.2     Solution to the Cooperative Game

We provide a closed-form solution to a social planner problem where the regions have log
utility. Due to their tractability, logarithmic preferences are commonly used in the literature
(see, e.g., Golosov et al. (2014)). We assume that the time-preference rates δn are the same
across countries, i.e., δn = δ for some δ. To simplify our analysis, we consider the special case
of constant utility weights.

Theorem 8.2 (Social Planner Solution). The regional utility indices associated with the optimal
strategy are given by

                                                 N
                                                 X
            n              o
          V (t, m, τ, τ , K1 , . . . , KN ) =          βkn log(Kk ) − pbnm m − pbnτ τ − pbnτo τ o + pn,SP (t)                      (32)
                                                 k=1


where pbnm , pbnτ , and pbnτo are given by (19) and pn,SP is stated in (53). The social planner’s indirect
utility function is given by

                                                            N
                                                            X
                                    o
                  V (t, m, τ, τ , K1 , . . . , KN ) =                ϕn V n (t, m, τ, τ o , K1 , . . . , KN ).                     (33)
                                                            k=1


The optimal strategy is given by

                                                                                                                   !b    1
                                            N         N                                                                 n −1
             SP                 1          X         X                        κτ ητ                       1
            αnt =          PN                    ϕ`         βk` ξk                            φ21 φ12
                                                                                                                               ,   (34)
                       δ               `
                               `=1 ϕ` βn   `=1        k=1
                                                                         δ + φ + φ21 −        δ+φ12
                                                                                                        an (t)bn
                              q
                     ϑn − An + (ϑn − An )2 + 4ϑn PNδϕϕn                           `
             SP                                                          `=1   ` βn
            Cnt =                                                                     Ynt ,                                        (35)
                                            2ϑn
            n,SP
           Ckt   = βnk Ckt
                        SP
                           .                                                                                                       (36)

The country-specific social cost of carbon is given by

                                                        N
                                         Ynt    X                   κτ ητ
                        SCCnt       = n              βkn ξk                                       φ21 φ12
                                                                                                                                   (37)
                                     βn δn An Mt k=1          δn + φ + φ21 −                      δn +φ12


and the equilibrium exchange rates are
                                                                     ∗
                                                       k        βkn Cnt
                                                      Pnt =          ∗
                                                                        .                                                          (38)
                                                                βnk Ckt

                                                              23
Proof. See Appendix B.1.                                                                                                   2

Notice that the formula for the social cost of carbon is the same as in the non-cooperative
game, but due to different abatement policies, it is evaluated at a different carbon dioxide
concentration and outputs. Furthermore, one can derive a similar decomposition of the SCC
with and without trade as in Section 5.


8.3      Comparison with the Non-cooperative Game

Strategy Analysis Although the qualitative form of the social cost of carbon is the same for
both games, there are substantial differences in the optimal consumption-abatement strategies
between the cooperative and the non-cooperative game. The following corollary summarizes
our findings.

Corollary 8.3. Assume N > 1, ξk ≥ 0 for all k = 1, . . . , N .

 (a) The optimal abatement policies are more stringent in the social planner problem than in
                                        SP    ∗
       the non-cooperative game, i.e., αnt > αnt , for all n = 1, . . . , N and all t ≥ 0.

 (b) The optimal consumption strategies are more modest in the social planner problem than
                                                 ∗
       in the non-cooperative game, i.e., χSP
                                           nt < χnt , for all n = 1, . . . , N and all t ≥ 0.


 (c) Initially, the social cost of carbon is the same for the social planner problem and for the
       non-cooperative game.

Proof. The results immediately follow from Corollary 4.2 and Theorem 8.2.                                                  2


Welfare Analysis We now analyze the welfare effect that occurs when coordinated action
is not possible and all countries maximize their individual utility only. For this purpose, we
determine the associated wealth equivalent utility gains or losses by comparing the regional
indirect utility functions in the situation of the non-cooperative game and the social plan-
ner solution. For region n the welfare effect wn = wn (t, m, τ, τ o , K1 , . . . , KN ) of coordinated
abatement relative to uncoordinated abatement is defined as the solution of

      V n (t, m, τ, τ o , K1 , . . . , KN ) = J n (t, m, τ, τ o , K1 , . . . , Kn−1 , Kn (1 + wn ), Kn+1 , . . . , KN ),


                                                             24
i.e., wn is the percentage of additional capital that would make region n indifferent between the
two situations. The welfare effects of coordinated or uncoordinated abatement relative to BAU
is defined analogously. Notice that the regional utility indices associated with the optimal
strategies only differ in the corresponding time-dependent terms.15 The following corollary
summarizes the results for log utility.

Corollary 8.4 (Welfare Effects). If a coordinated global abatement policy is implemented by a
social planner, the welfare improvement of region n relative to the non-cooperative game is

               n1 Z ∞          XN                                           XN
                       −δ(s−t)        n           ∗              SP        n               ∗
                                                                                SP        
      wn = exp        e             β k  κk (s, αks ) − κk (s, αks  )  + p m      α ks − αks  ds
                βnn t           k=1                                          k=1
                   N
                   X           h       χn,SP                       io
                                                                  ∗
               +         βkn    δ log    k             SP
                                                + gk (χk ) − gk (χk )    − 1.
                   k=1
                                         χn∗
                                          k



Proof. The statement follows immediately from Corollary 4.2 and Theorem 8.2.                       2



9     Numerical Example

We consider a model with five heterogeneous regions as in the representative concentration
pathways (RCPs) provided by the AR5 Scenario Database of IPCC (2014).16 Table 2 summa-
rizes the definitions of these regions and the calibration of other relevant parameters. More
details can be found in Appendix F. For various scenarios we determine the optimal abatement
policies, the resulting emissions, the evolutions of real GDP, as well as the evolution of the car-
bon dioxide concentration and the global average temperature changes over the next 100 years.
Furthermore, we study the influence of international trade on the SCC and show that trade
can have a more significant effect on the SCC than cooperation. For purposes of comparison
in all cases we use log utility.




                                                        25
                  (a) Emissions [GtCO 2 ]                                  (b) CO2 Concentration [ppm]
                                                             800
 100
                                                             700

                                                             600
   50
                                                             500

                                                             400
       0
           2020   2040    2060     2080   2100                      2020     2040   2060     2080     2100
                           Year                                                       Year
                  (c) Output [trillion US-$]                                 (d) Global Warming [°C]
 600                                                            4

                                                                3
 400
                                                                2
 200
                                                                1

       0                                                        0
           2020   2040    2060     2080   2100                      2020     2040   2060     2080     2100
                            Year                                                      Year



Figure 3: BAU Evolution. Based on the calibration, the graphs depict the BAU evolution of (a)
carbon dioxide emissions, (b) atmospheric carbon dioxide, (c) output, (d) global average temperature
increase. The five areas in (a) and (c) depict emissions and output of the five regions. These are
OECD90 (darkest area), followed by ASIA, LAM, REF, and MAF (lightest area).


9.1         BAU Scenario

Figure 3 shows the median business-as-usual (BAU) evolution of the key variables. The five
areas in Graphs (a) and (c) depict emissions and GDP of the five regions that consists of
OECD90 (darkest area), followed by ASIA, LAM, REF, and MAF (lightest area). Under BAU,
our calibrated model predicts annual global CO2 emissions of about 106 GtCO2 by the end of
the century, which is close to the predictions of the DICE model (103 GtCO2 ) and the RCP
8.5 scenario (106 GtCO2 ). These emissions yield an atmospheric CO2 concentration of about
800 ppm in 2100 and an average temperature increase of about 3.9◦ C compared to 3.8◦ C in
DICE-2013R.
  15
     This result is only true in case of constant utility weights. Taking time-varying utility weights into account
yields more pronounced differences between the utility indices. These results are available upon request.
  16
     The database is available at https://tntcat.iiasa.ac.at/AR5DB.


                                                        26
       Region      Description                                  Kn0       gn0     χn        σn      ξn · 103
       OECD90      OECD countries in 1990                       517.7     0.024   0.84     0.0164      0.182
       ASIA        Asia excl. OECD90, Middle-East and REF       168.3     0.056   0.73     0.0157      0.390
       LAM         Latin America and the Caribbean               66.3     0.042   0.77     0.0157      0.208
       REF         Eastern Europe and Former Soviet Union        27.4     0.025   0.79     0.0415      0.208
       MAF         Middle-East and Africa                        80.9     0.054   0.74     0.0235      0.546


Table 2: Definition of Regions and Calibration. The table summarizes the regions used in our
numerical examples. It also reports the initial values (in 2015) of capital (trillion 2005-USD) and other
relevant parameters.

                (a) Emissions [GtCO 2 ]                                 (b) CO2 Concentration [ppm]

                                                        800
100
                                                        700
                                                        600
 50
                                                        500
                                                        400
  0
      2020      2040   2060      2080   2100                    2020      2040     2060         2080     2100
                      Year                                                         Year
             (c) Output [trillion US-$]                                   (d) Global Warming [°C]
600                                                         4

                                                            3
400
                                                            2
200
                                                            1

  0                                                         0
      2020      2040   2060      2080   2100                    2020      2040     2060         2080     2100
                         Year                                                            Year


Figure 4: Solution to the Non-cooperative Game. Based on the calibration, the graphs depict
the optimally controlled evolution of (a) carbon dioxide emissions, (b) atmospheric carbon dioxide,
(c) output, (d) global average temperature increase. The five areas in (a) and (c) represent emissions
and output from the five regions under consideration. The areas represents OECD90 (darkest area),
followed by ASIA, REF, LAM, and MAF (lightest area).


9.2     Non-cooperative Game

Figure 4 presents the results if the problem is formulated as a non-cooperative game. It turns
out that the optimally controlled emissions lead to a global average temperature increase of

                                                   27
         Region     Regional SCC     2015   2035    2055    2075    2095    2115    2150     2200
         OECD90         Total        8.32   11.35   13.52   15.17   16.66   17.45   19.75    24.80
                        Trade        2.05    2.80    3.34    3.75    4.11    4.31    4.88     6.12
         ASIA           Total        5.17   11.65   19.22   26.47   32.19   36.22   41.72    50.39
                        Trade        0.80    1.80    2.97    4.10    4.99    5.61    6.46     7.81
         LAM            Total        1.33    2.44    3.55    4.55    5.41    6.04    7.20     9.53
                        Trade        0.41    0.76    1.10    1.41    1.68    1.87    2.24     2.96
         REF            Total        0.64    0.90    1.09    1.29    1.43    1.49    1.86     2.61
                        Trade        0.19    0.26    0.31    0.37    0.41    0.42    0.53     0.74
         MAF            Total        3.19    6.97   11.56   16.03   19.84   22.91   27.85    33.90
                        Trade        0.74    1.62    2.68    3.72    4.60    5.31    6.46     7.86

         Global         Total       18.65   33.31   48.94   63.51   75.53   84.11   98.38   121.23
                        Trade        4.19    7.24   10.40   13.35   15.79   17.52   20.57    25.49


Table 3: SCC for the Non-cooperative Game. The table reports the median evolution of the
regional and global social cost of carbon for selected years. It also reports the part of the SCC that
results from international trade. All SCC numbers are expressed in USD per tCO2 .


3.5◦ C by the year 2100 compared to a BAU temperature increase of 3.9◦ C. Therefore, the
temperature increase is almost as pronounced in the non-cooperative game as in the BAU
scenario. Table 3 reports the corresponding SCC expressed in USD per tCO2 . For 2015, we
obtain a global SCC of 18.65 US-dollars, which is well in the range of other models such as
the DICE model. Notice that international trade contributes significantly to the SCC. Ignoring
the effects of international trade would predict a social cost of carbon of only 14.46, which
is about 22.5% smaller than in the benchmark case. These numbers are calculated using the
decomposition derived in Section 5.


9.3     Cooperative Game

For illustrative purposes, we solve a social planner problem with constant utility weights that
reflect the current distribution of population, i.e., we choose ϕn = Pn / N
                                                                           P
                                                                              k=1 Pk where Pn
denotes the current population of region n. Figure 5 depicts the evolution of the key variables
for this set of utility weights.17 Graphs (a) and (b) show that countries act more drastically
than in the non-cooperative game. By implementing the optimal cooperative abatement policy,
  17
   An alternative is to determine the endogenous Negishi-weights. This is however beyond the scope of our
paper since constructing Negishi-weights in stochastic settings is an non-trivial problem.


                                                    28
             (a) Emissions [GtCO 2 ]                                (b) CO2 Concentration [ppm]
 80                                                    800

 60                                                    700

                                                       600
 40
                                                       500
 20
                                                       400
  0
      2020   2040    2060     2080   2100                    2020     2040   2060     2080   2100
                      Year                                                     Year
             (c) Output [trillion US-$]                               (d) Global Warming [°C]
600                                                      4

                                                         3
400
                                                         2
200
                                                         1

  0                                                      0
      2020   2040    2060     2080   2100                    2020     2040   2060     2080   2100
                       Year                                                    Year


Figure 5: Solution to the Cooperative Game. Based on the calibration, the graphs depict the
optimally controlled evolution of (a) carbon dioxide emissions, (b) atmospheric carbon dioxide, (c)
output, (d) global average temperature increase. The five areas in (a) and (c) represent emissions and
output of the five regions. These are OECD90 (darkest area), followed by ASIA, LAM, REF, and
MAF (lightest area).


the median global CO2 emissions peak in the year 2070 and CO2 concentration in 2120. From
this point onwards, the decay capacities of natural carbon dioxide sinks such as oceans and
forests exceed anthropological emissions and thus the atmospheric CO2 concentration declines.
Furthermore, implementing the optimal cooperative abatement strategies leads to a median
increase in the world temperature of 2.9◦ C by the year 2100, which is well in line with the
optimal temperature path in DICE (see Graph (d)). Table 4 reports the social cost of carbon
which are systematically higher than in the non-cooperative game. As in the non-cooperative
game, international trade contributes significantly to the social cost of carbon.

To summarize, both the country-specific and the global SCC increase in two dimensions: first,
non-cooperative vs. cooperative; second, closed vs. open economy. Focusing on the first di-
mension only, the SCC are higher in the cooperative case, which is a well-known fact, e.g.,


                                                 29
        Region    Regional SCC   2015    2035    2055    2075    2095     2115     2150     2200
        OECD90        Total      8.32    11.66   14.50   17.29   20.44    23.28    31.20    50.88
                      Trade      2.05     2.88    3.58    4.27    5.04     5.74     7.70    12.56
        ASIA          Total      5.17    11.95   20.57   30.13   39.54    48.49    66.64   106.32
                      Trade      0.80     1.86    3.18    4.66    6.13     7.51    10.32    16.47
        LAM           Total      1.33     2.44    3.55    4.55    5.41     6.04     7.20     9.53
                      Trade      0.41     0.76    1.10    1.41    1.68     1.87     2.24     2.96
        REF           Total      0.64     0.90    1.09    1.29    1.43     1.49     1.86     2.61
                      Trade      0.19     0.26    0.31    0.37    0.41     0.42     0.53     0.74
        MAF           Total      3.19     6.97   11.56   16.03   19.84    22.91    27.85    33.90
                      Trade      0.74     1.62    2.68    3.72    4.60     5.31     6.46     7.86

        Global        Total      18.65   34.27   52.73   72.99   93.87   114.25   160.03   261.48
                      Trade      4.19     7.46   11.23   15.36   19.65    23.86    33.53    55.12


Table 4: SCC for the Cooperative Game. The table reports the median evolution of the regional
and global social cost of carbon for selected years. All SCC numbers are expressed in USD per tCO2 .


Nordhaus and Yang (1996). However, our paper also documents that the SCC are higher in an
open than in a closed economy both for a cooperative and a non-cooperative game. Therefore,
it can actually happen that the SCC derived from a cooperative game without trade are smaller
than in a non-cooperative game with trade as Table 5 indicates. In our example this happens
during the whole 21st century.



10      Conclusion

This paper derives the optimal abatement decisions of multiple countries in a non-cooperative
game-theoretical framework that takes the repeated-game feature of this problem into account.
All countries are open economies, i.e., we allow for international trade between the countries.
We offer a tractable continuous-time setup leading to a stochastic differential game that can
be solved explicitly. In fact, we provide closed-form solutions for all key decision variables such
as consumption, abatement, and investment of each country. Furthermore, we can explicitly
quantify the social cost of carbon. One important finding is that the SCC is increasing in the
trade volume, both for a specific country and globally. This shows that determining the SCC
in models without trade can significantly underestimate the SCC. From a policy perspective,
this can become a crucial issue if the SCC is used as the basis to tax CO2 emissions.


                                                 30
                 SCC       2015   2035    2055    2075   2095     2115     2150    2200
                                               Cooperative
                 Total    18.65   34.27   52.73 72.99 93.87     114.25   160.03   261.48
                 Trade     4.19    7.46   11.23 15.36 19.65      23.86    33.53    55.12
                 Closed   14.46   26.81    41.5 57.63 74.22      90.39    126.5   206.36
                                            Non-Cooperative
                 Total    18.65   33.31   48.94 63.51 75.53      84.11    98.38   121.23
                 Trade     4.19    7.24   10.40 13.35 15.79      17.52    20.57    25.49
                 Closed   14.46   26.07   38.54 50.16 59.74      66.59    77.81    95.74


Table 5: Cooperative vs. Non-cooperative SCC. The table reports the decomposition of the
total global SCC into the part that is generated by international trade and the residual that is generated
by domestic damages. All SCC numbers are expressed in USD per tCO2 .


References
Ackerman, F., E. A. Stanton, and R. Bueno, 2011, CRED: A New Model of Climate and
  Development, Ecological Economics, 85, 166–176.

Ackerman, F., E. A. Stanton, and R. Bueno, 2013, Epstein-Zin Utility in DICE: Is Risk Aversion
  Irrelevant to Climate Policy?, Environmental and Resource Economics 56, 73–84.

Barro, R. J., 2006, Rare disasters and asset markets in the twentieth century, Quarterly Journal
  of Economics 121, 823–866.

Barro, R. J., 2009, Rare disasters, asset prices, and welfare costs, American Economic Review
  99, 243–264.

Cai, Y., and T. S. Lontzek, 2018, The social cost of carbon with economic and climate risks,
  Journal of Political Economy forthcoming.

Colacito, R., and M. Croce, 2013, International asset pricing with recursive preferences, Journal
  of Finance 68, 2651–2686.

Crost, B., and C. P. Traeger, 2014, Optimal CO2 Mitigation Under Damage Risk Valuation,
  Nature Climate Change 4, 631–636.

Dell, M., B. F. Jones, and B. A. Olken, 2009, Temperature and Income: Reconciling New
  Cross-Sectional and Panel Estimates, American Economic Review 99, 198–204.



                                                   31
Dell, M., B. F. Jones, and B. A. Olken, 2012, Temperature shocks and economic growth:
  Evidence from the last half century, American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 4, 66–95.

Dockner, E. J., S. Jorgensen, N. van Long, and G. Sorger, 2000, Differential Games in Eco-
  nomics and Management Science (Cambridge University Press, Camebridge).

Golosov, M., J. Hassler, P. Krusell, and A. Tsyvinsky, 2014, Optimal Taxes on Fossil Fuel in
  General Equilibrium, Econometrica 82, 41–88.

Hassler, J., and P. Krusell, 2012, Economics and climate change: Integrated assessment in a
  multi-region world, Journal of the European Economic Association 10, 974–1000.

Hayashi, F., 1982, Tobin’s Marginal q and Average q: A Neoclassical Interpretation, Econo-
  metrica 50, 213–224.

IPCC, 2014, Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (Cam-
  bridge University Press).

Jensen, S., and C. P. Traeger, 2014, Optimal Climate Change Mitigation under Long-term
  Growth Uncertainty: Stochastic Integrated Assessment and Analytic Findings, European
  Economic Review 69, 104–125.

Jermann, U. J., 1998, Asset Pricing in Production Economies, Journal of Monetary Economics
  41, 257–275.

Maddison, D., and K. Rehdanz, 2008, Carbon Emissions and Economic Growth: Homogeneous
  Causality in Heterogeneous Panels, Working Paper, Kiel Institute for the World Economy.

Nash, J., 1950, Equilibrium Points in N-Person Games, Proceedings of the National Academy
  of Sciences 36, 48–49.

Nordhaus, W. D., 1992, An Optimal Transition Path for Controlling Greenhouse Gases, Science
  258, 1315–1319.

Nordhaus, W. D., 2008, A Question of Balance: Weighing the Options on Global Warming
  Policies (Yale University Press, New Haven).

Nordhaus, W. D., 2010, Economic Aspects of Global Warming in a Post-Copenhagen Environ-
  ment, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 107, 11721–11726.

                                            32
Nordhaus, W. D., 2015, Climate clubs: Overcoming free-riding in international climate policy,
  American Economic Review 105, 1339–70.

Nordhaus, W. D., and P. Sztorc, 2013, DICE 2013R: Introduction and Users Manual, Technical
  Report, Yale University.

Nordhaus, W. D., and Z. Yang, 1996, A regional dynamic general-equilibrium model of alter-
  native climate-change strategies, American Economic Review 86, 741–765.

Pindyck, R. S., and N. Wang, 2013, The Economic and Policy Consequences of Catastrophes,
  American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 5, 306–339.

Rogelj, J., M. den Elzen, N. Hoehne, T. Fransen, H. Fekete, H. Winkler, R. Schaeffer, F. Sha,
  K. Riahi, and M. Meinshausen, 2016, Paris Agreement Climate Proposals Need a Boost to
  Keep Warming Well Below 2◦ C, Nature 534, 631–639.

Stanton, E. A., J. Cegan, R. Bueno, and F. Ackerman, 2012, Estimating Regions’ Relative
  Vulnerability to Climate Damages in the CRED Model, Working Paper .

Tol, R. S. J., 2002a, Estimates on the Damage Costs of Climate Change, Part I: Benchmark
  Estimates, Environmental and Resource Economics 21, 47–73.

Tol, R. S. J., 2002b, Estimates on the Damage Costs of Climate Change, Part II: Dynamic
  Estimates, Environmental and Resource Economics 21, 135–160.

Traeger, C., 2015, Analytic Integrated Assessment and Uncertainty,, Working Paper .

UNEP, 2016, The Emissions Gap Report 2016 (United Nations Environment Programme
  (UNEP), Nairobi).

van den Bremer, T. S., and F. van der Ploeg, 2018, Pricing Carbon under Economic and Climate
  Risks: Leading-Order Results from Asymptotic Analysis, Working Paper .

van der Ploeg, F., and A. J. de Zeeuw, 1992, International aspects of pollution control, Envi-
  ronmental and Resource Economics 2, 117–139.

van der Ploeg, F., and A. J. de Zeeuw, 2016, Non-cooperative and cooperative responses to
  climate catastrophes in the global economy: A north-south perspective, Environmental and
  Resource Economics 65, 519–540.


                                             33
A        Derivation of Carbon Dioxide Emissions

From (8) and (9), we conclude that the implied world CO2 emissions are thus given by

                             X              Mt               X     δm PI
                                   Ent =        µm (t) + δm −   αnt −    M .
                               n
                                            ζe                n
                                                                      ζe

In the special case where the world follows BAU, the world emissions read
                                   X
                                         BAU      Mt              δm PI
                                        Ent  =         µm (t) + δm −    M .
                                    n
                                                  ζe                 ζe

Assuming that the regional BAU-emissions are given by Ent = νn (t)Et where νn is a determin-
istic function,18 the regional BAU-emissions EnBAU are given by

                               BAU              Mt                     δm
                                                    µm (t) + δm − νn (t) M PI .
                                                               
                              Ent  = νn (t)
                                                ζe                      ζe

Notice that implementing a regional abatement policy αn prevents the amount Mt αnt to go
into the atmosphere according to (8). This implies that implementing αn reduces the current
                                   Mt
emissions of country n by             α .
                                   ζe nt
                                            Therefore, the regional emissions are given by

                                 BAU       Mt
                          Ent = Ent  −         αnt
                                            ζe
                                        Mt                     δm      Mt
                                            µm (t) + δm − νn (t) M PI −
                                                       
                               = νn (t)                                    αnt .
                                        ζe                      ζe      ζe


B        Proofs of Section 4

B.1        Proof of Theorem 4.1 (Unit EIS)

We consider the HJB equation (15) of country n from the main text. Our first goal is to
reformulate this equation in terms of the controls αn and

                                                   χnk = Ckn /Yk ,                                          (39)
 18
      This can be well calibrated to the RCP 8.5 scenario. See Table 6 for the values in our calibration.




                                                         34
which is the fraction of output of country k that is consumed in country n. We thus rewrite
(13) as follows
                                     N                    N
                                                  n                          n
                                     Y                    Y
                              Cn =      (χnk Yk )βk   =       (χnk Ak Kk )βk .
                                     k=1                  k=1

Furthermore, dividing (3) by Yn yields χn = χnn +                      χnk Pnk Yk /Yn . We now conjecture that
                                                            P
                                                                k6=n
the equilibrium exchange rates Pnk are of the form

                                           Pnk = ωnk Yn /Yk                                              (40)

for constants ωnk that clear the good markets and will be determined later on. Applying con-
jecture (40), we get an alternative representation of the budget constraint (3) for consumption
expressed in terms of χn and χn` :

                                                  N
                                                  X
                                           χn =           ωn` χn`                                        (41)
                                                  `=1

with ωnn = 1. Therefore, we can rewrite (15) as follows

                                 N                                   N
                     n         Y               n
                                                        h    1 2   X     i    1 2 n
 0=      sup          Jtn + fn     (χnk Ak Kk )βk , J n + µm − σm −         n
                                                                        αk Jm + σm Jmm + φ12 (τ − τto )Jτno
       n       n
      χ1 ,...,χN ,αn
                                k=1
                                                              2     k=1
                                                                               2
                                                                N
                                                                X
        + κτ ητ (m − mPI ) + F ex − (φ + φ21 )τ + φ21 τ o Jτn +                  n
                                                       
                                                                  Kk ρm,k σm σk JK km
                                                                            k=1
          N
          X         h  X   N                           i 1X  N X N                         o
               n                ` k                                                     n
        +     JKk Kk gk ·,     ωk χ` − κk (·, αk ) − ξk τ +           Kk K` ρ`,k σ` σk JKk K` . (42)
          k=1              `=1
                                                            2 k=1 `=1

The first-order conditions for abatement αn and consumption χnν read

                                          ∂κn (·, αn )      Jn 1
                                                       = − nm      ,                                     (43)
                                              ∂αn          JKn Kn
                                   P            
                               ∂gn ·, N    ω ` n
                                       `=1 n `χ                             1
                        n
                       JK n
                            Kn                     ωnν = δn (γn − 1)J n βνn n .                          (44)
                                      ∂x                                   χν

Multiplying (44) by χnν , summing over ν = 1, . . . , N , and using (41) leads to an algebraic
equation for χn :
                                ∂gn (·, χn )                 Jn 1
                                             χn = δn (γn − 1) n     .
                                   ∂x                        JKn Kn

                                                  35
The fractions χnν can then be found by substituting back into (44). To determine the indirect
utility function J n , we now substitute the conjectures

                                                        N
                                                   1 Y (1−γn )βkn
   J n (t, m, τ, τ o , K1 , . . . , KN ) =                K       exp {pnm m + pnτ τ + pnτo τ o + pn (t)} ,      (45)
                                                1 − γn k=1 k

for some regional-specific constants pnm , pnτ , pnτo into the HJB system:

                      n                   N
                                          X
                         n
0=       sup           ṗt + δn (1 − γn )   βkn log (χnk Ak ) − δn [pnm m + pnτ τ + pnτo τ o ] − δn pn
     χn       n
      1 ,...,χN ,αn                          k=1
                                        N
             h    1 2         i         X
        + pnm µm − σm       αk + pnτ κτ ητ (m − mPI ) + F ex − (φ + φ21 )τ + φ21 τ o + pnτo φ12 (τ − τ o )
                                                                                  
                      −
                  2     k=1
                          N
                          X           h  X   N                           i 1                          XN
        + (1 − γn )             βkn    gk ·,      ` k                          2   n 2             n
                                                 ωk χ` − κk (·, αk ) − ξk τ + σm (pm ) + (1 − γn )pm σm     βkn ρm,k σk
                          k=1                `=1
                                                                             2                          k=1
                            N                 N X N
         1                 X     1           X                         o
        − (1 − γn )     βkn σk2 + (1 − γn )2         βkn β`n ρ`,k σ` σk .
         2          k=1
                                 2           k=1 `=1


We choose pnm , pnτ , pnτo such that the separation holds true, i.e.,

                          (γn − 1) N       n
                                                                       pnτ φ21
                                  P
                                     k=1 βk ξk                                                  κτ ητ
                 pnτ   =                         ,          pnτo =             ,    pnm = pnτ         .
                         δn + φ + φ21 − φδ+φ
                                          21 φ12
                                              12
                                                                      δn + φ12                   δn

The simplified HJB system is thus given by:

                              n ∂pn                             N                                      N
                                                                X                          h    1 2   X      i
       0=        sup                   − δn pn + δn (1 − γn )       βkn log (χnk Ak ) + pnm µm − σm −     αk
             χn       n
              1 ,...,χN ,αn
                                ∂t                              k=1
                                                                                                2     k=1
                                 N
                                 X         h  X  N                     i        h               i
                + (1 − γn )             βkn gk ·,   ωk` χk` − κk (·, αk ) + pnτ κτ −ητ mPI + F ex
                                  k=1              `=1
                                             N
                 1 2 n 2               n
                                            X
                + σm (pm ) + (1 − γn )pm σm     βkn ρm,k σk
                 2                          k=1
                             N                      N X N
                 1          X
                                 n 2   1         2
                                                   X                         o
                − (1 − γn )     βk σk + (1 − γn )          βkn β`n ρ`,k σ` σk .
                 2          k=1
                                       2           k=1 `=1




                                                                 36
Using the conjecture (45) the first-order condition (43) of the optimal abatement policy becomes

                                                        ∂                  pnm
                                                 βnn       κn (t, αn ) =        .
                                                       ∂αn               γn − 1

Therefore, the optimal abatement policies are given by (20). Similarly, the first-order condi-
tions (44) for the optimal consumption rates imply the following system of equations

                                          h                     N
                                                                 X               i
                  0=   δn βkn   −   βnn       An − ϑn 1 −              ωn` χn`        ωnk χnk ,    k = 1, . . . , N,
                                                                 `=1


where the solutions are
                                q
                  ϑn − An +      (ϑn − An )2 + 4ϑn βδnn                                       βkn ∗
          χ∗n =
                                                                      n
                                                                          ,       χn∗
                                                                                   k =           χ ,      k = 1, . . . , N.   (46)
                                          2ϑn                                                 ωnk n

To avoid degenerate cases with negative investments, we must impose the restriction on the
parameters that
                                               Aαn Cn   κn (·, αn∗ )
                                                  +   =              + χ∗n ≤ 1.                                               (47)
                                               Y    Y      An
This condition is satisfied for realistic values of the parameters and in all our calibrations. In
all our calibrations the consumption rate χ∗n is much bigger than the relative abatement cost,
κn (·, αn∗ )/An . Consequently, condition (47) is typically satisfied if χ∗n is sufficiently below one.
Notice that for δn ∈ [0, An βnn ] we obtain

                                                       ϑn − An
                                                               ≤ χ∗n ≤ 1.
                                                          ϑn

Hence, a necessary condition for χ∗n < 1 is that

                                                                δn
                                                                    < An .                                                    (48)
                                                                βnn

Finally, the function pn is given by
                                                            Z   ∞
                                                 n
                                                p (t) =             e−δn (s−t) ηn (s)ds,                                      (49)
                                                            t




                                                                    37
where the deterministic function ηn is given by

                           N                                                           N
                           X                                           h       1 2    X
                                                                                           ∗
                                                                                             i      h             i
      ηn = δn (1 − γn )          βkn   log (χn∗
                                             k Ak )          +   pnm       µm − σ m −           n         PI
                                                                                          αk + pτ κτ −ητ m + F ex

                           k=1
                                                                               2      k=1
                            N                                                                               N
                           X           h                                   i    1 2 n 2                    X
             + (1 − γn )         βkn       gk (χ∗k )   −   κk (·, αk∗ )                               n
                                                                               + σm (pm ) + (1 − γn )pm σm     βkn ρm,k σk
                           k=1
                                                                                2                          k=1
                             N                   N X N
              1             X
                              n 2   1         2
                                                X
             − (1 − γn )     βk σk + (1 − γn )          βkn β`n ρ`,k σ` σk .
              2          k=1
                                    2           k=1 `=1


This solution constitutes a Nash equilibrium, but good markets do not necessarily clear. Market
clearing of the good produced in country n obtains if supply Cn is equal to the demands Cnk ,
k = 1, . . . , N , i.e.,
                                                  N
                                                  X                                          N
                                                                                             X
                                       Cn =                Cnk         ⇐⇒             χn =         χkn                       (50)
                                                  k=1                                        k=1

where we use definition (39). Choosing the constant in the equilibrium exchange rate to be

                                                                                χk∗
                                                                                 n
                                                                  ωnk =          n∗
                                                                                χk

and substituting into (41) we obtain market clearing (50). The first-order condition for con-
sumption can be rewritten as

                                           βkn ∗   βkn χn∗
                            χn∗
                             k =              χ  =       k
                                                           χ∗n                     =⇒        χk∗   n ∗
                                                                                              n = βk χn .
                                           ωnk n    χk∗n


Therefore, the equilibrium exchange rate (40) is

                                                        χk∗
                                                         n Yn   βkn χ∗n Yn   βkn Cn∗
                                              Pnk =           =            =         .
                                                        χn∗
                                                         k Yk   βnk χ∗k Yk   βnk Ck∗

Notice that also Pnk = Cnk∗ /Ckn∗ . Furthermore, the SCC (23) directly follows from

                                                           ∂J n  ∂J n   ∂J n ∂m  ∂J n
                                       SCCn =                          =                .
                                                           ∂M ∂Kn        ∂m ∂M ∂Kn




                                                                           38
B.2     Proof of Corollary 4.2 (Log Utility)

For log utility, we substitute the conjecture (25)

                                                          N
                                                          X
          n              o
         J (t, m, τ, τ , λ, K1 , . . . , KN ) =                 βkn log(Kk ) − pnm m − pnτ τ − pnτo τ o + pnlog (t)
                                                          k=1


into the HJB equation of country n and repeat the same steps as above. The function pnlog is
                    R∞
given by pnlog (t) = t e−δn (s−t) ηn (s)ds where

                    N                                            N
                    X                                     h     X
                                                                     ∗  1 2i       h             i
         ηn = δn         βkn   log (χn∗
                                     k Ak )     −   pnm    µm −                n         PI
                                                                    αk − σm − pτ κτ −ητ m + F ex

                   k=1                                          k=1
                                                                        2
                   N
                   X           h
                                     ∗             ∗    1 2i
               +         βkn    gk (χk ) − κk (·, αk ) − σk .
                   k=1
                                                        2


C     Proof of Proposition 6.1

We consider a model with N identical countries. The optimal world abatement policy is
                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                  ! b−1
                      N  1 X N        1
                     X                             κτ ητ                                    1
           α(N )   =             βkn ξk n                                     φ21 φ12    (N )
                                                                                                        ,
                     n=1
                          δn k=1        βn δn + φ + φ21 −                     δn +φ12   an (t)b
                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                  ! b−1
                      N    1 X  N         1                                                                  b
                     X                                 κτ ητ                               1             1  b−1
                   ≤                βkn ξk n                                  φ21 φ12
                                                                                                                  ,
                     n=1
                            δn k=1          βn δn + φ + φ21 −                 δn +φ12
                                                                                        a(1) (t)b         N
                                1
                          1  b−1       1
                   = α(1) n        N − b−1
                          βn

                                       (N )
                                                                                                                      2
                             PN
This implies limN →∞            n=1   αn      = 0 as b > 1.



D     Proof of Proposition 7.1

In the first scenario, the result is obvious since abatement policies stay the same. To prove the
result in the second scenario, we follow the three-step procedure explained in the main text.

1st step. The solution to the optimization problem of the first step is given by Theorem 4.1.


                                                                  39
2nd step. To formulate the optimization problem of the second step (over consumption and
transfers), we express transfers in relative terms and use the notation εnk = Tkn /Ckn . By (6) and
(30), the abatement policy of country k after transfers is given by
                                                                                      !1/bk
                                                     ak (t)(αk∗ )bk + `6=k Ak χ`k ε`k
                                                                        P
                                            α
                                            bk =                                            .
                                                                    ak (t)

The HJB equation of country n thus reads

                                    N                                       N
                         n
                           n
                                  Y
                                        n             n βkn   n
                                                                 h  1 2   X      i
                                                                                    n  1 2 n
0=         sup            Jt + fn     (χk Ak Kk (1 − εk )) , J + µm − σm −     α
                                                                               b k Jm + σm Jmm
   χn       n    n
    1 ,...,χN ,(εk )k6=n           k=1
                                                                     2     k=1
                                                                                       2
                                                                                          N
                                                                                       n X
                         τto )Jτno                 PI     ex                        o                      n
                                                            
        + φ12 (τ −                   + κτ ητ (m − m ) + F      − (φ + φ21 )τ + φ21 τ Jτ +   Kk ρm,k σm σk JK km
                                                                                                                  k=1
           N
           X           h  X   N                               i 1X  N X N                     o
               n                    ` k              ∗                                      n
        +     JK   K k  gk ·,     ω  χ
                                   k `    − κk (·, αk  ) − ξk τ  +           K k ` `,k ` k Kk K` .
                                                                                K ρ   σ σ J
          k=1
                 k
                              `=1
                                                                   2 k=1 `=1


To determine the indirect utility function J n , we now substitute the conjecture (45) into the
HJB system and choose pnm , pnτ , pnτo such that the separation holds true, i.e.,

                          (γn − 1) N       n
                                                                            pnτ φ21
                                  P
                                     k=1 βk ξk                                                          κτ ητ
                 pnτ   =                         ,                pnτo =            ,       pnm = pnτ         ,
                         δn + φ + φ21 − φδ+φ
                                          21 φ12
                                              12
                                                                           δn + φ12                      δn

which are exactly the same sensitivities as in the case without money transfers. The simplified
HJB system is thus given by:

                             n ∂pn                                N
                                                                  X
                                              n
0=          sup                      − δn p + δn (1 − γn )              βkn log (χnk Ak (1 − εnk ))                     (51)
     χn       n    n
      1 ,...,χN ,(εk )k6=n
                               ∂t                                 k=1
                         N
                                                                                  !1/bk
                                                           ∗ bk
                                                              ) + `6=k Ak χ`k ε`k
                                                                    P
             h    1 2   X                          ak (t)(αkt                           i
        + pnm µm − σm −
                  2     k=1
                                                                ak (t)
                             N
                             X           h  X   N                    i       h             i 1
                                                                    ∗
        + (1 − γn )                βkn    gk ·,      ` k                   n         PI
                                                    ωk χ` − κk (·, αk ) + pτ κτ −ητ m + F ex     2
                                                                                              + σm (pnm )2
                             k=1                `=1
                                                                                               2
                                     N                                 N                      N X N
                                     X                     1          X          1           X                         o
        + (1 −      γn )pnm σm              βkn ρm,k σk   − (1 − γn )      n 2
                                                                          βk σk + (1 − γn )2
                                                                                                     βkn β`n ρ`,k σ` σk .
                                     k=1
                                                           2          k=1
                                                                                 2           k=1 `=1




                                                                    40
The first-order conditions then imply the following non-linear system for the optimal consump-
tion and transfer decisions
                                                    ! 1−b k
                    ∗ bk                     ` `
                              P                        b
            ak (t)(αkt )    +       `6=k Ak εk χk
                                                        k
                                                               Ak χnk    δn βkn
     pbnm                                                              −        = λnkt
                           ak (t)                             bk ak (t) 1 − εnk
                                          ! 1−bk
                    ∗ bk
                       ) + `6=k Ak ε`k χ`k bk Ak εnk
                             P
            ak (t)(αkt                                      δn β n
     pbnm                                                  + nk + βnn [An − ϑn (1 − χn )]ωnk = 0
                         ak (t)                  bk ak (t)   χk

where λnk ≥ 0 is the Kuhn-Tucker multiplier associated with the non-negativity constraint
εnk ≥ 0. Due to its non-linearity, the above system cannot be solved in closed-form, but it defines
a set of state-independent optimal controls which does not compromise our separation (45).

3rd step. Now, assume that country n does not receive any transfers, i.e., ε`n = 0 for all ` 6= n.
Such a country is allowed to reoptimize abatement after transfers. If this country reoptimizes
αn in (51), then the first-order condition is identical to the case without transfers. Therefore,
the optimal abatement policy stays the same. However, if abatement does not change, then
consumption also does not change since it has already been optimized in the second step.

Finally, the SCC directly follows from

                                                 ∂J n  ∂J n   ∂J n ∂m  ∂J n
                                     SCCn =                  =                .
                                                 ∂M ∂Kn        ∂m ∂M ∂Kn


E     Proof of Theorem 8.2

For log utility, the social planner’s HJB equation is given by

                                                 N                               N
                                    n            X               h        1 2   X     i
            0=         sup                   ϕk log(Ck ) − δV + µm − σm
                                        Vt + δ                                −     αk Vm
                 (C1n ,...,CN
                            n ,α )N
                                n n=1    k=1
                                                                          2     k=1
                                      PI      ex
                                                   − (φ + φ21 )τ + φ21 τ Vτ + φ12 (τ − τ o )Vτ o
                                                                        o
                                                                        
                     + κτ ητ (m − m ) + F
                       N
                       X         h  X   N                             i 1
                   +       VKk Kk gk ·,                                     2
                                            ωk` χk` − κk (·, αk ) − ξk τ + σm Vmm
                       k=1              `=1
                                                                          2
                          N    N                                    N
                       1 XX                                X                      o
                   +             Kk Kl ρl,k σl σk VKk Kl +     Kk ρm,k σm σk VKk m ,
                       2 k=1 l=1                           k=1




                                                               41
                                                                                PN
By definition V (t, m, τ, τ o , K1 , . . . , KN ) =                                n=1   ϕn V n (t, m, τ, τ o , K1 , . . . , KN ). We substitute
the conjecture

                                                                        N
                                                                        X
            V n (t, m, τ, τ o , K1 , . . . , KN ) =                             βkn log(Kk ) − pnm m − pnτ τ − pnτo τ o + pn,SP (t)
                                                                        k=1


into the HJB equation and reformulate the HJB equation in terms of the controls αn and χnk .

                             N
                            nX                                   N
                                                                  X                                                                                   
                                                  n,SP
0=          sup                          ϕn ṗ              +δ            βkn   log(χnk Ak )   +δ       pnm m   +   pnτ τ   +   pnτo τ o   −p   n,SP

     (χn       n      N
       1 ,...,χN ,αn )n=1          n=1                             k=1
                      N
            h 1 2    X     i
                         αk pnm − φ12 (τ − τ o )pnτo − κτ ητ (m − mPI ) + F ex − (φ + φ21 )τ + φ21 τ o pnτ
                                                                                                    
        − µm − σ m −
              2      k=1
            N
            X           h  X  N                             io
        +         βkn    gk ·,   ωk` χk` − κk (·, αk ) − ξk τ     ,
            k=1                         `=1


We choose pnm , pnτ , and pnτo as stated in the theorem and obtain the simplified HJB equation

                                     N                      N                                         N
                                    nX         h
                                                   n,SP
                                                           X
                                                                n      n           n,SP
                                                                                         h    1 2    X     i
   0=             sup                        ϕn ṗ      +δ     βk log(χk Ak ) − δp      − µm − σ m −     αk pnm
         (χn       n      N
           1 ,...,χN ,αn )n=1            n=1               k=1
                                                                                              2      k=1
                                                               N                     N
                                                               X               X                          1 2 io
                  κτ pnτ           ex             PI
                                                                       βkn               ` k
                                                      
             −                 F        − ητ m             +                  gk ·,     ωk χ` − κk (·, αk ) − σk     ,
                                                                 k=1                `=1
                                                                                                             2

The optimal abatement policies satisfy the first order conditions

                                                       N                                         N
                                                       X                   ∂                X
                                                                 ϕ` βn`       κn (·, αn ) =     ϕ` p`m
                                                           `=1
                                                                          ∂αn               `=1


Therefore, the optimal abatement policies are given by (34). Similarly, the optimal consumption
strategies satisfy the first-order conditions

                                                                                                N
                                              ϕn δn βkn     n
                                                              h             X
                                                                                   ` n
                                                                                       i
                                                        = βn   An − ϑn   1 −     ω  χ
                                                                                  n `     ωnk
                                                χnk                          `=1




                                                                                    42
where the solutions are
                     q
         ϑn − An + (ϑn − An )2 + 4ϑn PNδn ϕϕn β `                                                  βkn ∗
   χ∗n =                              `=1 ` n
                                                  ,                                        χn∗
                                                                                            k =       χ ,   k = 1, . . . , N.   (52)
                        2ϑn                                                                        ωnk n

Therefore, the function pn,SP is given by
                                                                      Z     ∞
                                                   p   n,SP
                                                              (t) =             e−δ(s−t) η n,SP (s)ds,                          (53)
                                                                        t


where the deterministic function η n,SP reads

                           N                                                            N
                           X                                              h    1 2   X       i        h              i
         η   n,SP
                    = δn         βkn   log       χn,SP
                                                  k    Ak         −   pnm    µm − σm −     αkSP − pnτ κτ F ex − ητ mPI
                           k=1
                                                                                 2     k=1
                           N
                           X      h                            1 2i
                     +         βkn gk (χSP
                                        k  ) − κk (·, αk
                                                        SP
                                                           ) −   σk .                                                           (54)
                           k=1
                                                               2

Market clearing thus implies that optimal consumption is given by (36) and the exchange rates
are given by (38).                                                                                                               2



F       Details on the Parameter Selection

F.1       Economic Model

Economic Growth We use the model predictions from RICE (in particular GDP) and cal-
ibrate the growth rate parameters An , δnK and ϑn such that the median path of the economic
model closely matches the evolution of GDP and consumption in RICE, which is a deterministic
model. For this purpose we aggregate national data from RICE into the five regions used in our
model.19 This determines the expected gross growth rates gn of the five regions. Additionally
we use historical data from the website of the International Monetary Fund to estimate the
volatility and correlation parameters of capital growth.20
 19
      This data is available at https://www.icpsr.umich.edu/icpsrweb/ICPSR/studies/28461
 20
      The data is available at: https://www.imf.org/external/data.htm




                                                                                43
Abatement Costs The first step is to calibrate the global average abatement cost function
such that it closely matches the global average abatement costs in the DICE-2013R model, i.e.,
                                                                  Et
such such a(t)αb ≈ AaDICE (t)εb where εt = 1 −                  EtBAU
                                                                        denotes the emission control rate.21 For
this purpose, we iteratively solve a global model. We set b = 2.8 as in DICE and start with an
initial guess a0 for the deterministic part of the cost function. Having solved the problem, we
update our conjecture for a and set
                                                             h εi b i
                                                                 t
                                      ai+1 (t) = A aDICE (t)E
                                                                αti

where εit and αti denote the optimal emission control rate and αi the optimal abatement policy
in iteration i, respectively. We find that this iterative calibration converges quickly such that
the differences between DICE abatement costs and our abatement costs become negligible after
five iterations.


Impact of Climate Change We combine the global estimates of climate damages from
DICE-2013R with regional estimates from Stanton et al. (2012) to calibrate the damage pa-
rameters. Notice that DICE-2013R assumes a level impact of climate change.22 Therefore, we
calculate an equivalent growth rate impact in the following way: On a global level we determine
the damage parameter ξ such that the average GDP losses in the year 2100 coincide for both
damage specifications, i.e., ξ is chosen such that
                                        h Rt        i
                                       E e−ξ 0 Ts ds = E DN (Tt ) ,
                                                                


where t denotes the year 2100. This leads to a global damage parameter of ξ = 0.00026. To
obtain the regional damage parameters ξn , we use the relative estimates provided by Stanton
et al. (2012) and scale them in such a way that they are consistent with the global damage
parameter estimated above:
                                            N
                                            X                  N
                                                               X
                                        ξ         P$n Kn   =         P$n Kn ξn ,
                                            n=1                n=1

where P$n is the exchange rate to the USD so that P$n Kn is the capital of region n expressed
in USD. The results are summarized in Table 2. In our calibration, the damage parameter of
  21
       The function aDICE can be found in Nordhaus and Sztorc (2013).
  22                                                                                         1
       DICE-2013R uses an inverse-quadratic damage function of the form D(T ) =        1+0.000266 T 2




                                                           44
MAF is three times higher than the one of OECD90, which is consistent with other studies
such as Dell et al. (2012).


F.2       Climate Model

We calibrate the climate model such that the median BAU evolutions of CO2 concentration,
global CO2 emissions, and global average temperature increase mimic the corresponding evolu-
tions in DICE-2013R. Additionally, our calibration also relies on data on the historical carbon
dioxide concentration in the atmosphere as well as forward looking data on regional carbon
dioxide emissions from the RCP 8.5 scenario. In the following, we describe the procedure in
more detail.


Atmospheric Carbon Dioxide We fix the pre-industrial athmospheric carbon dioxide con-
centration at M PI = 280 ppm. Furthermore, in the year 2015 (t = 0) the carbon dioxide
concentration was M0 = 401 ppm. To calibrate (8) we chose the drift rate µm such that
the drift of the average BAU evolution mimics drift rate implied by the baseline scenario in
DICE-2013R leading to
                                        n        t − b 2 o                n        t − b 2 o
                                                        1                                  2
                      µm (t) = a1 exp       −                    + a2 exp       −               ,
                                                   c1                                   c2

where a1 = 0.0086, b1 = 44.88, c1 = 59.11, a2 = 0.005, b2 = 132.5, c2 = 61.42. In a second step,
we calibrate the volatility of carbon dioxide shocks such that the model matches the historical
variation. For this purpose, we use data on the historical carbon dioxide concentration in
the atmosphere.23 Calculating the standard deviation of the log changes of M , we obtain the
volatility σm = 0.0016.


Carbon Dioxide Emissions Equation (9) links changes in the atmospheric CO2 concen-
tration to the CO2 emissions. Following Nordhaus (1992), among others, we assume a carbon
dioxide residence time of 120 years implying δm = 0.0083. To determine the conversion factor
ζe , we discretize (9) and obtain Mt+1 − Mt + δm (Mt − M PI ) = ζe Et where Et denotes global
 23
      Source: Mauna Loa Observatory, Hawaii. Data available at http://co2now.org/Current-CO2/CO2- Now/




                                                            45
                                       Model-implied Emissions [ppm]
                     4

                    3.5

                     3

                    2.5

                     2

                    1.5

                     1

                    0.5
                          5    10          15          20          25      30       35
                                           Emission Data [GtCO 2 ]



Figure 6: Calibration of the Carbon Dioxide Model. The figure depicts pairs of historical
carbon dioxide emissions (measured in GtCO2) and emission triggered increases in carbon dioxide
concentrations (measured in ppm). The grey line depicts the related regression line.

                              2015     2030     2050        2075   2100   2150   2200
                    νOECD     0.34     0.31     0.28        0.26   0.22   0.19   0.18
                    νASIA     0.38     0.39     0.39        0.39   0.38   0.38   0.37
                    νLAM      0.07     0.07     0.07        0.06   0.06   0.05   0.04
                    νREF      0.10     0.11     0.12        0.13   0.15   0.17   0.18
                    νMAF      0.11     0.12     0.14        0.16   0.19   0.21   0.23


Table 6: Emission Calibration. The table summarizes the regional fractions describing the
share of the five regions in the global BAU-emissions based on RCP 8.5 data which is avalailable
at https://tntcat.iiasa.ac.at/AR5DB.


carbon dioxide emissions. Therefore, we estimate ζe by a least-squares minimization

                                  I
                                  X                                    2
                                     Mi+1 − Mi + δm (Mi − M PI ) − ζEi
                                    
                     ζe = arg min
                               ζ
                                     i=1


yielding a conversion factor of ζe = 0.0989. This is the slope of the regression line in Figure 6.
This calibration predicts annual global CO2 emissions of about 106 GtCO2 by the end of the
century, which is close to the predictions of the DICE model (103 GtCO2 ) and the RCP 8.5
scenario (106 GtCO2 ). In a second step, we use RCP 8.5 predictions of regional CO2 emissions
to determine the regional emission shares νn . Table 6 summarizes these calibration results.




                                                   46
Global Average Temperature For the parameters determining the climate system, we
follow Cai and Lontzek (2018) and choose φ = 0.047, φ21 = 0.0048, φ12 = 0.01, κτ = 0.037,
ητ = 5.48 corresponding to an equilibrium climate sensitivity of 3◦ C. The model predicts an
end-of-century global average temperature increase of about 3.9◦ C compared to 3.8◦ C in DICE-
2013R.


F.3       Preference Parameters

In our benchmark calibration, we choose logarithmic preferences (γn = ψn = 1) and a time
preference rate of δn = 0.015, which is in line with the IAM literature. Besides, we calibrate
the consumption preferences such that the model is in line with consumption and import data
from Worldbank.24 This implies weights βnn for the domestic good in the range of 60% for MAF
to 85% for OECD90.




 24
      The data is available at https://data.worldbank.org/


                                                      47
