NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INTERNATIONAL CAPITAL
MOBILITY AND TAX EVASION

Alberto Giovannini

Working Paper No. 2460

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue

Cambridge, MA 02138
December 1987

This paper is part of a project on "Capital Controls and Liberalization: Costs
and Benefits," financed by a World Bank McNamara Fellowship. I am grateful
to Michael Gavin, Pentti Kouri, Michael Salinger and seminar participants at the
National Bureau of Economic Research and Columbia University for suggestions,
and to Carmen Reinhart for assistance. The research reported here is part of
the NBER's research program in International Studies. Any opinions expressed
are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
Support from the Olin Foundation is gratefully acknowledged.

NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INTERNATIONAL CAPITAL
MOBILITY AND TAX EVASION

Alberto Giovannini

Working Paper No. 2460

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue

Cambridge, MA 02138
December 1987

This paper is part of a project on "Capital Controls and Liberalization: Costs
and Benefits," financed by a World Bank McNamara Fellowship. I am grateful
to Michael Gavin, Pentti Kouri, Michael Salinger and seminar participants at the
National Bureau of Economic Research and Columbia University for suggestions,
and to Carmen Reinhart for assistance. The research reported here is part of
the NBER's research program in International Studies. Any opinions expressed
are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
Support from the Olin Foundation is gratefully acknowledged.

NBER Working Paper #2460
December 1987

International Capital Mobility and Tax Evasion

ABSTRACT

This paper studies the welfare effects of international investment to evade

domestic taxes on domestic investment income. Capital mobility for tax evasion
eliminates distortions in the intertemporal allocation of consumption, but

introduces distortions in domestic production. Conversely, a regime where
residents pay taxes on all investment income, domestic and foreign, introduces
distortions in intertemporal consumption allocation, but leaves domestic

production distortion-free. The relative magnitude of the interest elasticity
of savings and the interest elasticity of domestic investment determines the
welfare effects of capital movements for the purpose tax evasion.

Alberto Giovannini
NBE R

1050 Massachusetts Avenue

Cambridge, MA 02138

1

1.

Introduction

In an open economy, foreign investment is often used as a means of evading

taxes on wealth, or on capital assets' income. The purchase of foreign assets
makes it easy to evade taxes for three reasons: (a) ownership of foreign assets
by domestic residents cannot always be verified and tracked by tax authorities;
(b) some governments (like the US government currently) do not levy withholding
taxes on income from domestic securities accruing to foreign residents; (c) in
many countries it is possible to defer the payment of taxes on foreign assets'

income, by deferring the repatriation of such income. The complexity of
national tax codes, and the differences of tax codes from country to country, in
many cases blur the distinction between (illegal) tax evasion, and (legal) tax
avoidance, and multiply the opportunities of the private sector to minimize tax
payments through international transactions

1

This paper presents the simple analytics of tax evasion through

international capital mobility. It discusses the general-equilibrium effects of
tax evasion and evaluates its impact on domestic welfare, under the assumption
that the distortionary taxes on capital income cannot be removed.
International capital mobility and the constraints it imposes or'

macroeconomic policies are the central issues of theoretical and empirical

1

In this paper I use the term "evasion" to denote all transactions motivated by
the desire to minimize tax payments. Given the current state of international
tax laws, many such transactions are in fact legal. This paper is not
concerned with the resource cost of breaking the law, and the resources used
to enforce the law. For the purpose of my analysis, the distinction between
tax avoidance and tax evasion is inconsequential.

2

research in international economics.2 Surprisingly, however, few papers have
analyzed the repercussions of changes in taxes on international capital flows,

and, as a consequence, on the domestic economy. Among the recent examples,
Aizensnan [1985] studies the optimal combination of the inflation tax, capital

controls, and tariffs, for the purpose of raising a given amount of government

revenue, in an economy without production;3 Stockman and Hernadez [1985]
discuss taxes on the purchase of foreign currency in a general-equilibrium asset
pricing model, while Gordon and Varian [1986] consider the optimal structure of
capital-asset taxes in an international capital asset pricing model; Frenkel and
Razin [1987] analyze the effects of tax reforms on international borrowing and
lending in a two-country world; Tornell [1987] and Velasco [1987] argue that
capital controls might be desirable as second-best devices in the presence of
distortionary taxation.

International capital flows to evade domestic wealth and capital-income
taxes are likely to be a widespread phenomenon, especially among developing

countries.4 Tanzi [1983], reviewing the structure of tax revenues in developing
countries, notes that (i) income tax revenue is accounted for almost exclusively
by taxation of wages; (ii) in poor countries the revenue from corporate income
taxes is very low; (iii) wealth taxes account for an almost insignificant

2

For a recent survey on international capital mobility, see Obstfeld [1986].
Extending the optimal tariff literature to account for international capital
mobility, Kemp [1966] and Jones [1967] study the optimal combination of
tariffs and taxes on international investment.
See, for example, Walter [1986].

4

2. The Model
I consider a one-good, two-period model of an open economy.6 Domestic
residents consume in period 1 and period 2, and can transfer wealth
intertemporally by investing in domestic capital or by purchasing (or selling)

foreign bonds. The government taxes only income from domestic investments. Tax
revenues are used to finance "infrastructures" that provide a positive

externality to domestic residents. The government does not spend in the first
period: thus there is no government debt. Taxes, however, are known by domestic
residents at the time investment decisions are made.

I study a small country, and assume that the foreign interest rate is

given. This case is both a useful theoretical benchmark, since it helps to
highlight all the basic effects that are at work also in a two-country world,
and a reasonable empirical paradigm, since in many countries the size of
international capital flows is too small to affect the world rate of interest.
Foreign residents can lend resources to domestic residents, but do not have

direct access to the domestic technology. Any taxes paid to the local
government, on income from loans to domestic residents, are instantaneously

rebated through international tax treaties. These assumptions imply that
domestic residents can borrow from the rest of the world at a given rate of
interest, which I take to equal the world lending rate.
The consumers' problem is:

6

This model is also used by Obstfeld [1987]. Bhagwati [1978] stresses the
importance of the effects of taxation and exchange controls on savings for
welfare analysis.

3

fraction of total tax revenue. These facts are in principle consistent with the
view that international capital mobility imposes severe constraints on fiscal

authorities. Dornbusch [1987] argues that the repeal of withholding taxes on US
government securities might have been an important determinant of capital flight

from Latin American countries. Giovannini [1987], discussing the interwar
experience in Italy, indicates that, during those years, international capital
flows to evade wealth taxes were possibly very large.5
Section 2 of this paper presents a two-period model of savings, investment,

and the current account, where government spending can be financed only by
levying distortionary taxes. The welfare effects of international investment
for tax evasion are discussed in section 3. Section 4 endogenizes government
spending, showing the open-economy effects of dynamic inconsistency and
"discretionary" equilibria studied by Fischer [1980] and Kydland and Prescott

[1980] in closed-economy models. Section 5 contains some concluding remarks.
An appendix proves the equivalence between quantitative controls on
international investment and a regime of uniform taxation of income from
domestic and foreign assets.

Although, to my knowledge, there is no systematic econometric evidence
relating international capital flight to tax evasion and changes in tax rates,
there is a substantial literature attempting to quantifying tax evasion in the
US. See Poterba [1987] for a review and tests relating capital-gains tax
evasion to capital-gains tax rates.

5

v(C)

(1)

s.t. K2+C1+AK

(2)

MAX

U(C1,C2) +

C2

A(l+r) +

(3)

f(K2)(1-r)

Where C1 and C2 stand for consumption in the two periods; C is government
spending; A represents the stock of foreign assets accumulated in period 1, i.e.
the current account surplus in period 1; K2 is the stock of productive capital
in period 2, which equals the rate of investment in period 1, and K is the

exogenous initial allocation of resources. f(K2) is a decreasing-returns-toscale production technology, yielding output in period 2. In the production
*

process,

the capital stock depreciates completely. r is the tax rate; r the

world interest rate. In this section and in section 3 I analyze the effects of
tax evasion by assuming that r--or C--is exogenously given. As equations (1)(3) suggest, the government could clearly optimize tax collection and spending:
in section 4 I study equilibria in the presence of a maximizing government.

Equations (4)-(5) and (2)-(3) are the first order conditions for the
consumption-savings and portfolio-allocation problem of the consumer:

f'(K2)(l-r)

U1(C1,C2) =

1+r*

(l+r*)U2(C1,C2)

(4)

(5)

Equation (4) determines domestic investment: the domestic capital stock is such
that its after-tax marginal productivity equals the world interest factor, l+r*.

This portfolio allocation rule insures that the net return on savings is always

equal to the world interest rate. Equation (5) is the standard Euler equation,

6

setting the marginal rate of substitution between present and future consumption
*

equal to the marginal rate of transformation, l+r .

Given domestic investment,

equation (5), together with (2) and (3), determine consumption, savings and the
current account.

Figure 1 shows the determination of equilibrium with r=O. The bowed-out
production-possibility frontier characterizes the domestic technology. Maximum
consumption at time 1 equals the stock of available resources, K, plus the
present discounted value (at the world rate of interest) of future investment

income. The investment in domestic capital is determined by the equality of the
marginal return on domestic and on foreign investment, i.e. the tangency of the
production possibility frontier with the world interteniporal terms of trade- - the

*

BB line with slope -(l+r ).

Savings, the current account, and consumption in

the two periods are determined by the tangency of the consumption indifference
curve and the BB line.

Figure 2 illustrates the effects of distortionary taxes in the presence of

tax evasion. Equalization of the after-tax return on domestic investment with
the world interest rate decreases the domestic capital stock and domestic
production: the fall in K2 is caused by tax evasion, which takes place because

domestic residents can substitute home capital with foreign securities. The
production distortion originating from the tax, however, does not affect the
marginal rate of substitution between present and future consumption, since the

fall in domestic investment insures that the net return on savings is r*. The
budget line shifts further down and to the left, from B'B' to B"B", since tax
revenue is not rebated in a lump sum fashion to consumers, but is used to

provide for utility-generating "infrastructures." At the consumption point C',

7

the vertical distance between the lines B'B' and B"B" is equal to tax revenue

and government spending. Consumption at time 2 is accordingly decreased, for

every level of investment. What is the effect of the distortionary tax on
savings? If present and future consumption are normal goods, an increase in r
increases savings, whereas savings decreases if future consumption is an

inferior good. Since portfolio substitution insures that the rate of return on
savings is unchanged, savings is here affected exclusively by the income effect
of the tax increase.

The effects of tax evasion can be evaluated by studying the case where
residents cannot evade domestic taxes by purchasing foreign securities: income

from all assets, domestic and foreign, is taxed at the same rate. When tax
evasion is not possible, the intertemporal budget constraint has to be changed.
Equation (3) becomes:

C2 =

(lr)[A(l+r*)

+

f(K2)]

(3')

Equation (3') implies that domestic residents can deduct foreign interest
payments- -when A is negative- -from taxable income. The first-order condition
for the consumption and portfolio-allocation problem are:

f'(K2) =

U1(C1,C2) =

l+r*

(l+r*)(lr)U2(C1,C2)

(4')
(5')

Figure 3 illustrates the effects of the tax distortions in this case.
Investment and the domestic capital stock are now unaffected by changes in r.

8

Thus international capital mobility now prevents capital income taxes from

distoring the production side of the economy.7 By contrast, as indicated by
(5'), the relevant rate of interest for savings is now the after-tax world
interest rate.

The BB" line shows the consumption possibilities of domestic residents. At
point B, first-period consumption equals the sum of the present discounted value
(at world interest rates) of second-period output and the initial endowment K,

second-period consumption equals zero, the revenue from taxation of domestic
production identically offsets the tax rebates on foreign interest payments, and

government spending is zero. The vertical distance between the BB" line and the
production point P is the revenue from taxation of domestic production.
Equilibrium consumption, government spending, and the structure of tax revenues

can be easily characterized as indicated in the figure. Line B'B' shows the
consumption possibilities of domestic residents before taxation of foreign

assets' income. The vertical distance between BB and B'B' is the revenue from
the tax on domestic income, while the distance between BB" and B'B' is the

revenue (or outlay) from foreign interest income (or payments). What is the
response of savings to an increase in taxes? In the absence of tax evasion,
intertemporal substitutability in consumption tends to decrease savings, while
the income effect- -if both periods' consumption levels are normal goods- -

increases savings. Thus the response of savings to an increase in the tax rate
is ambiguous, because of conflicting income and substitution effects, just like

Notice that this would not happen in a closed economy, see, for example,
Diamond [1970]

9

in the standard partial-equilibrium exercise.

3. The Welfare Effects of Capital Flows for Tax Evasion
A comparison of two regimes described in section 2. allows to determine
whether tax evasion through international capital mobility lowers national

welfare. The literature on optimal taxation provides the framework for the
comparison.8 The problem studied by the optimal taxation literature is finding
the structure of taxes that minimizes the deviation (in terms of welfare) from

the nondistorted, pre-tax equilibrium.9 The general prescription is to tax
those goods with a smaller demand elasticity: this criterion insures that the
after-tax allocation of resources is closest to the pre-tax, nondistorted
optimum.

To carry out the welfare comparison of the two regimes, it is convenient to

assume that both taxes on savings and capital income are available. The budget
constraint can be rewritten after solving out the current account in the first
period:

8

For surveys of the optimal taxation literature, see Sandmo [1976], and
Atkinson and Stiglitz [1980] . Horst [1980] and Findlay [1986] use the same
techniques to evaluate double taxation of international income flows and the
optimal structure of international tax treaties.
The same question can be asked with the model in this paper, since the utility
function is assumed to be separable in consumption and government spending.

10

C2

C1 +

K +

(i-r1-r2)f(K2)

(lr2)(1+r*)

(1-r2)(1+r*)

-

(6)

1(2

The tax rate on income from domestic investment is r1, while the savings tax

rate is r2. Equation (6) comprises the two extreme cases studied above. In the
presence of tax evasion,

=

0 and

0 0. With uniform taxation,

= 0 and

o 0. As above, the required rate of return on domestic investment is
determined by the international arbitrage condition:

f'(K2)(l-r1-r2) =

(1+r*)(ir2)

(7)

Maximization of (1), subject to (6) and (7), leads to the following indirect
utility function:

*
W((l-r2)(l+r ), K+Y)

(8)

where Y is the net present value of domestic investment projects- -i.e. the last
two terms on the right-hand side of equation (6)--a function of r1, r2 and r*.
An application of the envelope theorem shows:

dY/dr1 =

- [(lr2)(l+r*)],

dY/dr2 =

ri/[(l+r*)(lr2)2I

(9)

Since C is exogenous, the welfare effects of tax evasion can be analyzed by
minimizing the welfare loss of raising a given tax revenue.

The problem is

11

formally stated as follows:

MAX W((lr2)(l+r*), K+Y)
s.t. r2[A(l4r*) +

(10)

+

f(K2)]

=

r1f(K2)

G

(11)

(l0)-(ll) can be solved using (7) and (9). The first order conditions are:

W2r1
W1 +

=

2

A

*
A(i+r )

+ f(K2)

+

*
r2[(l+r

+
2

(l-r2) (i+r*)

+

*

____________
A [r2[(l+r
(i-r2) (1+r*)

+

df(K)

dr1

+

df(K)
dr 2

df(K2)
T1

dr2

(12)
]

df(K2)
f(K2) + T1 dr1

(13)
]

And equation (11). Wi and W2 are the partial derivatives of the W function with

respect to its first and second argument, respectively. A is the Lagrange
multiplier associated with the revenue constraint (11).

Equations (12) and (13) do not have a closed-form solution, even assuming

special functional forms for W and f. Furthermore, the optimal r1 and

are

normally both different from zero, i.e. neither of the regimes studied above is

optimal according to the criterion just outlined. However, the immediate
implication of the optimal-tax solution is that tax evasion is welfare-inferior

when the optimal level of

is much smaller than optimal r2.

The structure of the problem, and in particular the determinants of tax
revenue, provide some intuition for the conditions that make

= 0 and

0

12

' 0 and

(no tax evasion) preferable to

— 0 (the tax evasion case). The

left hand side of equations (12) and (13) are affected by the parameters of the

indirect utility function. Notice that the larger the intertemporal
substitution elasticity, the larger the (positive) effect of an increase in the
after-tax world interest rate on indirect utility (the larger is W1), and

consequently the smaller the optimal level of the savings tax. The right-hand
side of (12) and (13) are affected by the marginal tax revenue. In the presence
of tax evasion, an increase in taxes generates a fall in the domestic capital
stock that is larger, the closer the production technology is to constant

returns to scale. Differentiating equation (7) when

0 and r2 =

0, we

obtain:

f' (K2)

(14)

dr1

(lrl) f"(K2)

The closer the production technology to constant returns the smaller (in
absolute value) the denominator on the right-hand side of (14), and therefore
the larger the fall in the domestic capital stock after an increase in taxes.

The elasticity of returns to scale of the domestic investment technology
determines, in this open economy, the interest elasticity of domestic
investment.

In the presence of tax evasion, an increase in r brings about a fall of
domestic investment, and of second-period GDP, that is positively related to the

elasticity of returns to scale of the domestic investment technology. In a
regime of uniform taxation (r1 = 0 and r2

0), by contrast, a clmnge in the tax

13

rate does not affect the domestic capital stock, but gives rise to a large
deviation from the initial allocation of resources if the Lntertemporal

substitution elasticity is large. An increase in the tax rate decreases the
rate of return on savings. With a positive interest elasticity of savings,
domestic residents borrow from abroad, thus reducng the second-period total tax

bill. The response is larger, the larger the elasticity of intertemporal
substitution in consumption. Therefore, a regime of uniform taxation should be
preferable if domestic and foreign investment opportunities are similar, so that
the interest elasticity of domestic investment is large, while the interest
elasticity of savings is relatively small.

Since closed-form solutions to (12) and (13) cannot be obtained, I perform
numerical simulations by assuming the following funactional forms for U and f:

U(C1,C2) = [

f(K2)

+

(l/a)K

Under these assumptions, the elasticity of intertemporal substitution and the
elasticity of returns to scale are constant, and equal to 1/0 and a,

respectively.

*

In the simulations, K

1, r = 0.3, and &

0.25.

I study the

effects of varying a and 9 by computing the welfare loss of tax evasion for C

equal to 10, 20 and 30 percent of first-period GNP. The welfare loss is the
difference of U(C1,C2) under uniform taxation and U(C1,C2) with tax evasion,
scaled by the marginal utility of first-period consumption (in the uniform
taxation regime), and divided by first-period GNP.

In the top panel, with a=0.4, 0=4 and G=30 percent of GNP, international

14

tax evasion makes second-period GDP fall by roughly 10 percent, and gives rise

to a loss equivalent to 1.2 percent of GNP. In the second panel I double the
elasticity of intertemporal substitution in consumption, with the result that
the welfare loss of tax evasion at C = 30 percent of CNP is roughly halved. The

two bottom panels in the table show the cases where domestic investment and
production are almost unaffected by tax evasion and changes in taxes, because

is very small. In these cases tax evasion is welfare-superior to a regime of
uniform taxation, especially when the intertemporal substitution elasticity
equals 2 (9=0.5), as in the bottom panel of the table.1°

10 Clearly, these simulations give more than a fair chance to tax evasion: the

welfare cost of tax evasion should be computed relative the the solution of
the optimal-tax problem outlined above, where both domestic-investment income
and savings are taxed, i.e. both r1 and r2 are different from zero.

15

4. The Inconsistency of Optimal Plans: Capital Levies and Capital Flight
In this section I make the tax rate endogenous, and discuss optimal fiscal

policies. The government maximizes the representative individual's utility
function, taking the optimal responses to taxation as given. As Kydland and
Prescott [1980] and Fischer [1980] show, in this type of problem the optimal
plans of the government are in general reneged as time goes by, since the exante price elasticity of the demand for capital goods differs from the ex-post
11

elasticity.

What are the government's incentives to impose a capital levy and their

effects on investors' behavior? I consider here the case where foreign assets
are not taxable. The government's problem at time 1 is:

MAX

*
W(l+r , Y+K)

v(G)

(15)

G

s.t. rf(K2)

f'(K2) -

Y =

+

(16)

(1+r*)/(lr)

f(K2)(l-r)/(l+r

)

(4)

- K2

(17)

the first-order conditions are:

'2'

f''K '

v (G)[ 1

'2

f(K2) If"(K2) I

2

l-r

1 +

r*

(18)

and equations (16), (4) and (17). The solution of the problem yields a value of
r

11

that

investors would use in their portfolio and savings decisions. At time 2

This problem is also disussed by Krugman [1987].

16

the government might want to renege on the announced tax rate. The problem at
time 2 is:

MAX 1.J(C1,C2) +

s.t. C1

C2 —

v(G)

K - A

(1)

(2)

-

A(1+r)

+

(l-r)f(K2)

rf(K2) — C

(3)

(16)

A, 2 given

Since both A and K2 are given at time 2, C1 and f(K2) are given as well.
Therefore, the first order conditions are:

v'(G) = 8U/8C2

and equations (2), (3) and (16).
same value of r.

(19)

(18) and (19) are unlikely to give rise to the

In the first period, the marginal government revenue from an

increase in taxes--the second term on the left-hand side of (18)--times the
marginal utility of government spending, has to equal the welfare cost of the

tax distortion. In the second period, by contrast, the tax rate is such that
the marginal utility of consumption is equal to the marginal utility of
government spending.

Are the optimal ex-post taxes higher than ex-ante? The right-hand side of
equation (18) equals U1/(l+r*), since the derivative of the indirect utility
function with respect to the present discounted value of available resources
equals the Lagrange multiplier associated with the present-value budget

17

constraint, and in turn, the marginal utility of period-one consumption.

Therefore, given the consumption Euler equation (5), the right-hand side
expressions in equations (18) and (19) are identical. Thus, a comparison of the
left-hand sides of the two equations shows that ex-post government spending and
taxes are always grater than ex-ante, if the marginal utility of government
expenditure is decreasing.

Equations (18) and (19) also reveal that the government's incentive to
raise higher taxes ex-post is stronger, the larger the response of international
capital flows to future taxes, i.e. the more "similar" the domestic and foreign

investment technologies: in this case the marginal tax revenue term in equation
(18) is relatively small, thus driving a larger wedge between the ex-ante and
ex-post marginal utility of government spending.

By a similar argument it is possible to show that, in the uniform taxation
case, the government's incentives to raise higher taxes ex-post are positively

related to the response of the current account to the savings tax rate: the
higher the intertemporal elasticity of substitution the larger the difference
between ex-post and ex-ante taxes.

Historically, examples of extraordinary taxation, like capital levies,
debt repudiation, or exchange-rate "maxi" devaluations, are numerous. For this
reason, and since the "fooling" equilibrium just described is unlikely to be
self-replicating, it is plausible to study equilibria where the public

anticipates the government's actions. Define a discretionary equilibrium as one
where the the public perfectly anticipates future taxes, and the government has

18

no incentives to renege on previous committments.12 In the government's problem
at time 2, the values of C1, A, and K2--that the government takes as given--are

functions of taxes expected at time 1. To make sure that the government will
have no incentives to change the announced tax rate, the public has to choose A,
C1, and K2 conditional on a value of r consistent with the solution of the

problem (l)-(3) and (16) above. Since ex-post taxes are always greater than
their ex-ante optimal values, the discretionary equilibrium is characterized by

"over-accumulation" of foreign assets.13 The accumulation of foreign assets in
the discretionary equilibrium is larger, the more similar are the domestic and

foreign investment technologies. Therefore, the arguments for preventing
international capital flows for tax evasion are the same even when the
endogeneity of government spending, and the effects of dynamic inconsistency,

are explicitly accounted for:14 if the interest elasticity of domestic
investment is large relative to the interest elasticity of savings, tax evasion
lowers national welfare relative to a regime where domestic and foreign
investment income are taxed at the same rate.

12

13

14

See Fischer [1986] for the a complete discussion of the welfare ranking of
"first best," "time inconsistent" and "discretionary" equilibria.
An interesting historical example of this phenomenon is provided by the
Italian experience in 1919. A capital levy was passed by the Italian
government in November, and was publicly debated since the beginning of the
year. The dollar price of liras in New York fell by 52% from December 1918
to December 1919, and many contemporary observers argued that capital flight
for fear of the capital levy reached serious proportions in that year. See
Giovannini [1987]
Since the logical structure of the proof of this proposition- -as well as its
intuition--are clearly the same as in section 3, I nmit it for brevity's
sake.

19

Table 2 illustrates these arguments, by reporting simulations of the full
time-consistent discretionary equilibrium, assuming v(C) =

G

°'/(l-0), and

0=l.5. When a=O.4, the public's anticipations of future confiscatory taxes
much worsens the production distortions in the presence of tax evasion: output

falls 25 percent below the first-best optimum of 210. Similarly, when a=O.2 and
0=2, the relative ranking of the two regimes is sharply reversed.

15

5. Concluding Remarks
This paper has studied the simple analytics of tax evasion through

international capital flows. The main result is that the welfare costs of
international capital outflows to evade domestic taxes are larger, the larger
the interest elasticity of domestic investment, relative to the interest

elasticity of savings. Thus the relative importance of portfolio substituion
and intertemporal substitution provide a simple criterion to evaluate the

welfare effects of international tax evasion from an individual country's

15

This result stresses the large costs of savings taxation, rather than the
superiority of tax evasion, with high intertemporal substitution, and low
interest-rate elasticity of domestic investment. Tax evasion is of course
still inferior to the regime where both domestic investment income and
savings are taxed at differential rates. See footnote 10 above.

20

perspective:16 this general criterion should not be overturned in more
complicated models that account for uncertainty, many assets, a much richer menu
of taxes, including taxes on labor income, and differential tax schedules on the
various capital assets.

The analysis of this paper has implications for the desirability of

"capital controls." Capital controls decrease welfare in economies free of
distortions,17 but can be welfare-improving when some distortions are

unavoidable. Empirically, taxes are one of the most important distortions that

cannot be eliminated.

18

This paper suggests that the application of the

"public finance" approach to normative questions like the optimal design of
"controls" or taxation of international capital flows might prove fruitful.

16
17

18

Taking the rest of the world as exogenously given.
The effects of capital controls on equilibrium prices and quantities in an
open economy are studied by Greenwood and Kimbrough [1984, 19851, Adams and
Greenwood [1985], and van Wijnbergen [1985].
See Atkinson and Stiglitz [1980] for a review of the arguments demonstrating
the impossibility of achieving lump-sum taxation.

21

Atpendix:

Quantitative Capital Controls Can Achieve the Uniform Taxation Solution

A regime of uniform taxation like the one described in section 2 might be
difficult to achieve, since, for many governments, monitoring international
trade in assets and evaluating foreign assets holdings of domestic residents is

too costly. Traditionally, outright prohibitions of purchases of foreign assets
are a frequently-used form of capital controls. Below I show that
appropriately-set quantitative controls achieve the same allocation of resources

as a regime of uniform taxation. Consider the following problem:

v(C)

(al)

s.t. K2+C1+A=K

(a2)

MAX

U(C1,C2) +

C2 =

A(1+r*)

+

f(K2)(1-r)

AA

(a3)
(a4)

Equation (a4) represents the quantitative controls on purchases of foreign

assets. The first-order conditions for the problem (al)-(a3) plus (a4) are:

U1(C1,C2) =

U2(C1,C2)f'(K2)(l-r)

U1(C1,C2) =

U2(C1,C2)(l+r

)

-p

and the intertemporal budget constraint (2)-(3), together with the
"complementary slackness" condition:

(a5)
(a6)

22

p(A-A)

0

(a7)

In this problem, A can in fact be set at a level such that distortions on the

production side of the economy are avoided. Let rf'(K2)U2(C1,C2) = p:

l+r*,

equations (a5) and (a6), it follows that f'(K2) —
section 2, and p =

r(l+r*)1J2(C1,C2).

from

as in equation (4') in

Substituting into equation (a6) yields

equation (5') of section 2, the other first-order condition from the uniform

taxation problem. Solution of (4')-(5') and the two budget constraints (a2)(a3) produces the values for consumption, savings, and foreign asset

accumulation that are obtained in the uniform-taxation problem. Furthermore,
given the value of p, auctioning the rights to purchase foreign assets generates
the same revenue as in the case where foreign assets' income is taxed.

Therefore, even when foreign assets' income cannot be taxed, appropriately-set
quantitative restrictions can achieve an allocation of resources identical to
that obtainable with a system of uniform taxation.

23

References

Adams, C., and J. Greenwood, "Dual Exchange Rate Systems and Capital Controls:
An Investigation," Journal of International Economics, 1985.
Aizenman, J., "On the Complementarity of Commercial Policy, Capital Controls
and Inflation Tax," NBER Working Paper n. 1583, March 1985.
Atkinson, A.B., and J.E. Stiglitz, Lectures on Public Economics, New York:
McGraw Hill, 1980.
Bhagwati, J.N., Anatomy and Consequences of Exchange Control Regimes, NBER
Conference Series on Foreign Trade Regimes and Economic Development,
New York: Ballinger, 1978.
Diamond, P.A., "National Debt in a Neoclassical Growth Model," American
Economic Review, 55, 1965, pp. 1126-1150
Diamond, P.A., "Incidence of an Interest Income Tax," Journal of Economic
Theory, 2, 1970, pp. 211-224.
Dornbusch, R., "Impacts on Debtor Countries of World Economic Conditions,"
Forthcoming in External Debt. Investment and Growth in Latin America
Washington, D.C.: IMF, 1987.
Findlay, C.C., "Optimal Taxation of International Income Flows," The Economic
Record, vol. 62, June 1986, pp. 208-214.
Fischer, S., "Dynamic Inconsistency, Cooperation, and the Benevolent
Dissembling Government," Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 2,
1980, pp. 93-107.

Fischer, S., tTime Consistent Monetary and Fiscal Policies: A Survey,"
mimeo, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, January 1986.
Frenkel, J.A., and A. Razin, "International Effects of Tax Reforms," mimeo,
International Monetary Fund, August 1987.
Giovannini, A., "Capital Controls and Public Finance: The Italian Experience,"
manuscript, August 1987, forthcoming in High Public Debt: The Experience
in Italy, ed. by L. Spaventa, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Gordon, R.H., and H.R. Varian, "Taxation of Asset Income in the Presence of a
World Securities Market," NBER Working Paper n. 1994, August 1986.

24

Greenwood, J., and K.P. Kimbrough, "An Investigation in the Theory of
Foreign Exchange Controls," mimeo, University of Western Ontario,
August 1984.
Greenwood, J. and K.P. Kimbrough, "Capital Controls and Fiscal Policy in the
World Economy," Canadian Journal of Economics, 1985, pp. 743-765.
Horst, T., "A Note on the Optimal Taxation of International Investment Income,"
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 44, 1980, pp. 793-8.
Jones, R.W., "International Capital Movements and the Theory of Tariffs and
Trade," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 81, February 1967, pp. 1-38.
Kemp, M.C., "The Gain from International Trade and Investment: A Neo-HeckscherOhlin Approach," American Economic Review, 56, September 1966,
pp. 788-809.

Krugman, P., "Rationales for Capital Controls," paper presented at the
Seminar on Exchange Controls, Bogota', June 1987.
Kydland, F.E. and E.G. Prescott, "Dynamic Optimal Taxation, Rational
Expectations, and Control Theory," Journal of Economic Dynamics and
Control, 2, 1980, pp.

Obstfeld, M., "Capital Mobility in the World Economy: Theory and
Measurement," Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy,
Volume 24, Spring 1986, pp. 55-104.
Obstfeld, M., "Discussion of 'Capital Controls and Public Finance,' by
Alberto Giovannini," manuscript, August 1987, forthcoming in
High Public Debt: The Experience in Italy, ed. by L. Spaventa,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Poterba, J.M., "Tax Evasion and Capital Gains Taxation," American Economic
Review Papers and Proceedings, May 1987, pp. 234-239.
Sandmo, A., "Optimal Taxation," Journal of Public Economics 6, 1976, pp. 37-54.

Stockman, A.G., and A.D. Hernandez, "Exchange Controls, Capital Controls, and
International Financial Markets," mimeo, University of Rochester,
September 1985.
Tanzi, V., "Quantitative Characteristics of the Tax Systems of Developing
Countries," mimeo, International Monetary Fund, November 1983.
Tornell, A., "Capital Controls, Welfare and Reputation," mimeo, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, November 1986.
van Wijnbergen, S., "Capital Controls and the Real Exchange Rate," mimeo,

25

The World Bank, October 1985.

Velasco, A., "Time Inconsistency in an Open Economy: Lack of Credibility and
the Usefulness of Capital Controls," mimeo, Columbia University,
March 1987.
Walter, I., "The Mechanism of Capital Flight," manuscript , NYU October 1986.

26

Table 1:

Assessing the Welfare Cost of Tax Evasion through International Investment

C
(1)

A

f(K2)

r
(2)

(1)

(2)

(1)

U(2)-U(l)
(2)

0=4
10
20
30

.049
.102
.160

.086
.165
.240

203
195
187

.049
.102
.160

203
195
187

.086
.168
.246

10

.021
.043
.065

.044
.087
.128

466
463
460

a=0.2
10
20
30

.021
.043
.065

.044
.092
.142

-72
-68
-65

0.0885
0.4293
1.1935

210
210

-65
-55
-44

-72
-70
-67

0.0379
0.2129
0.6681

210

-184

-187
-183

-0.0033
-0.0104
-0.0162

0=4

a=0.2
20
30

-65
-55
-45

0=2

a=0.4
10
20
30

210
210
210

468
468
468

-177
-171

-180

0=0.5
466
463
460

468

468
468

-177
-171

-165

-188
-193
-198

-0.1794
-0.7991
-2.0303

Notes: All variables, except tax rates, are expressed as percent of first-period
GNP (=K). Columns (1) denote the regime where foreign assets' income is not
taxed, columns (2) denote the regime of uniform taxation. U(2)-U(1) is the
difference between U(c1,c2) in the regime of uniform taxation and U(c1,c2) in
the tax-evasion regime. This difference is also expressed as percent of firstperiod GNP.

27

Table 2:

Assessing the Welfare Cost of Tax Evasion through International Investment
The Case of Endogenous Taxes and Government Spending

a

A

f(K2)

r

9

U(2)-U(l)

(1)

(2)

(1)

(2)

(1)

(2)

0.4

4.0

.381

.411

152

210

-9

-55

0.2

0.5

.277

.644

432

468

-107

-271

10
-80.

Notes: All variables, except tax rates and taste and technology parameters, are
expressed as percent of first-period GNP (=K). Columns (1) denote the regime
where foreign assets' income is not taxed, columns (2) denote the regime of
uniform taxation. U(2)-U(1) is the difference between U(c1,c2) in the regime of
uniform taxation and U(c1,c2) in the tax-evasion regime. This difference is
also expressed as percent of first-period GNP.

0

Y

+

(N
a)

L

:3

Li-

0

0

0

0
oJ
ED

(N

*

+

0

+

Li

0

0 CNEDD

*

I

I A(1 +r*)I

Tf(K2)
2

C

B"

B'

2

C

C

C

Figure 3

KB'

C
1

-(i+)(i-r)

