NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

JUDICIAL POLITICS AND SENTENCING DECISIONS
Alma Cohen
Crystal Yang
Working Paper 24615
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24615

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2018

We thank Sue Long and the Transactional Records Access Clearinghouse (TRAC) for their
assistance in compiling and accessing data under our appointments as TRAC Fellows. We also
wish to thank John Friedman, three anonymous referees, and numerous seminar participants for
helpful comments and suggestions. Molly Bunke and Michael Zhang provided excellent research
assistance. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Alma Cohen and Crystal Yang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Judicial Politics and Sentencing Decisions
Alma Cohen and Crystal Yang
NBER Working Paper No. 24615
May 2018
JEL No. H1,J15,J71,K0,K14
ABSTRACT
This paper investigates whether judge political affiliation contributes to racial and gender
disparities in sentencing using data on over 500,000 federal defendants linked to sentencing
judge. Exploiting random case assignment, we find that Republican-appointed judges sentence
black defendants to 3.0 more months than similar non-blacks and female defendants to 2.0 fewer
months than similar males compared to Democratic-appointed judges, 65 percent of the baseline
racial sentence gap and 17 percent of the baseline gender sentence gap, respectively. These
differences cannot be explained by other judge characteristics and grow substantially larger when
judges are granted more discretion.

Alma Cohen
Harvard Law School
1525 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
alcohen@law.harvard.edu
Crystal Yang
Harvard Law School
Griswold 301
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
cyang@law.harvard.edu

Introduction
In the United States, racial and gender disparities are prevalent in the criminal justice system.
Black defendants receive significantly longer prison sentences than otherwise similar white offenders
(United States Sentencing Commission 2012, Fischman and Schanzenbach 2012), with substantial
across-judge variation in the racial sentencing gap (Abrams et al. 2012). This racial disparity
in sentencing decisions contributes to the fact that black defendants comprise a disproportionate
fraction of the prison population relative to their proportion in the overall population (Carson and
Sabol 2012). Similarly, male defendants are sentenced to substantially longer time in prison than
female defendants even after accounting for arrest offense and criminal history (Mustard 2001, Starr
2015). These large racial and gender disparities have long been the subject of heated debate and
thus, understanding the sources of these disparities is an important policy question.
Prior research has shown that Republican-appointed judges reach different outcomes compared
to Democratic-appointed judges in a variety of settings (see Sunstein et al. 2006). In the context of
criminal sentencing, Republican-appointed judges give longer sentences for the same crime compared
to their Democratic-appointed counterparts (see Schanzenbach and Tiller 2007, 2008). However,
virtually unexplored is the question of whether judges’ political preferences are a source of the
persistent and large disparities in federal criminal sentencing. In this study, we investigate whether
the political affiliation of the appointing president (henceforth “judge political affiliation”) influences
racial and gender gaps in sentencing decisions.
This question is of growing importance because of the increasing politicization of the federal
judiciary where judges are appointed for lifetime terms, particularly among federal district court
judges who “serve as the final arbiter of more than 99 percent of all federal court litigation” (Scherer
2005, Binder and Waltzman 2009, Wittes 2009). Today, the appointments process for lower court
judges garners heightened interest, with senators regularly debating the qualification of nominees,
such as whether nominees would bring with them ideological agendas or other disqualifying biases.
Given the increasing politicization of the appointments process, the senate has confirmed fewer
lower court judges by unanimous consent in recent years than it has historically. In addition,
the average time from nomination to confirmation now exceeds several months (see Rutkus 2016),
leading some to claim that “[j]udicial selection has been contentious at numerous junctures in U.S.
history, but seldom has it seemed more acrimonious and dysfunctional than in recent years” (Binder
and Maltzman 2009).
Estimating the impact of judge political affiliation on sentencing decisions has been complicated
by the lack of data linking judge identifiers to defendant characteristics and case outcomes. Prior
research on the subject has almost exclusively relied on court-level variation in the percent of
Democratic or Republican-appointed judges within a district court to study the impact of political
affiliation on sentencing (see e.g. Schanzenbach and Tiller 2007). However, relying on aggregate
court-level variation can lead to biased estimates if courts with different compositions differ in ways
that affect all judges in the district court, or if the partisan composition of a court is correlated
with unobservables that affect sentencing. Using only court-level variation, one prior paper finds
1

that racial disparities do not vary when a court is comprised of more Democratic-appointed judges
(Schanzenbach 2015). A few papers employ small samples of defendants linked to sentencing judge
to explore the impact of political affiliation on sentencing in the aggregate in the federal system.
For example, Schanzenbach and Tiller (2008) link approximately 2,200 sentencing decisions to the
assigned judge, finding that Republican-appointed judges giving longer sentences for the same crime
compared to their Democratic-appointed counterparts.
In this paper, we improve upon the prior literature by relying on individual judge-level variation
in over half a million cases and controlling extensively for a full set of judge fixed effects to account
for unobserved differences in sentencing across judges and prosecutors. Specifically, to investigate
whether judge political affiliation affects disparities in sentencing, we build a new dataset linking
federal sentencing data with judge information for defendants sentenced between 1999 and 2015.
In our sample, we observe the sentencing practices of approximately 1,400 unique judges. Using
this data, we analyze whether judge political affiliation can explain the large racial and gender
disparities in sentencing. Intuitively, we compare how judges appointed by a Republican president
(“Republican-appointed judges”) sentence black versus non-black offenders, or female versus male
offenders, relative to judges appointed by a Democratic president (“Democratic-appointed judges”).
The key assumption of our empirical design is that cases are randomly assigned to judges within
the same district court, in particular to Republican-appointed versus Democratic-appointed judges.
This assumption allows us to infer that any differences in disparities by political affiliation are
not the product of differences in observed and unobserved case characteristics across judges. We
document evidence consistent with random case assignment, finding that there is balance on a full
set of observable case and defendant characteristics by judge characteristics such as race, gender,
and political affiliation of the appointing president. As a result, any systematic differences in the
sentencing outcomes of black versus non-black offenders, or female versus male offenders, can be
attributed to judge political affiliation rather than case selection.
In sharp contrast to the prior literature relying on court-level variation, we find economically meaningful and statistically significant evidence that judge political affiliation is a source
of disparities in federal sentencing. We find that Republican-appointed judges give substantially
longer prison sentences to black offenders versus observably similar non-black offenders compared to
Democratic-appointed judges within the same district court. The racial gap by political affiliation
is 3.0 months, approximately 65 percent of the baseline racial sentence gap. We also find that
Republican-appointed judges give female defendants 2.0 months less in prison than similar male
defendants compared to Democratic-appointed judges, 17 percent of the baseline gender sentence
gap.
These racial and gender gaps by judge political affiliation are largely driven by serious drug
and violent offenses, and cannot be fully explained by other observable judge characteristics such
as judge race, gender, former prosecutorial experience, or proxies for racial bias. However, we also
find significant relationships between racial and gender gaps in sentencing and other judge traits.
For example, we find that racial and gender gaps in sentencing are larger among less experienced

2

judges, diminishing with more experience on the bench. We also find larger racial and gender gaps
among judges who serve in courts from states with higher racial bias, which are disproportionately
located in the South.
We next analyze whether differences in disparities by political affiliation are driven by individual
judge preferences. Specifically, we test whether sentencing differences by political affiliation expand
when judges are granted more discretion, and thus when they are freer to exhibit their preferences.
We exploit plausibly exogenous variation in the timing of the Supreme Court’s decision in United
States v. Booker, which greatly increased judicial discretion by making the prior mandatory Federal
Sentencing Guidelines advisory. We find that in the first few years after Booker, racial and gender
disparities by judge political affiliation expand. Specifically, we find that the racial gap in sentence
length by judge political affiliation doubles in magnitude post-Booker, with Republican-appointed
judges sentencing blacks to 4.7 months longer in prison compared to similar non-black defendants,
relative to their Democratic-appointed colleagues, a statistically significant increase from the preBooker period. Importantly, however, the increase in the racial gap by political affiliation is due
to Democratic-appointed judges reducing their sentencing of black versus non-black offenders in
the immediate aftermath of Booker, rather than Republican-appointed judges increasing their sentencing of black versus non-black offenders post-Booker. While less statistically significant, we
also find suggestive evidence that gender disparities by political affiliation are larger after Booker,
with Republican-appointed judges sentencing females to 1.8 fewer months than males compared to
Democratic-appointed judges, a more than doubling of the gender gap prior to Booker. Yet, we also
find that sentence gaps by political affiliation, in particular increases in gaps post-Booker, cannot be
solely explained by differences in the willingness of Republican-appointed and Democratic-appointed
judges to adhere to the Guidelines, suggesting that gaps by political affiliation exist for reasons other
than simply compliance with the Guidelines.
Finally, we consider the possibility that decisions made largely by federal prosecutors may explain
our results. Because prosecutorial discretion can lead to differential treatment of defendants prior to
sentencing (Rehavi and Starr 2014), we consider whether our main findings can be accounted for by
differential decisions made by prosecutors that affect sentence length. Accounting for the charging
and application of mandatory minimums and the application of government-sponsored substantial
assistance motions, we find that our main findings are not solely driven by prosecutorial discretion,
but rather judge-driven differences in sentencing that are associated with political ideology.
Overall, our findings suggest that judicial politics may be a source of the persistent racial
and gender disparities in the federal criminal justice system, and that politics may play an even
larger role today under the current state of increased sentencing discretion. These results indicate
that the appointment of federal judges can have profound distributional effects on the criminal
justice system, in particular because the federal criminal justice system is the source of the largest
and fastest growing prison population (Congressional Research Service 2013), with federal judges
making tens of thousands of sentencing decisions a year. Our estimates suggest that a ten percentage
point increase in the share of Republican-appointed judges in each court would increase the racial

3

sentencing gap by approximately five percent and the gender sentencing gap by roughly two percent.
During an average four-year term, a Republican president has the potential to alter the partisan
composition of the district courts by over 15 percentage points, potentially increasing the racial and
gender sentencing gap by 7.5 and 3 percent, respectively.1
Our paper contributes to a broad literature documenting the effects of judges’ characteristics,
including their political preferences, on their decisions.2 Our paper is also related to a large literature
on the presence of racial and gender disparities at various stages of the criminal justice process.3 Like
prior work, we document the presence of both racial and gender disparities in federal sentencing,
highlighting that these disparities emerge at both the fact-finding and sentencing stages of the
criminal justice process. However, we build on this prior work by showing that judge political
affiliation is a large source of these disparities, with implications for federal sentencing and the
judicial appointments process.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section I provides a brief overview of the
federal sentencing system. Section II describes our data and provides summary statistics. Section
III describes our empirical strategy. Section IV presents our results and Section V concludes.

I. Brief Background
A. Federal Judges
In the federal system, the judges that sentence criminal defendants are district court judges that
are appointed by the president and confirmed by the senate. As of 2017, there are a total of
677 authorized federal district court judgeships among the 94 district courts, with the majority of
district courts having between two and seven authorized judgeships.
New appointments are generally made when a judge retires, takes senior status, or dies, leaving
a vacancy in a district court. Historically, district court appointments occurred quickly and without
much controversy. However, in recent decades, these lower court judgeships have created substantial
interest and concern given that these judges decide a wide range of issues and are appointed for
lifetime terms (Rutkus 2016). Indeed, the nomination process for lower court judges has involved
substantially more senate debate in recent years, in particular on whether nominees would be able
1

According to the Brookings Institution, under reasonable assumptions about retirements and vacancies, the
share of district court Republican appointees could increase from 34 percent of the judiciary in early 2017 to 50
percent by 2020. See https://www.brookings.edu/blog/fixgov/2016/11/17/trump-lower-courts/.
2
See, e.g., Sunstein et al. (2006) and Epstein et al. (2013) for overviews of the literature, and a literature
examining judge characteristics at the appellate level (e.g., Cox and Miles 2008, Chew and Kelley 2008) and trial
court level (e.g., Schanzenbach and Tiller 2007, Tiede et al. 2010, Fischman and Schanzenbach 2012, Yang 2014,
Kastellec 2016, Lim et al. 2016). In particular, scholars have focused on the political affiliation of the appointing
president, which reflects the policy preferences of judges (Cross and Tiller 1998, George 2001), with judges appointed
by Republican presidents tending to be more conservative than judges appointed by Democratic presidents (Brudney,
Schiavoni, and Merritt 1999, Gottschall 1986). In a related literature, scholars have studied the impact of judge race,
gender, tenure, and family background on case outcomes (see, e.g. Gruhl, Spohn, and Welch 1981, Eisenberg and
Johnson 1991, Ashenfelter, Eisenberg, and Schwab 1995, Glynn and Sen 2015).
3
See, e.g., Antonovics and Knight (2009), Ayres and Waldfogel (1994), Rehavi and Starr (2014), Anwar et al.
(2012), Abrams et al. (2012), Alesina and La Ferrara (2014), Starr (2015), Arnold et al. (2017).

4

to set aside any ideological biases, leading to a dramatic increase in the time from appointment to
confirmation.
We follow the prior literature in using the most common measure of judge ideology in our
preferred specifications: the political affiliation of the appointing president. A natural question
may be whether the party of the appointing president is a good proxy for the political affiliation or
ideology of the sentencing judge. Indeed, judicial appointments may be influenced not only by the
president but also the senate. In the United States, under the norm of senatorial courtesy, a senator
of the same party as the president can exercise considerable influence on who is appointed to a
judgeship. Nevertheless, prior researchers have found that in the context of federal district courts,
the party of the appointing president is substantially correlated with other ideological proxies,
such as the judge’s own political affiliation or the political affiliation of same-party senators (see
Epstein, Landes, and Posner 2013). In robustness checks, we explore the sensitivity of our results
to alternative measures of judge ideology.
B. Federal Sentencing Guidelines
Prior to the enactment of the Federal Sentencing Guidelines, federal judges had virtually unlimited
discretion to sentence within broad statutory ranges of punishment. This large degree of discretion
led to concerns about sentencing disparities (e.g. inter-judge, socioeconomic, and racial) and a lack
of transparency in sentencing decisions (Frankel 1973). Some members of the public also argued that
during this era of indeterminate sentencing, judges endangered public safety with lenient sentencing
of offenders (Tonry 2005).
In order to reduce unwarranted sentencing disparities “among defendants with similar records
who have been found guilty of similar criminal conduct” and to promote transparency and proportionality in sentencing, Congress created the United States Sentencing Commission (USSC) under
the Sentencing Reform Act of 1984. The USSC, an independent agency located in the judicial branch
of government, was charged with adopting and administering the Federal Sentencing Guidelines,
which applied to all federal offenses committed after November 1, 1987.
Under the Guidelines, each defendant is assigned to one of 43 offense levels and to one of six
criminal history categories. The base offense level reflects the underlying severity of the crime. For
instance, trespass offenses are assigned a base offense level of four, while kidnapping is assigned
a base offense level of 32. Adjustments are made to the base offense level for certain offense and
defendant characteristics in order to obtain the final offense level. For example, adjustments are
made based on characteristics such as the amount of loss involved in the offense, use of a firearm, and
the age or condition of the victim. Further adjustments are made based on aggravating or mitigating
factors, such as obstruction of justice or a defendant’s acceptance of responsibility. The criminal
history category reflects the frequency and severity of a defendant’s prior criminal convictions, with
points added for each prior offense. These points are then converted into a criminal history category
that ranges from one to six. The combination of the final offense level and criminal history category
yields a narrow Guidelines recommended sentencing range.
5

Exploiting the random assignment of cases to judges, early work documented that the adoption
of the Guidelines reduced inter-judge sentencing disparities. Anderson, Kling, and Stith (1999)
found that the difference in sentence length between two typical judges fell from 17 percent of
the average sentence before the Guidelines to 11 percent in the several years after the Guidelines
were implemented. However, many scholars criticized the adoption of the mandatory Guidelines for
shifting power to prosecutors in their charging and plea-bargaining decisions (see Stith and Cabranes
1998, Alschuler 1978, Nagel and Schulhofer 1992).
For almost two decades, the Guidelines were mandatory and a judge was only permitted to
depart from the Guidelines if there were recognized aggravating or mitigating circumstances. A
judge departing from the Guidelines sentencing range would also have to justify her reasons for
departure to the appellate court. In United States v. Booker, decided in January of 2005, the
Supreme Court held that the long-standing mandatory Guidelines were unconstitutional under the
Sixth Amendment. The Court ruled that the Sixth Amendment right to a jury trial requires that,
other than a prior conviction, only facts admitted by a defendant or proved beyond a reasonable
doubt to a jury may be used to impose a sentence higher than the statutory maximum sentence.
However, rather than invalidating the Guidelines altogether, the Supreme Court held that the
Guidelines would be “effectively advisory,” as opposed to mandatory. The Court explained that
“district courts, while not bound to apply the Guidelines, must consult those Guidelines and take
them into account when sentencing.” Today, sentencing judges first calculate the recommended
Guidelines range but are free to vary or depart from the range. As a result, Booker greatly increased
the degree of judicial discretion afforded to judges.
Subsequent Supreme Court cases further increased judicial discretion by reducing the degree
of appellate review for sentencing decisions (Rita v. United States, Gall v. United States), and by
explicitly allowing sentencing judges to impose sentences outside the recommended Guidelines range
because of policy disagreements with the USSC (Kimbrough v. United States). Since Booker and
these subsequent cases were decided, researchers have found increases in both inter-judge sentencing
disparities (Scott 2010, Yang 2014), as well as increases in racial disparities (USSC 2012, Fischman
and Schanzenbach 2012, Yang 2015).
C. Federal Criminal Justice Process
Following arrest and the filing of initial charges, each defendant’s case is assigned to a district court
judge who presides over the trial, plea bargaining, and sentencing processes. In many courts, cases
are randomly assigned to federal district court judges after charges are filed in order to “assure
equitable distribution of caseloads and avoid judge shopping.” 4 According to the Administrative
Office of the US Courts, “[t]he majority of courts use some variation of a random drawing” as
prescribed by local court orders.5
4

Administrative Office of the US Courts, Frequently Asked Questions: Federal Judges, available at http://www.
uscourts.gov/faqs-filing-case.
5
See http://www.uscourts.gov/faqs-filing-case.

6

In the federal criminal justice system, prosecutors have enormous discretion in charging and plea
bargaining. Because the identity of the judge is known to prosecutors during the plea bargaining
process, prosecutors can endogenously adapt their initial charges and/or plea offers to dictate the
sentencing range by bargaining in the “shadow of the judge” (see, e.g. Lacasse and Payne 1999).
We assess the potential contribution of prosecutors, rather than judges, to sentencing disparities in
Section IV.E.
Today, over 95 percent of criminal convictions are the result of guilty pleas. Once a plea deal
is reached and accepted by a judge, the case is scheduled for sentencing. To assist the judge in
sentencing, a probation officer prepares a document known as the pre-sentence report (PSR) which
contains detailed information on the offender’s background and history, as well as facts about the
crime that are either stipulated to as part of the plea agreement or relevant to sentencing. The
probation officer often conducts an interview with the defendant in order to collect information
on the offense, related but uncharged criminal conduct, criminal history, personal history such as
family and employment, and other issues that might be relevant to sentencing.
From this information, the probation officer also calculates the base and final offense levels,
the defendant’s criminal history category, and the applicable Guidelines sentencing range. The
prosecution and defense are both presented with a copy of this PSR prior to the sentencing hearing
and permitted an opportunity to submit objections. Absent any objection, judges often directly
follow the calculation of the criminal history category and final offense level prepared in the PSR and
sentence the defendant accordingly. As documented by other scholars, however, the base and final
offense levels may be endogenous if judges independently make findings of fact, such as drug weight
or the use of a firearm, a phenomenon broadly known as “offense level manipulation” (Schanzenbach
and Tiller 2008). In addition, other actors may engage in differential fact-finding depending on
which judge is assigned to the case. For example, prosecutors may bargain with defense counsel
over the facts of case in order to apply an offense level adjustment under the Guidelines, such as a
mitigating role reduction in order to lower the recommended Guidelines sentence (Schulhofer and
Nagel 1997).

II. Data
A. Data Sources
This paper utilizes data from three sources: (1) the United States Sentencing Commission, (2) the
Transactional Records Access Clearinghouse, and (3) the Federal Judicial Center.
United States Sentencing Commission - We use publicly available data from the USSC on records
of all federal offenders sentenced in fiscal years 1999-2015 (October 1, 1998 - September 30, 2015).
These data include demographic, Guidelines application, and sentencing information on federal
defendants. This information is obtained from numerous documents on every offender such as
the indictment, pre-sentence report, plea agreement (if applicable), and judgment of conviction.
However, judge identifiers are redacted in the USSC data.
7

Demographic variables include each defendant’s race, gender, age, number of dependents, citizenship status, and educational attainment. Data is also provided on the primary offense type.
Offense level variables include the base offense level and the final offense level after all adjustments.
Criminal history variables include whether the defendant has a prior criminal record and the criminal
history category.
Sentencing characteristics include the district court in which sentencing occurred (94 total)
and the sentencing month and year.6 Data is also available on whether a case is settled by plea
agreement or trial, probation length, and the amount of any fines imposed. In this paper, we rely
on sentence length in months, including zeros, as our primary sentencing outcome. For sentence
length, we top-code at the first and 99th percentiles to remove the influence of outliers. Additional outcomes of interest include non-government sponsored departures from the Guidelines, the
application of mandatory minimums at sentencing, and the application of government-sponsored
substantial assistance motions.
Transactional Records Access Clearinghouse - We also use proprietary data from the Transactional Records Access Clearinghouse (TRAC), which provides sentencing data obtained through
Freedom of Information Act requests. The data do not contain defendant demographics or Guidelines application information, but defendants are linked to the sentencing judge. The TRAC data
also provide basic information on the sentencing district, sentencing month and year, as well as the
length of any probation and sentence imposed, and the amount of any fines imposed.
To link detailed defendant and crime characteristics to sentencing judge identifiers, we match
sentencing records from the USSC to records provided by TRAC. Specifically, we match on district
court, sentencing year, sentencing month, sentence length in months, probation length in months,
amount of total monetary fines, whether the case ended by trial or plea agreement, and whether
the case resulted in a life sentence. On the basis of these characteristics, we successfully match
approximately 50 percent of all USSC cases from fiscal years 1999-2015.7 The final matched dataset
consists of 546,916 cases during the sample period.
Because our matching variables are not always unique, particularly for cases that result in no
term of imprisonment (sentences of zero), our matched sample is different in some dimensions from
the full sample of USSC cases. Compared to unmatched cases, matched cases are more likely to be
of defendants who received a longer prison sentence and those who received mandatory minimums.
For example, in the full USSC data from 1999-2015, the average sentence length is 46.8 months,
the average final offense level is 18.2, the average final criminal history is 2.4, and 26.8 percent of
defendants have a mandatory minimum that applied at sentencing. In our matched dataset, the
average sentence length is 59.0 months, the average final offense is 20.3, the average final criminal
history is 2.5, and 31.4 percent of defendants have a mandatory minimum that applied at sentencing.
In the full USSC data, 26.5 percent of cases are sentenced at the Guidelines recommended minimum
6

USSC data prior to 2004 includes information on the exact sentencing day, but this variable is not available in
later years.
7
We drop a small handful of cases heard by “visiting” judges, less than 0.5% of the sample.

8

and 4.7 percent of cases are sentenced at the mandatory minimum, compared to 26.7 percent and
4.0 percent in the matched dataset, respectively. In terms of offense type, our matched dataset is
also less likely to contain immigration offenses which often carry no prison sentence (12.3 percent)
compared to the full USSC data (26.5 percent). All our results are estimated on this matched
sample and thus our results should be interpreted with this sample in mind.
While the sample of cases in our matched dataset is skewed towards more serious cases, we also
explicitly test for the underlying assumption in our empirical design: that there are no statistically
significant differences in case and defendant characteristics across judges, in particular by judge
political affiliation. We empirically explore this assumption in Section II.B.
Federal Judicial Center - To obtain information on characteristics of each sentencing judge, we
further match the USSC and TRAC linked data to judge biographical data from the Federal Judicial
Center.8 From the Federal Judicial Center, we obtain information on judge race, gender, political
affiliation of appointing president, commission year, birth year and region, and prior experience as
a prosecutor. In our sample from 1999-2015, there are a total of 1,398 unique active judges. Among
these judges, 43.8 percent were appointed by Democratic presidents, 82.2 percent are white, and
79.6 percent are male.
Table 1 presents summary statistics of the cases in our matched estimation sample. Column 1
presents summary statistics for cases assigned to Republican-appointed judges, column 2 presents
summary statistics for cases assigned to Democratic-appointed judges, and column 3 presents summary statistics for the full estimation sample.
Panel A of Table 1 shows that in terms of offender characteristics, Republican-appointed judges
are assigned very similar cases to Democratic-appointed judges. For example, 29.8 percent of
defendants assigned to Republican-appointed judges are black and 28.7 percent of defendants assigned to Democratic-appointed judges are black. Similarly, 13.6 percent of defendants assigned
to Republican-appointed judges are female and 13.5 percent of defendants assigned to Democraticappointed judges are female. Republican and Democratic judges are also assigned defendants similar
in age, rate of pleading guilty, number of dependents, U.S. citizenship status, and educational attainment.
Panel B of Table 1 reveals a similar balance in terms of criminal history category, base offense level, and final offense level. Defendants assigned to Republican-appointed and Democraticappointed judges have, on average, similar base offense levels, final offense levels, and criminal
history category. Cases assigned to Republican-appointed judges have an average criminal history
category of 2.6, base offense level of 18.8, and final offense level of 20.5, compared to 2.5, 18.3, and
20.0 for cases assigned to Democratic-appointed judges, respectively. In terms of our main outcome variable, sentence length, Republican-appointed judges give average sentences of 61.8 months
compared to average sentences of 55.5 months given by Democratic-appointed judges.
8

The Federal Judicial Center does not collect demographic information on judges in three districts: Guam, Virgin
Islands, and Northern Mariana Islands.

9

Panel C of Table 1 presents summary statistics on other judge characteristics by judge political
affiliation. In our sample, there are a total of 710 Republican-appointed judges and 688 Democraticappointed judges. Panel C reveals that black judges are disproportionately appointed by Democratic
presidents, with 14.5 percent of Democratic-appointed judges being black compared to 4.8 percent
among Republican-appointed judges. Similarly, Democratic-appointed judges are more likely to
be female, with 26.5 percent being female compared to 15.7 percent among Republican-appointed
judges. However, Democratic and Republican-appointed judges are qualitatively similar in terms
of age at appointment, judge tenure, background experience as a former prosecutor, and region of
birth.
B. Testing for Case Selection by Political Affiliation
In this section, we empirically test for whether there is random case assignment to Democratic
versus Republican-appointed judges within each district court. As described previously in Section
I.C, cases are randomly assigned to federal district court judges after charges are filed in order to
“assure equitable distribution of caseloads and avoid judge shopping.”
Because our paper tests whether judge political affiliation is a source of disparities in sentencing,
we rely on the assumption that there are no significant differences in offender characteristics by
judge political affiliation. If this assumption holds, we can attribute differences in sentence length
disparities to political affiliation itself, rather than observable and unobservable characteristics that
affect sentencing outcomes. In order to formally test this assumption, we regress individual judge
characteristics on a full set of exogenous case characteristics.
Table 2 verifies that assignment of cases to sentencing judges is random after we condition on
sentencing year and district court fixed effects. In columns 1 and 2, the dependent variable is
an indicator for being assigned to a Republican-appointed versus Democratic-appointed judge. In
columns 3 and 4, the dependent variable is judge tenure (number of years the judge has served
on the bench). In columns 5 and 6, the dependent variable is an indicator for being assigned to
a judge who was a former prosecutor. In columns 7 and 8, the dependent variable is an indicator
for being assigned to a judge who is female. Each row in Columns 1, 3, 5, and 7 displays the
coefficient from running an ordinary least squares regression of each dependent variable on the
defendant characteristic in that row. Columns 2, 4, 6, and 8 display the coefficients obtained from
running the same specification controlling jointly for all defendant characteristics. Across each judge
characteristic, we find that there is evidence consistent with random case assignment, with p-values
of the joint F-test for each judge characteristic ranging from 0.26 to 0.68. These results indicate
that any differences in racial or gender gaps in sentencing by political affiliation are unlikely to be
due to differential case selection, but rather judge political affiliation.

10

III. Empirical Methodology
A. Estimation Specification
This paper estimates the impact of judge political affiliation on racial and gender disparities in
sentencing. Intuitively, we compare how similar non-black and black defendants (or female and
male defendants) are sentenced based on whether they are assigned to a Democratic-appointed or
Republican-appointed judge within the same district court.
Our preferred specification is of the form:

Yijtc = β0 + β1 ∗ Republicanj(i) + β2 ∗ Blacki + β3 ∗ F emalei + β4 ∗ Republicanj(i) ∗ Blacki
+ β5 ∗ Republicanj(i) ∗ F emalei + Xi + γt + σj + ijtc

(1)

where Yijtc is the outcome of interest for defendant i sentenced by judge j in year t and district court
c. Republicanj(i) is an indicator variable for whether defendant i was sentenced by a Republicanappointed judge j. Blacki is an indicator for whether the defendant i is black, where the omitted
category is non-black. In robustness checks presented in Section IV.D, we explore comparisons
between blacks, whites, and Hispanics. F emalei is an indicator for whether the defendant i is
female, where the omitted category is male.
Xi comprises a vector of demographic characteristics including gender, age, age squared, whether
the defendant pled guilty, number of dependents, education, and citizenship status. Xi also includes
fixed effects for the most severe primary offense type and fixed effects for each criminal history
category. In our preferred specification, we exclude any controls for base offense level and final
offense level because of the possibility that offense level may be endogenous to the judge, as discussed
previously.
Our preferred specification also includes sentencing year fixed effects (γt ) and a full set of judge
fixed effects (σj ). These judge fixed effects capture time-invariant unobserved differences in sentencing across judges, and also control for differential behavior of prosecutors/defense attorneys in
response to the particular identity of the sentencing judge. Note that with the addition of a full set
of judge fixed effects, Republicanj(i) is unidentified. We also note that these judge fixed effects are
collinear with district court fixed effects. All standard errors are bootstrap-stratified at the district
court level given the case assignment process within courts.9
In this preferred specification, β1 estimates the difference in the average sentences imposed
by Republican-appointed versus Democratic-appointed judges for observably similar offenders. β2
captures the presence of any baseline racial disparities in sentence length and β3 captures the
presence of any baseline gender disparities in sentence length. The main coefficients of interest are
β4 , which estimates whether racial disparities in sentence length are different across Republicanappointed and Democratic-appointed judges, and β5 , which estimates whether gender disparities in
sentence length are different across Republican-appointed and Democratic-appointed judges.
9

Results are robust to clustering standard errors at the district court level.

11

IV. Results
A. Guidelines Fact-Finding
We begin by exploring the impact of judge political affiliation on Guidelines fact-finding to assess
whether there is differential fact-finding depending on the assigned judge. Table 3 presents the
results of our main specification where the dependent variables are criminal history category, base
offense level, and final offense level. Each regression controls for judge fixed effects, sentencing
year fixed effects, and primary offense type fixed effects. Bootstrapped standard errors stratified by
district court are presented in parentheses.
Column 1 of Table 3 reveals that black offenders have higher criminal histories than non-black
offenders, and that female offenders have lower criminal histories than otherwise similar male offenders. Older offenders have more extensive criminal histories than younger offenders. Offenders with
more children, non-citizens, and more educated offenders have lower criminal histories than their
counterparts. However, there is no economically meaningful or statistically significant difference in
racial or gender differences in criminal history by judge political affiliation, consistent with prior
work.
In contrast, we find statistically significant differences in racial gaps in base offense level (column 2) and final offense level (column 3) by judge political affiliation. Black defendants assigned
to Republican-appointed judges have a 0.12 higher base offense level relative to non-black defendants compared to black defendants assigned to Democratic-appointed judges, 0.6 percent of the
mean base offense level of 18.6, suggesting that “offense level manipulation” may be endogenous to
the sentencing judge. Black defendants assigned to Republican-appointed judges also have a 0.18
higher final offense level relative to non-black defendants compared to black defendants assigned
to Democratic-appointed judges, 0.8 percent of the mean final offense level of 20.3. Given these
findings, our preferred specification for sentence length excludes any control for base or final offense
level. We also note that these results suggest that we are likely to underestimate the magnitude of
true racial gaps in sentence length by judge political affiliation if we control for measures of offense
severity.
B. Sentence Length
We now turn to our main results on sentence length in months. Our main outcome variable includes
sentence lengths of zero and is winsorized at the one percent level. Table 4 presents these results.
In columns 1 and 2, we begin by presenting baseline results with district court fixed effects rather
than judge fixed effects. In column 1, when controlling only for district court fixed effects, we
find that on average, black offenders are sentenced to 4.8 months more in prison compared to
similar non-black offenders. Female offenders receive 12.1 fewer months compared to similar male
offenders. Older offenders receive longer sentences than younger offenders and defendants who are
non-U.S. citizens receive longer sentences than U.S. citizens. Defendants with more dependents
receive longer sentences than defendants with fewer dependents. Defendants who plead guilty and
12

defendants with higher education receive lower sentences than their respective counterparts. These
results are largely consistent with the demographic differences reported in prior papers (see, e.g.
Mustard 2001), although we note that our demographic results should be interpreted with caution
as we are not controlling for any measure of offense severity given our findings from Table 3.
Column 1 also indicates that black judges impose lower sentences on average than non-black
judges and that judges with more years of experience on the bench impose slightly longer sentences
relative to their less experienced counterparts. Regarding political affiliation, we find that controlling
for defendant and case characteristics, Republican-appointed judges give defendants an average of
2.4 months longer in prison than Democratic-appointed judges, four percent of the mean sentence
length. We also find that part of the racial and gender gaps in sentencing are driven by judge political
affiliation. Our interaction of Republican judge and defendant race indicates that Republicanappointed judges give black offenders an additional 2.7 months in prison compared to non-black
offenders, relative to Democratic-appointed judges in the same district court, over half of the baseline
racial sentence gap and five percent of the mean sentence length.10 We also find that, relative to
Democratic-appointed judges, Republican-appointed judges give female offenders 1.8 fewer months
in prison compared to males, 15 percent of the baseline gender gap in sentence length and three
percent of the mean sentence length. These results are similar with the addition of final offense
level fixed effects in column 2, although the magnitude of the estimates on the Republican judge
indicator interacted with defendant race/gender is somewhat smaller with this control, likely due
to our findings of “offense level manipulation” in Table 3.
Finally, in columns 3 and 4, we present our preferred specification from Equation 1 where we
control for a full set of judge fixed effects. Similar to our previous results, we find that Republicanappointed judges give black offenders an additional 3.0 months in prison compared to non-black
offenders, relative to Democratic judges in the same district court, 65 percent of the baseline racial
gap. We also find that Republican judges give female offenders 2.0 fewer months in prison compared
to males, relative to Democratic judges, 17 percent of the baseline gender gap. With the addition
of final offense level fixed effects in column 4, we find that Republican-appointed judges give black
offenders an additional 1.6 months in prison compared to non-black offenders, and female offenders
1.7 months less than male offenders, relative to Democratic judges. Overall, these results suggest
that Republican-appointed judges exhibit larger racial and gender disparities in sentencing compared
to Democratic-appointed judges.
Next, we explore the potential for judges to exhibit differential sentencing behavior due to other
judge characteristics, rather than political affiliation per se. For example, Republican-appointed
judges are more likely to be male. If male judges are more likely to give fewer months in prison to female defendants compared to male defendants, this could explain our main finding that Republican10

Republican-appointed judges also sentence black defendants more harshly relative to Democratic-appointed
judges compared to non-black defendants when the coefficients from Table 4 are expressed relative to race-specific
baselines. Relative to the unconditional mean sentence for non-black defendants (52 months), Republican-appointed
judges sentence non-black defendants to 4.6 percent longer sentences compared to Democratic-appointed judges.
Relative to the unconditional mean sentence for black defendants (79 months), Republican-appointed judges sentence
black defendants to 6.6 percent longer sentences compared to Democratic-appointed judges.

13

appointed judges exhibit smaller gender disparities than Democratic-appointed judges. Similarly,
Republican-appointed judges are more likely to be white. If white judges impose higher sentence
lengths for black defendants compared to non-black defendants, judge race may explain our previous
finding that Republican-appointed judges exhibit larger racial disparities than their Democraticappointed counterparts.
In Table 5, we test for the impact of other judge or court characteristics on racial and gender
disparities in sentencing. Specifically, we test for the impact of judge race, judge gender, judge
experience as a prosecutor, judge tenure as measured by years of experience,11 and a measure
of racial bias in the court. In each column of Table 5, we add double interactions between the
additional judge/court characteristic and defendant race and defendant gender, in addition to triple
interactions between the judge/court characteristic, judge political affiliation, and defendant race
and defendant gender.
We continue to find, even after controlling for these judge characteristics, that there is a large
and significant effect of judge political affiliation on racial and gender gaps in sentencing. As before,
Republican-appointed judges exhibit larger racial and gender disparities compared to Democraticappointed judges, and the magnitudes of these effects are almost identical to those in our main
results (Table 4). These results suggest that other judge characteristics correlated with political
affiliation are unlikely to explain our main findings.
However, we also find some evidence that other judge characteristics impact racial and gender
gaps in sentencing. For example, black judges exhibit smaller gender disparities than white judges
(column 1). In addition, black Republican-appointed judges exhibit smaller racial disparities than
other Republican-appointed judges, with the effect largely offsetting the main racial gap by judge
political affiliation. We also find that female judges exhibit smaller racial disparities compared to
male judges, although they do not differ significantly by political affiliation (column 2). Judges with
former experience as a prosecutor show smaller gender disparities, and if Republican-appointed, also
exhibit smaller racial disparities which largely offset the main racial gap by judge political affiliation
(column 3). These results suggest that the appointment of more diverse judicial candidates could
lead to lower disparities in sentencing.
Column 4 shows that judge tenure also has a significant effect on disparities, with more experienced judges exhibiting smaller racial and gender gaps compared to less experienced judges. In
other words, with greater experience on the bench, Republican-appointed and Democratic-appointed
judges become more similar in their sentencing patterns. These results suggest that judges may
learn with experience (see Epstein et al. 1998, Kaheny et al. 2008), potentially from their peers,
and/or that the impact of the political affiliation of the appointing president may dissipate over
time, perhaps because any “loyalty” effect diminishes when the appointing president is no longer in
office (Sharma and Glennon 2013, Epstein and Posner 2016).
11

In these tenure results, we limit cases to a balanced panel of judges with at least ten years of experience who
we can observe in the first five years of experience. Given the time span of our study and the life tenure of district
court judges, the majority of cases in our sample are decided by judges with at least ten years of experience on the
federal bench.

14

In column 5, we control for the degree of racial bias in each district court. We follow Mas and
Moretti (2009) who measure racial bias in a state based on the proportion of white respondents who
answer affirmatively to a question about support for laws against anti-interracial marriage from the
General Social Survey. We use Mas and Moretti’s (2009) classification of states into low, medium,
and high racial bias groupings, with Southern states overrepresented in the high racial bias group.
We find that judges in higher racial bias states exhibit substantially larger racial disparities and
gender disparities than judges in other states. These results are roughly consistent with Alesina
and La Ferrara (2014) who find that racial bias in capital sentencing is driven exclusively by capital
sentences from Southern states.
Tables 6 and 7 present subsample results. In Table 6, we present our main results by primary
offense type for the most common federal offenses. We find evidence that gender disparities by
political affiliation are largely driven by violent offenses and drug offenses. We also find that racial
disparities by political affiliation are largely driven by drug offenses. In Table 7, we divide the
sample of cases by various measures of offense severity. In columns 1 and 2, we follow Schanzenbach
(2015) and divide our sample into categories of more serious crimes (e.g. violent offenses, sex crimes,
drug trafficking, firearms), which have substantially higher sentences, and less serious crimes. We
find evidence of racial and gender disparities by political affiliation across both subsample splits,
but the magnitudes of the gaps are twice as large among the more serious offenses. In columns 3
and 4, we divide our sample into offenses that fall within Zones A, B, and C of the Guidelines grid,
which recommend lower sentences, and offenses that fall within Zone D, which recommends higher
sentences and requires that the minimum term must be served in prison. We find evidence that
while racial and gender disparities by political affiliation are present in cases in all zones, the gaps
are largest among the most severe cases that fall within Zone D.
C. Increased Judicial Discretion
In this next section, we further explore whether racial and gender disparities driven by judge political
affiliation are the result of judge-specific preferences. Specifically, if these disparities in sentencing by
political affiliation reflect preferences, we might expect to see larger or more pronounced differences
when judges are given more discretion. Recall that prior to 2005, the Federal Sentencing Guidelines
were mandatory, such that judges were generally constrained to the sentence length recommended
by the intersection of the offense level and criminal history. The Supreme Court’s January 2005
decision in Booker rendered the Guidelines advisory, such that judges could sentence outside of the
Guidelines-recommended range. As a result, one might expect judges to be more free in exhibiting
their true sentencing preferences in the aftermath of Booker. Indeed, the rate of departures from
the Guidelines-recommended range increased sharply in the aftermath of Booker (USSC 2012, Yang
2014).
Table 8 presents these results limiting our sample to defendants sentenced between 2002 and
2008 to explore the immediate effects of Booker, prior to subsequent cases that further increased
judicial discretion. We focus on this more narrow time span to limit the possibility of compositional
15

changes in offense severity over time given that we do not control for any measure of offense level
severity in our preferred specifications. In column 1 of Table 8, we present results from our main
specification using cases decided before Booker (2002-2005) and in column 2 we present results
using cases decided after Booker (2005-2008). Column 3 reports p-values of the differences in
the coefficients between columns 1 and 2. In all specifications, we control for judge fixed effects,
sentencing year fixed effects, offense type fixed effects, and criminal history category fixed effects.
In the sample of cases decided before Booker (column 1), we find that in general, black defendants are sentenced to 7.3 additional months compared to observably similar non-black defendants.
We also find evidence that Republican-appointed and Democratic-appointed judges exhibit different
racial gaps in sentencing, with Republican-appointed judges issuing sentences that are 2.4 months
longer for black defendants relative to non-black compared to their Democratic-appointed counterparts. In contrast, we find more limited evidence of differences in gender disparities by judge
political affiliation in this pre-Booker period.
Among cases decided after Booker (column 2), racial and gender disparities by judge political affiliation expand relative to pre-Booker. According to column 2, Republican-appointed judges
sentence black defendants to 4.7 months longer in prison relative to non-blacks compared to their
Democratic counterparts in the post-Booker period, a doubling of the gap prior to Booker. The
difference in this racial gap by political affiliation across the two time periods is statistically significant (p-value = 0.08). Importantly, the increase in the racial gap by political affiliation is due
to Democratic-appointed judges reducing their sentencing of black versus non-black offenders in
the immediate aftermath of Booker (p-value = 0.000), rather than Republican-appointed judges
increasing their sentencing of black versus non-black offenders post-Booker. Gender disparities by
political affiliation are also larger and highly significant after Booker, with Republican-appointed
judges sentencing females to 1.8 months less than males compared to Democratic-appointed judges,
a 111 percent increase from the gender gap prior to Booker, although the difference across the two
time periods is not statistically significant (p-value = 0.36). These results indicate that disparities
by judge political affiliation, in particular racial disparities, are larger after judges are granted substantially more discretion after Booker. Our evidence is consistent with the hypothesis that judges
may learn to sentence more consistently under the constraining effect of the mandatory Guidelines.
In a world in which the Guidelines are simply advisory, disparities by judge political affiliation
expand.12
In Appendix Tables A1 and A2, we also explore whether sentence disparities by judge political
affiliation are driven by differences in the propensity of Republican-appointed versus Democraticappointed judges to depart or vary from the Guidelines. In Appendix Table A1, we find that black
offenders are less likely to receive non-government sponsored below range departures (excluding
substantial assistance motions) and more likely to receive above range departures (defined as re12

Recall that we also find that as judges become more experienced, they converge in their sentencing of different
offenders (Table 5). In unreported results, we find that judge tenure has a smaller impact on convergence in sentencing
outcomes when judges are granted more discretion after Booker, potentially because the Guidelines have less of a
constraining effect when they become advisory.

16

ceiving a sentence above the top of the recommended Guidelines range) relative to similar non-black
offenders. In contrast, female offenders are much more likely to receive below range departures and
less likely to receive above range departures relative to similar male offenders. However, in terms
of racial and gender gaps in departures, we find minimal evidence of any substantial differences
depending on whether the defendant is assigned to a Republican-appointed judge or Democraticappointed judge, although Republican-appointed judges are slightly less likely to issue an above
range departure for black and female offenders. In Appendix Table A2, we find that racial gaps in
below and above range departures are larger post-Booker but that there is no significant change by
judge political affiliation before and after Booker. These results suggest that our main findings on
sentence length are not driven solely by differences in the propensity of Republican-appointed and
Democratic-appointed judges to adhere to the Guidelines, either before or after increases in judicial
discretion.
D. Robustness to Alternative Specifications
Table 9 presents a series of robustness checks for our main results. Column 1 excludes immigration
offenses which often carry no prison sentence. Column 2 excludes a small subset of life sentences.
Column 3 excludes border districts, which disproportionately use “fast-track” or early disposition
programs for low-level immigration and drug offenses.13 We find very similar evidence of racial
and gender disparities by political affiliation under these sample restrictions. In column 4, we use
standardized sentence length as a dependent variable following Rhodes et al. (2015), where sentence
length is normalized by the mean and standard deviation of sentence length in each Guidelines cell
for each sentencing year. We continue to find evidence that Republican-appointed judges exhibit
larger racial and gender gaps in standardized sentences compared to Democratic-appointed judges.
In columns 5 and 6, we use alternative measures of judge ideology in the literature. Column
5 measures judge ideology using the judicial common space score from Bonica and Sen (2017).
Column 6 measures judge ideology using the imputed common-space CFscore by Bonica and Sen
(2017), computed using data on political contributions from the Database on Ideology, Money in
Politics, and Elections. Both alternative measures of ideology are highly correlated with the political
affiliation of the appointing president. Under both alternative proxies for judge ideology, we continue
to find that more conservative judges exhibit larger racial and gender disparities relative to more
liberal judges within the same court. Finally, in column 7, we present our preferred specification
controlling for district court fixed effects interacted with the black offender indicator to account
for any unobserved time-invariant inter-court differences in racial gaps in sentencing. We find very
similar evidence of racial and gender gaps in sentencing by judge political affiliation.
In Appendix Table A3, we also test the robustness of our results to alternative comparisons
of defendant race. In our main results, we compare black offenders to all white and non-black
offenders, including those who are of Hispanic ethnicity. In Appendix Table A3, we present alternative measures of racial disparities by comparing blacks to Hispanics, blacks to non-Hispanic
13

Border districts include CAS, AZ, NM, TXW, TXS.

17

whites, and Hispanics to non-Hispanic whites. Interestingly, we find that racial gaps by political
affiliation are present regardless of the comparison group by which black offenders are measured
against (columns 1 and 2), but that there are no significant gaps in the sentencing of Hispanics
versus non-Hispanic whites by judge political affiliation (column 3), although Hispanic defendants
receive longer sentences on average than whites (Yang 2015, McConnell and Rasul 2017). These
results suggest that black offenders are treated differently relative to both non-Hispanic whites and
Hispanics by Republican-appointed judges compared to Democratic-appointed judges.
E. Accounting for Prosecutorial Discretion
Because prosecutors have an enormous amount of discretion in the criminal justice system, we
also consider whether our main findings can be accounted for by differential decisions made by
prosecutors that might affect sentence length. In particular, we consider three important decision
margins made largely by prosecutors, although in combination with judges. First, we assess whether
a mandatory minimum applies at sentencing given that this decision yields large racial disparities
(Rehavi and Starr 2014). A mandatory minimum applies at sentencing to the extent that prosecutors
have charged a mandatory minimum and judges have made findings of fact that trigger a mandatory
minimum (such as drug weight or use of a firearm). Second, we assess whether a mandatory
minimum binds the Guidelines recommended range such that the length of the mandatory minimum
sentence exceeds the lower end of the Guidelines recommended range. Finally, we assess whether
the government has applied a substantial assistance departure on the basis of significant cooperation
of the defendant with the government, a decision that could result in a sentence below an applicable
mandatory minimum (see Fischman and Schanzenbach 2012, Yang 2015).
Appendix Table A4 regresses each of these three decisions on our preferred set of controls,
and our interactions between defendant race/gender and judge political affiliation. Consistent with
prior research, we find that mandatory minimums, including binding mandatory minimums, are
more likely to apply at sentencing against observably similar black defendants compared to nonblack defendants and less likely to apply to female offenders relative to male offenders. In contrast,
prosecutors are significantly less likely to offer substantial assistance motions to black defendants
relative to non-black defendants, while they are more likely to offer substantial assistance motions
to female defendants relative to male defendants. In column 1, we also find some evidence that the
racial gap in the application of mandatory minimums is slightly larger for Republican-appointed
judges compared to Democratic-appointed judges (0.8 percentage points relative to a mean of 31.2
percentage points), potentially because Republican-appointed judges may be more likely to find
facts that invoke the application of a mandatory minimum at sentencing. In column 2, we find no
difference by political affiliation in racial or gender gaps in the application of a Guidelines-binding
mandatory minimum, our preferred charging measure given that Guidelines-binding mandatory
minimums (compared to non-binding mandatory minimums) more directly affect and limit the
sentence that a judge can impose. We also find in column 3 that the racial gap in substantial
assistance motions is slightly smaller for Republican-appointed judges compared to Democratic18

appointed judges (0.4 percentage points relative to a mean of 17.7 percentage points), which might
lead us to underestimate the true racial sentencing gap by judge political affiliation.
To explore how much these decisions could explain our findings, Appendix Table A5 presents
robustness checks of our main results on sentence length controlling for these decisions. In each
specification, we control for the relevant decision margin and its full set of interactions with defendant
race and gender and judge political affiliation. Even after accounting for these additional controls,
we continue to find larger racial and gender disparities in sentencing among Republican-appointed
judges versus Democratic-appointed judges.14 In sum, these results suggest that our main findings
are not solely driven by prosecutorial discretion and that judges play an important role in explaining
disparities in sentencing.

V. Conclusion
In this paper, we explore the impact of judge political affiliation on racial and gender disparities in federal sentencing. Linking approximately half a million defendants to their sentencing
judges, we find that Republican-appointed judges sentence black defendants to longer prison terms
than non-black defendants compared to Democratic-appointed judges, with the difference by political affiliation representing approximately two-thirds of the baseline racial gap in sentence length.
Republican-appointed judges also sentence female defendants to shorter prison terms than males
compared to Democratic-appointed judges, with this difference representing roughly one-sixth of
the baseline gender gap in sentencing. These racial and gender disparities by political affiliation
emerge at both the fact-finding and sentencing stages of the criminal justice process, and are robust
to controlling for other judge and court characteristics, such as judge race, gender, and proxies for
racial attitudes.
We also find that differences in disparities by political affiliation, particularly racial gaps in
sentence length, expand when judges were given more discretion after the mandatory Guidelines were
rendered advisory. Moreover, these enlarged differences cannot be solely explained by differences
in the willingness of Republican-appointed and Democratic-appointed judges to depart from the
Guidelines. These results suggest that a consequence of the advisory Guidelines system is an
expansion of sentencing disparities by judge political affiliation.
Overall, these results indicate that judicial ideology may be a source of the persistent and
large racial and gender disparities in the criminal justice system. The precise reasons why these
disparities by political affiliation exist remain unknown and we caution that our results cannot speak
14
We note that the magnitude of our main result is halved when we control for the application of a mandatory
minimum. We view this result as an underestimate of the true racial gap in sentencing given the potential endogeneity
of this decision although racial gaps in the application of a mandatory minimum by political affiliation are economically
small (see Appendix Table A4). Another way to bound the contribution of mandatory minimums is to multiply the
Judge Repub*Black coefficient from Appendix Table A4 (0.8 pp) with the average effect of a mandatory minimum
on sentence length for black offenders sentenced by Republican-appointed judges (81.0 months). This back-of-theenvelope calculation suggests that racial gaps in the application of a mandatory minimum can explain at most a 0.65
month racial gap in sentence length by political affiliation. We note that this magnitude is substantially smaller than
the main effect we find in Table 4 (3.0 months).

19

to whether the sentences imposed by Republican or Democratic-appointed judges are warranted or
“right.” Our results, however, do suggest that Republican and Democratic-appointed judges treat
defendants differently on the basis of their race and gender given that we observe robust disparities
despite the random assignment of cases to judges within the same court. Our results also indicate
that these disparities are not solely due to differences in the treatment of certain offense types by
judge political affiliation as we find large racial and gender gaps even within specific crimes such as
drug offenses. More speculatively, our results are consistent with some judges holding discriminatory
attitudes given that we find larger disparities among judges who serve in courts from states with
higher racial bias, which are disproportionately located in the South. For instance, some have
suggested in the context of defendant gender, that judges may sentence females more leniently than
males because of a perception that women are mere accessories to male partners, or that women
are primary caregivers to children (see Goulette et al. 2015, Starr 2015).15 Our results suggest that
a judge’s political ideology may affect how he or she views the dangerousness or blameworthiness
of different defendants by race and gender.
According to our findings, racial disparities in sentencing would be almost halved if federal
district courts were comprised of all Democratic-appointed judges, and reduced by more than five
percent if courts were comprised of ten percent more judges appointed by Democratic presidents. In
recent decades, the typical president has appointed roughly 160 district court judges in a four-year
term.16 Under the current composition of the federal court system, these appointments could change
the partisan composition of district courts by 15 to 20 percentage points, which could substantially
alter gender and racial disparities in the criminal justice system depending on the political affiliation
of the appointing president. The potential to affect disparities is even larger for two-term presidents.
Our results also have implications for the appointments process of federal judges, potentially
suggesting the importance of more rigorous and non-partisan selection and vetting procedures.
Historically, the American Bar Association (ABA) Standing Committee on the Federal Judiciary
has played a large role in providing evaluations of federal judicial candidates, noting that they
rate candidates not based on political affiliation or ideology, but rather “strictly on ... integrity,
professional competence and judicial temperament” (American Bar Association 2009). However,
our results suggest that political ideology does, in fact, infuse the federal judiciary, consistent
with Bonica and Sen (2017) who document the presence of ideologically-based selection in federal
courts. This politicization of the judiciary may in fact increase given the position of the current
administration to disregard the long-standing practice of inviting the ABA Standing Committee to
review the professional qualifications of candidates.17
Ultimately, our results indicate that the selection and appointment of federal district court judges
is not only important for administering the legal system, but also has important distributional
15
In unreported results, we find that female defendants with more dependents receive shorter sentences than
females with fewer dependents, although this relationship does not differ by judge political affiliation.
16
See, e.g., https://fas.org/sgp/crs/misc/R43058.pdf.
17
See,
for
example,
https://www.americanprogress.org/issues/courts/news/2017/05/12/432340/
trump-disregarding-senate-norms-get-judges-bench/.

20

consequences, particularly in the current system where judges are granted considerable discretion
and where they hold lifetime tenure.18 We view exploring the impact of the selection of public
officials on disparities in the criminal justice system as an important area for future research.

18

See, for example, George Soros’ mission to “find, prepare and finance criminal justice reform-oriented candidates
for jobs that have been held by longtime incumbents and serve as pipelines to the federal courts...” See http:
//www.politico.com/story/2016/08/george-soros-criminal-justice-reform-227519.

21

References
[1] Abrams, David S., Marianne Bertrand, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2012. “Do Judges Vary in
Their Treatment of Race?” Journal of Legal Studies, 41(2): 347-383.
[2] Alesina, Alberto, and Eliana La Ferrara. 2014. “A Test of Racial Bias in Capital Sentencing.”
American Economic Review, 104(11): 3397-3433.
[3] Alschuler, Albert W. 1978. “Sentencing Reform and Prosecutorial Power: A Critique of Recent
Proposals for ‘Fixed’ and ‘Presumptive’ Sentencing.” University of Pennsylvania Law Review,
126: 550-77.
[4] Anderson, James M., Jeffrey R. Kling, and Kate Stith. 1999. “Measuring Interjudge Sentencing
Disparity: Before and after the Federal Sentencing Guidelines.” Journal of Law and Economics,
42: 271-307.
[5] Antonovics, Kate, and Brian Knight. 2009. “A New Look at Racial Profiling: Evidence from
the Boston Police Department.” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 91(1): 163-177.
[6] Anwar, Shamena, Patrick Bayer, and Randi Hjalmarsson. 2012. “The Impact of Jury Race in
Criminal Trials.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(2): 1017-1055.
[7] Arnold, David, Will Dobbie, and Crystal S. Yang. 2017. “Racial Bias in Bail Decisions.” NBER
Working Paper No. 23421.
[8] Ashenfelter, O., T. Eisenberg, and S. J. Schwab. 1995. “Politics and the Judiciary: The Influence
of Judicial Background on Case Outcomes.” Journal of Legal Studies, 24: 257-281.
[9] Ayres, Ian, and Joel Waldfogel. 1994. “A Market Test for Race Discrimination in Bail Setting.”
Stanford Law Review, 46(5): 987-1047.
[10] Binder, Sarah A., and Forrest Maltzman. 2009. Advice & Dissent: The Struggle to Shape the
Federal Judiciary. Washington: Brookings Institution Press.
[11] Bonica, Adam, and Maya Sen. 2017. “The Politics of Selecting the Bench from the Bar: The
Legal Profession and Partisan Incentives to Politicize the Judiciary.” Journal of Law and Economics.
[12] Brudney, J., S. Schiavoni, and D. Merritt. 1999. “Judicial Hostility Toward Labor Unions?
Applying the Social Background Model to a Celebrated Concern.” Ohio State Law Journal,
60(5):1675-1999.
[13] Carson, E. A., and W. J. Sabol. 2012. Prisoners in 2011. NCJ 239808. Washington, DC: US
Dept. Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics.
[14] Chew, Pat K., and Robert E. Kelley. 2008. “Myth of the Color-Blind Judge: An Empirical
Analysis of Racial Harassment Cases.” Washington University Law Review, 86(1): 1117-1166.
[15] Congressional Research Service. 2013. The Federal Prison Population Buildup: Overview, Policy Changes, Issues, and Options. Report 7-5700. Washington, DC: Congressional Research
Service.
[16] Cox, Adam B., and Thomas J. Miles. 2008. “Judging the Voting Rights Act.” Columbia Law
Review, 108: 1-54.
22

[17] Cross, Frank B. 2007. Decision Making in the U.S. Court of Appeals. Stanford, CA: Stanford
University Press.
[18] Cross, Frank, and E. Tiller. 1998. “Judicial Partisanship and Obedience to Legal Doctrine:
Whistleblowing on the Federal Court of Appeals.” Yale Law Journal, 107(7): 2155-2176.
[19] Eisenberg, T., and S. L. Johnson. 1991. “The Effects of Intent: Do We Know How Legal
Standards Work?” Cornell Law Review, 76(6): 1151-1197.
[20] Epstein, L., V. Hoekstra, J. Segal, and H. Spaeth. 1998. “Do Political Preferences Change? A
Longitudinal Study of U.S. Supreme Court Justices.” Journal of Politics, 60(3): 801-818.
[21] Epstein, L., W. M. Landes, and R. A. Posner. 2013. The Behavior of Federal Judges: A
Theoretical and Empirical Study of Rational Choice. Harvard University Press.
[22] Epstein, L., and Eric A. Posner. 2016. “Supreme Court Justices’ Loyalty to the President.”
Journal of Legal Studies, 45: 401-436.
[23] Fischman, J. B., and M. M. Schanzenbach. 2012. “Racial Disparities under the Federal Sentencing Guidelines: The Role of Judicial Discretion and Mandatory Minimums.” Journal of
Empirical Legal Studies, 9: 729-64.
[24] Frankel, Marvin E. 1973. Criminal Sentences: Law without Order. New York: Hill & Wang.
[25] George, Tracey E. 2001. “Court Fixing.” Arizona Law Review, 43: 9-62.
[26] Glynn, Adam, and Maya Sen. 2015. “Identifying Judicial Empathy: Does Having Daughters
Cause Judges to Rule for Women’s Issues?” American Journal of Political Science, 59(1): 37-54.
[27] Gottschall, J. 1986. “Reagan’s Appointments to the U.S. Courts of Appeals: The Continuation
of a Judicial Revolution.” Judicature, 70:48-54.
[28] Goulette Natalie, John Wooldredge, James Frank, and Lawrence Travis III. 2015. “From Initial
Appearance to Sentencing: Do Female Judges Experience Disparate Treatment?” Journal of
Criminal Justice, 43: 406-417.
[29] Gruhl, J., Spohn, and C. S. Welch. 1981. “Women as Policymakers: The Case of Trial Judges.”
American Journal of Political Science, 25(2):308-322.
[30] Kaheny, E., S. Haire, and S. Benesh. 2008. “Change over Tenure: Voting, Variance, and Decision
Making on the U.S. Court of Appeals.” American Journal of Political Science, 52(3): 490-503.
[31] Kastellec, Jonathan. 2016. “Race, Context and Judging on the Courts of Appeals: Race-Based
Panel Effects in Death Penalty Cases.” Working Paper.
[32] Lacasse, Chantale and A. Abigail Payne. 1999. “Federal Sentencing Guidelines and Mandatory
Minimum Sentences: Do Defendants Bargain in the Shadow of the Judge?,” The Journal of
Law and Economics 42: 245-270.
[33] Lim, Claire S.H., Bernardo S. Silveira, and James M. Snyder Jr. 2016. “Do Judges’ Characteristics Matter? Ethnicity, Gender, and Partisanship in Texas State Trial Courts.” American
Law and Economics Review, 18(2): 302-357.

23

[34] Mas, Alexandre, and Enrico Moretti. 2009. “Racial Bias in the 2008 Presidential Election.”
American Economic Review, 99(2): 323-29.
[35] McConnell, Brendon, and Imran Rasul. 2017. “Hispanic-White Sentencing Differentials in the
Federal Criminal Justice System.” Working Paper.
[36] Mustard, D. B. 2001. “Racial, Ethnic and Gender Disparities in Sentencing: Evidence from the
U.S. Federal Courts.” Journal of Law and Economics, 44: 285-314.
[37] Nagel, Ilene H., and Steven J. Schulhofer. 1992. “A Tale of Three Cities: An Empirical Study
of Charging and Bargaining Practices under the Sentencing Guidelines.” Southern California
Law Review, 66: 501-66.
[38] Rehavi, M. Marit, and Sonja B. Starr. 2014. “Racial Disparity in Federal Criminal Sentences.”
Journal of Political Economy, 122(6): 1320-1354.
[39] Rhodes, William, Ryan Kling, Jeremy Luallen, and Christina Dyous. 2015. “Federal Sentencing
Disparity: 2005-2012.” Bureau of Justice Statistics Working Paper.
[40] Rutkus, Denis S. 2016. “The Appointment Process for U.S. Circuit and District Court Nominations: An Overview.” Congressional Research Service.
[41] Schanzenbach, Max M. 2015. “Racial Disparities, Judge Characteristics, and Standards of Review in Sentencing.” Journal of Institutional and Theoretical Economics, 171(1): 27-47.
[42] Schanzenbach, Max M. and Emerson H. Tiller. 2007. “Strategic Judging under the U.S. Sentencing Guidelines: Positive Political Theory and Evidence.” Journal of Law, Economics and
Organization, 23(1): 24-56.
[43] Schanzenbach, Max M. and Tiller, Emerson H. 2008. “Reviewing the Sentencing Guidelines:
Judicial Politics, Empirical Evidence, and Reform.” University of Chicago Law Review, 75(2):
715-760.
[44] Scherer, Nancy. 2005. Scoring Points: Politicians, Activists, and the Lower Federal Court
Appointment Process. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
[45] Schulhofer, Stephen J., and Ilene H. Nagel. 1997. “Plea Negotiations Under the Federal Sentencing Guidelines: Guidelines Circumvention and its Dynamics in the Post-Mistretta Period.
Northwestern Law Review: 91(4): 1284-1316.
[46] Scott, Ryan W. 2010. “Inter-judge Sentencing Disparity after Booker: A First Look.” Stanford
Law Review, 63:1-66.
[47] Sharma, Hemant, and Colin Glennon. 2013. “A Case for Supreme Court Term Limits? The
Changing Ideological Relationship between Appointing Presidents and Supreme Court Justices.” Politics and Policy, 41(2): 267-297.
[48] Starr, Sonja B. 2015. “Estimating Gender Disparities in Federal Criminal Cases.” American
Law and Economics Review, 17(1): 127-159.
[49] Stith, Kate, and José A. Cabranes. 1998. Fear of Judging: Sentencing Guidelines in the Federal
Courts. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

24

[50] Sunstein, Cass R., David Schkade, Lisa M. Ellman, and Andres Sawicki. 2006. Are Judges
Political? An Empirical Analysis of the Federal Judiciary. Brookings Institution Press.
[51] Tiede, L., R. Carp, and K.L. Manning. 2010. “Judicial attributes and sentencing-deviation
cases: do sex, race, and politics matter?” Justice System Journal, 31: 249-272.
[52] Tonry, Michael. 2005. “Obsolescence and Immanence in Penal Theory and Policy.” Columbia
Law Review, 105: 1233-75.
[53] US Sentencing Commission. 2012. Report on the Continuing Impact of United States v. Booker
on Federal Sentencing. Washington, DC: US Sentencing Commission.
[54] Wheeler, Russell. 2017. “Selecting Federal Judges in an Era of Political Polarization.” American
Bar Association.
[55] Wittes, Benjamin. 2009. Confirmation Wars: Preserving Independent Courts in Angry Times.
Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, Inc.
[56] Yang, Crystal S. 2014. “Have Interjudge Sentencing Disparities Increased in an Advisory Guidelines Regime? Evidence from Booker.” New York University Law Review, 89(4): 1268-1342.
[57] Yang, Crystal S. 2015. “Free at Last? Judicial Discretion and Racial Disparities in Federal
Sentencing.” Journal of Legal Studies, 44(1): 75-111.

25

Table 1: Summary Statistics

Panel A: Offender Characteristics
Offender Black
Offender Female
Offender Age
Guilty Plea
Offender # of Dependents
Offender Non-Citizen
High School
Some College
College
Panel B: Case Characteristics
Criminal History Category
Base Offense Level
Final Offense Level
Sentence Length (Months)
Panel C: Judge Characteristics
Judge Age
Judge Tenure
Judge Former Prosecutor
Judge Born in South
Judge Black
Judge Female
N

Republican-Appointed
(1)

Democratic-Appointed
(2)

All Judges
(3)

0.298
(0.458)
0.136
(0.343)
36.019
(11.171)
0.941
(0.236)
1.532
(1.707)
0.232
(0.422)
0.336
(0.472)
0.185
(0.389)
0.069
(0.253)

0.287
(0.452)
0.135
(0.341)
36.091
(11.218)
0.943
(0.232)
1.532
(1.720)
0.261
(0.439)
0.325
(0.468)
0.183
(0.387)
0.073
(0.261)

0.293
(0.455)
0.136
(0.342)
36.051
(11.192)
0.942
(0.234)
1.532
(1.713)
0.245
(0.430)
0.331
(0.471)
0.184
(0.388)
0.071
(0.256)

2.570
(1.793)
18.800
(10.229)
20.456
(8.958)
61.790
(71.754)

2.500
(1.774)
18.250
(10.164)
19.990
(8.795)
55.532
(66.564)

2.539
(1.785)
18.560
(10.204)
20.252
(8.890)
59.046
(69.595)

62.043
(9.223)
13.593
(8.167)
0.066
(0.248)
0.401
(0.490)
0.048
(0.214)
0.157
(0.363)
307,106

61.370
(9.094)
11.693
(8.282)
0.062
(0.241)
0.365
(0.482)
0.145
(0.352)
0.265
(0.442)
239,810

61.747
(9.174)
12.760
(8.271)
0.064
(0.244)
0.385
(0.487)
0.091
(0.287)
0.204
(0.403)
546,916

Note: This table presents summary statistics on defendant characteristics, case characteristics, and judge characteristics, by political affiliation of judges’ appointing president. Standard deviations are presented in parentheses.

26

27

Tenure
(3)
0.042
(0.127)
-0.068
(0.048)
0.004∗
(0.002)
-0.080
(0.088)
-0.001
(0.010)
-0.081
(0.113)
-0.003
(0.038)
0.014
(0.052)
0.106
(0.099)

Tenure
(4)
0.047
(0.133)
-0.068
(0.050)
0.003t
(0.002)
-0.062
(0.083)
-0.001∗
(0.000)
-0.068
(0.098)
0.016
(0.043)
0.029
(0.066)
0.096
(0.128)
524,723
0.101
[0.683]

Prosecutor
(5)
-0.001
(0.002)
-0.002∗
(0.001)
0.000∗
(0.000)
-0.001
(0.002)
-0.001∗
(0.000)
0.001
(0.002)
0.000
(0.001)
-0.002
(0.001)
-0.001
(0.001)

Prosecutor
(6)
-0.001
(0.002)
-0.002t
(0.001)
0.000∗∗
(0.000)
-0.001
(0.002)
-0.001∗
(0.000)
0.001
(0.002)
-0.001
(0.002)
-0.003∗
(0.002)
-0.003
(0.002)
524,914
0.214
[0.267]

Female
(7)
0.004
(0.005)
0.005∗∗
(0.002)
0.000
(0.000)
0.002
(0.004)
0.000
(0.000)
-0.002
(0.005)
-0.001
(0.001)
0.005t
(0.002)
0.008∗∗
(0.004)

Female
(8)
0.005
(0.005)
0.004∗
(0.002)
0.000
(0.000)
0.003
(0.004)
0.000
(0.000)
0.002
(0.005)
0.002
(0.002)
0.006t
(0.004)
0.010∗∗
(0.005)
524,914
0.097
[0.260]

Note: This table reports tests of random case assignment to judges. Each row in Columns 1, 3, 5, and 7 display the coefficient
from running an OLS regression of each dependent variable on the defendant characteristic in that row, controlling for sentencing
year and district court fixed effects. Columns 2, 4, 6, and 8 display the coefficients obtained from running the same specification
controlling jointly for all defendant characteristics. In columns 1 and 2, the dependent variable is an indicator for being assigned to
a Republican versus Democratic judge. In columns 3 and 4, the dependent variable is the number of years the judge has served on
the bench. In columns 5 and 6, the dependent variable is an indicator for being assigned to a judge who was a former prosecutor.
In columns 7 and 8, the dependent variable is an indicator for being assigned to a judge who is female. The p-value reported at the
bottom of columns 2, 4, 6, and 8 is for a F-test of the joint significance of the variables listed in the rows with the standard errors
clustered at the district court level. *** = significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10
percent level, t = significant at 15 percent level.

N
R2
Joint F-test

College

Some College

High School

Offender Non-Citizen

Offender # Dependents

Guilty Plea

Offender Age

Offender Female

Offender Black

Republican
(2)
-0.002
(0.008)
-0.003
(0.003)
-0.000
(0.000)
-0.001
(0.006)
-0.000
(0.001)
-0.023∗∗
(0.009)
0.003
(0.004)
-0.000
(0.005)
0.001
(0.007)
524,914
0.139
[0.433]

Table 2: Test of Random Case Assignment to Judges
Republican
(1)
0.004
(0.008)
-0.001
(0.003)
-0.000
(0.000)
-0.003
(0.006)
-0.001
(0.001)
-0.022∗∗
(0.011)
0.006t
(0.004)
0.001
(0.004)
0.001
(0.005)

Table 3: Guidelines Fact-Finding

Offender Black
Offender Female
Offender Age
Offender Age Sq.
Guilty Plea
Offender # Dependents
Offender Non-Citizen
High School
Some College
College
Judge Age
Judge Age Sq.
Judge Rep x Off Black
Judge Rep x Off Female
N
R2
Mean of Dep. Variable

Criminal History
(1)
0.706∗∗∗
(0.007)
-0.770∗∗∗
(0.009)
0.128∗∗∗
(0.001)
-0.002∗∗∗
(0.000)
-0.041∗∗∗
(0.008)
-0.024∗∗∗
(0.001)
-0.794∗∗∗
(0.006)
-0.066∗∗∗
(0.005)
-0.554∗∗∗
(0.006)
-0.899∗∗∗
(0.008)
0.013∗∗∗
(0.004)
-0.000
(0.000)
0.010
(0.008)
-0.017t
(0.011)
524,717
0.276
2.539

Base Offense Level
(2)
0.307∗∗∗
(0.028)
-0.709∗∗∗
(0.033)
0.055∗∗∗
(0.003)
-0.001∗∗∗
(0.000)
-1.908∗∗∗
(0.035)
0.109∗∗∗
(0.004)
0.536∗∗∗
(0.031)
-0.159∗∗∗
(0.019)
-0.459∗∗∗
(0.024)
-0.587∗∗∗
(0.031)
0.134∗∗∗
(0.015)
-0.001∗∗∗
(0.000)
0.120∗∗∗
(0.035)
0.010
(0.043)
523,620
0.746
18.560

Final Offense Level
(3)
0.641∗∗∗
(0.031)
-2.054∗∗∗
(0.050)
0.188∗∗∗
(0.004)
-0.002∗∗∗
(0.000)
-5.986∗∗∗
(0.046)
0.112∗∗∗
(0.006)
-0.002
(0.027)
-0.117∗∗∗
(0.019)
-0.422∗∗∗
(0.026)
-0.096∗∗
(0.044)
0.226∗∗∗
(0.017)
-0.001∗∗∗
(0.000)
0.176∗∗∗
(0.040)
-0.017
(0.054)
524,717
0.490
20.252

Note: This table presents OLS results for criminal history category and offense level. The dependent variable in column 1 is criminal history category (1-6), the dependent variable in column 2 is
base offense level (1-43), and the dependent variable in column 3 is final offense level (1-43). Each
regression controls for judge fixed effects, sentencing year fixed effects, and primary offense type
fixed effects. Bootstrapped standard errors stratified by district court are presented in parentheses. *** = significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10
percent level, t = significant at 15 percent level.

28

Table 4: Sentence Length in Months
Offender Black
Offender Female
Offender Age
Offender Age Sq.
Guilty Plea
Offender # Dependents
Offender Non-Citizen
High School
Some College
College
Judge Age
Judge Age Sq.
Judge Tenure
Judge Former Prosecutor
Judge Born in South
Judge Black
Judge Female
Judge Rep
Judge Rep x Off Black
Judge Rep x Off Female
N
R2
Court FE?
Judge FE?
Final Offense Level FE?

(1)
4.811∗∗∗
(0.272)
-12.056∗∗∗
(0.245)
0.807∗∗∗
(0.040)
-0.009∗∗∗
(0.000)
-72.307∗∗∗
(0.580)
0.870∗∗∗
(0.051)
5.305∗∗∗
(0.225)
-1.301∗∗∗
(0.156)
-3.109∗∗∗
(0.207)
-3.124∗∗∗
(0.231)
0.377∗∗∗
(0.075)
-0.003∗∗∗
(0.001)
0.032∗∗
(0.014)
-0.670∗∗
(0.299)
-0.202
(0.242)
-0.773∗∗
(0.322)
0.311t
(0.191)
2.423∗∗∗
(0.176)
2.749∗∗∗
(0.303)
-1.829∗∗∗
(0.318)
524,266
0.427
Yes
No
No

(2)
3.313∗∗∗
(0.237)
-4.211∗∗∗
(0.150)
0.220∗∗∗
(0.022)
-0.003∗∗∗
(0.000)
-24.400∗∗∗
(0.243)
-0.170∗∗∗
(0.033)
2.036∗∗∗
(0.138)
-0.711∗∗∗
(0.161)
-2.271∗∗∗
(0.130)
-3.995∗∗∗
(0.182)
-0.117∗∗∗
(0.035)
0.001∗∗∗
(0.000)
-0.040∗∗∗
(0.009)
-0.232
(0.200)
0.050
(0.124)
-0.361∗∗
(0.148)
0.142
(0.127)
1.567∗∗∗
(0.136)
1.708∗∗∗
(0.265)
-1.511∗∗∗
(0.166)
524,266
0.774
Yes
No
Yes

(3)
4.562∗∗∗
(0.297)
-11.803∗∗∗
(0.253)
0.791∗∗∗
(0.037)
-0.008∗∗∗
(0.000)
-71.855∗∗∗
(0.500)
0.880∗∗∗
(0.045)
5.546∗∗∗
(0.210)
-1.313∗∗∗
(0.197)
-3.270∗∗∗
(0.191)
-3.256∗∗∗
(0.267)
0.816∗∗∗
(0.154)
-0.005∗∗∗
(0.001)

(4)
3.537∗∗∗
(0.149)
-4.154∗∗∗
(0.169)
0.231∗∗∗
(0.018)
-0.003∗∗∗
(0.000)
-24.281∗∗∗
(0.331)
-0.175∗∗∗
(0.025)
2.225∗∗∗
(0.129)
-0.689∗∗∗
(0.083)
-2.241∗∗∗
(0.079)
-3.842∗∗∗
(0.288)
-0.472∗∗∗
(0.054)
0.002∗∗∗
(0.000)

3.018∗∗∗
(0.348)
-2.047∗∗∗
(0.294)
524,266
0.436
No
Yes
No

1.624∗∗∗
(0.080)
-1.671∗∗∗
(0.240)
524,266
0.778
No
Yes
Yes

Note: This table presents OLS results where the dependent variable is sentence length
in months winsorized at the top and bottom one percent. Each regression controls for
sentencing year fixed effects, primary offense type fixed effects, and criminal history
category fixed effects. Columns 1 and 2 control for district court fixed effects. Columns
3 and 4 control for judge fixed effects. Columns 2 and 4 add final offense level fixed effects. Bootstrapped standard errors stratified by district court are presented in parentheses. *** = significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, * =
significant at 10 percent level, t = significant at 15 percent level.

29

Table 5: Sentence Length Controlling for Other Judge and Court Characteristics
Judge/Court Characteristic:
Offender Black
Offender Female
Judge Rep x Off Black
Judge Rep x Off Female
Judge Char x Off Black
Judge Char x Off Female
Judge Rep x Judge Char x Off Black
Judge Rep x Judge Char x Off Female
N
R2

Black
(1)
4.488∗∗∗
(0.296)
-11.986∗∗∗
(0.234)
3.264∗∗∗
(0.336)
-2.096∗∗∗
(0.292)
0.432
(0.745)
2.912∗∗∗
(0.571)
-3.695∗∗
(1.503)
0.937
(1.095)
524,266
0.436

Female
(2)
4.964∗∗∗
(0.315)
-11.902∗∗∗
(0.274)
3.016∗∗∗
(0.407)
-2.024∗∗∗
(0.406)
-1.492∗∗∗
(0.557)
0.384
(0.493)
-0.984
(0.835)
0.084
(0.885)
524,266
0.436

Prosecutor
(3)
4.539∗∗∗
(0.290)
-11.912∗∗∗
(0.251)
3.396∗∗∗
(0.360)
-2.180∗∗∗
(0.337)
0.329
(0.951)
1.772∗∗
(0.840)
-4.732∗∗∗
(1.018)
2.014∗
(1.039)
524,266
0.436

Tenure
(4)
10.943∗∗∗
(0.575)
-13.068∗∗∗
(0.651)
1.643
(1.162)
-2.784∗∗∗
(0.947)
-0.580∗∗∗
(0.049)
0.092t
(0.062)
-0.332∗∗
(0.162)
0.252∗∗
(0.114)
246,484
0.430

Racial Bias
(5)
4.434∗∗∗
(0.297)
-10.959∗∗∗
(0.257)
2.567∗∗∗
(0.389)
-1.881∗∗∗
(0.282)
3.519∗∗∗
(0.416)
-1.605∗∗∗
(0.339)
0.490
(0.531)
-2.121∗∗∗
(0.297)
492,764
0.437

Note: This table presents OLS results where the dependent variable is sentence length in months winsorized at the
top and bottom one percent. Each column adds controls for the full set of interactions between judge political affiliation, the judge characteristic listed above, and defendant race and gender. Column 1 controls for whether the
judge is black, column 2 controls for whether the judge is female, column 3 controls for whether the judge was a
former prosecutor, column 4 controls for judge tenure (limited to a balanced panel of judges with at least ten years
of experience who we can observe in the first five years of experience), and column 5 controls for the racial bias of
the district court using a classification of states (low, medium, and high racial bias) developed by Mas and Moretti
(2009). Each regression controls for judge fixed effects, sentencing year fixed effects, primary offense type fixed effects,
and criminal history category fixed effects. Bootstrapped standard errors stratified by district court are presented
in parentheses. *** = significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10 percent
level, t = significant at 15 percent level.

30

Table 6: Sentence Length by Offense Type

Offender Black
Offender Female
Judge Rep x Off Black
Judge Rep x Off Female
N
R2

Violent

Drugs

Firearms

Property

Immig.

Sex

(1)
7.327∗∗∗
(1.409)
-16.822∗∗∗
(1.549)
1.348
(1.770)
-4.626∗∗
(2.100)
27,650
0.455

(2)
5.089∗∗∗
(0.463)
-20.091∗∗∗
(0.405)
3.872∗∗∗
(0.643)
-1.576∗∗∗
(0.605)
194,724
0.410

(3)
7.591∗∗∗
(0.715)
-19.905∗∗∗
(1.446)
0.146
(0.959)
1.176
(1.940)
74,850
0.346

(4)
0.558
(0.712)
-2.253∗∗∗
(0.489)
1.476
(1.060)
-0.876
(0.661)
16,069
0.406

(5)
0.102
(0.521)
-4.785∗∗∗
(0.475)
0.584
(0.780)
-0.257
(0.641)
61,319
0.421

(6)
-8.303∗
(4.895)
-3.342
(9.812)
-0.391
(5.830)
1.521
(11.328)
17,075
0.328

White
Collar
(7)
-1.959∗∗∗
(0.308)
-5.599∗∗∗
(0.240)
0.408
(0.473)
-0.432
(0.341)
101,577
0.260

Note: This table presents OLS results where the dependent variable is sentence length in months winsorized at the top
and bottom one percent. Column 1 includes violent crimes such as murder, manslaughter, kidnapping, sexual abuse, assault, and bank robbery. Column 2 includes drug crimes. Column 3 includes firearms offenses. Column 4 includes theft
and larceny offenses. Column 5 includes immigration offenses. Column 6 includes sex offenses such as child pornography.
Column 7 includes white collar offenses. Each regression controls for judge fixed effects, sentencing year fixed effects,
primary offense type fixed effects, and criminal history category fixed effects. Bootstrapped standard errors stratified by
district court are presented in parentheses. *** = significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, * =
significant at 10 percent level, t = significant at 15 percent level.

31

Table 7: Sentence Length by Offense Severity

Offender Black
Offender Female
Judge Rep x Off Black
Judge Rep x Off Female
N
R2

Less Serious
(1)
-1.049∗∗∗
(0.233)
-5.191∗∗∗
(0.179)
0.947∗∗∗
(0.313)
-0.442∗
(0.237)
215,116
0.327

More Serious
(2)
6.508∗∗∗
(0.351)
-21.179∗∗∗
(0.447)
2.077∗∗∗
(0.505)
-1.163∗
(0.599)
309,150
0.359

Zone A,B, and C
(3)
0.511∗∗∗
(0.079)
-0.993∗∗∗
(0.066)
0.270∗
(0.140)
-0.439∗∗∗
(0.087)
96,089
0.200

Zone D
(4)
5.086∗∗∗
(0.357)
-15.739∗∗∗
(0.304)
3.046∗∗∗
(0.470)
-1.423∗∗∗
(0.466)
428,364
0.380

Note: This table presents OLS results where the dependent variable is sentence length in months
winsorized at the top and bottom one percent. Column 1 includes less serious offenses with lower
Guidelines sentences following Schanzenbach (2015) as described in the main text. Column 2 includes the remaining more serious offenses. Column 3 includes cases with Guidelines sentences in
Zones A, B, and C. Column 4 includes cases with Guidelines sentences in Zone D. Each regression
controls for judge fixed effects, sentencing year fixed effects, primary offense type fixed effects, and
criminal history category fixed effects. Bootstrapped standard errors stratified by district court
are presented in parentheses. *** = significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent
level, * = significant at 10 percent level, t = significant at 15 percent level.

32

Table 8: Sentence Length - Booker

Offender Black
Offender Female
Judge Rep x Off Black
Judge Rep x Off Female
N
R2

Before Booker
(1)
7.286∗∗∗
(0.595)
-12.867∗∗∗
(0.470)
2.403∗∗∗
(0.921)
-0.837
(0.652)
100,437
0.461

After Booker
(2)
3.827∗∗∗
(0.701)
-12.581∗∗∗
(0.533)
4.731∗∗∗
(0.942)
-1.771∗∗
(0.750)
120,250
0.456

p-value
(3)
0.000
0.693
0.080
0.357

Note: This table presents OLS results where the dependent variable is sentence length in months winsorized at the top and bottom one percent. The
before Booker sample includes cases sentenced from the beginning of 2002
to January 11, 2005. The after Booker sample includes cases sentenced from
January 12, 2005 to the end of 2008. Column 3 presents p-values of the difference in the coefficients between column 1 and column 2. Each regression
controls for judge fixed effects, sentencing year fixed effects, primary offense
type fixed effects, and criminal history category fixed effects. Bootstrapped
standard errors stratified by district court are presented in parentheses. ***
= significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level, t = significant at 15 percent level.

33

34

Excluding
Border
Districts
(3)
4.071∗∗∗
(0.290)
-11.836∗∗∗
(0.260)
3.426∗∗∗
(0.435)
-2.152∗∗∗
(0.294)
452,004
0.443
(4)
0.104∗∗∗
(0.005)
-0.239∗∗∗
(0.006)
0.024∗∗∗
(0.007)
-0.016∗∗
(0.007)
524,017
0.117

Sentence
Z-Score

Table 9: Robustness Tests
Excluding
Life
Sentences
(2)
4.689∗∗∗
(0.280)
-11.624∗∗∗
(0.237)
3.085∗∗∗
(0.399)
-2.067∗∗∗
(0.266)
521,423
0.435

Common
Space
Scores
(5)
6.036∗∗∗
(0.163)
-12.784∗∗∗
(0.179)
2.155∗∗∗
(0.258)
-1.538∗∗∗
(0.225)
523,918
0.436

Political
Contribution
Scores
(6)
5.688∗∗∗
(0.200)
-12.687∗∗∗
(0.222)
2.542∗∗∗
(0.280)
-1.667∗∗∗
(0.236)
506,777
0.436
-12.582∗∗∗
(0.430)
1.826∗∗∗
(0.514)
-1.669∗∗∗
(0.522)
506,777
0.438

(7)

Dist*Black
FE

Note: This table presents robustness checks for our main results. Column 1 uses sentence length as a dependent variable but excludes immigration offenses. Column 2 uses sentence length as a dependent variable but excludes life sentences. Column 3 uses
sentence length as a dependent variable but excludes border districts. Column 4 uses a standardized sentence length as a dependent variable, which is normalized by the mean and standard deviation in each Guidelines cell in each sentencing year. Column 5
uses sentence length as a dependent variable and measures judge ideology using the judicial common space score from Bonica and
Sen (2017). Column 6 uses sentence length as a dependent variable and measures judge ideology using the imputed common-space
CFscore computed using data on political contributions from the Database on Ideology, Money in Politics, and Elections by Bonica
and Sen (2017). Column 7 controls for district court-by-black fixed effects. Each regression controls for judge fixed effects, sentencing year fixed effects, primary offense type fixed effects, and criminal history category fixed effects. Bootstrapped standard errors
stratified by district court are presented in parentheses. *** = significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, * =
significant at 10 percent level, t = significant at 15 percent level.

N
R2

Judge Rep x Off Female

Judge Rep x Off Black

Offender Female

Offender Black

Excluding
Immigration
Offenses
(1)
4.044∗∗∗
(0.236)
-11.841∗∗∗
(0.239)
2.628∗∗∗
(0.370)
-2.470∗∗∗
(0.360)
462,947
0.430

Table A1: Departures from the Guidelines

Offender Black
Offender Female
Judge Rep x Off Black
Judge Rep x Off Female
N
R2
Mean of Dep. Variable

Below Range
(1)
-0.014∗∗∗
(0.002)
0.037∗∗∗
(0.003)
0.001
(0.003)
0.001
(0.003)
524,717
0.112
0.177

Above Range
(2)
0.007∗∗∗
(0.001)
-0.007∗∗∗
(0.001)
-0.003∗∗∗
(0.001)
-0.003∗∗
(0.001)
524,266
0.032
0.031

Note: This table presents OLS results for departures from the
Sentencing Guidelines recommended range. The dependent variable in column 1 is an indicator variable for a non-government
sponsored below range departure, and the dependent variable in
column 2 is an indicator variable for an above range departure.
Each regression controls for judge fixed effects, sentencing year
fixed effects, primary offense type fixed effects, and criminal history category fixed effects. Bootstrapped standard errors stratified by district court are presented in parentheses. *** = significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, * =
significant at 10 percent level, t = significant at 15 percent level.

35

Table A2: Departures from the Guidelines - Booker

Offender Black
Offender Female
Judge Rep x Off Black
Judge Rep x Off Female
N
R2
Mean of Dep. Variable

Below Range
Before Booker After Booker
(1)
(2)
-0.011∗∗∗
-0.014∗∗∗
(0.003)
(0.004)
0.042∗∗∗
0.030∗∗∗
(0.004)
(0.005)
0.001
-0.003
(0.004)
(0.005)
-0.014∗∗∗
0.005
(0.005)
(0.007)
100,585
120,377
0.181
0.088
0.109
0.157

Above Range
Before Booker After Booker
(3)
(4)
0.001
0.004∗∗
(0.002)
(0.002)
-0.006∗∗∗
-0.011∗∗∗
(0.002)
(0.002)
0.002
0.000
(0.002)
(0.003)
-0.002
-0.002
(0.002)
(0.002)
100,437
120,250
0.038
0.037
0.022
0.036

Note: This table presents OLS results for departures from the Sentencing Guidelines recommended
range. The dependent variable in column 1 and column 2 is an indicator variable for a non-government
sponsored below range departure and the dependent variable in column 3 and column 4 is an indicator variable for an above range departure. The before Booker sample includes cases sentenced from
the beginning of 2002 to January 11, 2005. The after Booker sample includes cases sentenced from
January 12, 2005 to the end of 2008. Each regression controls for judge fixed effects, sentencing year
fixed effects, primary offense type fixed effects, and criminal history category fixed effects. Bootstrapped standard errors stratified by district court are presented in parentheses. *** = significant at
1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level, t = significant
at 15 percent level.

36

Table A3: Sentence Length by Defendant Race

Offender Race
Offender Female
Judge Rep x Off Race
Judge Rep x Off Female
N
R2

Blacks v. Hisp
Off Race = 1(Black)
(1)
-0.596t
(0.402)
-12.957∗∗∗
(0.378)
2.317∗∗∗
(0.521)
-2.128∗∗∗
(0.500)
315,450
0.453

Blacks v. Non-Hisp Whites
Off Race = 1(Black)
(2)
6.563∗∗∗
(0.319)
-10.902∗∗∗
(0.216)
2.992∗∗∗
(0.473)
-2.675∗∗∗
(0.322)
341,093
0.451

Hisp v. Non-Hisp Whites
Off Race = 1(Hisp)
(3)
8.221∗∗∗
(0.389)
-10.778∗∗∗
(0.242)
0.221
(0.383)
-1.332∗∗∗
(0.396)
341,507
0.403

Note: This table presents OLS results where the dependent variable is sentence length in months winsorized at the
top and bottom one percent. Column 1 includes blacks and Hispanic defendants where the race indicator is equal to 1
for black defendants. Column 2 includes blacks and non-Hispanic white defendants where the race indicator is equal
to 1 for black defendants. Column 3 includes Hispanic and non-Hispanic white defendants where the race indicator
is equal to 1 for Hispanic defendants. Each regression controls for judge fixed effects, sentencing year fixed effects,
primary offense type fixed effects, and criminal history category fixed effects. Bootstrapped standard errors stratified
by district court are presented in parentheses. *** = significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level,
* = significant at 10 percent level, t = significant at 15 percent level.

37

Table A4: Prosecutorial Discretion

Offender Black
Offender Female
Judge Rep x Off Black
Judge Rep x Off Female
N
R2
Mean of Dep. Variable

Mand Min
(MM)
(1)
0.041∗∗∗
(0.002)
-0.032∗∗∗
(0.002)
0.008∗∗∗
(0.002)
-0.001
(0.002)
524,122
0.443
0.312

Binding Mand Min
(BMM)
(2)
0.013∗∗∗
(0.002)
-0.001
(0.002)
0.001
(0.002)
0.002
(0.003)
524,717
0.204
0.146

Sub Assistance
(SA)
(3)
-0.028∗∗∗
(0.002)
0.033∗∗∗
(0.002)
0.004∗∗
(0.002)
0.005∗
(0.003)
517,103
0.143
0.177

Note: This table presents OLS results. The dependent variable in Column 1 is an indicator equal to 1 for any mandatory minimum applied at sentencing. The dependent
variable in Column 2 is an indicator equal to 1 for any “binding” mandatory minimum,
defined if the mandatory minimum length exceeds the lower end of the Guidelines recommended sentence. The dependent variable in Column 3 is an indicator equal to 1
for any government-sponsored substantial assistance motion. Each regression controls
for judge fixed effects, sentencing year fixed effects, primary offense type fixed effects,
and criminal history category fixed effects. Bootstrapped standard errors stratified by
district court are presented in parentheses. *** = significant at 1 percent level, ** =
significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level, t = significant at 15
percent level.

38

Table A5: Sentence Length Controlling for Prosecutorial Discretion

Offender Black
Offender Female
Judge Rep x Off Black
Judge Rep x Off Female
Control
Control x Judge Rep
Control x Off Black
Control x Off Female
Control x Judge Rep x Off Black
Control x Judge Rep x Off Female
N
R2

Control MM
(1)
-2.775∗∗∗
(0.270)
-2.265∗∗∗
(0.217)
1.239∗∗∗
(0.283)
-0.792∗∗∗
(0.289)
61.847∗∗∗
(0.415)
4.649∗∗∗
(0.509)
13.532∗∗∗
(0.603)
-32.204∗∗∗
(0.713)
0.976
(0.789)
0.082
(0.865)
523,672
0.552

Control BMM
(2)
1.321∗∗∗
(0.281)
-8.722∗∗∗
(0.262)
3.012∗∗∗
(0.336)
-2.003∗∗∗
(0.344)
8.642∗∗∗
(0.420)
1.688∗∗∗
(0.522)
19.750∗∗∗
(0.737)
-19.799∗∗∗
(0.786)
-1.414
(1.180)
0.618
(1.090)
524,266
0.443

Control SA
(3)
4.479∗∗∗
(0.257)
-11.161∗∗∗
(0.301)
3.147∗∗∗
(0.441)
-2.070∗∗∗
(0.409)
-14.368∗∗∗
(0.293)
-0.586t
(0.406)
-1.770∗∗∗
(0.523)
-0.566
(0.519)
-0.230
(0.791)
0.439
(0.770)
516,662
0.442

Note: This table presents OLS results where the dependent variable is sentence length
in months winsorized at the top and bottom one percent. Column 1 controls for a full
set of interactions between MM (any mandatory minimum), offender gender and race, and
judge political affiliation. Column 2 controls for a full set of interactions between BMM
(any binding mandatory minimum), offender gender and race, and judge political affiliation. Column 3 controls a full set of interactions between SA (any substantial assistance
motion), offender gender and race, and judge political affiliation. Each regression controls
for judge fixed effects, sentencing year fixed effects, primary offense type fixed effects, and
criminal history category fixed effects. Bootstrapped standard errors stratified by district
court are presented in parentheses. *** = significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at
5 percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level, t = significant at 15 percent level.

39

