                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     THE OTHER 1%: CLASS LEAVENING, CONTAMINATION AND VOTING FOR
                            REDISTRIBUTION

                                        Lars Lefgren
                                         David Sims
                                        Olga Stoddard

                                      Working Paper 24617
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24617


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    May 2018




We thank the Brigham Young University School of Family, Home, and Social Science for
generous research support. The authors thank Rebecca Jack for excellent research assistance.
We acknowledge helpful comments and suggestions from Scott Condie, Gordon Dahl, Laura
Gee, and seminar participants at Brigham Young University and the NBER Labor Studies Winter
Meeting. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Lars Lefgren, David Sims, and Olga Stoddard. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The other 1%: Class Leavening, Contamination and Voting for Redistribution
Lars Lefgren, David Sims, and Olga Stoddard
NBER Working Paper No. 24617
May 2018
JEL No. D3,H2

                                          ABSTRACT

We perform an experiment to measure how changes in the effort exerted by a small fraction of a
low-reward group affect the willingness of the high-reward group to vote for redistributive
taxation. We find that a substantial fraction of high reward subjects vote in favor of greater
redistribution when a very small fraction of high-effort individuals is added to a pool of otherwise
low-effort poor. Contaminating a group of high-effort poor with a small number of low-effort
individuals causes the most generous rich subjects to vote for less redistribution. These results
suggest that anecdotes about the deservedness of a small group of transfer recipients may be
effective in changing support for redistribution. We find large gender differences in the results.
Relative to men, women respond three times more strongly to the existence of high-effort
individuals among the poor. This behavior may help explain gender differences in support for
redistribution more generally.

Lars Lefgren                                     Olga Stoddard
Department of Economics                          149 Faculty office building
Brigham Young University                         Brigham Young University
130 Faculty Office Building                      Provo, UT 84602
Provo, UT 84602                                  olga.stoddard@byu.edu
and NBER
lars_lefgren@byu.edu

David Sims
130 Faculty Office Building
Brigham Young University
Provo, UT 84602-2363
davesims@byu.edu
   I.      Introduction


        The practice of using anecdotes to emphasize the deserving or undeserving nature of
government benefit recipients has a long history in American politics. In a famous 1976
campaign speech, then presidential candidate Ronald Reagan introduced much of the country to
the original “welfare queen,” a Chicago woman who he claimed had used over 80 identities to
defraud government assistance programs of hundreds of thousands of dollars, and who became
the poster child for welfare reform advocates. In October 2013, invoking a different government
program, President Barack Obama read aloud, in the White House Rose Garden, a letter from a
single, working mother with a special needs child, whose 15-year spell without health insurance
had been brought to an end by government-subsidized insurance exchanges.
       In both of these cases, the examples chosen were highly atypical of the population of
welfare and healthcare recipients. Furthermore, many listeners may have understood the non-
representative nature of the anecdotes. This raises the question of whether knowledge of the
existence of atypical individuals might causally change willingness to engage in redistribution
towards to the entire group. For example, perhaps knowing about a small set of very sympathetic
individuals within a population increases willingness to redistribute towards the group.
        Data and methodological challenges make it difficult to make empirical headway
regarding this question. First, researchers must identify an observable characteristic of an
individual that causes voters to be more or less willing to redistribute towards that individual.
Second, they must observe the distribution of this characteristic within a population. Finally,
they must identify exogenous variation in this distribution across populations to see how voters
react to information about the existence of a small fraction of individuals perceived to be
particularly deserving or undeserving. While these hurdles are virtually insurmountable in an
observational setting, we can address each in an experimental setting.
        In this experiment, we examine the extent to which over 3500 high-payoff experimental
subjects vote to redistribute earnings towards low-payoff subjects. For convenience, we refer to
these two groups as the “rich” and the “poor” respectively. All rich subjects perform 40 iterations
of a real effort task and are randomly assigned to four different groups, which differ solely in the
distribution of effort among the poor. In one group, all poor subjects also complete 40 iterations
of the task. In others, a varying fraction of the poor only complete 3 iterations of the same task.
        While our experiment does not directly manipulate whether one group of subjects is more
deserving in a moral or philosophical sense, we find that voters act against their own financial
incentives to reward the groups of poor subjects that exert more effort, showing empirically that
the voters view these groups as more deserving of transfers. Furthermore, voters respond
strongly to small changes in effort levels at the extremes of the potential effort distribution. We
find that a small leavening, or increase in the number of high-effort poor from a zero base, raises
average voting of the rich for redistribution by 70 percent. On the other hand, contaminating the
high-effort poor with a small number of low-effort individuals leads to a reduction in voted


                                                                                                    2
redistribution of only 7 percent. Both changes are larger than a linear relationship between the
average effort of the poor and redistributive voting by the rich would predict.
        The large disparity between the two effects belies an underlying symmetry in behavior.
Fully 19 percent of subjects who vote for full redistribution when all poor exert high effort would
vote for lower redistribution under class contamination. However, since most rich subjects vote
for no redistribution in either case, the effect appears small when averaged across all rich voters.
Similarly, 13 percent of subjects who vote for no redistribution when all poor exert low effort
would vote for some redistribution under class leavening. Because a higher fraction of rich
voters are able to increase their vote than decrease it, this change has a sizable effect on the
average voted level of redistribution among the rich.
        We also find striking differences between the voting patterns of men and women. When a
small number of the poor increase their effort from low to high, the fraction of rich women
voting for redistribution almost doubles, and the fraction of rich women voting for full
redistribution to the poor triples. This effect works in the same direction as the response from
men, but is much larger in magnitude. By comparison, we find only small, insignificant
differences in the voting behavior of men and women when we contaminate a group of high-
effort poor with a small percentage of low effort individuals.
         Thus, our results contribute to both the literature on how effort differences between
reward groups influence preferences for redistribution, and the related literature that attempts to
understand gender differences in redistributive preferences. Prior experimental evidence
examining how the deservedness of the poor affects redistribution only considers two extreme
cases: one in which all income disparities are due to effort or skill and the second in which
disparities are purely randomly determined. To our knowledge, there is no experimental
literature that examines gender differences in how individuals change voting for redistribution in
response to small effort differences among the recipients.
         Our findings are important because they help explain how very small differences in
perceptions about the causes of income disparities can lead to large changes in the level of
popular support for redistribution. While there is a literature that establishes that differences in
national beliefs about the source of income disparities can lead to separate equilibria with widely
varying levels of redistribution (Alesina and Angeletos 2005, Benabou and Tirole 2006), much
less is known about the stability of such beliefs or how they translate to personal decisions. Our
results suggest that a particular individual’s level of support for redistribution can be quite
sensitive to perceived effort levels, and perhaps more generally, perceptions about the
deservedness of the poor. They also suggest that the broad general equilibrium story told in
country-level models is founded on empirically verifiable microeconomic behavior, albeit
outside a general equilibrium setting. Thus, we conclude that anecdotes about the deservedness
of small numbers of the poor might matter a great deal in both the politics and economics of
redistribution.
       Our findings may also offer insights into other policy areas where public support for
controversial policies may show discontinuous jumps. For example, support for refugee


                                                                                                   3
resettlement may sharply diminish when a very small proportion of potential refugees are
anecdotally implicated as criminals, or may increase following the media portrayal of a
particularly sympathetic refugee. Similarly, attitudes towards police could be quite sensitive to
comparatively infrequent instances of police brutality that are highly publicized.
        Prior studies document that women support higher levels of redistribution than men both
in real world voting and in laboratory experiments (Besley and Case, 2002; Alessina and
LaFerrrera, 2005; Schildberg-Hörisch, 2010). There are several hypotheses about the
mechanisms underlying this gender difference, but no consensus view on which are most
important. For example, the experimental literature is often unable to distinguish between
mechanisms that rely on general inequity aversion as opposed to a specific distaste for
undeserved inequality or a lack of proportionality in rewards. Our experimental results support a
mechanism in which women’s preferences appear to depend disproportionately on the well-being
of the most deserving individuals among the poor. Thus, our findings may provide an important
insight into understanding gender differences in preferences for redistribution.
     The remainder of this paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 briefly introduces the background
literature and our experiment, Section 3 presents and discusses the results, and Section 4
concludes.


   II.     The Experiment

   A. Background


        This study highlights the importance of small changes in the effort distribution among the
poor for the voting behavior of the rich. In approaching this question, we build on two important
strands of the experimental economics literature on redistributive preferences. First,
experimental economists have repeatedly shown that subjects are more willing to redistribute to
those that they feel have exerted similar effort to their own, but were unlucky, than to a group
that has demonstrated relatively less effort or skill. This result has been observed in a variety of
settings including dictator, ultimatum and public goods games (Balafoutas, Kocher, Putterman
and Sutter 2013, Carlsson, He and Martinsson 2012, Cherry, Frykblom and Shogren 2002, Erkal,
Gangadharan and Nikiforakis 2011, Hoffman, McCabe, Shachat and Smith 1994). More
recently, the literature has extended this insight to situations that involve group voting over
redistribution. In particular, both Krawczyk (2010) and Gee, Migueis and Parsa (2015) show that
there is less voting for redistribution in situations where reward disparities match with skill or
effort differences rather than being driven by luck. Finally, Lefgren, Sims and Stoddard (2016)
show that both rich and poor voters favor more redistribution when everyone exerts equal effort
than when the rich exert more effort than the poor.
       With one exception, however, this literature considers cases where low reward
individuals are uniformly and easily classifiable in terms of relative effort. In other words, it

                                                                                                    4
validates the prediction that rich voters will treat identifiable groups of entirely high-effort poor
more generously than groups entirely composed of low-effort poor. In real life situations,
however, voters often choose how much to redistribute to the poor, recognizing that there is a
distribution of effort within that group. While this literature can also explain the high levels of
support for policies that contain self-revelatory mechanisms designed to separate the poor into
effort groups (e.g. the EITC), such distinctions are often impossible to make, either as a matter of
policy or at the time of voting. Thus, our experiment seeks to test whether the support of high
reward voters for redistribution is responsive to small changes in the distribution of effort for the
low reward group from the two extremes.
         Figure 1 presents a graphical representation of some possible outcomes of a hypothetical
experiment that measures the relationship between effort of the poor and voting for redistribution
by the rich. The horizontal axis shows the fraction of the poor that exert a high effort level—a
level of effort identical to that of the rich in the experiment—while the vertical axis measures the
level of redistributive voting by the rich. Points A and F on this figure represent the key findings
of the literature to date. The rich will vote for much lower levels of redistribution to a group of
entirely low-effort poor (A) than to a group solely made up of higher-effort poor (F). In a similar,
hypothetical experiment that presents subjects with a discernable distribution of effort levels, a
simple, statistical response might follow a linear relationship in support for redistribution
according to the proportion of high-effort poor. This would produce a weighted average
represented by the line in Figure 1. Thus, a group that consisted of half high-effort poor would
see the rich vote for redistribution at a midpoint, in this case point D.
         While this simple weighting may provide a useful baseline hypothesis, it is possible that
voters could react in other ways. One particular alternative, which we refer to as the class
leavening hypothesis, would be that voters react more strongly to a small increase in effort in an
otherwise low-effort class of poor than a linear relationship would predict. Such a response
might happen if voters have strong preferences concerning the consumption or rewards of the
highest effort poor individuals or if voters treated small fractions of a group as if they were much
larger. In this scenario, we would expect to see behavior represented by a point such as B. At
this point, the presence of a relatively small number of high-effort individuals causes a more than
proportionate increase in redistribution. On the other hand, a point such as E would represent the
opposite phenomenon, which we refer to as class contamination. Here, the existence of a
relatively small number of low-effort poor leads to a disproportionately large decrease in support
for redistribution among the rich.
        To this point the only study that provides significant results about voting behavior of the
rich when the poor demonstrate a known, non-degenerate distribution of effort levels is Lefgren,
Sims and Stoddard (2016). In one of their treatments, the rich are allowed to vote for
redistribution to a group of poor subjects that is equally split between high and low effort
individuals. Though this is not the focus of their study, we can use their results to calculate an
additional point on Figure 1. Interestingly, subjects in this experiment voted for more
redistribution that a linear relationship would predict something much more like point C than
point D. However, even this study only provides information about behavior in the center of


                                                                                                   5
Figure 1, when the two effort classes are evenly mixed. To provide evidence regarding how
voters respond to small changes in composition, we need to construct a dataset that is much
larger than most laboratory experiments to identify differences in voting behavior that are
smaller than when comparing starkly different pools.
        Our experiment uses online delivery and the large samples made available through the
Amazon Mechanical Turk (MTurk) platform to allow us to test the class contamination and
leavening hypotheses. We look at how the support of the rich for redistribution changes when
we make small deviations in the fraction of the poor that are high-effort. Indeed, we make these
deviations even smaller than those shown in Figure 1, and highlight the substantial impact of the
1% of poor who differ from an otherwise homogenous class on the voting behavior of the rich.
        The second empirical foundation for our study is the commonly cited result in
experimental economics that women support higher levels of redistribution than men under a
variety of conditions (Alesina and Giuliano 2009, Durante, Putterman and Weele 2014, Eckel
and Grossman 1998, Kamas and Preston 2015). However, the literature has yet to agree on a
parsimonious set of explanations for these differences. Some emphasize explanations where
women hope to gain a larger share of increased transfer payments and government jobs (Lott and
Kenney, 1999). Others emphasize the role of redistribution as a transfer or insurance policy in
response to a decline in marriage rates (Edlund and Pande, 2002; Edlund, Pande, and Haider
2005). Still others suggest that gender-specific differences in fundamental preferences over the
welfare of certain parties may explain gender differences in support for redistribution (Alessia
and Giuliano 2009). This study provides more insight into an area where the gender difference
is especially pronounced, suggesting that women are more sensitive to the existence of
unfairness, meaning a lack of rewards proportional to effort, even when it affects a very small
group.


   B. Experimental Design


        Our experiment consists of two parts. We explain both parts to the subjects during the
initial instructions stage. We include multiple comprehension checks throughout the experiment
to ensure the subjects understand the instructions. In part one; each subject has to encode four-
letter words into numbers given a table that provides a random number for each of the letters of
the alphabet. This encoding task was first introduced in an experiment designed to elicit subject
effort, by Erkal, Gangadharan and Nikiforakis (2011). The task has been found to be both gender
neutral (Kuhn and Villeval 2015) and free from learning by doing effects (Charness, Masclet and
Villeval 2013).
       Each treatment in the experiment has high-payoff individuals, the rich, who are randomly
assigned to encode 40 words correctly for a payment of $3. Each treatment also has low-payoff
individuals, the poor, who are all randomly assigned a payment of $1. The number of words the
poor are assigned to encode varies, both within and across treatments, as follows:


                                                                                                  6
        Treatment 1 (All poor high-effort): All subjects were assigned to encode 40 words
        correctly, with some randomly assigned to receive $3 and the others assigned to receive
        $1.
        Treatment 2 (All poor low-effort): Some subjects were randomly assigned to encode 40
        words correctly for $3, while the rest were assigned to encode 3 words correctly for $1.
        Treatment 3 (99% poor high-effort): The subjects were randomly assigned to receive a
        payment of $3 or $1. Those assigned a payment of $3, had to encode 40 words correctly.
        Of those assigned a payment of $1, 99% had to encode 40 words correctly while the
        remaining 1% only had to encode 3 words.
        Treatment 4 (99% poor low-effort): The subjects were randomly assigned to receive a
        payment of $3 or $1. Those assigned a payment of $3, had to encode 40 words correctly.
        Of those assigned a payment of $1, 1% had to encode 40 words correctly while the
        remaining 99% only had to encode 3 words.
In each treatment, the effort and payoffs described above for that treatment are common
knowledge to its participants.
       In part two of the experiment, subjects, with full knowledge of their payoffs from part 1,
are asked to vote on an amount to tax from each rich participant and give to each poor subject.
We present the possible choices in 50-cent increments, with a table indicating the final allocation
of money to the rich and poor individuals in each scenario. Since, the subjects cannot vote to
redistribute beyond the full equality outcome, their functional choice is to vote to take $0, $0.50,
or $1 from each of the rich and give that amount to each of the poor. After everyone in a session
indicates their preferred tax amount, we implement the median voted amount in each treatment
group. The subjects then complete an exit questionnaire intended to collect their demographic
information. Upon the conclusion of the experiment, we pay all subjects their final earnings
through an online transfer to their Amazon accounts. Appendix 1 contains the complete
experimental protocol and instructions for further reference.
       The observation of interest in this study is the voting decisions of the subjects randomly
assigned to be rich. In order to remain honest in our presentation of the experiment to the
subjects, we do, in fact, randomly assign some subjects to the low-reward group as part of the
experiment. The poor perform the tasks and receive the (possibly redistribution augmented)
payments as the instructions detail. However, we do not analyze their voting behavior in this
paper. 1


    III.     Data and Results

1
 Given the substantial cost of the experiment and the large number of rich subjects required, we assigned far fewer
subjects to the poor group than the rich group. We did not provide information on the relative fraction of rich and
poor voters in the two groups. While it seems likely that the rich assumed equal numbers of rich and poor subjects,
as long as beliefs were similar across the various treatments, our results are unlikely to be affected by the specific
beliefs they held.

                                                                                                                         7
    A. Data and Summary Statistics

        We obtain our experimental sample from MTurk, an online labor market that has shown
promise as a platform for experimental economic research, including experiments about
preferences for redistribution (Horton, Rand and Zeckhauser 2011, Kuziemko, Norton and Saez
2015). 2 Respondents follow a hyperlink to our experiment, which is housed on Qualtrics and
programmed using Javascript. Subjects are free to drop out at any time during the experiment but
are only paid upon completion. The experiment take an average of 15 minutes to complete. The
average payment to MTurk participants who completed the experiment was close to $3.
        In response to our request for participation, 4230 MTurk workers chose to participate in
the experiment and passed our sample validation procedures, which are as follows: First, we
restrict the survey to workers who reside in the U.S. and ask the respondents to confirm their
residency. 3 Second, we implement a prescreening measure in order to prevent MTurkers from
completing the experiment more than once. Finally, we include a CAPTCHA feature to exclude
non-human participants. Approximately 15% of the subjects that were randomized to treatment
dropped out before completing the voting task, leaving us with an analysis sample of 3577
completers. Regression analyses find no statistical relationship between dropping out and the
treatment assignment of the subject.
       We present the descriptive statistics for each treatment in Table 1 as well as statistics for
the overall group. As might be expected from a group recruited via computer through a service
maintained by a large internet retailer, the group as a whole is relatively younger on average (age
33 years) than the U.S voting-age population as a whole. Additionally, relative to the U.S.
voting-age population, blacks and Hispanics are underrepresented in the sample while Asians
and whites are overrepresented. More importantly, perhaps, for an experiment about voting over
redistribution, the group also appears to have a much higher proportion of subjects that self-
identify with the Democratic party and a much lower proportion that identify with the
Republican party than in the U.S. voting-age population. These distributions hold true as we
examine each treatment individually as well. 4
       In presenting the further columns of Table 1, we have ordered the treatments to make the
most relevant comparisons salient. This ordering is also relevant as sample sizes for Treatments
1 and 3 should be considered as a pair, as should treatments 2 and 4. Due to the higher voted
redistribution levels in the treatments in which poor subjects exert higher effort, the standard
errors on the mean voting rates and corresponding differences in these rates are higher for
Treatments 1 and 3. Consequently, we oversampled these treatments.

2
  Lefgren, Sims, and Stoddard (2016) discuss the costs and benefits of MTurk samples versus traditional laboratory
samples in greater detail.
3
  To discourage foreign workers even further, our survey was launched during the normal business hours of US
EST.
4
  Lefgren, Sims, and Stoddard (2016) were able to replicate the results of their redistributive voting experiment from
MTurk in an outside sample with much more conservative political leanings, suggesting that this sample need not
produce unusual results.

                                                                                                                    8
       The final column of the table tests the success of the randomization by looking for
differences in demographic measures across the randomly assigned treatment groups.
Specifically, it presents p-values for the joint test of equality across the four treatment group
means for each variable. In thirteen tests we find one characteristic where we reject the
hypothesis of a common average across all treatment groups at the five-percent level
(male/female), and one where we reject group mean equality at the ten percent level (Democratic
identification). 5 These equality test results are in line with what we would expect from a
successful randomization, however we also present covariate-adjusted results in our analysis
tables as a demonstration of robustness.


    B. Baseline Results
        The central aim of this paper is to investigate the class leavening and contamination
hypotheses. Specifically, do the rich subjects respond more when faced with small deviations in
the composition of an otherwise homogenous class of high- or low-effort poor than a linear
prediction would suggest? We are able to explore this question because we have both a large
experimental sample and because we randomly assign effort. This contrasts with almost all prior
redistribution voting experiments where subjects play in contests or tournaments, and the
experimenters are thus unable to guarantee that fine distinctions in effort or skill will manifest
themselves in the experiment. The distinctions we make are very fine, with only one percent of
the poor changing their effort level in Treatments 3 or 4 from the two baseline treatments.
        Figure 2 presents a graphical representation of our main results. This figure has a layout
analogous to figure 1, except now it presents our actual findings rather than the hypotheticals and
results from the previous literature shown in the first figure. As before, the horizontal axis
represents the fraction of the poor in each treatment that exerted the same effort as the rich, while
the vertical axis shows the average amount the rich in that scenario voted to redistribute to the
poor. Treatments 1 and 2 present the extreme situations where the poor are entirely high effort
or low effort respectively.
        As in prior experiments (Lefgren, Sims and Stoddard 2016), we find that the rich vote for
much higher redistribution to the high-effort poor, almost three times as much, than to the low-
effort poor. We note, however, that the voted level of redistribution is still far from a level that
would achieve equality ($1.00). The graph also suggests evidence of the class leavening and
contamination phenomena at work. In both cases, one percent alterations in the number of the
poor that are high effort appear to change voting for redistribution more than predicted by the

5
  The first row of Table 1 suggests that women may not be equally represented in all treatment groups, particularly
treatment four. An important result of this paper is the strong effect of class leavening (treatment four) on women.
Thus, there may be some concern that the measured effect is mainly due to selective attrition of women with certain
voting preferences from that group. However, a quick calculation suggests that even in the worst-case attrition
scenario the results of Table 5 result would only attenuate by a small amount. Imagine if there had been 6 percent
more women in treatment four and all had voted for no redistribution (the worst-case scenario for our finding). If all
other women’s votes remained the same the average voted redistribution would still have been 19 cents instead of
the reported 21.

                                                                                                                    9
line averaging the extreme groups. It also appears, at least to casual inspection, that the effects
are not symmetric, with the increase in redistribution from adding a small number of high-effort
individuals seeming larger than the decrease from contaminating the poor with a few low-effort
individuals.
         Table 2 puts these results in a regression framework to provide exact numerical values
and standard errors. The top panel corresponds to the class contamination intervention
(treatments 1 versus 3), or the points shown on the right-hand side of figure 2. While the
addition of one percent low-effort individuals to the previously high-effort poor is estimated to
reduce the redistribution provided by the rich by two percentage points, this difference is not
statistically significant even in a sample size of nearly 2000 rich voters. In contrast, the lower
panel of the Table shows that the class leavening effect is much larger (in an absolute value
sense) and statistically significant. Adding one-percent high-effort poor to the previously low
effort group increased the redistribution voted by the rich by seven percentage points, or seventy
percent! This is precisely estimated and significantly different from a predicted linear
relationship between the high-effort fraction of the group and voted redistribution. The addition
of demographic covariates has no effect on either of these results.
        Thus, examining simple average voting patterns provides evidence of class leavening
effects. It also suggests the absence of a symmetric class contamination effect. However,
because each individual could choose to vote for no redistribution, full redistribution, or partial
redistribution, the average amount of voted redistribution may conflate voting changes on
multiple margins and may not capture all the interesting behavioral effects.
         To account for this possibility, Figures 3 and 4 show the fraction of subjects in various
treatment groups that voted for each of the possible redistribution alternatives. Figure 3 suggests
that introducing a small number of low-effort individuals does not change the fraction of voters
who oppose any redistribution. In other words, it does not appear that the presence of low-effort
individuals persuades any subjects to vote against all redistribution. If we are willing to assume
that the results of this change are subject to a monotonicity restriction, namely no one is induced
to vote for more redistribution as the target population exerts less effort, we can further see that
the relevant change in behavior is likely a reduction in the generosity of redistribution on the
intensive margin.
         Table 3 examines this possibility in a regression framework, comparing the fraction of
rich individuals in Treatments 1 and 3 that voted for any redistribution in the top panel, and the
fraction that voted for full redistribution in the bottom panel. The simple and covariate-adjusted
differences are located in the right hand columns. As the graphical evidence suggests, there is no
statistical difference between the number of voters that vote for no redistribution when a small
number of low-effort recipients are introduced. While it makes sense that none of the voters who
opposed any redistribution would change their mind when faced with a lower-effort target
population, it is also interesting that there is no evidence that those who favored some
redistribution in the case of all high-effort recipients change their votes to no redistribution at all.



                                                                                                     10
         On the other hand, Table 3 does show evidence of a potentially important behavior.
When faced with a small percent of transfer recipients that exert lower effort, the support for full
redistribution among the rich is 4 percentage points lower, a statistically significant reduction.
Furthermore, if we assume that the effect of this change follows our above monotonicity
assumption, the true marginal subject population we should consider as available to be
influenced by the change in effort is the 36 percent of the population that voted for some
redistribution when all the poor exerted high effort. The results suggest that the change affected
fully one-ninth of these marginal voters. Furthermore, since there is no evidence that our
treatment induced those who would have voted for an intermediate level of redistribution to
modify their support to no redistribution, it might be more appropriate to conclude that the true
marginal voters in this case were those individuals who initially voted for full redistribution. In
that case, the effect of the small change in effort level was to reduce the redistribution generosity
of almost twenty percent of the initial full redistribution voters. Given the large change among
the voters who would be alternatively most in favor of redistributing to the high effort poor
indicates that class contamination could represent a significant effect in the behavioral as well as
statistical sense.
         Figure 4 considers the specific voting choices in the class leavening treatments. More
specifically, it presents the voting choices made by the rich when all poor participants are low
effort, as opposed to the case when one percent are high effort. The voting patterns appear quite
different from those shown in the class contamination case. In particular, it appears that a
substantial number of voters move away from voting against all redistribution when a small
number of high-effort recipients are introduced. Furthermore, there appear to be more
individuals that favor both potential levels of redistribution (partial and full) under these
circumstances.
        Table 4 confirms these visual conclusions. The vote share in favor of a positive level of
redistribution increases by eleven percentage points when one percent of the recipients become
high-effort. This results in an approximately eight percentage point increase in the voters voting
for the intermediate redistribution level and three percentage points more voting for the full
redistribution level. If we again assume a monotonic response, we would conclude that we
should exclude the four percent of voters who always vote for full redistribution from the
marginal group. This would suggest that 11 out of 96 potentially marginal subjects increase their
support for redistribution, which is quite close to the 1/9 figure we arrived at in the class
contamination case. This suggests that the apparent asymmetry in the behaviors is due to
drawing comparisons across group means rather than measuring voting changes by those for
whom a change could actually be marginal. These large magnitudes also suggest that class-
leavening effects can be important determinants of voting behavior regarding redistribution.
   Indeed, the results of the experiment to this point indicate that the existence of a small
number of poor with effort levels different from an otherwise homogenous class has important
consequences on the willingness of the rich to engage in redistribution. This lends support to a
common interpretation in the prior literature that effort is a key source of perceived
deservedness. To the extent this is true, this experiment further suggests that support for


                                                                                                   11
redistribution might also be sensitive to very small changes in perceived deservedness of other
sorts, such as cultural or ethnic similarity to the rich voters.


   C. Gender differences in redistributive voting patterns
        As previously noted, the literature on voting for redistribution also suggests that women
behave in systematically different ways than men in making these choices. We next investigate
whether gender differences in redistributive voting might help to explain the pattern of results
seen so far. Table 5 is similar to the structure of Table 2, in that it gives the average amount of
redistribution voted by the rich, broken down by treatment status. This time, however, we further
separate the average redistribution amounts voted by men versus women under each treatment.
As before, the top panel shows the class contamination treatments (1 and 3) while the bottom
panel shows the leavening treatments (2 and 4).
         Three of the treatments confirm the finding of the previous literature that women vote for
higher redistribution than men. When all subjects exert high effort, the rich women vote for five
percent more redistribution than the men. In both cases with a mix of effort levels the women
vote for eight percentage points more redistribution than the men. These differences are
statistically significant. More interesting, however, is the case in which all the recipients exert
low effort. This is the one case in which the women do not appear to vote for more redistribution
than the men. In fact, the point estimates are identical for both men and women.
         Comparing this identical behavior of men and women toward entirely low-effort groups
of poor subjects with the response when introducing one percent high-effort poor is startling. In
the latter case, men increase the amount of redistribution by a small and statistically insignificant
amount, while women more than double the voted amount of redistribution. Thus, the voting
behavior of women is responsible for most of the class leavening effect found in Table 2.
        Another interesting gender difference suggested by the table is that men respond similarly
to leavening and contamination, while women respond more strongly to leavening. Although we
cannot identify it precisely, the magnitude by which men reduce their votes for redistribution
under class contamination is estimated to be statistically similar to the amount they increase it
under class leavening. The women, in contrast, appear almost completely unresponsive to the
class contamination scenario despite their strong reaction to leavening. One interpretation of
these results could be that women are much more sensitive to the possibility of failing to reward
someone they view as deserving than the possibility of granting someone undeserved rewards.
        In Tables 6 and 7, we consider whether considering votes for specific levels of
redistribution might affect our assessment of gender differences in redistributive voting. Table 6
considers the class contamination treatments. Here a more complex picture of the differences
emerges. Women are more likely to vote for both partial and full redistribution than men in all
cases. Most of the reduction in redistribution voted by men when faced with a small number of
low-effort recipients comes from a statistically significant decrease in the number of men who
vote for full redistribution. Furthermore, this roughly matches the decrease in the fraction of

                                                                                                  12
women who vote for full redistribution when 1% of the recipients exert low effort. This suggests
that our observed class contamination effect, where a large proportion of the most generous
redistribution voters are the ones to reduce their support for redistribution, is not gender-specific
but is general to both groups.
         Table 7, by contrast, confirms the earlier conclusion that the votes of the women in the
sample drive the strong class leavening effect. While a significantly higher fraction of men vote
for some redistribution when there are 1% high-effort poor than when all the poor exert low
effort, the number of men voting for full redistribution remains the same. Meanwhile the
response of female voters to this change is much stronger, with almost double the increase in the
number moved to vote for some redistribution, relative to men, and a tripling in the number of
women voting for full redistribution.


   V. Conclusion
        This study presents novel, experimental evidence that voters can be highly sensitive to
small changes in the effort level of the poor when voting for redistribution. Prior research has
established that the rich vote for more redistribution when the poor recipients uniformly exert
high effort than when they exert low effort. We show that the uniformity of group effort is
crucial to these results. In particular, our experimental evidence suggests about one-eighth of
voters chose to increase the level of redistribution they support, as indicated by their vote, when
a previously low effort recipient group is “leavened” by 1% high-effort recipients. Furthermore,
a similar fraction of those already voting for full redistribution when the recipient population is
all high-effort, vote for less redistribution when the recipient group is contaminated by 1% low-
effort subjects.
        We also find there are important gender differences in these effects. Notably, women are
far more sensitive to class leavening than men, with more than twice as many women responding
to small changes in the effort level of the poor. While women are also more generous across
most of the redistribution scenarios, the size of this particular effect suggests that it could be
important for understanding some of the mechanisms behind the greater female support for
redistribution.
        Our findings suggest that at least some subjects in our study appear to place
disproportionate weight on those individuals perceived to be most deserving within a pool of
transfer recipients. This is particularly true for women. This could be because the welfare of
such individuals enters most heavily into voters’ utility functions or because voters act as if a
known, but small fraction of deserving recipients is larger. Some evidence also points to the
possibility that other voters care disproportionately about the least deserving elements of a
group.
        Our experiment provides multiple insights into voter behavior in broader contexts. First,
our results imply that small changes in beliefs about the deservedness of the recipients of
government transfer programs could translate into major changes in support for redistribution. In

                                                                                                    13
our experiment there is, by construction, a single, verifiable measure of deservedness, relative
effort. More generally, the deservedness of recipients may be ambiguous. Combining this
ambiguity with voters’ willingness to support large changes in redistribution in response to
recipient deservedness may well explain the prevalence of anecdotal descriptions of the poor in
politics.
        A second implication of our findings is subtler. Our results, as seen in figure 2, suggest
that though there are large changes in voting behavior in response to movements at the extremes
of the deservedness distribution, there is little response in the middle. Thus, while anecdotes
might produce an initially strong voting reaction, once voters believe there is heterogeneity in
deservedness, additional information will have little impact on voting.
        Our study also suggests some important topics for future inquiry. One would be
experimentally confirming the flat, low-response portion of figure 2. Even more important
might be studying observable characteristics of the poor that might proxy for deservedness in the
minds of voters. Understanding how voters form perceptions of deservedness when effort data is
unavailable or suspect might be an important step in understanding actual voting data. In the
meantime, it seems certain that political candidates and advocates of all persuasions will attempt
to use stories about the deservedness of the poor in an attempt to leverage the type of large
voting changes we document in this paper.




                                                                                                14
                       Average Voted Redistribution Among the Rich
 0.35

  0.3
                                                                                                F
 0.25
                                                      C                                 E
  0.2

 0.15                                                 D
               B

  0.1

 0.05 A

    0
        0     0.1      0.2      0.3        0.4      0.5       0.6    0.7     0.8      0.9       1
                                      Fraction of High-Effort Poor

Figure 1: Redistribution and the effort of the poor: The past literature and hypothetical examples.




                                                                                                15
                                             Experimental High-Effort Support for Redistribution
                                  0.35

                                   0.3
   Voted Redistribution to Poor




                                  0.25

                                   0.2

                                  0.15

                                   0.1

                                  0.05

                                    0
                                         0       0.2          0.4             0.6         0.8      1
                                                           Fraction of High-Effort Poor



Figure 2: Redistribution and the effort of the poor in our experiment
Notes: The points show the experimentally observed relationship between the fraction of high-
effort poor and the amount of redistribution the rich subjects voted for. Also shown is what a
linear relationship between redistribution and fraction high effort poor would predict.




                                                                                                   16
   Treatment 1 - All Deserving




 Treatment 3 - 1% Undeserving




                                 0      0.1        0.2       0.3      0.4      0.5       0.6         0.7
                                                  Fraction of the Rich who vote for:

       Redistribution to Equality ($1.00)     Half-redistribution ($0.50)   No redistribution ($0)


Figure 3: The class contamination effect of introducing 1% low effort among the poor on the
voting of the rich




 Treatment 2 - All Undeserving




   Treatment 4 - 1% Deserving




                                 0    0.1      0.2     0.3     0.4    0.5   0.6    0.7     0.8       0.9
                                                  Fraction of the Rich who Vote for:

       Redistribution to Equality ($1.00)     Half-redistribution ($0.50)   No redistribution ($0)


Figure 4: The class leavening effect of introducing 1% high effort among the poor on the voting
of the rich




                                                                                                           17
  Table 1: Summary Statistics by Treatment Status
                                All High      99% High        All Low     99% Low       P-Value
                 Overall
                                 Effort -       Effort          Effort      Effort      Equal
                  Mean
Variable                      Treatment 1 Treatment 3 Treatment 2 Treatment 4 Means
Female               0.55          0.57          0.55            0.57        0.51
                                                                                           0.03
                    (0.50)        (0.50)        (0.50)          (0.50)      (0.50)
Age                 33.16         33.18         33.37           32.86       33.17
                                                                                           0.49
                   (11.07)       (10.88)       (10.64)         (11.49)     (11.41)
Married              0.40          0.41          0.40            0.40        0.38
                                                                                           0.82
                    (0.49)        (0.49)        (0.49)          (0.49)      (0.49)
White                0.79          0.80          0.79            0.80        0.78
                                                                                           0.21
                    (0.41)        (0.40)        (0.41)          (0.40)      (0.42)
Asian                0.06          0.06          0.06            0.05        0.07
                                                                                           0.59
                    (0.24)        (0.24)        (0.24)          (0.23)      (0.25)
Hispanic             0.05          0.05          0.05            0.06        0.06
                                                                                           0.32
                    (0.22)        (0.21)        (0.22)          (0.23)      (0.23)
Black                0.07          0.06          0.07            0.06        0.08
                                                                                           0.35
                    (0.25)        (0.24)        (0.26)          (0.24)      (0.27)
Other                0.02          0.03          0.02            0.03        0.02
                                                                                           0.95
Ethnicity           (0.15)        (0.16)        (0.16)          (0.16)      (0.14)
> Median             0.55          0.54          0.55            0.55        0.56
                                                                                           0.84
Income              (0.50)        (0.50)        (0.50)          (0.50)      (0.50)
Employed             0.63          0.67          0.65            0.60        0.61
                                                                                           0.13
                    (0.48)        (0.47)        (0.48)          (0.49)      (0.49)
Student              0.14          0.12          0.13            0.16        0.15
                                                                                           0.21
                    (0.34)        (0.32)        (0.33)          (0.37)      (0.36)
Republican           0.17          0.19          0.16            0.16        0.17
                                                                                           0.43
                    (0.38)        (0.39)        (0.37)          (0.37)      (0.38)
Democrat             0.42          0.38          0.40            0.44        0.46
                                                                                           0.09
                    (0.49)        (0.49)        (0.49)          (0.50)      (0.50)
Sample Size         3,577          988           978             814         797
   Notes for Table 1: Standard deviations are in parentheses below means. The sample size does
   not include observations that were dropped. P-values are computed controlling for session fixed
   effects to take into account composition differences across sessions.




                                                                                                18
Table 2: Mean Voted Tax Amounts by Treatment Status
                 Voted Tax Levels                                       Comparison
    All High Effort          99% High Effort             Raw Difference         Covariate Adjusted
         0.29**                   0.27**                       0.02                      0.02
         (0.01)                   (0.01)                      (0.02)                    (0.02)
     All Low Effort          99% Low Effort              Raw Difference         Covariate Adjusted
         0.10**                   0.17**                     -0.07**                   -0.07**
         (0.01)                   (0.01)                      (0.01)                    (0.01)
Notes to Table 2: Listed amounts are the average voted redistribution amount in dollars for the
particular group. Redistribution to full equality would involve an amount of $1.00 being
redistributed from high to low earner groups. ** indicates statistical significance at the 5
percent level. Covariates include gender, high income, ethnicity, employed, student, Republican,
and Democrat dummy variables along with a linear age control.




Table 3: Fraction Voting for Redistribution Levels – Class Contamination Treatments
     Fraction Voting for Any Redistribution                              Comparison
    All High Effort           99% High Effort             Raw Difference          Covariate Adjusted
         0.36**                   0.37**                        0.01                      0.01
         (0.02)                   (0.02)                       (0.02)                    (0.02)
     Fraction Voting for Full Redistribution                             Comparison
    All High Effort           99% High Effort             Raw Difference          Covariate Adjusted
         0.21**                   0.17**                       0.04**                    0.04**
         (0.01)                   (0.01)                       (0.02)                    (0.02)
Notes to Table 3: Listed amounts are the fractions of the rich who vote for the indicated
redistribution option in Treatments 1 and 3. ** indicates statistical significance at the 5 percent
level. Covariates include session fixed effects, gender, high income, ethnicity, employed,
student, Republican, and Democrat dummy variables along with a linear age control.




                                                                                                19
Table 4: Fraction Voting for Redistribution Levels – Class Leavening Treatments
     Fraction Voting for Any Redistribution                              Comparison
    All Low Effort            99% Low Effort              Raw Difference          Covariate Adjusted
         0.16**                   0.27**                      -0.11**                    -0.11**
         (0.01)                   (0.02)                       (0.02)                     (0.02)
     Fraction Voting for Full Redistribution                             Comparison
    All Low Effort            99% Low Effort              Raw Difference          Covariate Adjusted
         0.04**                   0.07**                      -0.03**                    -0.03**
         (0.01)                   (0.01)                       (0.01)                     (0.01)
Notes to Table 4: Listed amounts are the fractions of the rich who vote for the indicated
redistribution option in Treatments 2 and 4. ** indicates statistical significance at the 5 percent
level. Covariates include session fixed effects, gender, high income, ethnicity, employed,
student, Republican, and Democrat dummy variables along with a linear age control.




Table 5: Mean Voted Tax Amounts by Treatment Status and Gender
                         Voted Tax Levels                                  Comparison
  Gender        All High Effort     99% High Effort          Raw Difference Covariate Adjusted
   Male             0.26**                0.23**                     0.03                  0.03
                    (0.02)                (0.02)                   (0.03)                (0.03)
  Female            0.31**                0.30**                     0.00                  0.01
                    (0.02)                (0.02)                   (0.02)                (0.02)
 Difference         -0.05*               -0.08**                     0.03                  0.03
                    (0.03)                (0.02)                   (0.04)                (0.08)
                All Low Effort      99% Low Effort           Raw Difference Covariate Adjusted
   Male             0.10**                0.13**                    -0.03                 -0.03
                    (0.01)                (0.01)                   (0.02)                (0.02)
  Female            0.10**                0.21**                 -0.11**                -0.11**
                    (0.01)                (0.02)                   (0.02)                (0.02)
 Difference          0.00                -0.08**                  0.07**                 0.07**
                    (0.02)                (0.02)                   (0.03)                (0.03)
Notes to Table 5: Listed amounts are the average voted redistribution amount in dollars for the
particular group. Redistribution to full equality would involve an amount of $1.00 being
redistributed from high to low earner groups. ** indicates statistical significance at the 5 percent
level. Covariates include gender, high income, ethnicity, employed, student, Republican, and
Democrat dummy variables along with a linear age control.




                                                                                                20
Table 6: Fraction Voting for Redistribution Levels – Class Contamination Treatments by
Gender
              Fraction Voting for Any Redistribution                        Comparison
  Gender       All High Effort     99% High Effort            Raw Difference            Covariate
                                                                                        Adjusted
   Male             0.33**               0.31**                     -0.02                  -0.02
                     (0.02)               (0.02)                   (0.03)                 (0.03)
  Female            0.39**               0.42**                      0.03                  0.03
                     (0.02)               (0.02)                   (0.03)                 (0.03)
 Difference          -0.05*              -0.11**                    -0.05                  -0.04
                     (0.03)               (0.03)                   (0.04)                 (0.04)
               Fraction Voting for Full Redistribution                      Comparison
                All High Effort      99% High Effort          Raw Difference            Covariate
                                                                                        Adjusted
   Male             0.19**               0.14**                     0.04*                  0.04
                     (0.02)               (0.02)                   (0.03)                 (0.03)
  Female            0.23**               0.19**                      0.04                 0.04*
                     (0.02)               (0.02)                   (0.02)                 (0.02)
 Difference           -0.04               -0.04*                     0.00                  0.00
                     (0.02)               (0.02)                   (0.04)                 (0.04)
Notes to Table 6: Listed amounts are the fractions of the rich who vote for the indicated
redistribution option in Treatments 1 and 3. ** indicates statistical significance at the 5 percent
level. Covariates include session fixed effects, gender, high income, ethnicity, employed,
student, Republican, and Democrat dummy variables along with a linear age control.




                                                                                                      21
Table 7: Fraction Voting for Redistribution Levels – Class Leavening Treatments by
Gender
              Fraction Voting for Any Redistribution                        Comparison
    Sex        All Low Effort      99% Low Effort             Raw Difference            Covariate
                                                                                        Adjusted
   Male             0.15**               0.22**                    -0.07**               -0.07**
                     (0.02)               (0.02)                    (0.03)                (0.03)
  Female            0.18**               0.32**                    -0.15**               -0.15**
                     (0.02)               (0.02)                    (0.03)                (0.03)
 Difference           -0.03              -0.11**                   0.08**                 0.08*
                     (0.03)               (0.03)                    (0.04)                (0.04)
               Fraction Voting for Full Redistribution                      Comparison
                All Low Effort       99% Low Effort           Raw Difference            Covariate
                                                                                        Adjusted
   Male             0.05**               0.05**                      0.01                  0.01
                     (0.01)               (0.01)                    (0.02)                (0.02)
  Female            0.03**               0.10**                    -0.06**               -0.06**
                     (0.01)               (0.01)                    (0.02)                (0.02)
 Difference           0.02               -0.05**                   0.07**                0.07**
                     (0.01)               (0.02)                    (0.02)                (0.02)
Notes to Table 7: Listed amounts are the fractions of the rich who vote for the indicated
redistribution option in Treatments 2 and 4. ** indicates statistical significance at the 5 percent
level. Covariates include session fixed effects, gender, high income, ethnicity, employed,
student, Republican, and Democrat dummy variables along with a linear age control.




                                                                                                      22
References


Alesina, Alberto, and George-Marios Angeletos, "Fairness and redistribution," American
Economic Review, (2005), 960-980.
Alesina, Alberto F, and Paola Giuliano, "Preferences for redistribution," (National Bureau of
Economic Research, 2009).
Alesina, Alberto, and Eliana La Ferrara, "Preferences for redistribution in the land of
opportunities," Journal of Public Economics, 89 (2005), 897-931.
Andreoni, James, and John Miller, "Giving according to GARP: An experimental test of the
consistency of preferences for altruism," Econometrica, 70 (2002), 737-753.
Bordalo, P., Coffman, K., Gennaioli, N., & Shleifer, A. "Stereotypes." The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 131 (2016), 1753-1794.
Benabou, Roland, and Jean Tirole, "Belief in a just world and redistributive politics," The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121 (2006), 699-746.
Besley, Timothy, and Anne Case, "Political institutions and policy choices: evidence from the
United States," Journal of Economic literature, 41 (2003) , 7-73.
Carlsson, Fredrik, Haoran He, and Peter Martinsson, "Easy come, easy go," Experimental
Economics, (2012), 1-18.
Charness, Gary, David Masclet, and Marie Claire Villeval, "The dark side of competition for
status," Management Science, 60 (2013), 38-55.
Cherry, Todd L, Peter Frykblom, and Jason F Shogren, "Hardnose the dictator," The American
Economic Review, 92 (2002), 1218-1221.
Durante, Ruben, Louis Putterman, and Joël Weele, "Preferences for redistribution and perception
of fairness: An experimental study," Journal of the European Economic Association, 12 (2014),
1059-1086.
Eckel, Catherine C, and Philip J Grossman, "Are women less selfish than men?: Evidence from
dictator experiments," The Economic Journal, 108 (1998), 726-735.
Edlund, Lena, Laila Haider, and Rohini Pande, "Unmarried parenthood and redistributive
politics," Journal of the European Economic Association, 3 (2005), 95-119.
Edlund, Lena, and Rohini Pande, "Why have women become left-wing? The political gender gap
and the decline in marriage," Quarterly Journal of Economics, (2002), 917-961.
Erkal, Nisvan, Lata Gangadharan, and Nikos Nikiforakis, "Relative Earnings and Giving in a
Real-Effort Experiment," American Economic Review, 101 (2011), 3330-3348.
Gee, Laura K., Marco Migueis, and Sahar Parsa, "Redistributive Choices and Income Inequality:
Experimental Evidence for Income as a Signal of Deservingness," Working Paper Tufts
University, (2015).
Hoffman, Elizabeth, Kevin McCabe, Keith Shachat, and Vernon Smith, "Preferences, property
rights, and anonymity in bargaining games," Games and Economic Behavior, 7 (1994), 346-380.
Horton, JohnJ, DavidG Rand, and RichardJ Zeckhauser, "The online laboratory: conducting
experiments in a real labor market," Experimental Economics, 14 (2011), 399-425.
Kahneman, Daniel, and Amos Tversky, "Prospect theory: An analysis of decision under risk,"
Econometrica: Journal of the econometric society, (1979), 263-291.
Kamas, Linda, and Anne Preston, "Can social preferences explain gender differences in
economic behavior?," Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 116 (2015), 525-539.

                                                                                              23
Krawczyk, Michał, "A glimpse through the veil of ignorance: Equality of opportunity and
support for redistribution," Journal of Public Economics, 94 (2010), 131-141.
Kuhn, Peter, and Marie Claire Villeval, "Are Women More Attracted to Co‐operation Than
Men?," The Economic Journal, 125 (2015), 115-140.
Kuziemko, Ilyana, Michael I Norton, and Emmanuel Saez, "How Elastic Are Preferences for
Redistribution? Evidence from Randomized Survey Experiments," American Economic Review,
105 (2015), 1478-1508.
Lattimore, Pamela K, Joanna R Baker, and Ann D Witte, "The influence of probability on risky
choice: A parametric examination," Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 17 (1992),
377-400.
Lefgren, Lars J, David P. Sims, and Olga Stoddard, "Effort, Luck and Voting for Redistribution,"
Journal of Public Economics, 143 (2016), 89-97.
Lott, John R, and Larry W. Kenney, "How dramatically did women's suffrage change the size
and scope of government?," Journal of political Economy, 107 (1999), 1163-1198.
Schildberg-Hörisch, Hannah, "Is the veil of ignorance only a concept about risk? An
experiment," Journal of Public Economics, 94 (2010), 1062-1066.




                                                                                             24
