                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           SOME NOTES ON THE SCIENTIFIC
                             METHODS OF SIMON KUZNETS




                                 Robert W. Fogel




                              Working Paper No. 2461




                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 1987




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in Development
of the American Economy. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research or the University of Chicago.
                                                 NBER Working Paper #2461
                                                 December 1987




            Some Notes on the Scientific Methods of Simon Kuznets




                                  ABSTRACT




        This paper discusses the scientific methods that guided the economic
research of Simon Kuznets, with particular stress on his approach to
measurement and theory. The paper closes with the transcription of a brief
autobiographical talk by Kuznets at a dinner in honor of his eightieth
birthday.




                                                Robert W. Fogel
                                                Center for Population Economics
                                                University of Chicago
                                                1101 East 58th Street
                                                Chicago, IL 60637
            SOME NOTES ON THE SCIENTI1C METHODS OF SIMON KUZNETS1



         "Anyone can start a row in economics; it is much harder to find out

what is really happening to the economy." Simon Kuznets made this statement

during a conversation he had with Henry Rosovsky and me at Harvard

University in the early 1970s.   I was startled when he said it, since our

profession thrives on controversy. Indeed, to many economists cleverness in

debate, rather than the applicability of the debate to any issue of the real

world, is what economics is all about. To Kuznets, however, there was a

real economic world and the task of the economist was to describe it

accurately and to explain it in a way that would be helpful to those who had

to make economic policy.


              Four Aspects of Kuznets's Approach to Economics

        If there was any aspect of Kuzriets's approach to economics that may

be said to have dominated all the other aspects, it was his concern with the

great policy issues of his age. My emphasis on this point may surprise

those who are familiar with Kuznets's work, since he never became directly

involved in those highly politicized disputes over economic policy that

often split the profession into partisan camps. Moreover, many of the

problems on which he worked, such as the relationship between the rate of

population growth and of technological innovation, are hardly likely to be

resolved or even affected significantly by new legislation, nor did his

findings on such issues enter prominently into the shifting partisan

alignments of his age. Nevertheless, Kuznets recognized the importance of

the points at issue in the political debates over economic policy and he

believed that the development of a reliable body of evidence bearing upon
                                         2



these issues was an urgent task of economists. He saw economics as an

empirical science aimed at disclosing the factors which affect economic

performance.

           It is important to keep in mind how new the issues with which

Kuznets grappled during his career were when he first began to address them

in the mid 1920s. The proposition that Western Europe and America had

undergone an irreversable economic transformation -- an industrial

revolution --    was not effectively enunciated until the end of

the 1880s. Although optimism about the economy was widespread during the

first three decades of the twentieth century, these years also spawned

influential theories that economic progress was grinding to a halt. The

notion of a general crisis for capitalism, set forth in the work of such

socialist or radical theorists as Hobson, Hilferding and Lenin, became

widely accepted by professional economists during the 1930s, and Hansen's

suggestion that a correct fiscal policy could bring an end to secular

stagnation, despite a certain optimism, seemed to endorse the view that

secular stagnation was the natural condition of free market economies in the

twentieth century (Abramovitz 1952).

            Kuznets broke new ground in several respects when he set out to

describe the phenomenon he called modern economic growth. Such growth was

not a lucky accident, the outcome of a fortunate but ephemeral conjunction

of circumstances. It was, rather, the central feature of a new historical

epoch marked by the application of science to industry and possessing other

characteristics that gave it unity and set it apart from the epochs that

preceded it (1966, p. 2). Among the primary features of modern economic

growth were sustained rises in output per capita or per worker accompanied

by increases in population and by sweeping changes In the structure of the
                                       3


economy. When Kuznets first began his work on economic growth in the mid

1920s, not all the processes that he later identified had worked themselves

out. Europe and America were still passing through the demographic and

epidemiological transitions (U.S. life expectation at birth in 1920 was

still under 55 years) and the nature of these phenomena was not yet fully

apparent. It would be another two decades before the theory of the

demographic transition was formulated and it would be another three to four

decades before it became clear that the economic advances of the last half

of the nineteenth century were part of a new epoch of economic growth that

was about two centuries old, and that was in the process of spreading from

its origins in Western Europe and in certain countries of European

settlement to the Impoverished nations of Africa, Asia, and Latin America.

        To Kuznets, accurate description of the characteristics of modern

economic growth and of the factors that tended to promote or retard growth

were necessary not only for the continued prosperity of the developed

nations but also to formulate policies that would close the enormous gap in

per capita income that had arisen between the developed and the less

developed nations. Much of his work was directed toward measuring and

explaining differing patterns In the inequality of the distribution of

income, across and within nations, over time. He believed that at low

levels of per capita income, economic growth tended to increase inequality

of' the distribution of income, but at intermediate and higher levels, growth

reduced inequality. On this question, as on so many others, Kuznets sought

to distinguish factors affecting the income distribution that were more or

less inescapable consequences of the dynamics of population or income growth

from those that were amenable to current policy.
       The last point touches on a second aspect of Kuznets's approach:

his concern with the role of long-term factors in the determination of

current economic performance. In his view many current economic

opportunities and problems were determined by economic conditions and

relationships that evolved slowly, often taking many decades to work out.

At a time when Keynes declared that "In the long run we are all dead," an

aphorism reiterated by many economists not only during the 1930s but during

the 191Os and 1950s, Kuznets continued to call attention to the role of

long-term factors that had to be taken into account by policy makers,

factors which led him to conclude that the opportunities for returning to

high employment levels and rapid economic growth were greater than generally

believed.

        Current social problems, Kuznets emphasized, are often the result of

past growth --   the consequence of past desirable attainments, which at a
later time produce socially undesirable consequences that require remedial

policy action. Of his numerous illustrations of this principle, one is

particularly cogent: the explosion of population growth in the less

developed nations of Asia, Africa, Oceania, and Latin America in the quarter

century following World War II. This population explosion threatened to

thwart efforts to raise per capita incomes from their dismally low levels

because birth rates remained traditionally high, while public health

policies and improved nutrition cut death rates in these regions by more

than 50 percent in less than a generation. One obvious solution to the

problem was to reduce fertility, yet there was a web of traditional patterns

of behavior and beliefs that tended to keep fertility high. Nevertheless,

Kuznets believed that properly designed public policies could hasten the

social and ideological changes required to reduce fertility and to lead
                                       5



these societies to prefer a greater investment in a fewer number of

children. Such a program required not only government and private campaigns

to disseminate the technology of birth control but a restructuring of social

and economic incentives that would provide rewards for families with fewer

children.

        Kuznets pointed out that this urgently needed program to reduce

fertility would have its negative as well as its positive side. Since it

was those in upper income brackets who would respond most rapidly to the new

incentives, the immediate impact of a campaign to reduce birth rates would

be to increase the inequality of the income distribution. This initial

impact could be overcome by a determined effort to change the social and

economic conditions of the lower classes in a way that would promote their

interest In smaller families. Yet as the experience of the U.S. and other

developed nations has shown, the success of the program to curtail fertility

is bound, much further down the line, to create a new set of problems,

similar to those which are currently at the center of the modern women's

movement: the restructuring of society in such a way as to promote equal

opportunity for women in all occupational markets.

        Economic growth creates social problems because it is profoundly

disruptive to traditional values and religious beliefs, to longstanding

social and family patterns of organization, and to numerous monopolies of

privilege. Despite the fact that modern economic growth has brought with it

tremendous increases in longevity and good health, has brought to the lower

classes standards of living as well as social and economic opportunities

previously available only to a tiny minority, and has greatly reduced the

inequality in the income distribution of developed nations, the social

restructuring of society required by modern economic growth has been
                                        6


fiercely   resisted -- sometimes because of an unwillingness to give up

traditional values and ways of life, sometimes by entrenched classes

determined to protect their ancient privileges. Because of the complex

responses to change and because the epoch of modern economic growth was

still unfolding, many aspects of the social restructuring that was under way

were still obscure and difficult to predict (Kuznets 1966, p. 15). As late

as 1972 Kuznets felt compelled to point out that despite the multitude of

tentative partial generalizations, cross-sectional studies, and econometric

exercises, there was as yet no "tested generalization, significantly

specific to permit the quantitative prediction of aggregate growth, or even

of changes in the structural parameters in the course of growth" (1972, p.

58).

           The difficulty of predicting the future relates to two

methodological problems with which Kuznets continually struggled: How long

a period of observation is needed to identify the underlying process at work

in any specific aspect of economic growth? How can one determine whether

such a process, once identified, is sufficiently stable to provide a

reliable basis for prediction? These problems are illustrated by an issue

on which <uznets was the preeminent investigator of his age, the

interrelationship between demographic processes and modern economic growth.

           Kuznets considered the acceleration of population growth during the

nineteenth century not only as one of the most important consequences of

economic growth, but also a major factor contributing to it. A particularly

important aspect of the phenomenon was the concentration of the decline of

death rates at early ages, which contributed to the reduction in fertility

rates. The reduced fertility rate released a large proportion of the female

labor force to gainful occupations, accelerated the transition to modern
                                         7



families, mobile arid responsive to economic incentives, and promoted new

ideologies conducive to economic growth (1966, pp. 56-62). In this

connection Kuznets noted the increase in the share of women in the U.S.

labor force from 17 percent in 1890 to 27 percent in 1950, which he

attributed to the lower fertility rates, the shift in employment

opportunities from manual to service sector positions, and urbanization

which made organized labor markets more accessible to women. He also called

attention to the fact that the most rapidly growing occupations -- those in

the professional, technical, clerical, sales, and other services -- were the

ones in which women had made the greatest Inroads. Nevertheless in the late

1950s and early 1960s, when the new women's movement was still incipient,

Kuznets did not anticipate the explosive entry of women into the labor force

during the next quarter century, nor the new ideology that would facilitate

that development (1966, pp. 193—195).

           A third aspect of Kuznets's method was his approach to the

establishment of the priorities for empirical research in economics. At any

moment there are more issues and problems demanding the attention of

economists than there are resources to address them. In Kuznets's view the

priorities for research were determined by a complex interaction of three

factors:     (1) the needs of policy makers inside and outside of the

government, particularly the issues that they considered paramount for

promoting economic growth, stability, and equIty; (2) the beliefs of

economists and other social scientists regarding the most effective measures

for resolving the problems on this social agenda; and (3) the availability

of the data needed to address these issues and the effectiveness of the

tools, both analytical and mechanical, required to process and analyze the

data (1972, p. 39).
                                      8


        In explaining both the enormous growth of economic research between

1930 and 1970, and the direction that it took, Kuznets emphasized the

importance of the interaction between these three factors, rather than the

ascendeney of any one over the other. This expansion of economic reasearch

undoubtedly depended on the social agenda, since it was largely through the

government that the training of the scientific personnel, the collection of

the primary data, and the financing of individual research projects were

directly or indirectly promoted.2 However, which direction this research

took was heavily influenced by developments within the academic community.

Thus, while the devastating impact of the great depression of the 1930s

promoted greater government intervention in the economy, the direction that

the intervention took, arid the type of research that the government

promoted, was greatly affected by Keynesian theory which had gained such

dominance in the scholarly community. In the absence of this influential

theory, government policy "might have been limited to new provisions for

unemployment insurance, new plans for public works, and the like" (1972, p.

42). Since the theory indicated that the depression could recur unless the

government was continuously concerned with insuring a sufficiently high

level of final demand, government policy moved heavily in a Keynesian

direction. This interaction between social priorities and economic theory

gave an enormous stimulus to the development of national income accounts, of

measures of employment and unemployment, of the size distribution of income,

and of other macro variables as a means of monitoring economic performance

and of guiding government intervention.

        Kuzriets emphasized the critical role played by academic research on

the innovations in economic measurement adopted by government agencies in
                                       9



the free market economies. It was not primarily from the government

bureaucracy but from the scholarly community that new approaches to

measuring economic performance arose. It was not until they had been

advanced and explored within the scholarly community that the national

income and product accounts, input-output analysis, flow-of-funds measures,

and periodic sample surveys were adopted by government agencies as standard

procedures on which they relied.

        The increased importance placed on economic measurement was also

promoted by the enormous strides made since World War II in methods of

collecting and summarizing primary data, as well as in analyzing them. In

this connection Kuznets emphasized not only the enormous advances in

computer technology and in methods of statistical inference, but also the

advances in the mathematical modelling of both simple and complex

socioeconomic behavior. Just as he viewed Keynesian theory as a great

stimulus to quantitative economic research, he viewed the post-war explosion

of economic models as having the potential to promote more well-defined

empirical research and eventually to increase the body of empirically tested

and confirmed economic theory (1972, pp. 514-58).

        This emphasis on the intimate interconnection between measurement

and theory was the fourth, and perhaps the most distinctive aspect of

Kuznets's method. Although Kuznets was a quintessestial empiricist and a

standard-bearer for empirical research, his empiricism did not imply

hostility to theory. Quite the contrary, he continually emphasized that a

sound theory was needed to identify the variables that had to be measured,

and theory had to be invoked in order to determine how the raw data thrown

up by normal business or governmental activities had to be combined in order

to create the desired measures. Since measurement was dependent on theory,
                                        10


he emphasized that as theory advanced, due either to deeper insights or
sounder empirical knowledge, past measures would have to be revised. Thus

empirical and theoretical knowledge are at any point in time only

asymptotically valid, subject to changing knowledge in both areas as well as

to changing social goals and values (1972, pp. 18-22). In attempting to

pursue his empirical objectives Kuznets frequently encountered theoretical

issues that had not yet been addressed adequately. On such occasions he

made notable contributions to theory, as in his work on the theory of

national income accounting, in which he extended utility theory to issues

involved in designing measures of output that reflected economic welfare.

          Kuznets did not pit deductive theory against inductive theory but

made use of both approaches in his work. Nor did he object to simplifying

assumptions that, although a gloss on reality, facilitated an analysis

without distorting it. Kuznets was, however, impatient with theorists who

knew so little about the institutions or processes about which they

theorized that they could not distinguish between metaphors and reality and

so failed to consider the logical implications of assumptions that violently

distorted the real world. One of Kuznets's repeated contributions was the

demonstraton that certain so-called pure theories embodied false assumptions

about empirical matters, assumptions that critically affected the

conclusions derived from the theories. In so doing he helped to counter the

view that in theoretical work, cleverness and elegance were all that

mattered. Clever economic theories that did not ultimately contribute to

the bottom line, curing or keeping the economy healthy and promoting its

growth,   were no more useful than biomedical theories that did not ultimately
contribute to fighting disease or otherwise improving people's   health and

longevity.
                                      11




        Kuznets not only used theory but sought to extend it by identifying

empirical regularities that could provide the basis for new theories or to

modify and extend existing ones. In this connection he made notable

contributions to the theory of technological change, the theory of

industrialization and other aspects of long-term structural changes in

modern economies, the theory of economic cycles, the theory of the size

distribution of income, the theory of the interrelationship between

population change and economic growth, the theory of capital formation

(including the role of variations in saving rates over the life cycle), and

the theory of changes in vital rates on the socioeconomic characteristics of

households.

        I am acutely aware that the preceding comments are at best a gloss

on the methods that underpinned the work of a scholar as prolific and as

broad ranging in issues, and as flexible in methods, as Kuznets was. Others

might have emphasized much different aspects of his approach than those that

I have singled out. And enough can be written on each of these points to

fill a book. Since the editor, although generous in his charge, did not

give me that liberty, I have limited my desire to elaborate on Kuznets's

methods to two points: his approach to what one might call the art of

measurement in economics and his contribution to economic theory.


                        How to Measure in Economics

       To many of those who studied under Kuznets, his demonstrations and

discussions of the art of measurement were the most valuable aspect of their

training. By the art of measurement I mean not merely statistical and

econometric theory, which are important but quite adequately conveyed in

papers and books. A far more difficult question in practice is how to apply
                                      12


statistical methods and economic models to the incomplete and biased data

with which economists normally work and still produce reliable estimates of

key economic variables and parameters. That question cannot be answered by

a simple rule because economic data are so variable in quality and because

the circumstances under which a given set of defects in the data are

tolerable depends on the issues that are being addressed, on the statistical

and analytical procedures that are being employed, and on the sensitivity of

the results to systematic errors in the data, to the choice of behavioral

models, and to the choice of statistical procedures.

        Good judgement on these issues is developed with experience, and

Kuznets tried to convey his rich experience on these matters in the same way

that doctors use rounds to teach medical students the art of diagnosing

illnesses. Kuznets conducted his "rounds" in three different ways: first,

in his lectures on economic growth where he discussed problems of

measurement and gave numerous examples of good and bad attempts to measure

key economic variables and relationships; second, in his seminar on the

application of quantitive methods to the analysis of time series, which was

largely a laboratory course in which students applied various procedures to

typical bodies of economic data, and collectively discussed the problems and

interpreted the outcomes; third, in his supervision of dissertations, during

which Kuznets varied his approach to the degree of independence desired by

the student, while always serving as a sympathetic, thorough, and


penetrating critic.3

        At the time I took it, Kuznets's course on economic growth covered

four main topics: population, technological change, long-term trends in

national product and its components, and cross-sectional analysis of
                                       13


differences in per capita income, industrial structure and the political and

social characteristics of developed and less developed nations. On each of

these topics, Kuznets defined the issues to be studied, the types of

evidence available to study them, the methodological problems of obtaining

from the available data the kinds of information required to resolve the

issues, and the results obtained from applying different analytical and

statistical procedures to different types of data (including qualitative and

anecdotal information). He also interpreted the findings to date, carefully

evaluating the conclusions that they could support, pointing up crucial gaps

in information revealed by the studies (often suggesting how they might be

closed), and carefully evaluating conflicting findings in order to determine

whether the conflicts were merely the consequences of poorly conceived or

poorly executed studies, or raised new issues that constituted an agenda for

the next round of research.

        One of the first methodological points that emerged from the course

was that while the statistical analysis of quantitative data was a powerful

instrument in the study of long-term changes in the economies of nations, it

provided no magical solutions. Quite the contrary, it was filled with

pitfalls that had entrapped some of the most able investigators (virtually

no one was immune), and that even when the data were good, the procedures

appropriate, and the results fairly unambiguous, great care had to be

exercised in drawing conclusions about the domain to which the findings

applied and the predictions that could reliably be based upon them. High on

his list of major dangers was the superficial acceptance of primary data

without an adequate understanding of' the circumstances under which the data

were produced. Adequate understanding involved detailed historical

knowledge of the changing institutions, conventions, and practices which
                                      114




affected the production of the primary data but which were difficult to

ascertain and to quantify.

        Throughout his lectures it was apparent that Kuznets practiced what

he preached about the need to know history. He was well versed in the

history of economics as a discipline, in the history of censuses and other

data sources (not only in the United States and Europe but also in many less

developed nations), in the history of science and technology, and in the

general economic history of numerous countries. One might think that with

such wide reading his grasp of any one of these topics was bound to be

superficial. Yet the depth of his knowledge on each of these questions was

strikingly evident.

        When Kuznets dealt with the development of the Watt steam engine,

for example, he not only carefully identified each of its new components but

he went into considerable detail about the host of problems that Watt had to

overcome. Numerous events preceding the basic design and many that came

afterward were set forth, including Watts education as a mechanic, his

exclusion from the guild, the opportunities opened to him when he was hired

as the instrument maker for the laboratory at the University of Glasgow, the

way in which his scientific cast of mind developed, his difficulty in

finding machinists who could mill parts to the tolerances required by his

design, the difficulties of financing both the long developmental process

and the sales of expensive equipment, the advantages of his partnership with

Matthew Boulton, and the persistent search for improvements in the original

design, especially for adaptations that transformed the engine from a steam-

powered pump into a general power source capable of driving all kinds of

machinery. Kuznets did not assume that the search for generalizations about

the process of invention and diffusion made details about the personalities,
                                          15



beliefs, and circumstances of inventors and entrepreneurs irrelevant. Quite

the contrary, he believed that the mastery of these details was a

precondition for valid generalizations.

        Another point high on Kuznets's list of major dangers was the easy

assumption that a good fit of a mathematical model to the data made it an

adequate description of the significant features of the data. Because of

the limitations of data, especially in time series, many mathematical

models, varying in complexity and structure, may give fairly good fits to a

given body of data. Nor can Occam's razor be glibly invoked to settle such

issues, since it is possible that the curve which gives the best fit,

incorrectly leads to the conclusion that the data were generated by a simple

process, an elegant "law" of behavior embodied in a single equation, when in

fact they were generated by several distinct processes that are badly

distorted by the simple function.

        Kuznets's comments on methods were always deeply embedded in a more

general evaluation of the substantive findings of a particular

investigation. Thus, whether a given body of data was good or bad depended

not only on the inherent limitations of the data set but on the types of

measures that were being constructed from it and the issues to which these

measures were addressed. Consequently, his evaluation of the validity of

substantive findings tended less to be cast as simply right or wrong,

although this was sometimes the judgement, but more often focused on

reliability of the results (usually expressed as the probable range of error

in the estimates --   not   just t-values, but a more fundamental assessment

which included judgements of the probable influence of systematic errors in

the underlying data as well as errors introduced by the selection of the
                                      16



behavioral models and statistical techniques), and on their domain of

applicability.

        Although he placed great emphasis on the development of data bases

of the highest quality (i.e. those least afflicted by sample selection

biases, by definitional changes which led to lumping data that are

intrinsically different in some important dimension into the same category,

etc.), Kuznets was not a purist who insisted on working only with "perfect"

data. Since no data set is ever perfect, his emphasis was on how to exploit

the data at hand in order to extract from them whatever useful information

they might contain. But then the limitations of the data on the resulting

analysis had to be specified, with some results treated as conjectural, and

still others merely as illustrative computations. Providing that they were

carried out with due caution regarding the nature of the results, such

preliminary analyses were useful, because they increased the likelihood of

upgrading the available data sets or closing gaps in them by demonstrating

the social usefulness of such efforts. Indeed, he viewed the preliminary

analysis of the available data as an essential part of an asymptotic process

of discovery, during which both the underlying data sets and analytical

procedures were perfected and made more suitable to the resolution of the

substantive issues.

        Like many other statisticians, Kuznets worried about imposing so

much structure on the data that the a priori assumptions of the

investigation overwhelmed whatever information there was in the data. He

was skeptical about fitting simple (two or three parameter) curves to data

sets with relatively few observations of questionable quality.

Consequently, he tended to work with frequency distributions, usually in

either one-way or two-way classifications, rather than with regressions.
                                      17



Kuznets did not object to regressions per se (his students frequently used

them with his blessings), but only to statistical procedures that were

inappropriate (especially too restrictive) for the issues under study and

that presumed too much about imperfect data. He considered it misleading to

attach too much importance to R2 and t statistics, when the systematic

biases in the data overwhelmed sampling variability.

        He had numerous "horror" stories of how very able investigors had

been misled by relying too heavily on a priori assumptions of what the world

was really like, and on arguments by analogy, as well as by misplaced

confidence in formal measures of goodness of fit. The case that impressed

me most was his discussion early in the course of Raymond Pearl's contention

that a simple logistic curve summarized tendencies so stable in human

                                                                  14
populations that it represented a law of the population growth.        Pearl's

theory was suggested by experiments with fruit flies raised in closed

containers which show that with increasing density and a fixed food supply,

the growth of the population was well described by a logistic curve. Using

Malthusian types of arguments, he contended that the analogy applied to man

because space is also limited on earth. He then proceeded to fit logistic

curves to data for various populations and, with one or two exceptions that

he explained as special cases, obtained apparently good fits. Pearl also

showed that one of the conditions for a logistic curve to be applicable, a

decline in birth rates as population density increases, was supportft by

cross—sectional regressions on U.S. cities between birth rates and two

density measures, after controlling for city size and per capita wealth or

income. One implication of Pearl's findings was that population growth
                                      18



moved in long cycles, with population increasing until it came close to its

asymptote. It hovered at this asymptote until some exogenous factor caused

the asymptote to shift.

        Kuznets carefully discussed both the a priori and statistical

aspects of the argument, but I focus here on some of his statistical points.

Although the data that Pearl gathered to test his theories came from a

fairly exhaustive list of the nations for which such data were available at

the time, they were mainly Western nations at relatively high levels of

economic development. The observations were primarily for the period from

the early or mid nineteenth century to 1920, and since they were usually

decennial estimates, there were generally about 12 or less observations per

country; consequently, "good fits" in the sense of a high    did not mean

they were significant. Even if the fits were statistically significant,

however, they did not necessarily justify the conclusion that the underlying

process was well described by a logistic curve, or provide the basis for a

"law" invarient to social and cultural conditions. Since the logistic curve

has three segments (convex from above, linear, and concave from above), it

would give good fit to data sets that were strictly linear, as well as to

those that were strictly increasing at a decreasing rate or strictly

increasing at an increasing rate. Examination of the underlying data

revealed such segmentation to be pretty much the case.

        Kuznets's manner of discussing these examples was nearly as

important as the substance of his points. There was no attempt to demean

Pearl or to puff up his own image. His aim was to demonstrate both the

possibilities and limitations of quantitative methods in the social

sciences. Valuable as they were, such methods did not provide easy, let

alone automatic, solutions to otherwise difficult problems. No matter how
                                      19



high-powered the technique, the results it yielded had to be carefully

evaluated not only by looking at such internal evidence as the scatter of

observations around the fitted curve, but also by a thorough consideration

of such relevant external evidence as the nature of the societies that

yielded the data, and of the conventions followed by the agencies that

gathered, processed and published them.

        The results, he emphasized time and again, had meaning only if the

investigator defined and studied the universe from which the data were

drawn, and that required a substantial effort to discover and understand the

relevant social institutions of the societies under study as well as how

they were changing over time. To be a good quantitative economist, then,

required not only logical and technical cleverness, but also a substantial

knowledge of recent and more distant history. Although he admired

cleverness and technical proficiency, I believe that he considered the

capacity to be thorough and to pursue details rigorously as a rarer quality

and as a more binding constraint on good work.

        In assessing the reliability of particular estimates, Kuznets

emphasized the importance of systematically investigating their relationship

to other series and other kinds of information that were logically related

to them. He was, in this connection, a master of devising algebraic

identities that brought other available data to bear on the estimates at

issue in a particularly illuminating way. They were also marvelous devices

for revealing implicit and unsupported assumptions, and thus contributed to

the social research agenda. A dazzling example of this skill is contained

in his evaluation of the time series on US. national income and its

sectoral distribution generated by Robert F. Martin for the period 1799

through 1869 (Kuznets 1952a, 1952b). What puzzled Kuznets about these
                                              20



widely cited figures was that they implied a decline of about 8 percent in

per capita income over the 140 years between 1799 and 1839, which witnessed

vigorous growth in population, a vast geographic expansion, and the

introduction arid initial diffusion of the steamboat, the railroad, and the

factory system.

        To evaluate Martin's series in the light of the available data,

Kuznets employed the following identity:

                                (1)       =
                                              Pa'a   +   AW)

where

        I = per         capita income

        p           the labor force participation rate

                =   the share of the labor force in agriculture

        A = the         share of the labor force in nonagriculture
            n

        W = output         per worker in agriculture

        W = output         per worker in nonagriculture

Marshalling the available fragments of data, Kuznets surmised that even if

there had been no increase in W or W over the period 1799 to 1839, the

rise in p and the rise in An relative to A should jointly have led to about

a 19 percent increase in per capita income since Wn/Wa as indicated by

Martin's data, was equal to about 5. He then went on to marshal fragmentary

data suggesting that Wa and Wn had both probably risen, contrary to the

implication of Martin's series, so that even Kuznets's exercise probably

underestimated the total growth of per capita income during 1799-1839.
                                      21



        Kuznets's exercise on Martin's data touched off a major stream of

research involving numerous investigators that have greatly illuminated the

course of U.S. economic growth prior to 18110 (Engrman and Gailman 1983).

It was characteristic of Kuznets that he considered the mathematics

underlying his computations so obvious that he never made equation (1)

explicit. Although this and other Kuznetsian identities were often used by

his students in teaching, the simple equation (or a variant of it) was not

put into print until the publication of David's influential paper in 1967,

more than a decade after Kuznets's original discussion of it. Subsequently

a variety of Kuznetsian and Kuznets—like identities have been set forth as

differential equations and effectively exploited.

        Did the numerous biases that afflicted the data sets with which

economists had to work, the pitfalls of curve fitting, and the sensitivity

of results to the presumed underlying behavioral models, as well as to the

choice of statistical procedures, doom the usefulness of quantitative

methods in the study of economic growth? By no means. Kuznets was neither

an optimist nor a pessimist on this question but a realist and an architect

of procedures needed to make the most of defective data and imperfect tools.

In the most difficult of circumstances, Kuznets pointed out, such as those

which confronted Pearl in his attempt to demonstrate that the logistic curve

represented the law of human population growth, there was important

information to be gleaned. What Pearl had indirectly demonstrated was that

all of the advanced nations on which data were available, had experienced

declines in their percentage rates of natural increase between 1850 and

1920. That finding was robust no matter what segment of the logistic curve

Pearl had fitted to his data, since it is a characteristic of the logistic

function that the percentage rate of increase is always declining. This was
                                      22


no mean finding. It was one of the early demonstrations of what subsequent

research confirmed as a major demographic feature of modern economic growth.

Hidden among the oysters was a genuine pearl.

        The last point calls attention to what I believe was the most

powerful lesson that Kuznets taught about the art of measurement in

economics: sensitivity analysis. It was sensitivity analysis, not clever a

priori arguments, that separated robust findings from conjectures. Anyone

good enough to get a Ph.D. after the mid 1950s could marshall an a priori

case for why one procedure should be preferred over another, or why some

bias in the data could be ignored. It was much harder to demonstrate that a

finding based on such a priori arguments should be taken seriously, since it

was equally easy to construct a priori arguments proving that the

designated procedure badly biased the result or that the imperfections in

the data were fatal. Kuznets's solution to such problems was sensitivity

analysis, by which he meant a careful examination of both the procedures and

data in order to see if plausible ranges of the systematic errors in the

data, or the substitution of reasonable alternative estimation procedures,

would make a material difference in the finding. If they did not, the

finding was robust; otherwise the data added nothing to the theoretical

considerations that preceded the measurement. The original conjecture was

still just a conjecture.

        I learned about sensitivity analysis during the course of my

dissertation. In order to estimate the social savings of railroads in the

interregional distribution of grain and meat, it was necessary to know the

total amount of each commodity shipped during 1890 from each primary market

and the total receipts at each secondary market. The outshipments from the

10 midwestern primary markets could be obtained directly from the annual
                                      23


reports of the boards of trade in each of these cities, but the reports did

not list either the specific destinations or the specific quantities

assigned to each destination. It occurred to me that I could fill the gap

by estimating the required consumption of each commodity in each secondary

market and then subtract out local production (using the disappearanoe

procedures of the U.S.D.A. to convert stocks into net flows available for

human consumption) to obtain the import requirements as a residual.

Although feasible, it was a laborious task which required information on the

boundaries of over a hundred secondary markets; budget studies by regions

with considerable detail on consumption by age, sex, arid occupation;

information on live weights of animals as well as coefficients needed to

convert live weights into dressed equivalents, and a host of other details.

After many weeks of searching in libraries at Johns Hopkins and the Library

of Congress, and of lengthy calculations on old-fashioned mechanical

computers, I finally produced a set of estimates, one that I was quite

prepared to defend on conceptual grounds. So I proudly presented them to

Kuznets. He looked my tables over carefully and said: "very interesting,

Mr. Fogel. What kind of figures do you obtain when you estimate the

requirements of secondary markets by another procedure?" "What other

procedure," I asked. "Think about it for a while, Mr. Fogel, and I am sure

that something will occur to you. Then let me see the results."    With some

hard thinking and further searching in the sources, I discovered an

alternate way of estimating requirements in two of the major secondary

markets. The results in these markets were close enough to the original

estimates to satisfy Kuznets. And that, as I have often told my students,

is how I learned about sensitivity analysis.
                                        214




                             Kuznets as a Theorist

        Kuznets is one of' the most important theorists since Keynes. Some

measure of his impact on theory in one of the major areas of' his research,

the interrelationship between population change and economic growth, is

provided by the author index of The Determinants and Consequences of

Population Trends: New Summary of Findings on Interaction of Demographic,

Economic and Social Factors. Prepared by a United Nations commission, the

study summarizes and interprets the worldwide literature in this field from

the earliest times to the 1970s. Among the individuals frequently cited in

the author index are Donald J. Bogue, Cohn Clark, Ansley J. Coale, Richard

A. Easterlin, Phillip M. Houser, Edgar M. Hoover, Charles P. Kindleberger,

W.A. Lewis, Thomas R. Maithus, H. Myint, Gunnar Myrdal, Frank W. Notestein,

Alfred Sauvey, Joseph J. Spengler, Dorothy S. Thomas, Irene B. Tauber, and

B.T. Urlanis. The citations to Kuznets, however, exceed those to any of

these specialists, usually by large margins. They even exceed the citations

to such collective authors as F.A.O., I.L.O., O.E.C.D., and W.H.O. Indeed,

only the combined agencies of the United Nations have more citations than

Kuznets.

           Since the interrelationship between population and economic growth

is only one of the major themes on which Kuznets theorized, it is obvious

that I cannot comment in detail on the substance of' his numerous

contributions. So I want only to present some brief comments about his

approach to theory. In this connection it is useful to begin with a

distinction that Kuznets often made between a partial and a general theory

of economic growth. By a partial theory Kuznets meant the in-depth

consideration of a few variables torn from the context of the general
                                      25


process of economic growth. In this connection he welcomed the explosion of

mathematical growth models that began in the late 19140s and the 1950s as a

return to issues that had been so important to Smith, Maithus and

Schumpeter, thus finally overcoming the long neglect of growth theory. Yet

he feared that because of the severe aesthetic constraints placed on the

issues and on the interrelations of variables by the type of mathematic

modeling that was fashionable, this stream of research might rapidly

dissipate without making a lasting contribution to what Kuznets considered

the principal objective of theoretical work in this field: the development

of' a tested and confirmed general theory of growth that included a theory of

technological change, of population growth, of changes in the economic

structure of production, of changes in political and social organization,

and of the role of international political relations. A general theory not

only needed to encompass each of these major elements but to describe the

feedback mechanisms that linked them together in a dynamic context.

        Kuznets recognized that such a theory was a tall order, that would

probably not be accomplished in his lifetime. He not only welcomed partial

models as contributions toward that goal, as long as they contributed to the

ultimate object of a general theory, but himself contributed numerous

partial models. His presidential address to the American Economic

Association, in which he considered the impact of economic growth on the

inequality of the income distribution (1955), exemplifies his approach to

such partial theories. It was in this paper that Kuznets set forth the

hypotheses that in early stages of economic growth (i.e. at low levels of

per capita income), growth tended to increase the inequality of the income

distribution, but that at later stages (high levels of per capita income),

growth reduced inequality. That hypothesis, which has come to be known in
                                       26


the literature as the "inverted-li hypothesis," set off a large train of both

theoretical and empirical research aimed at elaborating the hypothesis and

at testing it empirically. The hypothesis has been put to practical use by

the World Bank, which transformed the hypothesis into an econometric model

suitable for estimating the share of the world population living in poverty

(Anand and Kanbur 19814a, 193'1b, 1987; cf. Fei, Ranis, and Kuo 1978).

         it is interesting to note that Kuznets's 1955 paper has not only

been treated as an important theoretical paper but also as providing

empirical support for the inverted—U hypothesis (Fields 1980, pp. 78,    814).


This is a rather strange development since Kuznets was at pains to stress

its theoretical nature, repeatedly warning that his allusions to fragmentary

data were not evidence but little more than "pure guesswork." Most of the

paper is devoted to explicating the conflicting factors that arose during

the course of growth and that created pressures both to increase and to

reduce inequality. The paper also describes processes that influenced the

relative strength of the conflicting factors at different stages in the

growth process. It would have been easy for Kuznets to set forth his model

in a mathematical form (since the computations he presented to illustrate

the process implied a set of equations), but Kuznets chose to make the same

points   with numerical examples. Numerical examples had two advantages over
a mathematical presentation. They emphasized the limited range of the
changes in the key variables and parameters needed to bring about the
postulated   curve. Numerical examples also made his argument accessible to a

wider range of readers. Since there was nothin' in the model which required

a long chain of reasoning to reveal some deeply buried implication, there

was no reason to unnecessarily restrict his audience.
                                        27



        This example reveals something important both about Kuznets's

approach to theory and about certain problems in the profession. Because

Kuznets developed a theory consistent with the available fragmentary

evidence, because he used numbers rather than algebra to set forth the

theory, his paper was widely interpreted as an "empirical paper," despite

Kuznets's repeated warnings about the fragility of the data that suggested

the theory. He also stressed that even if the data turned out to be valid,

they pertained to an extremely limited period of time and to exceptional

historical experiences, so that caution had to be exercised in the

conclusions that were drawn from his theory. Nevertheless, Kuznets's

caveats were jettisoned and his hypothesis was raised to the level of law,

becoming the basis for numerous formal models and elaborate econometric

exercises, some of which lost touch with the complex reality that Kuznets

was trying to uncover and to characterize.

        The example calls attention to a shortcoming of current theory.

That is the tendency to value a theory according to the type of the

mathematics it employs. On this criterion the best theory employs the most

general mathematics, as free as possible from such empirical or quasi-

empirical limitations, as the specification of the form of functions. But

that criterion is purely aesthetic --   equivalent   to constraints that a

sonnet imposes on a poet. Aside from aesthetic considerations such severe

limitations are generally unnecessary in economics because the range of most

economic variables is fairly constrained. Making use of that knowledge

frequently makes it possible to solve models that cannot be solved in a

purely analytical (abstract) framework. Ansley Coale, an elegant analyst,

has frequently made use of the limited ranges of variation in demographic

behavior to close demographic models with empirical relationships, and
                                       28


thereby manipulate models that would otherwise remain intractable. It is

this flexibility in demographic modeling that in no small measure accounts

for the vastly improved quality of empirical research in this field, in the

face of data problems as severe as any encountered in economics proper.

        Kuznets was more interested in theories that proposed to describe

and generalize on some aspects of the observable behavior of the economy

than those that sought the simplest set of a priori assumptions, and the

weakest specification of functional relationships, that could produce a

particular generalization. Among the theories that he found most fruitful,

but not necessarily correct, were Maithus's statements on the relationship

between population and economic growth, Schumpeter's theory of' the business

cycle, Hoffrnann's theory of the sequencing of industrialization, Hansen's

theory of the effect of population growth on savings rates, theories about

the behavior of savings over the life cycle, theories of human captial

formation, theories about the factors affecting the size distribution of

income, and neoclassical models of economic growth (particularly as

developed by Solow, Denison, Griliches, and Jorgenson, since they implied

accounting identities that when flexibly approached were useful in arraying

data bearing on the growth process).

        Kuznets appreciated the advantages of formalizing such

generalizations and of demonstrating how they could be deduced from a

limited set of a priori assumptions. Such work had shown that downward-

sloping demand curves, perhaps the single most important analytical and

empirical tool of economics, did not require the dubious, convoluted

assumptions about consumer psychology of earlier theorists, but could be

generated from a few simple assumptions about preference orderings. The

mathematical development of the theory of consumer demand also called
                                          29


attention to the important distinction between income and substitution

effects, and had a large impact on the development of statistical procedures

for the estimation of demand functions.

        Yet, without in any way belittling these achievements, Kuznets

feared that such formalization of theory was becoming increasingly sterile,

partly as the result of an overinvestment in it. Too many papers merely

explored the consequence of changing one or another assumption in a given

hypothetico-deductive model. Though they pointed up the sensitivity of such

models to their assumptions, they rarely served as guides to study of the

real economic world. Nevertheless these intellectual exercises acquired a

vogue, and those engaged in this work developed a set of standards for

judging quality that had little to do with the ultimate bearing of the

models on empirical research. To avoid sterility, hypothetico-deductive

modeling had to be intimately connected with, and regularly infused by,

findings from empirical, experimental, and clinical research, as they

normally were in the natural sciences.

        Kuznets was impatient with economists who became infatuated with

elegance, and forgot that the aim of theory was to promote the search for

tested knowledge about economic behavior. There was a limit to how far

theory in economics could become separated from the product which the

patrons of economics —-   the policy makers -- demand of the discipline.
Although, as I tried to indicate in the first section of this paper, he

placed great emphasis on the importance of specialized research institutions

and university graduate programs that were sufficiently free from government

and business bureaucracies to explore novel ideas and methods, Kuznets also

emphasized that all work, even the purest of theory, had ultimately to be

judged by its social payoff. One may quarrel about the proper way to
                                      30


measure the payoff to pure theory, but as a practical matter the resources

available for such work are heavily dependent upon the volume and quality of

that part of the output of scientific disciplines whose social usefulness is

readily apparent to policy makers. It is not the pure theorists but the

experimentalists and empiricists whose output is directly keyed to societal

demands that have been most effective in convincing policy makers to support

those seemingly dainty and irrelevant exercises (the pure theory) that they

neither understand nor are inclined to support.


                          A Brief Talk by Kuznets

        No one understood the social context of the rise of economics better

than Kuznets. So it is fitting to close my comments on his scientific

methods by presenting a brief autobiographical talk, to my knowledge the

only such liberty he allowed himself. The occasion was a dinner in honor of

his eightieth birthday, sponsored jointly by the economics department of

Harvard Unversity and the National Bureau of Economic Research. It was a

remarkable occasion, attended by some 200 well—wishers, coming from as far

away as India, and representing not only economics but other disciplines

that Kuznets had influenced. Those present included numerous past

presidents of the American Economic Association, the Econometrics Society,

and other scholarly associations, seven Nobel prize winners, and economists

who had served in government at cabinet and subcabinet levels. It was, as

Henry Rosovsky pointed out, one of the most impressive assemblies of

scholarly talent ever gathered in a single room. At the end of an hour of

accolades showered on Kuznets with deep sincerity, he rose to respond:5

           You probably will not be able to hear me, as usual. I

       am really very grateful to all of you who came here,
                               31



particularly to those who organized this festivity, and

those who were so eloquent on behalf of a person whom I did

not recognize.   I have an inclination always to think of how

much I do not know and how much I have to learn. So it is

very difficult for me to recognize in your descriptions the

kind of person I think I am. Furthermore, there were

certain circumstances that determined my long-term research

program that were not of my making and which made it easy to

do what I have done. I would like briefly to describe those

circumstances.

    I came to this country in 1922, at the age of 21, so

that most of the first quarter of my life was spent in

Russia, primarily in study but also accumulating a fair

amount of experience: war, revolution, two years in an

institution devoted to economics, two years in the Soviet

government. In fact, I ended up as the head of a section of

the bureau of labor statistics of the Ukraine, and my first

publication was In Russian at the ripe age of twenty. So

when I came to the United States, I came with a peculiar

equipment: formal training in a scientific gymnasium, a

fair amount of experience with statistical research in

economics, a fair amount of reading (I knew Schumpeter's

work well before I came here), and a liking for orderly

quantitative procedures applied to socially-oriented topics.

    I spent from 1922 to 1927 working toward my Ph.D. degree

at Columbia University where I met Wesley Mitchell, who had

a tremendous influence on me. I then wrote my first
                               32


postdoctoral   research monograph on secular movements in

production and prices. In 1927 I joined the National Bureau

of Economic Research at which I stayed for three and a half

decades. At the National Bureau I also met Edith. We

married in 1929 and she has been with me through thick and

thin for 50 years now. While at the National Bureau, I was

asked to teach in the statistics department at the

University of Pennsylvania. I agreed because I felt I

should try teaching, although I had earlier turned down an

invitation from Columbia college to become an instructor

there.   I began teaching on a part-time basis in 1930 and

became a full-time professor in 1936, while continuing at

the Bureau.

    From 1936 until 1971 , when I retired from Harvard, I

continually combined graduate teaching in economics with

special research work under the auspices of specialized

research institutions. The National Bureau of Economic

Research, the Social Science Research Council, and the

Economic Growth Center at Yale University all helped to

shape my research program and permitted me to pursue it in

environments that promoted solid performance. At the same

time, I taught at the University of Pennsylvania in both

statistics and economics, at Johns Hopkins and at Harvard,

which gave me an opportunity to interest the younger

generation in some of the problems in which I was

interested. Now I submit that the availability of'

specialized research institutions in this country, which
                               33


were rare abroad, and the possibility of combining that

opportunity with graduate teaching at the university was

one, almost indispensible, condition for the kind of

sustained research program that I preferred to follow.

    A second set of circumstances should be noted. There

was an explosion of quantitative economic research in this

country beginning with the 1930s. The U.S. government, and

later governments of many other countries, began to accept

responsibility for economic growth, for adequate employment,

and, in general, for shaping the long-term conditions of

economic life in ways in which they did not do previously.

These new efforts required recourse to macro measures of the

kind on which the National Bureau was working. It was

within the year that I began preparing to take over the

national income work of the Bureau that I was drafted by the

Department of Commerce to construct the first of the

official government estimates of national income, in

fulfillment of a Senate resolution requesting such

estimates. The same sort of pressures continued during

World War II because macro measures were needed to check and

shape the war production program. If the external

circumstances, the concern of the government and the nation

with especially urgent economic problems and policies, had

not occurred when they did, there would not have been a

coincidence between the measures on which I was working and

what was needed. Because such measures were needed to carry

out national policy, it was possible to secure cooperation
                                314




and a volume of resources that otherwise would not have been

available.

    As I look back on the sequence of studies that I was

instrumental in completing, they began with a group of

related studies of factors --   cyclical     fluctuations, secular

movements, seasonal variations --     that   affected the

development of the American economy. Then they shifted to

national income for a single country, the United States.

Then they shifted to a wider view, using national income

estimates and their components to compare the performance of

different countries in many parts of the world on an

international scale. That sequence of studies would not

have been feasible between 1900 and 1920 or even between

1910 and 1930. It was feasible only between 1930 and 1970.

    Let me conclude by thanking you ll for participating in

this festivity, and I thank you not only for that. In a

sense you are all collaborators, who are to be praised for

whatever I am praised, and blamed for whatever I am blamed.

So let me share the glory and let me share the troubles with

you. And perhaps tomorrow we can return to real work.6
                                        35


                                    NOTES



        1 .   Since this paper is a highly personal account of Simon Kuznets's

methods, based to a large extent on recollections of conversations and

seminar discussions, I have kept references and other scholarly paraphenalia

to a minimum. For other views of Kuznets's approach to economics, which

overlap but may not coincide exactly with mine, see Easterlin's introduction

to this volume as well as Abrarnovitz 1971, 1985; Patinkin 1976; Ben-Porath

1986; Bergson 1986; and Bergson et al 1987.    I have benefited from comments

and criticisms on an earlier draft by Moses Abramovitz, Abram Bergson,

Ansley Coale, Milton Friedman, Robert E. Gailman, Zvi Grilliches, Edith

Kuznets, David Landes, W. Arthur Lewis, Barbara McCutcheon, Marc Nerlove,

Dwight Perkins, Gustav Ranis, Samuel H. Preston, W.W. Rostow, T.W. Schultz,

Robert M. Solow, Kenneth Wachter, and Nathaniel Wilcox.

        2. Foundations and other private institutions also played an

important role.

        3. Because of schedule conflicts, I was not able to take the

applications seminar, and so will confine the balance of this section to my

experiences in Kuznets's growth course and during his supervision of my

dissertation, which lasted for five years. However, fellow students at

Johns Hopkins who took the seminar, told me how much they had learned about

the art of measurement from the course.

        L.    Pearl was a noted biologist and statistician whose theories on
population growth are summarized in his 1925 book.

        5. What follows is a transcription, which I have edited lightly for

publication, of a talk that Kuznets gave at Harvard University on April 25,

1981.
                                     36



        6. The last sentence referred to an all-day meeting on April 26

devoted to a discussion of recent deve1oments in the international study of

economic growth.
                                           37



                                    REFERENCES



Abramovitz, Moses. 1985. Simon Kuznets: An appreciation. Department of

     Economics, Stanford University. Photocopy.

_____________      1971.    Nobel prize for economics: Kuznets and economic

     growth. Science, October 29.

_______________    1952.    Economics of growth. In A survey of contemporary

     economics, vol. 2. Bernard F. Haley, ed. Homewood, IL: Richard D.

     Irwin.

Anand, Sudhir and S.M. Ravi Kanbur. 1987. International poverty

     projections. Paper presented at the UNU/WIDER conference on poverty,

     undernutrition and living standards, Helsinki, Finland, July 27-31.

_______________   198LIa.   Inequality and development: A reconsideration.

     In Towards income distribution policies: From income distribution

     research to income distribution policy in LDC's. H.P. Nissen, ed.

     EADI-Book Series, No. 3,   Tilburg.
_______________   198'b.    The Kuznets process and the inequality-development

     relationship. St. Chatherine's College, Oxford. Mimeograph.

     Forthcoming in Journal of Development Economics.

Ben-Porath, Yoram. 1986. Simon Kuznets in person and in writing. The

    Maurice Falk Institute for Economic Research in Israel. Discussion

     Paper No. 86.08.

Bergson, Abram. 1986. Simon Kuznets: 30 April 1901—8 July 1985. American

     Philosophical Society Yearbook:13'4-138.

Bergson, Abram, Harvey Leibenstein, Henry Rosovsky, and Zvi Griliches

     (Chairman). 1987. Faculty of arts and sciences -- Memorial minute:

    Simon Kuznets. Minute placed upon the records at a meeting of the
                                        38


     Harvard University faculty, December 16, 1986. Harvard Gazette, March

     20, 1987.

David, P.A. 1967. The growth of real product in the United States before

     18110: New evidence, controlled conjectures. Journal of Economic

     History 27:151—97.

Engerman, S.L., and R.E. Galiman. 1983. U.S. economic growth. Research in

     Economic History 8:1-146.

Fei, J.C.H., Gustav Ranis, and S.W.Y. Kuo. 1978. Growth and the family

     distribution of income by factor components. Quarterly Journal of

     Economics 92:17—53.

Fields, Gary S.    1980. Poverty, inequality and development. Cambridge:

     Cambridge University Press.

Kuznets, Simon. 1972. Quantitative economic research: Trends and

     problems. Economic research retrospect and prospect, Fiftieth

     Anniversary Colloquia. General Series 96, vol. 7. New York: National

     Bureau of Economic Research.

______________     1966.    Modern economic growth: Rate, structure, and

     spread. Studies in Comparative Economics 7. New Haven, CT, and

     London: Yale University Press.

_______________•   1955.    Economic growth and income inequality. American

     Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings 115:1-28. Presidential address.

     Reprinted in Economic growth and structure: Selected essays. New

     York: Norton.

_______________•   1952a.   National Income estimates for the United States

     prior to 1870. Journal of Economic History 12:115-130.

_______________    1952b.   Long-term changes in the national income of the

     United States of America since 1870. In Income and Wealth of the
                                      39


    United   States: Trends and structure. Income and Wealth, ser. 2.

    International Association for Research in Income and Wealth.

    Cambridge: Bowes and Bowes.

Patinkin, Don. 1976. Keynes and econometrics: On the interaction between

    macroeconomic revolutions of the interwar period. Econornetrica

    14:1O91—1123

Pearl, Raymond 1925. The biology of population growth. New York: A.A.

    Knopf.

United Nations. 1978. The determinants and consequences of population

    trends, vol. 2. New York: United Nations Publication.
