NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE ECB'S FISCAL POLICY
Hans-Werner Sinn
Working Paper 24613
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24613

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2018

The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Hans-Werner Sinn. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

The ECB's Fiscal Policy
Hans-Werner Sinn
NBER Working Paper No. 24613
May 2018
JEL No. E50,E58,G01,H63,H81
ABSTRACT
While the ECB helped mitigate the euro crisis in the aftermath of Lehman, it has stretched its
monetary mandate and moved into fiscal territory. This text describes and summarizes the crucial
role played by the ECB in the intervention spiral resulting from its bid to manage the crisis. It
also outlines ongoing competitiveness problems in southern Europe, discusses the so-called
austerity policy of the Troika, comments on QE and presents two alternative paths for the future
development of Europe.

Hans-Werner Sinn
Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich
Department of Economics
Schackstr. 4
80539 Munich
GERMANY
and NBER
sinn@ifo.de

1. Preface: Why the ECB cannot Japanize
Given that I am presenting this lecture in Japan, it might be worth beginning by explaining
why the ECB cannot pursue economic policies like those implemented by Japan’s central
bank. When the Japanese economic bubble burst in 1990 and Japanese banks ran into trouble
in the mid-1990s when they could no longer hide the burden of non-performing loans, the
Japanese central bank began its policy of unprecedentedly loose monetary policy, expanding
the monetary base by a total of 947% from 1995 to 2017 although the nominal growth of the
economy during this period was close to zero (6.6% in toto over the 22 years). It reduced the
short-term annual interest rate from 1.75% to 0.5% in 1995 and the rate has remained at
around that level up to the time of writing. 1 This policy has inspired the Fed, the Bank of
England and also, to some extent, the European Central Bank (ECB), which have all
implemented very loose monetary policies in recent years too.
However, for a number of reasons, the ECB has a more limited mandate than the other
central banks and cannot really "Japanize", given the mandate with which it has been
endowed by the Maastricht Treaty. It is not the central bank of a state, but of a group of
sovereign nation states, which has been unable to create anything that even remotely
resembles Japan or the United States of America. The EU also seems a long way off
satisfying the most essential pre-condition of a political union, which is dismantling national
armies and placing them under a common European control. In the absence of a political
union, the fiscal implications of monetary policy are a far more crucial and sensitive issue in
the EU than they are in Japan or the US; and face severer constraints.
For these reasons, the ECB has been given a lexicographic preference structure, with
price stability as its unique goal. This goal cannot be compromised by others like sustaining
employment or economic growth. In this respect it is very different from other central banks.
The ECB can only operate within the boundaries it has been given by parliaments; it has no
"competence competence", i.e. it cannot independently define the boundaries of its mandate.
It works on the principle of conferral, i.e. it can only carry out those functions that it has been
explicitly given. Among other things, this excludes the pursuit of economic policy. It is worth
noting that Article 123 of the Treaty for the European Union (TFEU) specifies that the ECB

1
IMF International Financial Statistics, Interest Rate Selected Indicators, Japan, Discount Interest Rate, 2018,
retrieved from: http://data.imf.org/; Bank of Japan, Statistics, Monetary Base, 2018, retrieved from:
https://www.boj.or.jp/en/statistics/boj/other/mb/index.htm; Cabinet Office, Government of Japan, Statistics,
National Accounts, Quarterly Estimates of GDP, 2018, retrieved from: http://www.esri.cao.go.jp/index-e.html.
2001 the rate was reduced to 0.1%, 2006 increased to 0.4%, and 2007 to 0.75%, and since 2008 it has been kept
at 0.3%.

3

must not monetize public debt, while Article 125 excludes the bail-out of states in financial
difficulty.
Germany insisted on these restrictions as a condition for giving up the deutschmark for
fear that the ECB would pursue excessively loose and expansionary monetary policies of the
type implemented by some southern central banks, particularly the Banca d'Italia, for decades.
Moreover, it feared that the ECB would use its power to carry out redistributive policy
measures and drive down the spreads of southern European debt through mutualization
policies. Such policies would not be compatible with the German constitution and could not
even be approved by German parliament with a qualified majority, as budget decisions remain
the inalienable right of the national parliament. A change would require a referendum.

2. The Intervention Scale: Seven Steps
However, the reality of the ECB's policies adopted under the protection of formal
independence turned out to stretch – if not transgress – the boundaries of the ECB's mandate.
This prompted the German Constitutional Court to appeal to the European Court of Justice,
and it lead to the resignations under protest of German Bundesbank President Axel Weber and
the ECB's chief economist Jürgen Stark. Indeed, the introduction of the euro and the Lehman
crisis drove European institutions, including the ECB, into an intervention spiral of
unprecedented dimensions which, step by step, led the bank deeper and deeper into fiscal
territory. All of these steps were rational reactions to the different stages of the crisis and there
seemed to be no alternative to them in view of the overarching goal of keeping the Eurozone
together. However, taken together, they substantially changed the nature of the Treaty of
Maastricht signed by the EU countries.

The intervention spiral can be broken down into the following seven steps.

I) The first step came with the ultimate and firm announcement of the launch of the euro at
the 1995 EU summit in Madrid. 2 As shown in Figure 1, this quickly reduced interest spreads,
bringing all rates down to the German level. In Italy, Spain and Portugal, for example, rates
fell by around 500 basis points. The Italian state could have abolished its value added tax in
exchange without facing a shortage of funds (Sinn, 2014, p. 52). The Greek rates, which had

2

European Council, Madrid European Council 15 and 16 December 1995 Presidency Conclusions, 1995,
retrieved from: http://www.europarl.europa.eu/summits/mad1_en.htm.

4

been around 25% p.a. in the mid-1990s, came down even more dramatically, albeit a little
later, once it was clear that Greece would be able to join the Eurosystem in 2001.
The interest rate reduction made it possible to consume the saved interest. Private and
public borrowers were able to spend more money on consumption and investment, thus
inducing a strong Keynesian stimulus for the advantaged economies. Moreover, the lower rate
provided incentives to borrow even more. In Greece and Portugal, the governments borrowed
to increase transfers, public wages and public investment. In Spain and Ireland, the emphasis
was more on the private sector. People borrowed cheap funds from their banks and invested in
real estate, which created unprecedented bubbles in the real estate markets. In the end it did
not matter how the cheap foreign credit entered the economies, whether it was via the
government sector or the private sector, as the beneficiaries of government expenditure
bought goods in the private economy, and the beneficiaries of private expenditure had higher
incomes, from which they paid higher taxes to the state. The end result was an inflationary
credit bubble that deprived the inflating countries of their competitiveness, implied huge
current account deficits and burst when the Lehman crisis swept over to Europe. All of a
sudden interest spreads rose again, and in some cases to even higher levels than before the
introduction of the euro.

Figure 1: Interest rates on ten-year government bonds

Source: Thomson Reuters Datastream, Category: Interest Rates, Benchmark Bonds.

5

II) The second step followed directly after Lehman. It was characterized by local money
creation to compensate for the dramatic slump in private capital imports, and even for capital
flight from southern Europe and Ireland. Essentially foreign investors stopped rolling over
debt and wanted their money back. As the huge current account deficits could no longer be
financed with fresh foreign credit and maturing old debt had to be redeemed, huge net
payment orders totaling hundreds of billions of euros to other countries emerged. Without
compensatory additional credit courtesy of the local printing presses, international payment
orders would quickly have dried up domestic liquidity (Sinn and Wollmershäuser, 2012). As
will be explained below, it was possible for the local central banks to provide the extra credit
from local printing presses thanks to various policy actions by the ECB, including its
collateral policy for refinancing credit and tolerating local emergency credits.

III) In addition, and this was the third step, the ECB asked the national central banks to buy
the government bonds of southern countries as well as Ireland, within its so-called Securities
Markets Programme (SMP). 3 A total of 223 billion euros was spent on this program. No
equivalent program exists in the USA, for example, as the Fed does not buy any bonds from
regional state governments. These purchases were indirect credits to the states, as these states
were able to issue the same amount of new debt without changing the debt conditions, thus
replacing the bonds that went to the central banks.

IV) The fourth step was defined by two official fiscal rescue programs: the EFSF set up in
May 2010 and the ESM set up later on in 2012 by intergovernmental contracts between the
euro states for the purpose of helping the GIPS counties, i.e. Greece, Ireland, Portugal and
Spain. 4 The beginning of the EFSF coincided with the ECB’s SMP decision as of early May
2010. One of the reasons for the fiscal rescue programs was that policy makers, at least in
Germany, were afraid that the ECB's government bond purchases would violate the ban on
state debt monetization, as specified in article 123 TFEU. If someone had to rescue states, it
should be them rather than the ECB. Indeed, it was the fear of violating article 123 TFEU that
triggered the resignations of the then Bundesbank president Axel Weber and the ECB's Chief
Economist Jürgen Stark.
3
European Central Bank, Decision of the ECB of 14 May 2010 Establishing a Securities Markets Programme
(ECB/2010/5), 14 May 2010. Official Journal of the European Union, L 124, p. 8.
4
Euro-Area Member States, EFSF Framework Agreement, 19 October 2011, retrieved from:
https://www.esm.europa.eu/sites/default/files/20111019_efsf_framework_agreement_en.pdf; Euro-Area Member
States, Treaty Establishing the European Stability Mechanism, T/ESM 2012-LT, retrieved from:
https://www.esm.europa.eu/sites/default/files/20150203_-_esm_treaty_-_en.pdf.

6

V) The markets, however, were not convinced by the fiscal rescue programs as they found EU
governments to be too parsimonious, and called for a much bigger intervention. This
intervention, which is the fifth step in the sequence, came in September 2012, at the peak of
the crisis, with the ECB's OMT program, after some prior informal agreements along these
lines between the ECB president and selected heads of state. OMT stands for Outright
Monetary Transactions. The name is highly deceptive: in reality OMT was nothing other than
free-of-charge Credit Default Swap (CDS) insurance for Eurozone government bond buyers.
The insurance was implied by the ECB's offer to buy back unlimited amounts of government
bonds from the portfolios of investors, should a country get into trouble and ask for help from
the ESM. "Whatever it takes" is the famous slogan characterizing this insurance protection.
When pressed on the issue, the President of the ECB even declared that he would keep any
write-off losses on his balance sheet should a country go bankrupt, thus excluding the redenomination trick of early 2012, whereby the ECB managed not to participate in the writeoff losses of Greek government bonds when the country defaulted, creating 105 billion euro in
write-off losses for private investors. 5
As Figure 1 shows, the OMT program immediately reduced interest spreads, which is
a sign that private investors once again dared to buy government bonds from crisis-afflicted
countries. More than anything the free-of-charge insurance offered by OMT, which was
basically a fiscal subsidy equivalent to the spared insurance premium, helped to pacify
markets and lure capital to countries that it would otherwise have fled given their recent
history of bursting speculative bubbles.

VI) The next and sixth step in the sequence was the agreement on a banking union subject to
joint European supervision with the aim of building up a common fund from the banks' own
contributions to bail out failing banks, after some participation of bank lenders in the losses. 6
This step has not been fully completed and is subject to ongoing negotiations.

5

Draghi (2012).
Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the European Central Bank,
the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions "Towards the Completion of
the Banking Union", COM/2015/0587, Strasbourg, 24 November 2015, retrieved from:
http://ec.europa.eu/finance/docs/law/171011-communication-banking-union_en.pdf.
6

7

VII) The seventh step in the sequence is the ECB's QE program, which was enacted in
January 2015 and took effect as of March 2015. 7 Basically, this program means that all
central banks buy back their own countries' government bonds in proportion to country size,
as defined by the ECB's capital keys. In addition, the ECB itself and the national central banks
buy private sector bonds, even directly from private issuers. The overall size of the program
encompassed government bond purchases worth a total of around 1.8 trillion euros by the end
of 2017, as well as around 500 billion euros worth of private bond purchases. More purchases
are planned for 2018 and possibly beyond. To avoid national risks, it was agreed that each
central bank keeps the (algebraic) excess of the interest earned over the ECB's main
refinancing rate for distribution to its national government, while paying interest equal to the
ECB's main refinancing rate into the Eurosystem's common interest pool. It has to pay such
interest with all money creating measures, including the provision of refinancing credit and all
other asset purchases. The interest income given to the pool is redistributed to all national
central banks in proportion to country size (capital key) and from there to the finance
ministries of the respective countries. The QE purchases are being carried out with freshly
printed base money. With an overall volume of 2.3 trillion euros by the end of 2017, QE
constitutes a major expansion of the ECB's monetary base, which was just 1.2 trillion euros at
the start of the program. 8
Of the seven steps, four involve the ECB directly and constitute policies that, at least
in part, can be seen as fiscal: the lending from local printing presses (II); the SMP (III); the
OMT (V); and the QE program (VII). Lending from local printing presses is taking an
overdraft credit from the Eurosystem, which in many respects is equivalent to the open fiscal
rescue credits from the EFSF and ESM. Similarly, the SMP and the QE programme constitute
public credit insofar as local governments can issue as many new bonds as the Eurosystem
buys without overloading the market and being forced to offer their creditors higher interest
rates. The OMT program is equivalent to a fiscal subsidy allowing a country's creditors to
receive free-of-charge CDS insurance. And even the access to local printing presses as such,
Step I, can be seen as an insurance-like privilege, as it was greeted by investors with a
dramatic initial reduction of spreads, as shown in Figure 1.

7

Introductory Statement to the Press Conference (with Q&A) by Mario Draghi, President of the ECB, Vítor
Constâncio, Vice-President of the ECB, Frankfurt am Main, 22 January 2015, retrieved from:
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/pressconf/2015/html/is150122.en.html.
8
European Central Bank, Statistical Data Warehouse, Base Money, 2018, retrieved from:
https://sdw.ecb.europa.eu ; European Central Bank, Expanded Asset Purchase Programme, History of
Cumulative
Purchase
Breakdowns
under
the
APP,
2018,
retrieved
from:
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/mopo/implement/omt/html/index.en.html.

8

Arguably, all of the ECB’s quasi-fiscal activities can be seen as a combination of debt
mutualization and outright public international credit provision undercutting the conditions
that competitive capital markets would have required. Their rationale lies in the ECB's
suspicion that markets fail and are unable to allocate scarce capital efficiently to rivalling
uses. The ECB repeatedly speaks of market failure in terms of markets allegedly being unable
to transmit the ECB's policies to the different countries and to understand the true safety that
euro membership implies, alluding to the theory of multiple equilibria due to self-fulfilling
expectations. 9

3. Defeating the Debt Brakes
While the ECB has calmed markets and helped overcome the imminent crisis by giving
heavily-indebted states access to fresh credit, it has also given them problematic incentives to
borrow more than parliaments had foreseen and allowed. This is shown in Figure 2, which
compares the public sector debt-GDP ratios in 2011 and 2016. Obviously, most euro countries
with ratios above 60% in 2011 increased their debt-GDP ratios during this period, with the
only exceptions being Austria, Ireland, Netherlands, Malta and Germany. It is worth noting
that 60% is the allowed maximal debt-GDP level for euro countries, as specified in the
Maastricht Treaty.
The increase in the debt-GDP ratios is particularly problematic insofar as all euro
countries had promised in the enhanced fiscal compact of 2012 to reduce their debt-GDP
ratios year by year by 1/20 of the distance to 60%. 10 This promise had been required in early
2012 by Germany as a precondition for offering its liability to creditors of problematic
countries via the ESM; and for tolerating the ECB's various debt mutualization activities,
including the OMT insurance provision. Germany’s argument ran as follows: yes, we will
help reduce the spreads to alleviate the interest burden for the crisis-afflicted and heavilyindebted countries of the south, but in exchange we want a guarantee that they will not abuse
our assistance by borrowing even more than before. In retrospect, it was naive to believe that
this deal would be respected.

9

Ses Draghi (212) and Cœuré (2013).

10

EU Publications Office, Treaty on Stability, Coordination and Governance in the Economic and Monetary
Union, D/12/2, Brussels, 1 February 2012, retrieved from: europa.eu/rapid/press-release_DOC-12-2_en.pdf.

9

Figure 2: Public debt-GDP ratios in 2011 and 2017

Source: Eurostat, Database Economy and Finance, Government Statistics, Government Deficit and Debt.

Not only the Maastricht Treaty and the enhanced fiscal compact of 2012 were broken
by many European countries. The old Stability and Growth Pact of 1996, which was
Germany's precondition for ultimately giving up the deutschmark, was also violated.11
According to that compact, a state's deficit-GDP ratio should always be close to zero and must
never be above 3%, except in well-defined cases of emergency. There had been 168
transgressions of the 3% rule by the end of 2017, 47 of which were allowed due to sufficiently
strong recessions. In 121 cases the compact was violated and the sinners should have been

11
European Council, Dublin European Council 13 and 14 December 1996 Presidency Conclusions, DOC-96-8,
Dublin, 14 December 1996, retrieved from: http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_DOC-96-8_en.pdf; European
Council, Resolution of the European Council on the Stability and Growth Pact, 97/C 236/01, Amsterdam 17
June
1997,
retrieved
from:
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legalcontent/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:31997Y0802(01)&from=EN.

10

punished. 12 In fact, however, none of them were ever punished. Ironically, Germany, which
had demanded the compact, was among the first countries to violate it in the early years of the
euro when it experienced its own euro crisis. Back then, many German economists argued
that the compact would never be respected unless Germany would be the first country to pay
the fines.

4. Massive Redistributive Effects
It seems likely that the ECB's policies have created strong international redistribution effects
by depressing market interest rates. These policies include reducing the main refinancing rate
to zero and the deposit rate to -0.4% on 16 March 2016, a rate that was rapidly adopted by the
interbank market, as shown in Figure 3.

Figure 3: The ECB's deposit rate and the interbank market rate (EONIA)

Source: Deutsche Bundesbank, Statistiken, Zeitreihen-Datenbank, Notenbankzinsen, EZB-Zinssätze; ibidem,
Statistiken, Zeitreihen-Datenbank, Zinssätze und Renditen, Geldmarktsätze.

In addition to the short term rates, the ECB's actions, and particularly OMT and QE,
reduced the long-term rates after 2012, as demonstrated in Figure 1.
All these interest reductions helped the debtors and imposed losses on their creditors.
Among the debtors were all European governments. They obviously benefitted massively by
12

Own calculations based on Eurostat, GDP and Main Components, GDP, Current Market Prices, Chained
Volumes (2010), retrieved from: http://appsso.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/nui/submitViewTableAction.do. Eurostat,
Government Deficit/Surplus, Debt and Associated Data, Share of GDP, retrieved from:
http://appsso.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/nui/show.do?wai=true&dataset=gov_10dd_edpt1.

11

having to pay lower rates on their outstanding debt, and there would certainly have been many
more violations of the EU's deficit criteria than reported above, had the European states been
obliged to pay higher interest rates. For a country like Italy, for example, whose public debtGDP ratio was 132% by the end of 2017, each percentage point more interest means ceteris
paribus an increase in the deficit rate of about 1.3 percentage points. Instead of the reported
2.3%, the country would have had a deficit rate of 6.2% in 2017 had the interest rate been 3
percentage points higher as would have been normal prior to the Lehman crisis (see Figure 1).
More pronounced redistributive effects can be expected on the country level, as some
euro countries have negative net foreign investment positions due to huge current account
deficits accumulated in the past, while others with large current account surpluses have
positive positions. The latter include Germany, which was the country with the world’s largest
net foreign investment position after Japan by the end of 2017, with a sum of 1.9 trillion euros
in absolute terms and 59% of GDP. 13 The former include the six formally recognized crisis
countries, which received fiscal rescue funds and benefitted from the SMP. These countries,
referred to here as GIPSIC, are Greece (-141%), Ireland (-156%), Portugal (-106%), Spain (81%), Italy (-7%) and Cyprus (-120%). 14 A country’s net external debt is defined for the
purposes of this article as the negative of the respective net international investment
position. 15
Figure 4 offers a glimpse of the absolute interest advantage these countries taken
together may have enjoyed thanks to the low interest rates. It compares the time path of their
actual net payments of capital income to the rest of the world (negative net foreign investment
income, lower curve) and the fictitious capital income that they would have had to pay, had
the average actual rate of return remained constant at the 2007 level (upper curve), the latter
being defined as the ratio of capital income payments to the rest of the world and the negative
of the net foreign investment position. The graph shows that despite the initial surge in market
interest rates (Figure 1) and the originally huge current account deficits of the GIPSIC
countries, which meant a steady accumulation of net foreign debt, the external interest burden
of the respective economies has not risen during the crisis; and has even remained somewhat

13

Eurostat, International Investment Position - Quarterly Data, Million Units of National Currency, Net
Positions
at
the
End
of
Period,
2018,
retrieved
from:
http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/tgm/refreshTableAction.do?tab=table&plugin=1&pcode=tipsii41&language=en
;
Eurostat, Net International Investment Position - Quarterly Data, % of GDP, 2018, retrieved from:
http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/tgm/table.do?tab=table&init=1&language=en&pcode=tipsii40&plugin=1.
14
Eurostat, Net International Investment Position - Quarterly Data, % of GDP, 2018, retrieved from:
http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/tgm/table.do?tab=table&init=1&language=en&pcode=tipsii40&plugin=1.
15
Note that since 2014 the current account statistics have been prepared according to a new methodology
(Balance of Payments and International Investment Position Manual, Sixth Edition: BPM6).

12

below the 2007 level in absolute terms. As the upper curve shows what the external interest
burden would have been, had it been necessary to serve growing external debt at the 2007 rate
of interest, the area between the two curves gives an estimate of the interest advantage of the
GIPSIC countries.

Figure 4: GIPSIC net investment income paid to other countries

Source: Eurostat, Database Economy and Finance, Balance of Payments – International Transactions (BPM6),
Balance of Payments Statistics and International Investment Positions.
Note: Hypothetical net interest payments are defined as the product of the actual net foreign investment position
and the 2007 average rate of return that was actually paid on net foreign debt (in the sense of a negative net
foreign asset position).

The graph shows that in 2017 alone, the GIPSIC countries saved as much as 73 billion
euros in interest payments. Over the ten years from 2008 to 2017, they saved a total of 517
billion euros. Had the rate of interest remained at its 2007 level the countries would have had
to import fewer goods worth 517 euros to sustain the same time path of their net foreign asset
position.
The true cause of this interest saving is debatable. Was it policy, was it the change in
market conditions? However, in view of the information given in Figure 1, which shows that
the GIPSIC market rates all were rising sharply after Lehman until the OMT changed the
situation, it seems safe to say that using the 2007 average rate of interest for the benchmark
calculation gives the lower boundary of the interest gains resulting for political interventions
of the ECB and the rescue funds. The fiscal rescue credits, the overdraft credits in the form of
extra local money printing (as measured by the Target balances, which will be discussed in

13

greater detail in Section 6) and the interest reductions resulting from the OMT promise were
presumably largely responsible for the interest savings.

5. The Keynesian Recovery
The interest savings implied a strong increase in disposable income relative to the base line
scenario with 2007 interest rates. This, in turn, set Keynesian multiplier effects in motion, as
governments and private agents used the funds they did not have to transfer to foreign
creditors for local expenditure of all kinds. In addition, the lower interest rates made it
attractive to borrow even more funds to finance public and private investment and
consumption, which created a second Keynesian stimulus. As explained in Section 3, the
barriers created by legal debt constraints turned out to be way too weak to stem the tide. The
outcome was that the crisis-afflicted economies of the south ultimately managed to pull
through the most arduous phases of the crisis.
As shown in Figure 5, GDP recovered in southern Europe and France, with the
exception of Greece. After ten years of crisis Spain and Portugal have not been able to
significantly surpass the pre-crisis GDP level like France and Germany, for example, but they
at least came close to this level. 16 Italy also seems to have pulled through the worst of the
crisis, although in Q4 2017 its GDP still was 5% smaller than a decade ago, in Q3 2007.

16

GDP also recovered strongly in Ireland. However, the Irish data are not comparable as the recovery largely
resulted from relocation of profit bases to Ireland, rather than from real economic effects. This is the reason for
the Irish statistical office's decision to focus on a new indicator, namely gross national income (GNI) in 2017.
See Irish Statistical Office, Central Statistics Office (CSO) Response to the Main Recommendations of the
Economic
Statistics
Review
Group
(ESRG),
3
February
2017,
retrieved
from:
http://www.cso.ie/en/media/csoie/newsevents/documents/reportoftheeconomicstatisticsreviewgroup/ESRG_CSO
_response_3_Feb_2017.pdf.

14

Figure 5: Real GDP – Keynesian recovery, quarterly data

Source: Eurostat, Database Economy and Finance, National Accounts (ESA 2010), Quarterly National Accounts,
Main GDP Aggregates.

However, GDP recovery is largely concentrated on the non-traded goods sectors that
directly benefit from improved local credit conditions for governments. If governments spend
more money on wages and pensions, for example, local services consumed by the recipients
of these funds expand, but this does not necessarily benefit the traded-goods sectors, above all
manufacturing. Manufacturing output, as shown by Figure 6, paints a far less favorable
picture of the recovery. Obviously, all Mediterranean countries, including France, have
struggled to even come close to their pre-crisis levels. By the end of 2017, Italy was 17%
below the level achieved ten years earlier, while Spain and Greece lagged around 20% behind
their previous levels. Even France was trailing 9% behind its pre-crisis peak. These numbers
shed light on the economic difficulties that have led to the sharp and dramatic rise of radical
parties in these countries in recent years. They also suggest that the somewhat shaky
"recovery" shown in Figure 5 may prove little more than a Keynesian flash.

15

Figure 6: Manufacturing output

Source: Eurostat, Database Industry Trade and Services, Short-term Business Statistics, Industry, Production in
Industry.

This disappointing outcome did not necessarily come about despite the Keynesian
recovery, but perhaps even because of it. The reason for this is that a government driven
Keynesian boom boosts the non-traded goods sectors and helps maintain the overdrawn
wages that developed in the pre-crisis bubble, thus undermining the competitiveness of the
traded-goods sectors, a typical Dutch disease phenomenon.
Figure 7 confirms this interpretation by showing the GDP deflators of various
countries relative to the rest of the Eurozone as published by Eurostat. For the purpose of
drawing the figure, the GDP deflators were normalized such that they all attained the value of
100 at the time of the Lehman crisis (Q3 2008), which obviously is the point in time at which
most of the relative price levels of the GIPSIC countries peaked.

16

Figure 7: Real effective exchange rates in the Eurozone (GDP deflator relative to respective
rest of the Eurozone)

Sources: European Commission, Business, Economy, Euro, Economic Databases, Price and Cost
Competitiveness, Quarterly Real Effective Exchange Rates vs. (rest of) EA19, Price Deflator GDP,
Market Prices; Pill et al. (2012); own calculations.
Note: The chart shows real effective exchange rates, normalized to 100 in Q3 2008. The real effective exchange
rate shown here is defined as the ratio of a country's GDP deflator and the trade-weighted average GDP deflator
of the rest of the Eurozone. The end points in the diagram giving actual data refer to Q4 2017. The horizontal
bars on the right-hand side of the graph show model-based median estimates of long-run target levels as
calculated by Pill et al. that would be necessary to bring the countries' net foreign investment positions into the
range from minus to plus 25% of GDP after a period of 20 years, given the average real exchange rate of the
euro with regard to the rest of the world. The authors report estimates of the respective national target price
levels relative to the average of the Eurozone. To make these estimates compatible with the Eurostat data they
were converted to target price levels relative to the respective rest of the Eurozone. Note that while this
conversion is unimportant for small countries, it may generate larger deviations for bigger countries like
Germany. Germany's target price level relative to the average of the Eurozone that is equivalent to the 31%
shown in the graph is only 20%.

The figure also confirms the description of the euro bubble given above in the context
of Figure 1 by showing that the southern European countries and Ireland all underwent an
inflationary boom, if not bubble, before Lehman. This boom deprived them of their
competitiveness. The resulting current account deficits were no problem as long as these
countries were financed by the capital market, but after Lehman foreign funds became scarce,
17

and while helping to avert a disaster, credit from local printing presses was not enough to
avoid austerity. This was the period when price trends had to reverse to re-establish
competitiveness. As can be seen, this happened in Ireland, Greece and Spain, but not in Italy
and Portugal.
In fact, Ireland ran into trouble back in autumn 2006, two years before Lehman and
began a process of real devaluation via wage and price cuts. As can be seen, this process was
already in full swing when the Lehman crisis broke out and it terminated in 2011, when
Ireland received support from the rescue fund EFSF. Obviously, this also was a Dutch-disease
type of reaction, countering the EU Commission's view that its own actions helped Ireland to
recover.
The right-hand side of the figure features estimates of the long-term target values for
price levels derived from a study by the economics department of Goldman Sachs (Pil et al.
2012). These target values were calculated from long-term growth models under the
assumption that the respective countries' net foreign asset positions should be in the band of
plus/minus 25% of GDP after a period of 20 years, given the real exchange rate of the euro
with the outside world. Greece, Portugal and Spain, which all had negative net asset positions
of close to 100% or more, needed substantial real devaluations to generate sufficiently large
trade surpluses to achieve this goal. Italy, by contrast, which was far less indebted abroad,
needed proportionately lower adjustments.
As the graph shows, Ireland has successfully done the job. Spain and Greece are on
the right track, but still have to go a long way. Italy and Portugal, by contrast, have made no
real bid to embark upon the necessary process of real devaluation.
Germany, whose price level reveals a mirror development, on the other hand, has been
inflating more than the rest of the Eurozone for some time now. But the path towards reestablishing competitiveness in southern Europe is long. It is worth bearing in mind that the
real exchange rates shown in the figure are defined as a country's price level relative to the
rest of the Eurozone, rather than the average. For Germany, which is a big country, an
appreciation of 31% against the rest of the Eurozone is equivalent to an appreciation of
around 20% against the average.
In principle, there are only four dismal options for dealing with the problem. The first
involves a disinflation, if not outright deflation, in southern Europe. It is painful, as it implies
stagnation and potential difficulties for long-term debtors and tenants with nominally fixed
payment obligations and can be compared to a form of chemotherapy.

18

The second is re-inflating the north to catch up with the increased price levels in the
south. This expropriates savers who invested in securities and savings accounts and violates
the ECB's price stability target.
The third is implementing a transfer union whereby the north permanently co-finances
living standards in the south. It is expensive, as the euro countries in difficulty comprise about
40% of the Eurozone population. It would drive the south into a permanent Dutch disease of
the kind prevailing in the Italian Mezzogiorno, Spanish Andalusia or ex-communist eastern
Germany, sustaining wages above the competitive market equilibrium.
The fourth way is (temporary) exits to allow countries to formally devalue,
accompanied by haircuts for external debt and subsidies for essential imports. It requires
capital controls like those recently implemented in Greece and Cyprus until the exit has taken
place and the exchange rate can freely adjust. As is well known, Greece was very close to
such a solution in summer 2015, given that 16 Eurozone finance ministers had opted for it and
even Greek finance minister Yanis Varoufakis had secretly prepared a plan to install a parallel
currency in Greece. George A. Papandreou would also have preferred such a solution back in
2011, as he publicly revealed in 2016. 17

6. Self-service with the Printing Press
While exits would quickly resolve the competitiveness problem, there are two reasons why
countries are reluctant to choose this solution. One is the difficulties involved in increasing
foreign debt levels relative to domestic GDP, as measured after devaluation, or in foreign
investors accepting write-offs, respectively. The other is the easy access to the euro printing
press, which the Eurosystem provides, to fulfill international payment obligations, as already
mentioned in Section 2. The right to print a currency that other countries accept as legal
tender is an overwhelmingly strong incentive to stick to the euro, despite the mass
unemployment resulting from being overpriced.
Contrary to the widespread belief that euros are minted in Frankfurt and lent out to the
euro countries in proportion to country size, the truth is that, within the Eurozone, national
central banks have a lot of autonomy to deviate from proportionally issuing credit to the
national economy. Within extremely loose rules laid down by the ECB they can issue more
money by way of providing refinancing credit to local banks or buying more assets if needed.
There are three channels for making self-service with the printing press possible.

17

He made this comment at a pre-conference event on the eve of the Munich Security Conference on 11
February, 2016.

19

Firstly, every central bank has the right to issue unlimited amounts of emergency liquidity
(ELA), i.e. to provide credit from the local printing press to local banks according to its own
collateral rules. It does not need the permission of the ECB Council, the governing body of
the central bank in Frankfurt, to do so. However, the Council does have the right to stop ELA
if a majority of two thirds of votes can be assembled. Alas, during the initial crisis years,
before the Baltic states joined the EU, the GIPSIC countries, which had all made use of ELA,
had more than a third of the council votes and could not have been stopped, even if all of the
other euro countries had wanted to do so. ELA credit was issued for several hundreds of
billions of euros during the crisis.
The second channel is the Eurosystem's Agreement on Net Financial Assets (ANFA).
This is a secret agreement between the central banks enabling them to issue local money for
the purpose of buying assets at their own discretion and running their own business models.
The agreement was detected by Daniel Hoffmann, a doctoral student from the Technical
University of Berlin, and subsequently published by the ECB. 18 The Banca d'Italia, for
example, bought 105 billion euros worth of government bonds under the ANFA rules with
freshly-created domestic money.
ANFA and ELA credit is a credit available to the local central banks at the ECB's main
refinancing rate (which has been equal to 0.05 since September 2014 and zero since March
2016) 19 and can be transferred to the private economy at the national central bank's own risk.
Any interest surcharge it owns belongs to itself alone and can be distributed to the respective
national treasury, and any losses it incurs have to be financed from its own resources without
other central banks sharing them. 20
The third channel for over-proportionally issuing credit with freshly created money to
the domestic banking sector is implied in the ECB's collateral policy (Sinn, 2012a, pp.150163; 2014, pp. 153-165). To draw ordinary refinancing credit from its national central bank, a
commercial bank has to provide sufficiently good collateral. Before the crisis, the collateral
rules were very strict, and only very safe assets were accepted. As banks in the GIPSIC

18

European Central Bank, Agreement of 19 November 2014 on Net Financial Assets, Confidential, 5 February
2016, retrieved from: https://www.ecb.europa.eu/ecb/legal/pdf/en_anfa_agreement_19nov2014_f_sign.pdf. The
dissertation of Hoffman (2015) was formally submitted and discussed among specialists before this publication
date.
19
European Central Bank, Statistical Data Warehouse, Official Interest Rates, ECB Main Refinancing
Operations,
Fixed
Rate
Tenders,
2018,
retrieved
from:
https://sdw.ecb.europa.eu/browseTable.do?node=9691107.
20
There was a debate about whether or not the interest on ELA credit belonged to the central bank issuing this
credit. It was clarified in Fuest and Sinn (2016) that interest to the extent of the main refinancing rate has to be
transferred to the Eurosystem's interest pool, while any excess or loss in deviation from that interest is to be
captured or born, respectively, by the national central bank alone according to the rules of the Eurosystem.

20

countries ran out of good assets during the crisis, however, the ECB Council reduced the
required collateral quality in a multitude of single decisions to the no-investment grade
territory, and even accepted assets generated by ring trading between banks so as to enable
banks to draw more and more credit from their local central banks.
The extra credit and liquidity that thus became available to the banks of crisis
countries made it possible:
- To compensate for the missing foreign credit and the liquidity losses resulting from net
payment orders to other countries to finance current account deficits, which in the initial years
were still large (as before Lehman);
- To redeem foreign credit in cases where private foreign investors were no longer willing to
roll over old credit; and
- To invest funds abroad.
It therefore enabled balance-of-payments deficits in the sense of net-payment orders to other
countries as measured by the so-called Target balances. Target is an acronym for the ECB's
internal international system of payment orders. 21
The Target balances measure a sort of overdraft credit in the Eurosystem provided by
those central banks that have to carry out the payment orders and issue money to local banks
without accumulating claims on them, money that the local banks transfer to the domestic
recipients of the payments. The recipient of the Target credit is not the recipient of the
payment, but the respective other central bank that gives the payment order. The other central
bank withdraws local liquidity by accepting the international payment order coming from a
local commercial bank and normally replenishes local liquidity by issuing new local credit to
commercial banks via the mechanisms explained above. The Target credit cannot be called
due, but needs to be serviced at the main refinancing rate, which however, as mentioned, has
been practically zero since 2014. A national central bank's Target claim is part of the nation's
net foreign asset position.
Figure 8 gives an overview of all public credit that had been delivered to the GIPSIC
countries by the peak of the crisis in August 2012, including the Target credit, the SMP credit
(explained in Section 2) and the fiscal rescue programs, providing money from the EU, the
IMF, and the Eurozone governments. The credit came from public sources and was granted to
local states and banks, which then handed it on to local companies, individuals and states. As
can be seen, the sum of all credit stood at 1,342 billion euros, but the Target overdraft credit,
21 For the basic role of Target balances in the Eurosystem cf. Sinn and Wollmershäuser (2012), Sinn (2014), and
Steiner (2016).

21

totaling 1,005 billion euros, dwarfed all other items. Netting out the GIPSIC countries' own
contributions 22 reduces the overall amount of credit flown to the GIPSIC countries to 1,316
billion euros 23 and implies that 83% of the aggregate public credit provided to these countries
by the rest of the euro countries was delivered through the Eurosystem, while only 17% was
approved by parliaments.

Figure 8: Public international lending to the GIPSIC countries (billion euros, August 2012)

Source: ifo Institute, The Exposure Level - Bailout Measures for the Eurozone Countries and Germany’s
Exposure, Column 1, and the sources cited there, retrieved from: https://www.cesifogroup.de/ifoHome/policy/Haftungspegel.html
Note: The graph shows the sum of all public credit, net of potential repayments, provided by international
institutions (IMF, ECB, EU, EFSF, ESM) to local central banks of the GIPSIC countries and to local
governments. The sum includes SMP purchases of GIPSIC government bonds by non-GIPSIC national central
banks as such purchases make new bond sales to non-GIPSIC markets possible without forcing governments to
offer better conditions. Such new bond sales as well as the genuinely fiscal rescue credits from international
organizations replace and reduce the GIPSIC Target balances. While the upper parts of the column contain gross
fiscal credit stocks, the calculation at the right, nets them with the GIPSIC countries' own contributions.

The asymmetry between the credits provided by parliaments and the Eurosystem is
stunning. This asymmetry is a major challenge for European democracy, as the Eurosystem is
governed by the ECB Council, which consists of national central bank governors and the

22

The 123 billion euro SMP purchases are net of the GIPSIC's own contributions, the total SMP volume being
223 billion euros.
23
This sum is also net of the GIPSIC countries' net claims due to an under-proportional volume of bank note
issues, which is booked as a claim on other central banks in the national central bank balance sheets.

22

Eurozone directorate and is a purely technocratic body whose members enjoy immunity for
all actions.
It is often argued one should not worry about the fiscal effects of monetary policy, as
they are natural and unavoidable. While true in principle, this argument is overshadowed by
the sheer magnitude of the international public credit coming from the Eurosystem. This
credit is five times as large as the public credit that the parliaments deemed acceptable for
taxpayers.
The credit provided by the ECB is ultimately provided by taxpayers, just like ordinary
fiscal credit, as the nation states are (in most cases) the owners of the respective national
central banks, which are entitled to collect the seignorage income from credit provisions. Any
explicit write-off losses and any implicit losses resulting from interest relief provided to the
debtors of the Eurosystem will have to be fully borne by European taxpayers alone, as these
losses reduce profit distributions, unless monetary policy changes its inflationary stance and
imposes the losses on money holders instead. This is true regardless of the fact that central
banks could even operate with negative equity capital. Even if they do, the present value of
central bank "dividends" paid out to public "shareholders" will always diminish by the full
extent of the explicit and implicit losses.

7. Greek Austerity
Greece is an interesting case study that nicely illustrates the role of public rescue credit. Greek
politicians often argue that the Troika consisting of the IMF, the EU and the ECB, imposed
austerity on the nation, forcing the Greek government to tighten its belts beyond reasonable
levels. This is clearly a distortion of the truth, as the austerity Greece experienced during the
crisis exclusively came from the capital market, which was unwilling to continue financing
the country. Instead, the Troika reduced and mitigated this austerity with public credit and
credit guarantees, although perhaps not to the extent that the beneficiaries would have liked.
The insufficiency of gifts from other countries was then called "austerity". The extent to
which the austerity argument turns the truth on its head is shown in Figures 9 and 10.

23

Figure 9: Public and private consumption relative to net national income

Source: Eurostat, Database Economy and Finance, National Accounts (ESA 2010), Annual National Accounts,
Main GDP Aggregates, GDP and Main Components (Output, Expenditure and Income); Eurostat, Database
Economy and Finance, National Accounts (ESA 2010), Annual Sector Accounts (ESA 2010), Non-financial
Transactions.

Figure 9 gives the time paths of the sum of public and private consumption relative to
net national income for various countries as of 1995, the year the interest conversion began
for most countries (see Figure 1). The graph shows that while most countries' consumption
has stayed below net national income, Greece and Portugal were able to increase their
consumption levels above net national income with a delay of three years after joining the
Eurosystem (Portugal 1999, Greece 2001) and have been able to keep consumption above the
national income level ever since. This remained true even after Lehman when both countries
were practically shut off from the capital market and public credit from domestic printing
presses and rescue funds replaced the stalling private credit. Even in 2016 Greece was still
about 8% above the level it would have been able to finance itself. This gives some
impression of the extent to which international aid mitigated the market-imposed austerity.
Another frequently expressed view is that the foreign aid Greece received was used
primarily to redeem foreign debt and hence rescue European creditor banks (Varoufakis,
2017, p. 23-29). The fallacy of this argument is not only implied by Figure 9, but also more
precisely by Figure 10. The latter provides information about the absolute levels and the
24

composition of international aid for Greece compared to the Greek current account deficit
accumulated from 1 January 2008 (the curve cutting the abscissa) and in comparison to the
overall Greek net foreign debt position (negative net foreign asset position, upper curve). 24

Figure 10: Foreign aid for Greece during the crisis

Source: Eurostat, database Economy and finance, Balance of Payments—International Transactions; European
Commission, Economic and Financial Affairs, The EU as a Borrower; European Commission, EU Budget 2011,
Financial Report; European Commission, The Economic Adjustment Programme for Greece: Fifth Review;
European Financial Stability Facility, Lending Operations; IMF, Financial Activities; IMF, SDR Exchange Rate
Archives by Month; IMF, Updated IMF Quota Data; European Stability Mechanism, Financial Assistance;
European Stability Mechanism, ESM Factsheet; ECB, Open Market Operations; Bank of Greece, Research and
Publications, Financial Statements, Monthly Balance Sheet.
Note: A country’s net foreign debt is defined for the purposes of this article as the negative of the respective net
foreign investment position. The figure shows the time paths of the stock of formal credit Greece received from
public institutions, net of any repayments and booked at its face value. It does not include the explicit or implicit
Greek debt relief at the expense of private and public creditors provided in the year 2012.

The height of the lower area is the Greek Target liability as reported in the Greek
central bank's balance sheet, and that of the next area packed onto it is a similar credit and
liability Greece was drawing from the Eurosystem by printing an above-normal amount of
physical bank notes – money that often was carried in suitcases to neighboring countries to
buy real estate and other assets. Obviously, in the first two years of the crisis, i.e. in the years
2008 and 2009, the money from extra electronic and physical money printing was roughly
equivalent to the accumulated current account deficit of Greece. This, of course, does not say
24

Cf. Sinn (2015).

25

anything about correlation or causality, but it is a relevant accounting statement, indicating
that during these two years, Greece did not (yet) experience capital flight, but had to live on
its printing press, because the inflow of private foreign credit stopped.
The height of the next area added to the two previous areas is the volume of
outstanding Greek government bonds bought by other central banks under the SMP program,
and the height of the upper area gives the sum of all fiscal rescue funds net of redemptions
stemming from the various intergovernmental aid program, the EU and the IMF.
By December 2017 the overall sum of net credit that the Greek economy had received
from public sources was 302 billion euros or 170% of Greece's 2017 GDP (178 billion euros).
By way of comparison: the Marshall aid that Germany received in the post-war period as
formally stated in the 1952 London Debt Conference was 5.2 % of Germany's 1952 GDP
(Berger and Ritschl, 1995). Thus, Greece received about 33 times the Marshall aid granted to
Germany in relative terms. Note, however, that Germany also received debt relief, as did
Greece in 2012. The debt relief of Germany and Greece is not included in the figures
discussed here.
What was this aid used for? To bail out foreign creditors and compensate for an
outright flight of foreign capital, as is often contended, or to sustain Greek living standards?
The curve showing the current account deficit accumulated since the beginning of the Lehman
year 2008 gives a partial answer. By December 2017, the current account deficit accumulated
over a decade was 130 billion euros or 43% of the overall stock of foreign public credit
received. 25 Thus 43% of the public credit received served sustaining the Greek living
standard, and 172 billion euros at most, or 57%, might have been used to redeem foreign debt
and hence help foreign creditors.
But even this percentage seems too big, since the Greek net foreign debt (in the sense
of a negative net foreign asset position, comprising all cross-border asset holdings and credit
claims), was only 251 billion euros. How is it possible that Greek net foreign debt is 251
billion euros, while the entire net foreign credit the Greek economy received from public
sources was 302 billion euros? The only explanation is that 51 billion euros of the 302 billion
euros, or 17%, was used to finance Greek capital flight to other countries. Greek institutions
and individuals obviously used this part of the public rescue credit to finance their own
foreign net investments. This information fits to the newspaper stories that Greek investors
bought substantial assets in the London and Berlin real estate markets, for example. As a

25

Eurostat.
Current
Account
Balance,
Quarterly
Data,
2018,
retrieved
http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/macroeconomic-imbalances-procedure/indicators/main-tables.

from:

26

result, only the difference between the net foreign debt and the accumulated current account
deficit, 121 billion euros (251 billion euros – 130 billion euros), i.e. 40% of the overall public
credit can have been used to redeem foreign debt and rescue foreign creditors. This is a
sizeable share indeed, but certainly does not represent "most" of the funds that Greece
received.
To summarize, over the entire decade from 2008 to 2017, around 43% of the credit
given to Greece was used to finance the Greek current account deficit, and 17% was used to
finance the capital flight by Greek investors. The remaining 40% was used to redeem foreign
debt and thus bail out foreign creditors.

8. Quantitative Easing
For the time being, the last step in the ECB's fiscal rescue operations has been its Quantitative
Easing (QE) program. This program was agreed in January 2015 and implied that, by the end
of 2017, central banks had bought 2,337 billion euros worth of assets in the markets. 26 The
purchases increased the monetary base by nearly 2 trillion euros, from 1,193 billion euros at
the end of 2014, shortly before the beginning of the program, to 3,139 billion euros by the end
of 2017. 27
The largest share of the purchases were government bonds, comprising around 1.8
trillion euros of the 2.3 trillion euros, and enabling governments to issue correspondingly
more bonds without deteriorating the interest conditions that the market would require.
According to an opinion expressed by the German Constitutional Court in its order for
reference submitted to the European Court of Justice in August 2017, these purchases helped
governments finance their expenditure in a similar way as direct purchases of government
bonds by the ECB would have done and are therefore illegal, violating Article 123 TFEU. 28
The purchases, which were continued beyond the end of 2017, were carried out by the
national central banks. Each of them bought the respective domestic government bonds in
proportion to country size (ECB capital key). As with ELA or ANFA, each national central
26

European Central Bank, History of Cumulative Purchase Breakdowns Under the APP, 2018, retrieved from:
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/mopo/implement/omt/html/index.en.html#pspp. The monetary base is defined as
currency (banknotes and coins) in circulation plus the minimum reserves credit institutions are required to hold
with the Eurosystem and any excess reserves they may voluntarily hold in the Eurosystem's deposit facility, all
of which are liabilities on the Eurosystem's balance sheet.
27
European Central Bank, Statistical Data Warehouse, Base Money, Euro Area, 2018, retrieved from:
https://sdw.ecb.europa.eu.
28
BVerfG. Beschluss des Zweiten Senats vom 18. Juli 2017. 2 BvR 859/15 - Rn. (1-137), 18 July 2017, retrieved
from: http://www.bverfg.de/e/rs20170718_2bvr085915.html; German Constitutional Court, Proceedings on the
European Central Bank’s Expanded Asset Purchase Programme are Stayed - Referral to the Court of Justice of
the European Union, Press Release No. 70/2017, 15 August 2017, retrieved from:
http://www.bundesverfassungsgericht.de/SharedDocs/Pressemitteilungen/EN/2017/bvg17-070.html.

27

bank bore the investment risk in the sense that it collected the actual interest on the
government bond, while it was paying interest according to the ECB's main refinancing rate
into the common interest pool, which was then redistributed according to country size among
the national central banks and their owners, normally the nation states. 29 Any interest earned
above the main refinancing rate would belong the the national central bank, and likewise any
shortfall would have to be borne by this bank.
The program was symmetrically designed and aimed at reducing long-term interest
rates for governmental and private bonds. 30 However, in the end, it was not symmetrical.
Instead it rather turned out to be a big asset swap program, exchanging parts of the securitized
government debt of the GIPSIC countries for Target liabilities with the Eurosystem, and
indirectly with the Bundesbank and a few other national central banks.
The reason for the non-symmetrical implications of QE, despite its seemingly
symmetric construction, is that substantial fractions of the bonds of the GIPSIC countries
were located abroad because these countries had financed the huge current account deficits
that developed in the pre-Lehman euro bubble by selling assets, including government bonds,
to the rest of the world. Calling these bonds back home meant that net-payment orders to the
rest of the world arose, which increased the respective Target liabilities (Sinn, 2016, p. 260268). QE can therefore be seen as a process of retroactively financing prior current account
balances with overdraft credit from the Eurosystem.
The curves in the lower part of Figure 11, which depict the joint Target balances of the
GIPSIC countries in toto, as well as those of Italy and Spain, show this development. Before
2007, the balances were roughly zero, as current account deficits were financed with private
capital imports. After the outbreak of the financial crisis, private capital shied away from the
GIPSIC countries and the compensation came from national electronic printing presses in the
sense discussed above, financing the redemption of maturing private debt, as well as current
account deficits, and to some extent even capital flight by domestic residents, who borrowed
at home to buy foreign assets, as was demonstrated above for the case of Greece. The peak of
this development was reached in summer 2012, by which point the 1,005 billion euros of
Target debt already shown in Figure 8 was accumulated.

29

In Greece and Italy, national central banks have private owners.
“APP will strengthen confidence and support inflation expectations, having a direct impact on real interest
rates and thus counteracting an unwarranted tightening of financial conditions. Furthermore, the ECB’s
interventions will reduce yields on government bonds, which will set in motion a more conventional chain of
propagation channels that will support the economic recovery” (European Central Bank, 2015, p. 17)
30

28

Figure 11: The Target balances

* Germany, the Netherlands and Luxembourg.

Source: European Central Bank, Statistics, ECB/Eurosystem Policy and Exchange Rates, Target Balances of
Participating NCBs. For data before 2008 see: Deutsche Bundesbank, Database, Time series BBK01.EU8148B;
De Nederlandsche Bank, Statistics, Financial Institutions, Domestic MFI-statistics (monetary), Balance Sheet of
the Nederlandsche Bank; Banco de España, Boletín Estadístico, Balance Sheet of the Banco de España; Banca
d’Italia, Statistical Database, Bank of Italy Balance Sheet Aggregates; International Monetary Fund,
International Financial Statistics, Net Claims on Eurosystem (IFS code xxx12e0szkm), Currency Issued (IFS
code xxx14a00zkm), and Currency put into Circulation (IFS code xxx14m00zkm).

Then came the OMT program, the free-of-charge CDS-like insurance provided by the
ECB that lured capital back to the GIPSIC countries, caused payment orders to these countries
and hence reduced the Target balances again. This process came to an end in July 2014 when
the discussion about the forthcoming QE program started and GIPSIC banks began to buy
domestic government bonds abroad in order to subsequently resell them to their local central
banks after the launch of the QE program.
From March 2015 when the program did start, this effect was reinforced as national
central banks began to actually buy back the government bonds. In February 2018, the overall

29

Target liability of the GIPSIC countries amounted to 969 billion euros, of which 843 billion
euros were attributable to Spain (399 billion euros) and Italy (444 billion euros) alone. 31
Three Target-generating channels through which the repurchase actions took place can
be distinguished.
1. The national central bank bought the bonds from their domestic banks, which
themselves bought them in other countries, carrying out international payment orders for that
purpose, forcing other central banks to credit the payments. The respective credit claims and
liabilities were booked as Target balances.
2. The national central bank bought the bonds from foreign investors inside the
Eurozone. For that purpose this central bank gave a direct payment order to the central bank
of the country where the respective investors resided. Let us take the Bundesbank as an
example. The Bundesbank created and issued the money necessary to make the payments to
the selling investors, giving the former central bank a credit by doing so. As it issued money
without receiving a claim on German commercial banks, it received a Target claim on the
Eurosystem instead, which itself received a claim on the national central bank making the
payment order. This was probably the standard case.
3. The national central bank bought the bonds from foreign investors outside the
Eurozone. In this case it asked the ECB itself to make the payment order, which led to a
Target-liability with regard to the ECB. However, the foreign sellers typically did not keep
the euros they received, but reinvested them in the Eurozone, most often in Germany, forcing
the Bundesbank to credit the payment to the ECB, and indirectly to the central bank that
repurchased the government bonds from the foreign investors. Again, the claims and
liabilities were booked as Target balances.
Most of the reinvestment did indeed take place in Germany, but some went to the
Netherlands and Luxembourg. The newest data published at the time of writing show a
Target claim of the Bundesbank of 923 billion euros by the end of March. By the end of
February when all data were available, the German Target balance was 914 billion euros, the
Dutch balance 123 billion euros and Luxembourg’s balance was 191 billion euros, bringing
the total of all three countries to 1,228 billion euros. 32
31

European Central Bank, Statistical Data Warehouse, TARGET Balances of Participating NCBs, 2018,
retrieved from: http://sdw.ecb.europa.eu.
32
European Central Bank, Statistical Data Warehouse, TARGET Balances of Participating NCBs, 2018,
retrieved
from
https://sdw.ecb.europa.eu;
Deutsche
Bundesbank,
Zeitreihe
BBFI1.M.N.DE.4F.S121.S1.LE.A.FA.O.F2___T2.S._T.N.N: Mtl. Auslandsposition der Bundesbank - Aktiva Übrige Kapitalanlagen - Bargeld und Einlagen - Nettoposition aus TARGET, 2018, retrieved from:
https://www.bundesbank.de/Navigation/DE/Statistiken/Zeitreihen_Datenbanken/Makrooekonomische_Zeitreihe
n.

30

In other words, QE was like a big asset swap helping the GIPSIC countries to
effectively get rid of some of their securitized foreign debt. Prima facie, it might have been
suspected that central banks bought back government bonds from domestic banks and
replaced it with base money, which represented a claim on themselves. However, the sellers
included foreign investors and they as well as the selling domestic banks typically used this
opportunity to reshuffle their portfolios and buy assets from other countries instead, thus
distributing the money they received more evenly among wealth owners in other euro
countries.
There was a debate on how to interpret the new Target balances triggered by the QE
program. While Westermann (2016, 2017) and the Dutch Central Bank (De Nederlandsche
Bank, 2016) argued that the concentration of liquidity generated by QE in just three countries
was a sign of a fragmented capital market if not capital flight, the president of the ECB denied
this interpretation fiercely, maintaining that it was a natural implication of the attempt to
"redeposit" the new liquidity (Draghi 2016, European Central Bank 2017). However, if he is
right with this interpretation and the Target balances do indeed result from a foreseen
technical effect, the new Target balances are particularly worrisome, as the asset swap they
indicate constitutes an extreme act of fiscal policy that goes far beyond the ECB's mandate,
because it replaces a securitized state debt in the hands of private creditors with a mere book
debt of a country's central bank with other central banks of the Eurosystem.
This replacement is a big advantage for the debtor countries as, unlike government
debt, the Target liability can never be called due by the creditors and carries a rate of interest
that the debtors co-determine. The Council's majority did indeed set this rate at close to zero
in 2014 and kept it there, even although the European economy has recently faced a strong
Keynesian boom.
Moreover, saying that the debtors co-determine the rate at which they can borrow is an
understatement. In 2017, 63% of the votes in the ECB Council were held by countries with a
negative net foreign investment position.33 Any public choice model applied to the trade-off
between national interest and true monetary goals would suggest that this fact will have
repercussions for the kind of policies chosen by the ECB Council.
Another advantage for the indebted countries of the Eurozone is that the asset swap
carried out by the ECB has replaced private creditors that tend to become intrusive in the case
33
Austria, Belgium, Finland, Germany, Luxembourg, Malta and the Netherlands had a positive net international
investment position by the end of 2017. Cyprus, Estonia, France, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania
Portugal, Slovakia, Slovenia and Spain had a negative net international investment position by the end of 2017
(Eurostat, Net International Investment Position, Quarterly Data, % of GDP, 2018, retrieved from:
http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/.)

31

of crisis with the ECB and ultimately a small number of other central banks that can be
expected to be far more conciliatory and malleable if necessary.
From the point of view of the Target creditor countries, on the other hand, the QE
swap is much less favorable. The Bundesbank, which at the time of writing has a Target claim
of 923 billion euros, cannot call this claim due and can only collect and distribute to the
German state an interest equal to the ECB's main refinancing rate, which is currently zero.
And as Germany only has a tiny minority vote in the ECB Council – the same as that of
countries like Malta or Cyprus whose population is 1/179 or 1/97 compared to the German
population – it is unable to significantly influence the interest decisions.
The Target balances are integrated in international payment accounting systems, and
they enter a country's positive and negative net foreign asset positions in the statistics of
Eurostat, OECD and the IMF. The 923 billion euro Target claims of the Bundesbank
constituted 48% of the entire net foreign asset position of the Federal Republic of Germany by
the end of 2017, which, apart from write-off losses, is the sum of all past current account
surpluses Germany has been able to realize. Thus QE implicitly converts a substantial fraction
of Germany's past current account surpluses into mere Target claims, forcing the Bundesbank
to retroactively finance the current account deficits of other countries with freshly printed
money, i.e. claims against itself.
Those who argue that a current account surplus is a benefit for a country should reexamine their opinion in the context of the ECB's QE policy, and in view of the fact that any
private investor would have to write-off a claim that he can never call due, that currently
carries a rate of interest equal to zero and that may be carrying a positive rate in some distant
future at debtors' discretion.

9. Settling the Target Balances
Arguably, the international public credit measured by Target balances could be subjected to
settlement. Such settlement is normal between any private banks mutually carrying out
payment orders, and it is also essential for the US payment system. The Interdistrict
Settlement Accounts between the 12 district central banks existing in the USA, for example,
are settled each April by transferring the ownership of assets bought through open market
operations (the SOMA portfolio) (Sinn, 2012b; European Economic Advisory Group, 2012;
Sinn and Wollmershäuser, 2012). Until 1975, the USA even had annual gold settlement
between the district central banks.

32

Gold settlement was also common in the fixed-exchange rate Bretton Woods System
that lasted until 1973. That system fell apart after France required the dollars it had
accumulated to actually be settled with gold. Germany, in turn, had accumulated nearly 4,000
tons of gold by 1968, among other things because it had the right to have the foreign reserves
accumulated, primarily French Franc and British Pounds, being converted to gold or dollars at
a politically determined parity (Bernholz, 1998; Furth, 1955; Sinn, 2014, p. 325). 34 As the
market price of gold was below that parity, the central banks of France and Britain decided to
settle the Target like balances that arose in the Bretton Woods System with gold. If today's
Target balances were settled with gold, the Bundesbank would receive 26,684 tons of gold for
its Target claim by the end of March 2018 at the then prevailing gold price. 35
Settlement is necessary in order to limit the moral hazard effect resulting from nonsettlement and unlimited Target balances. The settlement obligation gives a country's central
bank an incentive to issue local credit parsimoniously by making only limited use of ELA,
ANFA and generous collateral policies and allow local interest rates to increase, which would
lure in private capital from abroad . Even the USA, for example, used to have internal interest
spreads between the districts of the Federal Reserve System that reflected both risk spreads
and the unwillingness of district central banks to let ISA balances grow which they then
would have to settle with gold (in the years up to 1975). While no single transaction would
ever be blocked, rising local interest rates would result in more private capital flowing in and,
if not, domestic agents, governments, investors and consumers alike, would have less
incentive to borrow, which would reduce the import of goods, and hence the need to finance it
with money from the local printing press.
It is true that the advantage of unlimited balances is that a central bank has unlimited
abilities to withstand speculative attacks and compensate for the capital flight with cheap
public credit. However, the downside is that the national central bank also faces the
temptation to use the cheap public credit, which is available without any risk spreads, to
undercut the market and expel private credit that it finds too expensive. While this would limit
any acute crisis, it breeds the risk of bigger crises in the future, as the country's international

34

Deutsche Bundesbank, Statistiken, Zeitreihe BBK01.EU8201: Auslandsposition der Bundesbank -Bestand- /
from:
Gold,
2018,
retrieved
https://www.bundesbank.de/Navigation/DE/Statistiken/Zeitreihen_Datenbanken/Makrooekonomische_Zeitreihe
n/its_details_value_node.html;jsessionid=00001hSSnuWdkMIWc0RpebpebXe:-1?startpageId=StartseiteDE&startpageAreaId=Marginalspalte&startpageLinkName=its_details_value_node+194&tsId=BBK01.EU8201.
35
Gold Price: 1076.43 EUR per Troy Ounce (March 30, 2018); Target balance of Germany by March 31, 2018:
923,466,081,285.58 EUR ; 1 Troy Ounce = 31.1034768 g = 0.0000311034768 tons. Target claim in tons of gold
= (923,466,081,285.58 EUR) / (1076.43 EUR / Troy Ounce) * (0.0000311034768 tons / Troy Ounce) =
26,683.58 tons.

33

indebtedness increases, and public institutions enter debtor-creditor relationships that tend to
result in distrust and anger.
The Soviet transfer ruble system exemplifies the risk of a system without settlement of
balances between the republics. As all Soviet republics had access to local money creation,
most of the national central banks over-used the local printing presses to buy goods from
Russia without ever paying with assets or other goods, thus accumulating more and more
Target-like external debt (Sinn 2014, p. 243). After the end of the Soviet system this was one
of the reasons why Russia eventually limited the overdraft facilities in the ruble payment
system, resulting in a sudden break-down of the system in 1993, given that a private capital
market that could have provided replacement capital was non-existent.

10. Two Models for Europe
There are two models for Europe. One is the model of a transfer union, while the other is the
Maastricht model. The transfer union is based on debt mutualization, risk sharing,
redistribution and the monetization of public debt. The Maastricht model in turn is based on
the principles of self-liability, no-bail-out and non-monetization of public debt. While it
started out with the Maastricht model, Europe has shifted far closer to a transfer union.
The chain of events beginning with the implicit debt mutualization reducing the
interest spreads after the 1995 summit in Madrid, continuing with the self-service with the
printing press after Lehman and moving on through the rest of the seven steps described in
Section 2, up to the QE program, will ultimately lead to a fully-fledged transfer union because
it implies reduced interest spreads and a strong incentive to over-borrow. Over-borrowing
may lead to unsustainable debt levels, which will force public lenders from other countries
standing at the end of a process of debt roll-overs to agree to substantial debt relief and
replace at least parts of the credit flow with intergovernmental transfers.
The community of states may try to prevent the over-borrowing from taking place by
imposing legal debt constraints as in the Stability and Growth Pact or the enhanced fiscal
compact of 2012 as described in Section 3, but the borrowing incentive resulting from
reduced interest spreads has to date proven far stronger than the legal constraints, and there is
little hope that this will ever change.
There are two potential ways in which this chain of events may end. One outcome is a
chronical Dutch disease of the kind eastern Germany, the Italian Mezzogiorno or the Spanish
Estremadura are suffering, which forces the northern Eurozone to permanently transfer some
of their resources. This outcome will please no one and will frustrate jobless recipients and
34

overstressed donors alike, creating tensions of the Catalonian type. Arguably, the major driver
of Catalonian tensions is the Catalonians’ unhappiness with the massive, but obscure flows of
public resources to other parts of Spain, depriving the province of a substantial part of its
superior productivity.
The other outcome is a repetition of US history. 36 Alexander Hamilton, the nation's
first finance minister, mutualized the debt of the single states in 1791, making it federal debt
to be serviced jointly by all. This decision plus a second round of debt mutualization in 1813
during the second war against Britain created the expectation among states that there would
be more mutualization in the future. At reduced interest spreads they borrowed more to invest
in infrastructure like roads, bridges, canals and public buildings. This created a strong
Keynesian boom, which turned into a bubble that burst in the 1830ies. From 1835 to 1842,
nine out of 29 states and territories went formally bankrupt and the others were sufficiently
handicapped to be unable to assume the debt. Nothing but hassle and strive had resulted from
debt mutualization. James (2012) argued that, while Hamilton thought debt mutualization was
"cement" for the new state, it in fact turned out to be an "explosive". James drew a direct line
from 1842 to 1861 when the War of Secession started, arguing that the unresolved debt
problem had contributed to the tensions that led to the War of Session in addition to the
rivalry for cheap labor, which was the main driver.
Thus, while mutualization undoubtedly is able to fence off speculative attacks and
generate short-term stability of a monetary union, it may in the long run lead to rather
problematic implications ranging from the Dutch Disease to an outright crash with
unprecedented dimensions and implications.
Therefore, it might be wise for Europe to reconsider the original Maastricht model,
which basically is the current US model, as emerged after the US debt crisis and partly after
the War of Secession, resting on the ban of a monetization of state debt (Article 123 AEUV)
and the no-bail out clause (Article 125 AEUV). Unlike the ECB, the US Fed does not
monetize the debt of the union states, and the entire federation is built on the no-bail out
principle. Indeed, the Fed does not buy any government bonds of member states and the
federal government does not take responsibility for the debt of member states should they
over-borrow and face bankruptcy. California, Minnesota and Illinois went through this bitter
experience in the last few years, and the city (and state) of New York experienced it in the

36

See Ratchford (1941) and Wright (2008) as well as the underlying philosophy as revealed by Hamilton in
Hamilton and Madison (1788).

35

early 1970ies when New York City had to pledge some of its future tax revenue to creditor
banks to overcome the financial crisis that Mayor Lindsey's social programs had caused.
This strictness has contributed to the overall financial solidity of the US federal system
during the last 150 years, because whenever a state tends to over-borrow, the creditors, afraid
of the bankruptcy risk, charge higher interest rates, which then reduces the appetite for credit.
The fear of the creditors is a sort of automatic overrun brake preventing economic booms
from gaining too much "speed" and turning into inflationary bubbles which would undermine
local competitiveness as in Europe. In addition, US states do have various forms of
idiosyncratic legal debt constraints that help them to respect the detrimental consequences of
excessive borrowing.
Admittedly, at the federal level, the USA also shows an inclination to borrow, but
interestingly, this coincides with the Fed buying federal government bonds. Moreover, the
federation has common taxes and implicit transfers through various forms of federal expenses
like defense and other nationwide tasks that do have redistributive implications, given that a
full political union has been formed.
Europe will have to think about which model to adopt, but whatever its decision may
be, the rules of democracy require that it be taken by the European electorate and its
parliaments, rather than inevitably resulting from prior mutualization decisions made by the
ECB Council, which is merely a technocratic body that is supposed to carry out monetary,
rather than fiscal policy. The continent may wish to take note of the lessons that the USA had
to learn so painfully in the first few decades of its history. To do so, it would have to avoid
being taken hostage by zombie banks, which live on the gamble of resurrection allowing them
to asymmetrically participate in the gains and losses from risky investment decisions, because
ultimately the losses will be borne and mutualized by taxpayers. While zombie banks need a
policy of maximizing short-term financial stability by way of risk mutualization, long-term
stability, including an efficient allocation of resources and sustainable growth, calls for forms
of protection against over-borrowing like the market-based overrun brake mentioned above.
Temporary exit options, bankruptcy rules for states and a settlement system for Target
balances could be considered as the features of a system that may eventually evolve into the
United States of Europe.

36

References
(See footnotes for the statistical and institutional sources.)

Berger, H., A. Ritschl (1995), "Die Rekonstruktion der Arbeitsteilung in Europa. Eine neue
Sicht des Marshall-Plans in Deutschland 1947-1951", Vierteljahreshefte für
Zeitgeschichte 43, p. 473-519.
Bernholz, P. (1998), "Die Bundesbank und die Währungsintegration in Europa", in: Deutsche
Bundesbank, ed., 50 Jahre Deutsche Mark – Notenbank und Währung in Deutschland
seit 1948, C.H.Beck, München, p. 773 n.
Cœuré, B. (2013), "Non-standard Monetary Policy Measures: Where do We Stand?", speech
at the International Monetary Seminar Sovereign Risk, Bank Risk and Central
Banking, organized by the Banque de France, Paris, 7 October 2013, retrieved from:
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2013/html/sp130710.en.html.
De Nederlandsche Bank (2016), "Target2 Imbalances Reflect QE and Persistent
Fragmentation within the Euro Area", DN Bulletin, 16 June 2016, retrieved from:
https://www.dnb.nl/en/news/news-and-archive/dnbulletin-2016/dnb342673.jsp.
Draghi, M. (2012), Introductory Statement to the Press Conference (with Q&A), Frankfurt,
6
September
2012,
retrieved
from:
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/pressconf/2012/html/is120906.en.html#qa.
Draghi, M. (2016), Introductory Statement to the Press Conference (with Q&A), Frankfurt, 8
September 2016, retrieved from https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/pressconf/
2016/html/is160908.en.html.
European Central Bank (2017), "The ECB’s Asset Purchase Programme and TARGET
Balances: Monetary Policy Implementation and beyond", ECB Economic Bulletin,
Issue
3,
2017,
retrieved
from:
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/ecbu/eb201703.en.pdf.
European Economic Advisory Group (2012), The Euro Crisis, EEAG Report on the European
Economy, CESifo, 27 February 2012.
Fuest, C., and H.-W. Sinn (2016), "Non Tacemus", Ökonomenstimme, 18 January, retrieved
from: http://www.oekonomenstimme.org/artikel/2016/01/non-tacemus.
Furth, J. H. (1955). "The European Monetary Agreement", Review of Foreign Developments,
6 September 1955.
Hamilton, A., J. Jay, J. Madison (1788), "The Federalist: A Commentary on the Constitution
of the United States", in: J. and J. McLean, eds., The Federalist: A Collection of
Essays Written in Favour of the New Constitution, New York, Reprint in The Modern
Library, New York 2001.
37

Hoffmann, D. (2015), Die EZB in der Krise: eine Analyse der wesentlichen
Sondermaßnahmen von 2007 bis 2012, Pro Business Verlag, Berlin 2015, Nr. 1 der
Schriftenreihe zur Erforschung des Geldwesens.
James. H. (2012), Lessons for the Euro from History, Lecture at the Conference „European
Crisis: Historical Parallels and Economic Lessons“, Julis-Rabinowitz Center for Public
Policy
and
Finance,
Princeton,
10
April
2012,
retrieved
from:
https://jrc.princeton.edu/annual-conference/2012-conference-0.
Pill, H., K. Daly, D. Schumacher, A. Benito, L. Holboell Nielsen, N. Valla, A. Demongeot
and A. Paul (2012), “Achieving Fiscal and External Balance (Part 1): The Price
Adjustment Required for External Sustainability,” European Economics Analyst
(Goldman Sachs Global Economics), Issue No. 12/01, 15 March.
Ratchford, B. U. (1941), American State Debts, Duke University Press, Durham.
Sinn, H. W., and T. Wollmershäuser (2012), "Target Loans, Current Account Balances and
Capital Flows: The ECB’s Rescue Facility", International Tax and Public Finance,
19(4), 468-508, retrieved from:
http://www.hanswernersinn.de/de/veroeffentlichungen/2012_ITAX19_Target_Loans.
Sinn, H.-W. (2012a), Die Target-Falle: Gefahren für unser Geld und unsere Kinder, Carl
Hanser Verlag, München.
Sinn, H-W (2012b), "Fed versus ECB: How TARGET Debts Can Be Repaid", VoxEU 10
March, retrieved from: https://voxeu.org/article/fed-versus-ecb-how-target-debts-canbe-repaid.
Sinn, H.-W. (2014), The Euro Trap: On Bursting Bubbles, Budgets, and Beliefs, Oxford
University Press, Oxford; German translation: Der Euro: Von der Friedensidee zum
Zankapfel, Carl Hanser Verlag, Munich 2015.
Sinn, H.-W. (2015), "The Greek Tragedy", CESifo Forum 16, Special Issue, 2015, retrieved
from: http://www.hanswernersinn.de/de/node/64.
Sinn, H.-W. (2016), Der Schwarze Juni: Brexit, Flüchtlingswelle, Euro-Desaster. Wie die
Neugründung Europas gelingt, Herder-Verlag, Freiburg.
Steiner. A. (2016), Global Imbalances, Financial Crises, and Central Bank Policies,
Academic Press, London, Oxford, Boston etc.
Varoufakis, Y. (2017), Adults in the Room: My Battle with the European and American Deep
Establishment, Farrar, Straus and Giroux, New York.

38

Westermann, F. (2016), "Target2 Imbalances Rise again", International Financing Review, 7
April
2016,
retrieved
from:
http://www.ifre.com/target-2-imbalances-riseagain/21242227.fullarticle.
Westermann, F. (2017), "Capital Flight towards Germany", OMFIF, 27 February, retrieved
from:
https://www.omfif.org/analysis/commentary/2017/february/capital-flighttowards-germany.
Wright, R.E. (2008), "Cementing the Union", Financial History 90, 2008, p. 14-18.

39

